THE HISTORY OF WILLIAM de CROY Surnamed the WISE, Governor to the Emporour
CHARLES V. BEING A PATTERN FOR THE Education of Princes. CONTAINING The
Memorable Transactions that happened during his Administration in most of the
Courts of CHRISTENDOM, from the Year 1506. to the Year 1521.

In Six Books.

WRITTEN In French by Mr. VARILLAS, Historiographer of France: And now made
English.

LONDON: Printed for George Wells, and Abel Swalle, at the Sun, and at the
Unicorn, in S. Paul's Churchyard, MDCLXXXVII.

THE AUTHOR'S ADVERTISEMENT.
SEeing the public has taken in good part both my boldness in offering to
write the History of Charles the Ninth after The Historians are placed here
according to the order of time they wrote in.
La Popilimore, Masson, Thuanus, Aubigne, Matthieu, Tortora, Davila, Dupleix,
and Mezeray, as also the Preface in the new manner that I prefixed to the
beginning thereof, perhaps it will not take it ill that I have made an essay
upon a subject that has not as yet been handled: That I give it now the
Pattern for the Education of Princes, and that I add some illustrations upon
the principal Manuscripts from which it has been taken. All that I have to do
before I proceed further is to intimate to the Reader, that he is not here to
expect Regular Elogies, but bare remarks, which I make not so much as curious
but as being necessary to the understanding of what comes after.

The Emperor Maximilian the first has been the most singular Prince that wore
a Crown in these last ages. He was dumb until the age of ten years; and as the
skilfullest Physicians could not discover the cause of his distemper, so
neither could they find a remedy for it; at the end of that time precisely his
speech came to him; and by the volubility of his tongue, nature made amends for
her slowness in allowing him the use of it. He was the Son of the Emperor
Frederick the Third, and Leonora Infanta of Portugal, and he had almost an
equal share of the predominant inclinations of his Father and Mother. Frederick
loved money beyond what can be imagined, and Leonora loved as well to spend it.
Maximilian was subject to both these failings; and as no man ever more
solicitously sought out ways to fill his coffers when they were empty, so never
any man was more impatient to empty them when they were full. He only received
that he might give away by handfuls and without distinction; and resembled
those pipes that never retain the water that comes into them, as if they only
received it to spill it as fast. He had not one hundred Crowns when he went to
marry the Heiress of Burgundy; and he was so happy as to have no other rival
but the abominable Adolph of Gueldres, who was become the horror of mankind
through the inhumanity he had practiced toward his own Father. Maximilian was
soon a Widower, and fortune offered him the Heiress of Bretagne for a second
Wife: but his Father refused him money to defray the charges of his journey,
and no man would lend him a farthing, had it not been for that Bretagne would
have escaped from the French Monarchy, and been annexed to the Low Countries.
His prosperities were blended with some misfortunes. Maximilian continued long
the prisoner of the Flemings: after they had set him at liberty they refused
him the Guardianship of the Archdukes, Philip his Son, and Charles his
Grandson; and forced him thereupon to write Letters, which are very far from
the style of his life, which he himself wrote afterward. He strips himself of
Majesty to demand from the Governors of the Archduke gratuities in ready
money; and has so forgotten his quality, that he would be vexed that one
should think on it. It Is all one to him whether these Gratuities were made as a
due or a present; and that he might obtain them the sooner he consents to
things misbecoming his dignity.

Nothing can be more generous than the Letters of Louis the Twelfth to
Chievres, all Europe was informed that his most Christian Majesty had made him
Governor to the Archduke; and the favor was so great that it could not
sufficiently be acknowledged. Nevertheless Louis seems to be apprehensive that
Chievres may suspect that he has not obliged him for nothing. His Majesty
writing to him thinks no more of that favor which had been the most approved
of all his kindnesses; and he is for having Chievres forget it as well as he:
He never desires any thing of him but with such cautions as leave him fully to
his liberty; nor does he neither apply himself directly to him upon the
differences arisen betwixt the Provinces of Picardy and Champagne, and the
Walloons: He makes him believe that he reserves him for better occasions, and
chooses rather to write to the Council of Bruxelles, though he is not ignorant
that Chievres is the head of it, and that nothing can pass therein but what is
approved by him: He pretends to convince the most incredulous that he demands
nothing of him but what the Flemings shall think reasonable; and by that means
he is sure to obtain what he desires, and Chievres not to be suspected to have
obliged him in granting it. Louis follows not altogether the same Conduct in
respect of the Archduke, and always remembers that he is his feudatary. Not but
that in some rencounters he treats him as his equal, because the Monarchy of
Castile belonged to him already, and that he was presumptive Heir of that of
Arragon: but on other occasions his Majesty labors indirectly to put him in
mind that he is not considerable but because of the Territories which he holds
of the Crown of France, and that he may forfeit them in case of felony.

The Catholic King Ferdinand of Arragon at first managed Chievres by all the
ways that policy has invented, and prudence permits, so long as he had any
hopes of rendering him favorable unto him: But so soon as the Low Countries
had declared for the Emperor Maximilian, there was no more place for
dissimulation, or it appeared so useless that it was neglected. Ferdinand
proposed to himself to remove Chievres from his Grandson; and some relations
are so malicious as to add, that it was none of his fault if revenge went not
farther. Chievres had timely enough notice to remedy it; but he always confined
his resentment within so narrow limits, that his Majesty had ground to imagine
that he had safely offended him. Nor did he think neither that he ought to take
greater liberty after that Doctor Adrian was raised up against him; and he
discontinued not to respect the Maternal Grandfather of the Archduke, though he
knew him to be the greatest and most formidable enemy that he had.

Henry the Eighth King of England, neglected the Politics of his Predecessors,
and took a way of his own that succeeded not with him. The five last Kings from
whom he held the Crown, supposed that it was enough for them to keep in
alliance with the House of Burgundy, to have the better on it as often as they
attacked France; and they found it to answer their ends so well, that since the
Battle of Azincour, till the fight of Hareas, their forces had always worsted
the French that durst resist them. Henry offered at something more, and would
needs give the Law to the Low Countries whilst they were in minority. Chievres
pleased him not for the very reason that he had been made Governor to the
Archduke Charles by Louis the Twelfth. He formed then intrigues to have him
deposed, and a Flemish Lord in whom he confided put in his place; and seeing he
foresaw that he could not be powerful enough to succeed in it by his single
authority, he joined with the Catholic King. The instances of both the one and
other were so urgent, that it is strange how a Prince of nine years of age
could be able to resist them. Chievres for all that stood his ground, and the
ambition of Henry abated not for having been baulked in so famous a quarrel. He
governed not the Low Countries after his own way its true, but he took the
quality of Arbiter betwixt France and Spain; and he caused himself to be
painted holding in his right hand a Balance, in the two Scales whereof were
the two Monarchies we have mentioned in so just a counterpoise; that it
depended absolutely on him to cast the Scale into which he let fall the weight
that he held in his left hand. His presumption was the more ridiculous, that
France and Spain were not then what they had been during the fourteenth and
fifteenth ages. France was enlarged by the Provinces of Province, Burgundy, and
Bretagne; and Spain wholly united into one, except Portugal. And indeed Henry
found by experience that the English were no more in a condition of giving Laws
to the French; and though when leagued with the Emperor, the Catholic King,
the Suisse and the Pope, for reviving his ancient pretensions to Picardie, he
took a great many Towns; yet he had so small hopes to keep them, that having
plundered he either abandoned or burnt them. Nevertheless in his Negotiations
he still retains some ascendant over the Archduke; and if he heat him not as
his inferior, he takes the liberty to set him Lessons. He writes to Chievres
with the greatest indifference imaginable; and by the manner how he sollicites
him it is easy to judge, that great men observe but very few measures with
those whom they have a mind to undo.

They who maintain that Charles of Austria changed his style after the Battle
of Pavia; and that whereas till then his Letters had been most civil, they
afterward scandalized all Europe by their extraordinary haughtiness, have not
read that which begins with these words, My Viceroy of Naples. It is in French
indeed, but never any King of Spain wrote so imperiously. There are others also
that come very near, if they do not match it; and perhaps it may be true if one
suppose here, that Charles practiced wonderfully well what he had learnt from
his Governor, that he ought to treat with Nations with whom he had to do
according to their Genius, and the need he stood in of them. Thus we find in
the Letters which he writes to the Flemings and French, a condescension that
seems to degenerate into a lowness; but as to the Spaniards and Italians he is
so jealous of his Grandeur, that he is afraid to ruffle it by the least word of
compleasance that might escape him. If he pray the Italians, it is but rarely
and still backed with some order. To the Spaniards he never stoops so low; and
though he think them not always obliged to do what he desires, yet he only
proposes barely his will and pleasure; as if he cared not so much to be
refused, as unseasonably to hazard his gravity.

Julian de la Ronera Pope, by the name of Julius the Second, treats Charles and
Chievres, with almost as much lostiness as if the Archduke were the Feudatary,
and his Governor a subject of the Holy See. As he had changed the friendship
which he had for Louis the Twelfth into an extreme aversion, though his Majesty
had given him neither cause nor pretext for it, so he gives himself no trouble
to excuse his inconstancy. He will have all the Sovereigns of Europe to change
in imitation of him; and cannot endure that the Archduke and Chievres represent
to him with all imaginable respect that his Holiness had heretofore not only
approved that the Flemings should live in a good correspondence with the
French, but that besides he had labored for almost fifteen years to reconcile
those two Nations upon all occasions when they were ready to fall into
variance. Julius answers that what he did as Cardinal of St. Peter ad vincula
ought not to be brought as an instance of what he ought to do as Pope; and
there is a necessity of replying to him that the people of the Low Countries
are as incapable of enjoying a full liberty, as of submitting to an entire
slavery: That, to speak properly, they have no neighbors to be afraid of but
the French; and that provided they keep peace with them, they are certain of
greatest tranquillity: That they have indeed an extreme deference for the Holy
See, but that that deference carries them not so far as to put them into bad
intelligence with the Most Christian King: That if they be forced to it they
will infallibly revolt; and that Julius who would push them upon that extreme,
cannot be able to assist the Archduke neither with Forces nor Money to reduce
them. Julius having nothing to answer to this, falls into passion, and
threatens the Archduke and his Governor, but he dies before he found an
occasion to do them hurt.

John Angelo de Medicis, so famous by the name of Leo the Tenth, takes a course
contrary to Julius in regard of the Archduke. He calls him the most
affectionate Son to the Holy See: He considers him with proportion to what one
day he foresees he will be, and respects him as much as he does any of the
chief Monarchs of Europe. He proposes to himself at first to turn the French
out of the Duchy of Milan, and has not so good an opinion of himself as to
hope to bring it about by his own Forces. The Emperor is suspected by him,
because of his inconstancy, and the Catholic King for his infidelity. He knows
that Chievres makes it his chief care to arm the Archduke against those two
vices, and he would have the Court of Rome make advantage thereof. But the care
of his Holiness is not altogether disinterested. He is very willing that the
Archduke Charles assist the Italians in the recovery of the Duchy of Milan,
but he desires not that he should have any other reward for it but the glory of
having done such an action: He dissembles not but that Maximilian Sforza ought
to be freely restored to the State which his Father and Grandfather have
possessed; and will by no means have it represented to him that it would be to
no purpose to act for him, seeing he could not maintain himself in it, and that
the Italians would be forced to be continually in Arms for no other end but to
oppose the Kings of France as often as they might have a mind to recover what
they should lose.

Of so many who since two hundred years have written the History of the
Cardinal George of Amboise, it seems there is none that has given him his true
Character. Yet he had one so singular that it will be hard to find the like in
the other Ministers of State of these last ages. It consisted in this that he
laid his own Grandeur for the foundation of his Masters greatness. The design
which he formed was as ample and handsome, as Sully so pompously describes it to
be at the end of his Memoirs.

If it was not altogether necessary in the judgment of the Cardinal of Amboise
that Christendom should be united under one sole Monarch, that so it might more
easily resist the Infidels, he pretended at least that it ought to have one
King so powerful as that he might alone be able to make head against the Armies
of the Turks when they should advance to ravage the Countries which confined
nearest upon the Empire, until the other Christian Princes might have time to
arm and march to his relief. It behoved for that that Louis the Twelfth having
recovered the Duchy of Milan should still render himself the most powerful in
Italy, and that he should have a Fleet there in a readiness to cruise upon the
Coasts of Barbary, and his Majesty could not do that without he had the Court
of Rome at his devotion. There were at that time so few French Cardinals in the
Sacred College, that it was hardly to be expected that the resolutions of it
would be advantageous to Louis the Twelfth. To augment the number of them it
was necessary to raise a Frenchman to the Holy See; and though no body accuses
the Cardinal of amboise of having too good an opinion of himself, yet he
imagined himself to be the fittest of his Nation for bearing the chief of all
Ecclesiastical Dignities. He thought that the consideration, power and merit of
the King his Master would infallibly obtain it for him; and if he took other
measures, it was only to keep decorum. The Cardinal of St. Peter ad vincula
owed his life and liberty unto him: during twelve years time he had testified
his gratitude for it which the sharpest sighted would have taken for sincere.
He offered the Cardinal of Amboise to procure for him the voices which he
wanted, and he was taken at his word. Nevertheless instead of keeping his
promise, he hindered his Benefactor from being elected in the Conclave of Pius
the Third, and in the following Conclave got himself chosen in exclusion of
him. The Cardinal of Amboise was no less unfortunate in the third measures he
took for attaining to the Papacy. The Catholic King had the art to make him
sensible on the one hand that without him he could never obtain what he
desired, and on (...) hand to persuade (...) that he won^ serve him in good
earnest. The Cardinal believed him though on several occasions be had found
that his Majesty never stuck to his word but when he found (...). He continued
in (...) his last breath; and the Ambassadors of Spain who almost ten years
had been success^ (...) of him, kept him still from perceiving that he was
deceived. He never was Pope, and his Master was so far from recovering the
Kingdom of Naples that he kept not one foot of Land in Italy. However it is not
impertinent to observe by the by that the Author of the illustrations
concerning the conduct of the Cardinal of Amboise is not impartial enough for
an Historian. He extenuates as much as he can the brave actions which he
comments upon, and it has been thought that he has done so in design to raise
the Minister of Louis the Thirteenth (...) on the ruins of the Minister of
Louis the Twelfth. If it be so his maliciousness is no way excusable; and he
had enough to praise Cardinal Richlieu for, though he did it not at the cost of
the Cardinal of Amboise. The Archduke and Chievre show a deference for him that
(...) to that which they had for (...) was convinced that he had suggested to
Louis the Twelfth to make him Governor to the Archduke, and for the same
reason the Archduke observes no measures in the praises which he gives to that
Cardinal.

The Spanish Gentleman who renounced the friendship of Francis de Cisneros
Cardinal Ximenes when he saw him Minister of State was not so far out as men
have imagined. He knew him thoroughly, and was not mistaken in his opinion that
that new dignity would cause a strange alteration in him. Certainly so strange
a Metamorphosis as that was is not to be found in the History of latter ages;
and Ximenes whose thoughts till then were wholly confined to the Convent of
Cordeliers of Talavera where he had made profession, were now filled only with
notions that tended to the aggrandizing of the Spanish Monarchy. He remembered
no more neither his Mediocrity nor his Birth, nor yet the frequent humiliations
which he had practiced in his Cloister. He minded nothing at least outwardly
but Politic affairs; and he labored more to reduce the Grandees of Castile to
their duty, than to subdue his own passions. Not that he wholly neglected
regular austerities, which he made sufficiently appear on this occasion. He was
present at the Sermon of a Friar of his Order who made a long invective against
him; and having sent for him as he came out of the Pulpit, he perceived that he
wore a shirt contrary to his rule, and only rebuked him for it by showing him
the hair-cloth which himself had on: but that was all that he retained of his
ancient profession, and in all things else nothing appeared in his conduct of
what he had been before. He treated as his equals the most considerable of the
high nobility, not excepting the Dukes of Alva and Infantado. However he
promised his alliance to the Duke of Infantado by giving his Niece in Marriage
to the Dukes Nephew, but he soon repented it; and made amends for his fault in
such a manner as made his parts more to be admired, than his ambition was
blamed. He supposed that the power of the Catholic Kings ought to be sounded
on the depression of the Nobles, and he labored in that all his lifetime
without omitting any occasion. He obliged them in small matters, and was
against them in great: But he had always care to make it appear he was in the
right; and by that means all the Burghers and Peasants declared openly for him
in all occasions when the Nobility conspired either to depose or assassinate
him. In every thing he jumps with Chievres wherein the greatness of the Spanish
Monarchy is concerned; but he is always against him when the Low Countries have
any competition with the Monarchy of Spain. Chievres as being a Fleming will
have his Country to be the basis of the greatness to which the Archduke Charles
aspires; and that the others which he is to inherit by the distraction of his
Mother, and the death of his Grandfathers, should only be the accessory.
Ximenes on the contrary pretends that Spain must always be the center of the
Archdukes Grandeur, and the Low Countries be reduced into bare Provinces.
Chievres represents to him in vain that they belong not to the Archduke by
right of conquest; and that if Philip his Father had not possessed them, they
would not have given him in Marriage the heiress of Spain. Ximenes makes no
satisfactory reply: but he persists in his project; and in that considers not
that he thereby provokes the Governor of a young Prince, who well quickly
become his Master.

It is not easy to determine whether fortune did good or hurt to Doctor Adrian
Florent in taking him out of the College of Louvain whereof he was principal,
to raise him to all the Dignities of the Church, not excepting the Papacy. He
had a Genius for the functions that render men famous in Universities: but he
went no farther: and amongst the many employments that he had afterward, there
was not one that suited with him. He had acquired reputation in the Schools,
and in the Pulpit: His Commentary upon the Master of Sentences was admired; and
certainly if that Book was not the most subtle of the three hundred of the same
nature which then were to be found in Libraries, it was at least the clearest
and most methodical. His Harangues for the preservation of the privileges of
Scholars had had better success than he had promised himself; and not only the
Archduke Philip confirmed them, but besides honored the University of Louvain
by being a member of it. It was thereupon imagined that it would be a disgrace
to the Flemings to suffer Adrian to continue longer in Louvain; and it was not
so much to do him justice as to satisfy the public desire, that Chievres took
him to be Preceptor to the Archduke Charles. He did not discharge his
commission ill so long as his business was to instruct his Scholar: But when he
was sent into Spain to negotiate with the Catholic King, he neither answered
the expectation of Chievres, nor of the Spaniards who took him for the ablest
man of his Nation in Cabinet Councils. He discovered at first that his Majesty
was an irreconcilable enemy to Chievres; and from that he concluded that it
would do irreparable prejudice to the interests of the Archduke, obstinately to
defend his Governor how innocent soever he was; for that reason alone he
declared against Chievres: and if he was not powerful enough to supplant him,
it was not his fault if he was not sent home to his house, and the Spaniards
entrusted with the supreme direction of the Council of the Low Countries. He
showed his weakness as much after the death of the Catholic King, when he had
the occasion of making use of the Commission which he brought from Flanders for
being Regent of Castile and Arragon, in case of that death. He suffered himself
unseasonably to be prevented by Cardinal Ximenes, who gained him by promising
him the second place in the Councils of Spain. He had, indeed, that place, but
he wanted the Authority that ought to have gone along with it. He complained
sometimes that the Cardinal consulted with him only about matters of small
importance, and that he dispatched the rest without him: But that was all he
did, and thought not that he ought to fall out with him about the matter. For
that he had the Bishopric of Tortosa, and it was left to men to judge whether
or not that was a recompense proportionable to the power that he was deprived
of. Death quickly rid him of Ximenes, as it protected Ximenes from the
Catholic King; and he was afterward so happy, that he ingenuously confessed he
could not comprehend his own happiness. Leo the Tenth made him a Cardinal in
prospect only of gratifying Charles the Fifth, and the Conclave having spent
several Months without coming to agreement about the person who should succeed
to Leo, in spite chose him Pope; whence it came to pass that the people of
Rome loaded the Cardinals with reproaches as they came out, and threw stones at
them. Till then the quality of common Father had been so respected, that the
Popes who had lived least exemplarily laid it not altogether aside, and made a
fair show at least. Adrian neglected it at first; and when he went from Spain
to go take possession of St. Peter's Chair, he carried with him into Lumbardy
the six thousand Soldiers who two years after took Francis the first before
Pavia. Instead of keeping the Balance even, He took a side that he might rather
cast it; and if his Pontificate which lasted but two and twenty Months had been
of longer duration, it would have raised a schism in the Church more dangerous
than that of Urban the Sixth, and Clement the Seventh.

John Manuel was in reality the Politician of his age, most crossed by fortune,
but by his ability and patience he forced her at length to be favorable. His
extraction was low; but his way of writing wonderfully well, and yet very fast,
was the reason that when he was very young he was chosen under-Secretary of the
Council of State of Castile. He was not full eighteen years old when he grew
weary of his Employment, though at first he thought himself most happy in
obtaining it. He considered that the three chief Ministers of Spain, Zapata,
Carvaial, and Vargas were not much promoted; and that the richest of them had
not a thousand Crowns a year, though they had long served the Catholic Kings
Ferdinand and Isabelle with all imaginable zeal, and that they had facilitated
to them the conquest of the Kingdoms of Granada and Naples. That was not a
reward proportionable to the greatness of their services; and the truth is it
cannot be denied but that the Catholic Kings were too great Husbands in that
particular, if it be not pretended for their excuse that the Revenues of
Castile and Arragon were not sufficient to gratify the tenth part of their
most faithful servants. Manuel who saw nothing but Crowns above his ambition,
was satisfied to continue under-Secretary of State during the life of Queen
Isabelle his Sovereign; but he carried his desires higher when the Archduke
Philip of Austria and Jane of Arragon his Wife went to Spain to get themselves
declared apparent heirs of Castile. Manuel was persuaded that that young Prince
loved an easy life too well to trouble himself with the weight of affairs; and
that if he insinuated himself into his favor before all other Spaniards, he
might govern him at his pleasure; and obtain from him whatever he should
desire. He was the first Spaniard that made his court to him; and won so much
upon him, that none afterward could equal him in favor. The Archduke upon his
return into the Low Countries took him not along with him; and had no cause to
repent of it, seeing he served him incomparably better in Castile than he could
have done in Flanders. He was his spy during the sickness of Isabelle, and
discovered, or at least thought so, that the Testament attributed to that Queen
was forged. He gave the Archduke private notice of it: supplied him with means
to prove the forgery; encouraged him to make haste back again into Spain; and
promised to gain him a great party among the Grandees. What he wrote was not
very probable; and it was rationally to be presumed that the Catholic King
would take the start of his Son-in-law, and make sure of the Nobility of
Castile before the Archduke could be in a condition to solicit them to own
him. Nevertheless there was greater deference had to Manuel than he deserved.
The Archduke at his bare solicitation set forth on his journey; and
extraordinary good luck covered the fault which he committed so very well, that
it was scarcely perceived. He found that Manuel had acquired him the friendship
of all the Grandees except the Dukes of Alva and Medina Sidonia, who more for
shame than affection would not abandon the Catholic King. The party was too
unequal, and maugre the opposition of those two Dukes the Archduke was declared
King. The efforts of the Catholic King for maintaining the pretended Testament
were too weak; and he himself admired the inconstancy of human affairs, when he
saw his whole Court reduced to fifty persons. It seemed at that time that
Manuel's head turned round, so pleased he was to insult over a Prince who had
been so long his Master. He thought it not enough to draw up the Articles which
his Majesty was forced to sign; but it is said, he also joyfully beheld him when
mounted on a Mule without other Equipage he went to wait on his Son-in-law. The
reign of the Archduke was so short that nothing fell during it which Manuel
thought worth the accepting but the Government of Burgos. He obtained it, and
it was at the feast which he made for his Master to thank him therefore, that
that Prince, as they say, had the poison given him of which he died. There were
some contemplative heads that thought it was given rather to put a stop to the
prosperity of Manuel, than to make away the new King Philip. Certainly the
revolution was complete, and Manuel all of a sudden fell from the height of
favor into the greatest abjection. He supposed that the Catholic King would
be revenged on him, upon the same ground that he would have continued to
persecute the Catholic King, if the life of Philip had been longer, and he
Embarked for Flanders before he was apprehended. The Archduke Charles and
Chievres received him very well, and it was none of his fault but that the
Emperor Maximilian had deprived the Catholic King of the administration of
Castile: But the Emperor could not set out a Fleet to transport him into
Spain; and the Catholic King having settled his Authority, wrote to the
Archduke his Grandson, and to Chievres, that he would disinherit the former,
and ruin the latter, if they did not punish Manuel. That was a terrible
threatening; and he that made it was not of a humor to be appeased, nor
patiently to take a denial. But on the other hand Manuel had obliged Philip,
who having been Father to the Archduke, and Benefactor to Chievres, required
that there should be more consideration had for a Minister whom he had
cherished, than for the Catholic King that hated him. The Expedient which
Chievres found out to avoid those two Rocks, was to put Manuel into prison
during the life of the Catholic King, with this qualification that he should
have all the satisfaction that he could desire except his liberty. He proposed
to himself also besides, to secure the person of Manuel, who would have run the
risk of being stabbed even though he had been environed with Guards: But
Politicians are nicer than other men in the offenses which they pretend to have
received. Manuel who reasoned so quaintly about matters of State, never thought
of the motives which induced Chievres to do him a little hurt to preserve him
from a greater mischief. He conceived as great an aversion to him as he had
entertained kindness for him before; and was not at all moved at the pains
which Chievres took to come in person and set him at liberty, so soon as the
Courier who brought the news of the death of the Catholic King was arrived at
Bruxelles. Chievres had not afterward a greater enemy than Manuel, and the good
offices he did him exasperated rather than sostened him. The Archduke who could
not be without either of them, kept Chievres at Court; and sent Manuel into
Italy, where he succeeded in two most difficult Intrigues. The business was not
only to persuade the Pope and Venetians to take from the Most Christian King
Francis the First the Duchy of Milan which he had recovered, and to send the
French beyond the Alps; but also to make them consent that the Spaniards who
already possessed the Kingdom of Naples, should also conquer that Duchy; that
so they might enjoy two Thirds of Italy, and that keeping it enclosed within
the two extremities, they might wait for an occasion of subjecting the rest.
There was no appearance that the Consistory and the Pregady would endure that
so disadvantageous a proposal shall be made unto them, but the industry of
Manuel supplied the seeming impossibility of success. He got a wonderful
ascendant over the mind of Leo the Tenth, and concluded with him in the year
One thousand five hundred twenty and one the famous Treaty which gained the
Spaniards the Territories which they still possess in Lumbardie. His Eloquence
had no less effect upon the Venetians, and by two such brave Negotiations he
ended his days.

THE Arguments Of the Several BOOKS.
Of the First BOOK.
THE Archduke Philip being resolved to go to Spain to take possession of the
Kingdoms fallen to his Wife, chose Chievres to govern the Low Countries, who
fully answered the good opinion that he had of him. The disposition of Charles
of Austria Eldest Son of the Archduke is left by Will to Louis the Twelfth King
of France, for reasons which could neither be more just nor more urgent; and
Louis in that particular gives a mark of moderation which has but one example
in Antiquity in the person of Ildegerge King of Persia. He nominates Chievres
for Governor to the young Prince, without any regard to the prejudice which it
did to the French Monarchy. Chievres discharges himself of his Commission by
instructing his Pupil in his true interests, and by obliging him to exercise of
himself the chief functions of Sovereignty. He endeavors in conjunction with
Gouffier Governor to the Count of Angouleme, to root out of the hearts of
their two Pupils the seeds of aversion which the Marriage of the Count with the
Heiress of Bretagne who was promised to Charles had sowed there; and in the
extreme difficulty that presented of remaining united with the Emperor or
Catholic King, Chievres wisely prefers the German before the Spaniard.

Of the Second BOOK.
Chievres takes all necessary measures for governing in the Low Countries
during the absence of the Archduke Philip of Austria who was gone to Spain to
take possession of the Kingdoms of Castile fallen to his Wife. But the Archduke
dies not long after he had been Crowned King; and Chievres is by the King of
France made Governor of the Archduke Charles Eldest Son to Philip. He labors
but in vain to hinder his Maternal Grandfather from the administration of
Castile. He endeavors to have it given to Maximilian the Paternal Grandfather
of that Prince. But Louis the Twelfth opposes it contrary to his own interests,
and thereby augments the power of his most dangerous enemy. Manuel Secretary to
Philip is persecuted by Ferdinand the Catholic King because he had too well
served his Son-in-law. Manuel withdraws to Flanders, and Chievres receives him
well in hopes that he will hinder Ferdinand from disposing of Castile at his
pleasure. But Ferdinand sets so many Engines at work, that at length Chievres
is forced to abandon the protection of Manuel, and even to commit him to
prison, where he continues during the life of Ferdinand. Cardinal Ximenes is no
better treated for his having remained Neuter betwixt the Father-in-Law and
Son-in-law. Ferdinand resolves to take from him the Archbishopric of Toledo,
and the Cardinal has his recourse to Chievres, who makes the Archduke his
Pupil interpose. He offers Ximenes a retreat in the Low Countries; and
Ferdinand is so much afraid of it, that he lets the Cardinal alone.

Of the Third BOOK.
FErdinand sets the Governor and Tutor of his Grandson against one another. He
persuades Dean Adrian that he will frustrate the Archduke of the Monarchies of
Spain, if Chievres be not deposed; and the Dean possessed with the fear of
that, signs a Treaty whereby he engages himself to bring Chievres into
disgrace. But Chievres is informed of it, and guards himself equally both
against the Catholic King and the Dean. He negotiates with the French a Treaty
at Noyon; and gives it so cunning a cast that he turns the accessory into the
principal, and the principal into the accessory. He thereby secures to the
Archduke the Succession of Spain; and Ferdinand is so vexed at it, that he
joines with England for undoing him. But in that particular the Archduke has no
more regard to the offices of the King of England, than to the exhortations of
his Maternal Grandfather, and Chievres remains in greater favor with him than
before. This puts Ferdinand out of all patience. A dangerous design is formed
against the life of Chievres. He has notice of it. He acquaints the Archduke
with the same, and at the same time advises him most prudently to keep the
thing secret. The event made appear that the Council was good, and Ferdinand at
his death puts not in execution the design which he had formed of disinheriting
the Archduke.

Of the Fourth BOOK.
CHievres being informed of the death of King Ferdinand resolved to have his
Pupil declared King of Castile and Arragon during the life of the Queen his
Mother; and begins so difficult an Intrigue by obliging first the Emperor
Maximilian, and then the Court of Rome to give him the title of King. He writes
immediately after to Cardinal Ximenes to assemble the States of the two
Monarchies, and there to cause the Archduke to be declared King jointly with
the Catholic Queen. Ximenes finds many more difficulties in it than he
imagined; but at length he overcomes them, partly by policy, and partly by his
haughty way of acting. There remains no more then but to take possession of the
two Monarchies, and the Archduke could not go thither without being in
agreement with France. He mediates a negotiation in the Town of Noyon, where
the Governor of Francis the first and of the Archduke in quality of
Plenipotentiaries labor to unite their Pupils. Gouffier Plenipotentiary of
France acts sincerely, but his candor succeeds not with him; and Chievres
signs a Treaty with him ambiguous enough to give the Archduke pretext of waving
the execution of it when he might have a mind. Francis provoked that his
Governor had been overreached; favors the arming of John d' albert for the
recovery of Navarre; but the imprudence of that dispossessed King, makes him lose
the occasion of re-establishing himself. His forces having been unseasonably
divided are cut in pieces, and he loses his hopes of remounting the Throne by
losing his life. Chievres is moved at the oppression of the Indians whom the
Spaniards forced to dig in the Mines. He offers to persuade them to employ
Negro-slaves in that toilsom labor: but Cardinal Ximenes opposes it upon
interest of State, and the matter continues in suspense.

Of the Fifth BOOK.
XImenes having obliged the Catholic King to share with him his power in
Castile, enjoys not long the advantage of his Politics. The Grandees support
him with so much the less patience that he continued to carry toward them with
extraordinary haughtiness, and not being able to dispatch him by open force,
they have recourse to artifice. They give him a slow poison; and he takes it a
minutes time before he who came to warn him of it arrived. He takes Antidotes
which do not serve his turn, but only prolong his life for some Months. For all
he saw himself so near his end yet he undertook one of the boldest of all his
actions, by removing from the Infanto all his servants only one excepted. The
matter was carried on without tumult, and the Catholic King arrives
fortunately in Spain. The Courtiers of his Majesty of whom Chievres was the
most considerable resolve to acquire and preserve the friendship of Ximenes,
but his sternness makes it impossible for them. He persists obstinately in
soliciting the King his Master to exclude them all out of the Council of
Spain, and by that means obliges them to unite for procuring his disgrace. They
obtain it of the Catholic King; and the news that the Cardinal received of it
affects him so sensibly, that a few hours after he expires. After his death the
weight of affairs lies upon Chievres, who discharges himself of his trust to a
wonder in two occasions; the one by all means to get the Infanto Ferdinand
removed out of Spain and sent into Germany; and the other in disposing the
Emperor Maximilian who would have yielded the Empire to the Infanto, to change
his design, and choose the Catholic King for his Successor.

Of the Sixth BOOK.
THE greatest part of Spain conspire together for the disgrace of Chievres, and
this great man is in extreme danger. Nevertheless the Emperor abandons him
not; and his cause at length prevails. The Spaniards who kept their allegiance
defeat the rebels in an open battle, and the Sovereign authority is restored to
all its splendour. Chievres who waited on the Emperor into Germany provided
there so advantageously for the Infanto Ferdinand by procuring him the Marriage
of the Heiress of Hungary and Bohemia, that that young Prince thinks no more of
complaining that his Elder Brother had done him injustice in giving him no
share in the Dominions of Queen Jane their Mother. He gives so good orders also
in Navarre, that it as easily again recovered to the Spaniards as it had been
lost by them, and taken by the French. Nothing withstands the Lord Asparant,
and he becomes Master of it in less than a fortnights time: But his good
fortune blinds his judgment, and he imagins that the conquest of Castile will
cost him no more than that of Navarre. He enters it: suffers himself to be
straightened for provisions there. The Spaniards expect till his Army was weakened
through hardships, and attack him presently after. He is overcome, loses his
sight in the sight, taken prisoner; and lived only after to be an instance,
that conduct in War is as necessary as courage. The Revolted Spaniards are
reconciled to their Master, but they turn all their fury against Chievres. They
poison the Cardinal de Croy his Nephew, and fifty days after serve him in the
same manner.

A PATTERN FOR THE EDUCATION OF PRINCES.
The First BOOK CONTAINING The most memorable Affairs that passed in Europe
from the beginning of the year One thousand five hundred and six, to the middle
of the year One thousand five hundred and fourteen.
THe House of Crouy acording to the Ancient, or of Croy, according to modern
Orthography, pretends to be descended ^n a right masculine Line from the
ancient Kings of Hungary by one Stephen, whom others call Andrew, third Son to
King Bela, and Brother to St. Elizabeth Countess of Thuringe, who being forced
out of Hungary, In Pontuc. Huterus.
fled for refuge into France in the year One thousand one hundred seventy and
three, during the Reign of Louis the Young; but his Son settled himself in
Gallia Belgica by marrying Catharine Heiress of Croy, whose name he took, and
left it to his Posterity. This House was afterward in succession of time allied
by William the First of Croy to the House of Guines; by James the First of Croy
to the House of Soissons; by James the Second of Croy to the House of
Perguigny; by William the Second of Croy to the House of Kenti; by John of Croy
to the House of Curton; by Anthony of Croy to the House of Lorrain; and by
Philip of Croy to that of Luxembourg.

John of Croy transplanted his Family from Picardy into Flanders, when he
became the Favorite of Philip the Hardy, first Duke of Burgundy, descended of
the second Branch of the Bloud-royal of France.

The Historians of that time have not taken pains enough to give us the
Character of this Lord: nevertheless he must have been a man of extraordinary
parts, seeing that during the whole course of his life he governed two Princes,
the most contrary in temper and humor, and the most difficult to be persuaded
that ever were, Philip the Hardy, and John without Fear his Son, Dukes of
Burgundy. He was their chief Chamberlain, and by an extraordinary Conduct and
Policy, though Philip the Hardy and John without Fear were for most part in
continual variance with the Kings of France, yet John of Croy continued to be
the constant Favorite of the Dukes of Burgundy, without ever giving them the
least umbrage or suspicion of his fidelity, notwithstanding he stood so well
all his lifetime at the Court of the most Christian Kings, that they made him
great Master of their House, and suffered him to discharge the duties of that
important place, without ever accusing him that he had managed the interests of
the Dukes of Burgundy against their Majesty's. This particular ought the more
to be remarked, that it is singular, and perhaps, in its chief circumstances
not to be paralleled in the lives of ^he illustrious men of these last Ages;
and besides it is so advantageous to John of Croy, that it seems nothing can be
said greater in his favor.

In so happy a state he did not forget, but that he might more easily tumble
down than he had mounted up; and foreseeing that at length the Kings of France
and Dukes of Burgundy would become irreconcilable enemies, and that in that
case, the House of Croy would be forced to declare for the one side or other,
he so disposed his Inheritance and the Purchases which he made; that he had as
much in the Dominions of the Kings of France, as in the Territories of the
Dukes of Burgundy, to the end that to what side soever he might incline, he
should retain one half of his Estate, and be in a condition of making the
figure of a great Lord in either of the two Courts which he might prefer before
the other.

Anthony of Croy his Son was so happy as to succeed him in the favor, and to
dispose so absolutely of Philip the Good, third Duke of Burgundy, that this
Prince relished no Counsels nor Designs but what had either been proposed or
approved by that Favorite.

But Philip of Croy, the Son of Anthony, fell into the disgrace which his
Grandfather John of Croy had apprehended by an accident which is fit we should
unfold in this place, because it conduces to the understanding of the matters
following.

Seeing Philip the good had from his Father John without fear, received Anthony
of Croy, both for his chief Minister and Favorite, without the least show of
repugnance, whether he thought himself obliged to have, as to that, an
implicit deference to his Fathers Will, or that his inclination suited with
the Person that was presented to him; he imagined that his Son Charles the
Terrible, would comply no less with him, and that he would gladly admit of
Philip of Croy to the same rank with him, that John and Anthony of Croy had
held with his Father, Grandfather, and great Grandfather: But the dispositions
were not alike on both sides, as they ought to have been for cementing a new
confidence and favor. There was nothing wanting on the part of Philip of Croy
for the worthy discharge of the two places in question about Charles the
Terrible: But Charles was prepossessed with an opinion that his ^ather demanded
too much of him, and that he stretched the Prerogative of Nature farther than
it ought to be. That to take things aright, a Minister and Favorite were no
more in relation to a Sovereign, than what a Steward is in respect of great
men, and an intimate Friend to any private person; and for the same reason that
great men and private persons have the liberty of choosing their Stewards and
Friends, a young Prince ought not to be confined in the choice of a Minister
and Favorite, by any thing without himself. So that the earnest desire of
promoting Philip of Croy was the thing that made him disagreeable; and Charles
the Terrible, who in all appearance would have cast his eyes upon him, had he
not been spoke to about it, would by no means do it, because be had been
recommended unto him. In the causes of the disgrace of the Croyes.
He declared himself so briskly as to that, that his Father thought it not
convenient to press him any farther; But the good Prince who had been only over
sollicitous because of the extraordinary affection he had for the Croyes,
perceived that in respect of them he had made one of those politic steps which
are irreparably hurtful when they do not succeed. He was afraid that he had
unseasonably given his Son an occasion of changing the indifference which he
had showed to the Croyes, into an aversion, and in prospect of that, omitted
nothing that he thought capable to insinuate them into his favors. He was even
of the mind that the young Prince his Son had too severely mortified the Croyes
by his refusal; and therefore that he might do what he could to please them, he
heaped favors and kindnesses upon them.

A Lady, who was the last of the House of Bethune, died not only without
Children, but also without any Kindred, and without disposing of the vast
Estate which she possessed. By the right of ultimus haeres or Escheatage the
whole Estate belonged to Philip the good, and he made a Present of it to the
Croys. The liberality, indeed, was great, but not extraordinary; seeing that
Prince had sometimes showed the like, nay, and greater, to those who had not
served him so faithfully as the Croys had done; however it passed for
Prodigality, and a piece of Injustice in the notion of Charles the Terrible. He
was already five and twenty years of age; married, Maria Heiress of Burgundy.
and the Father of one only Daughter, which was all the Children he had: In the
mean time his Father, who had no more Children neither but him, had not as yet
given him any thing in advance of the Low Countries which belonged to him in
Succession: He obliged him to live in the same Palace with himself, to eat at
Table with him, follow the diversions that he did, and to content himself with
a small Pension for defraying his other Expenses. Charles, who was to be one of
the richest Princes in Christendom, would not be more pinched nor stinted, and
omitted no opportunity of enlarging his Fortune. Some Months before the death
of the Lady of Bethune he had been informed that the fear of being poisoned by
those to whom she might leave her vast Estate would infallibly hinder her from
making a Will, and therefore he begged the gift of it beforehand of his
Father, who freely granted it him: But the good Prince had so wholly forgot it,
that he did not so much as remember even when his Son put him in mind of it. He
made answer to him in a positive manner, that he had never promised in all his
life time one and the same thing to two different persons; and that seeing he
had granted the Croys the Estate of the House of Bethune, it must needs be,
that he never promised it to the Prince of Burgundy. He continued so firm in
that particular, that the Croys had the gift: But no sooner did those that
envied them perceive how much the Prince of Burgundy was discontented thereat,
but that they inflamed his resentment by a rumor they raised in his Fathers
Court, that the Duke would not stop there; and that he had only enriched the
Croys with the Succession of Bethune, that it might appear less strange in the
World when he should divest himself, and frustrate his only Son of the most
important Province of the Low Countries, by investing them in the Province of
Namur in the same manner as he possessed it, to wit, in absolute sovereignty.
Thus affairs went already, but bad enough at the Court of Burgundy for the
Croys, when an unexpected accident which at first was thought would retrieve
all, made every thing go worse and worse with them.

The Dauphin of France, who was afterward Louis the Eleventh, stood in so bad
terms with Charles the Seventh his Father, that his Majesty drove him out of
the Province of Dauphine, where he could not endure that whilst he was alive
another should rule as a Sovereign Prince, seeing there was no security for him
in any other place in Europe but in the Low Countries, no other State being in
the humor to refuse the delivering him up to his Father in case he should
demand him; and that besides, Philip the Good had sufficiently made it known,
to confirm the opinion that the Dauphin had of him, that if he desired him to
receive him at his Court he would not consent to it, for fear of quarrelling
with France; but that if he entered the Low Countries without demanding
permission, Philip, who gloried in Hospitality, and had granted it to all sorts
of People, not excepting even the persons of Kings, would not be so hard as to
send him back again; The Dauphin came as far as Brabant before it was known at
the Court of Burgundy that he was upon his Journey.

His conjecture proved true; and Philip though he was extremely troubled at his
having such a Guest, yet durst not desire him to depart out of the Low
Countries: His only care was how he might civilly send him back again, and for
that end chose the expedient of reconciling him to his Father. He therein
employed the Offices of his Agents; and because so thorny a negotiation was not
the business of one day, he commanded the Croys to divert the Dauphin in the
mean time, and to link themselves in a strict friendship with him.

Obedience is never more readily performed, than when the Orders of Sovereigns
suit with the present interests of those who receive them. The Croys were
persuaded that there was no necessity of affecting any more a scrupulous
complaisance for the Prince of Burgundy: they had Estates in France: they
foresaw that the Dauphin would shortly be King, and they stood absolutely in
need of his prorection to secure them from the formidable Enemy whom they could
not avoid but to have one day upon their backs. In that prospect they omitted
nothing that might win the Dauphin; and succeeded therein the more easily, that
that Prince, the most assiduous of his Age, to make sure of those from whom he
thought he might procure services, on his part met them more than half way. He
had just before in some Conferences that he had had with the Prince of Burgundy
experienced the strange Antipathy that was betwixt their two tempers. He made
no doubt but that it would one day be the cause of a War betwixt them that
might last as long as they lived: he thought it convenient to prepare for it
betimes: He foresaw how useful the Croys would then be to him; And that was
enough to make him endeavor to gain them in a point which failed not to
produce its natural effect, which the Croys had not sufficiently apprehended,
since it increased the hatred of the Prince of Burgundy toward them, adding to
the discontent, disdain, anger and resentment which he already entertained,
Jealousy in that he perceived they sought to fortify themselves by protection
against him. He was so sensibly touched with this, that he observed no more
measures with those whom he regarded now far less than before, since his Father
pressed him no more to receive them as Domestic Servants.

He was informed that Charles the Seventh hearing that the Dauphin was
retreated into Flanders, had said that the Duke of Burgundy had received into
his house a Fox that would destroy his Poultry; and he took occasion to give it
out by his Emissaries, that his Majesty's Prediction was fulfilled, and that
the Croys had with the Dauphin conspired the ruin of the House of Burgundy. He
openly threatened to be revenged on them after the death of his Father; and
seeing he was not as yet appeased when the Dauphin being become King of France
left Brabant, the Croys that they might prepare for themselves a Sanctuary,
incited his most Christian Majesty to recover out of the hands of the Duke of
Burgundy, the Towns of Picardy lying upon the River of Soam, seeing the Treaty
of Concluded in the year 1405. betwixt Charles the Seventh and Philip the good.
Arras allowed it upon the payment of four hundred thousand Crowns. This was a
sast Sum considering the times: which notwithstanding being quickly raised;
Philip the Good, though it went against the grain with him to receive it, yet
durst not refuse it. The Towns were honestly restored; and though Philip's good
will was not thereby lessened toward the Croys, his Son made heavy complaints
against them for it. They continued with the Father, and served him faithfully
so long as he lived; and when they perceived him brought so low and weak that
he had but a few hours longer to live, they demanded leave of him to withdraw
to their Lands in France, and obtained it. They were long persecuted as much as
lay in the power of the new Duke; nevertheless they supported it with a
moderation never before practiced on the like occasions in the Low Countries;
no complaining was heard to proceed out of their mouth, nor any Manifesto in
their favors from the Pens of their Friends. They wisely considered that those
two ways of easing great Afflictions were dangerous; and that for the most part
if those who were chiefly concerned were so moderate as not to mingle
Invectives and Satyrs in them, yet they were so unfortunate that others did it,
and that the Public was unjust enough to impute them to those who were not the
Authors of the same. There appeared not so much as an Apology on the part of
the Croys to justify their innocence. They kept themselves in a profound and
respectful silence; and during the Wars that followed betwixt Louis the
Eleventh their Protector, and the Duke of Burgundy their declared Enemy, they
neither acted against the King, nor against the Duke but on such occasions
wherein they could not civilly excuse themselves neither to the one nor to the
other. In acting, or before they acted they used all the circumspection that
might justify their Proceeding; and though Louis the Eleventh was so difficult
to be managed in that Affair, that the Constable of St. Paul could not succeed
in it, yet they behaved themselves so wisely as that their Conduct in so nice a
Point was not at all suspected by his most Christian Majesty, They waited for
the return of their good fortune in peace, and thereby deserved that their
perseverance should triumph over their adversity. It is not known precisely
whether the Duke of Burgundy was touched with it; or if the need he had of the
Croys to get into the possession of Guelderland, which was then made over to
him by an abused Uric Duke of Guelders.
Father in prejudice of his own Son Adolphe.
, obliged him to be reconciled to them; but it is certain they were honorably
re-established; that they had great interests with the chief men of the Duchy
of Guelders; that they contributed much to engage them mildly under the
Dominion of the House of Burgundy; and that if the change was introduced almost
without effusion of blood, Charles the Terrible was obliged to the Croys for it.

They lived with him afterward in such a manner, that if they gained not his
friendship, yet they prevented the remains of aversion that he might have
concealed in his heart from breaking out against them; and after he was killed
before Nancy, they again advanced to the chief place of favor in the Court of
Mary of Burgundy his Heiress. They had disposed her to the Marriage of the
Dauphin of France, though she was already twenty years old, and the Dauphin but
six; and their gratitude to Louis the Eleventh was so sincere that they omitted
nothing which might serve to persuade him by that Alliance to unite the Low
Countries to his Family. The blindness and obstinacy of that Prince in refusing
the greatest advantage that could ever happen to him, amazed them the more,
that they perceived him with extreme earnestness, courting others incomparably
of far less importance. Nevertheless they were not thereby discouraged from
obliging France; but managed so well the credit which they had with their
Princess Mary of Burgundy, that she consented to marry Charles Count of
Angoulesm, who was afterward the Father of Francis the First. They supposed
that if the irreconcilable hatred which Louis the Eleventh bore to the House of
Burgundy so far transported him, as not to admit of the Princess who inherited
it into his Family, yet it would not carry him so far, as to suffer the Low
Countries to go out of the Royal Family of France: But they had no comfort
remaining, when they understood that his most Christian Majesty looked upon an
Alliance of a Prince of his blood with the Heiress of Burgundy as the greatest
misfortune that threatened France, by reason of the Interests that he might
have, and of the Civil Wars he might raise therein, when he had a mind to it.
They admired Divine Providence in the limits that it sets to Monarchies, and in
the obstacles it raises against their growth and greatness, and so thwarted no
more the Marriage of Mary of Burgundy with Maximilian of Austria. They
negotiated for Philip of Austria their Son a Treaty It is in the French King's
Library.
with the Duke of Cleve which confirmed the Union of Guelderland with the Low
Countries; and their Affairs were in that posture when William de Croy, Lord of
Chievres, third Son of Philip de Croy, began by his rare qualities to signalize
himself in the World. He came into it in the Spring of the year one thousand
four hundred and fifty eight; and seeing he was but a younger Son of ^o
numerous a Family that there were fourteen Children of them in all, and that
nevertheless he found himself born to be ^e day the honor of it, he proposed
to himself betimes to be indebted only to himself next to God for the greatness
to which he aspired, and of which he had ^me secret forethought; and the
measures (...) took for attaining to it were the same, (...) if he had neither
Birth nor Fortune.

His Body was strong enough to endure without inconvenience the toils and
fatigues o^ War, and nevertheless so well shaped, that (...) might dispute for
beauty and comeliness ^ith any man living. To eye him, though (...) chance, was
enough to convince one (...) the first glance, that he was of the upper Rank in
Civil Society; and had he lived in those times when the handsomest men were
chosen to command others, the most flourishing Empire would have fallen ^o his
share. But this outside served for nothing to him, save to inspire into those
that beheld him a desire of knowing what lodged within; since men left off to
praise the Shape of Chievres, when by means thereof they had discovered some
draughts of the sublimity and reach of his Wit. Both of these were so polite,
that they abundantly supplied what study might have added to it: he was
naturally furnished with what he could not without pains have learned from the
best Author; and it was never so distinctly to be seen in any other of his
time, that there are some Wits that can easily dispense with all that has been
invented, for improving Reason by Learning, or fortifying it by Experience. He
was so sharp-sighted that there was no putting upon him: so firm and steady
that he was proof against the most surprising emergences: so wise, that no
troublesome accident happened to him, but that he foresaw it timely enough to
correct its bitterness either in whole or in part: so just, that he inviolably
preferred merit before all other humane considerations: so generous, that in so
many different Offices which he discharged, he never swarved from decency, nor
from his duty: so skilful in the Art of knowing men, that his Prince was never
better served than by those he preferred to him: and so disinteressed that he
never demanded any gratuity that might redound to his own profit.

Seeing he had no Children by Mary Magdalen, whom others call Mary of Hamal,
his Wife, he addicted himself the more willingly to the profession of Arms, and
served the Kings of France, Charles the Eighth at the Conquest of Naples, and
Louis the Twefth in the recovery of the Duchy of Milan, having first obtained
leave from his Master Philip Arch^uke of Austria, the only Son and Suc^essour
of Mary of Burgundy, who liked it very well that his Subjects should learn the
Art of War at the expense of others, when he reckoned them otherwise so
mo^erate as not to abuse it to the prejudice ^f their Country In the Panegyric
of that Prince.
. The first rupture betwixt France and Spain happened shortly a^er; and the Wife
Joan of Arragon.
of the ^rchduke becoming Heiress (...) the last of these two Monarchies,
^hievres left off carrying Arms for the ^ench, and lived at his ease in the
Pro^nce of Hainault when the Archduke ^led him from thence to give him a
Commission, which gave a sufficient proof ^at that Prince preferred him before
the ^reatest Lords of the Netherlands.

It has been an indispensible Law of the ^panish Monarchy, that he who would
^ne day reign there, and without opposition succeed to so many Crowns, must be
owned by the States of the Country assembled for that end alone, for Prince of
the Asturies, that is to say, for Successor and Heir apparent to the Crown.
The Archduke was a Flemming, and his Wife at her Marriage had not expressly
stipulated, that her rights to the Spanish Monarchy should be reserved to her,
because she was so remote from it, that there was no appearance that ever she
should succeed by the course of Nature: Nevertheless all those that precluded
her were dead, and made way for her Succession. She had a younger Sister in
Spain; and it was to be seared that the Spaniards marrying her at home, might
use the Archdutchess as they had heretofore treated Queen Blanch of Castile,
the Mother of St. Louis, who being in France at the death of King Alphonso her
Father, and having neglected to get her self acknowledged for Heiress apparent,
the Estates of Castile had disappointed her of it, and conferred the same upon
the Infanta Berenguelle her younger Sister. There was a necessity then for the
Archduke and Archdutchess to go with all expedition into Spain; and though
there was no instance that ever the Sovereigns of the Low Countries had removed
so far out of that Country, yet Custom at that time yielded to Necessity, and
the Subjects of the Archduke at length consented to it upon the solemn promise
he gave them of a speedy return; and probably it was to remove from them all
suspicion of failing in his word, that he left no Governor to supply his place
in his absence. But after the death of Isabelle his Mother-in Law, and when
there was a ^ecessity of going a second time into Spain ^o take possession of
the Crowns of Castile, Leon, and others that were united to them, the Archduke
foreseeing that his abode there would be long, as, indeed, ^e never returned
back more; and being ^onstrained to choose an able man to supply ^is absence in
the Low Countries, he cast his eyes upon Chievres. The choice was generally
approved of all; and as the Archduke had no cause to repent of it, (...) his
Subjects had no occasion to find any ^ult with the same. The tranquillity and
quiet of the Low Countries was so ^rofound, that nothing discomposed it neither
within nor without; and the Arch^uke was the more obliged to the Judici^us
Conduct of Chievres for that, that (...) was the chief cause, as will appear in
^he sequel of this Work, which procured ^im the success that he had in the
follow^ng enterprise, which was one of the most difficult that has appeared on
the Stage in these latter Ages.

The Archduke claimed the Government of Castile immediately upon the death of
his Mother-in-law, and grounded his Pretensions upon the Right and Custom
received in that point all over Spain. Ferdinand, the Catholic King his
Father-inlaw, pretended on the contrary to the usufruct and administration of
the same Government, and showed his Queens Testament, which lest it to him in
express terms. The Archduke made answer that the Testament was forged; and that
if the truth was not altogether clear on his side, it was at least very
apparent. Most of the Grandees of Castile were persuaded of it, and publicly
declared for him. But Ferdinand had made the rest; and seeing he had besides
engaged in his Interests his hereditary Kingdoms of Arragon, to which his
Son-in-law had no pretension, he would have hindered him from taking possession
of Castile, and would have reserved it to himself in spite of the Archduke,
had he been engaged in a War with any of his Neighbors: whereas upon the
certain advice that was brought into Spain that the administration of Chievres
was so acceptable to the Flemings and their Neighbors, that not only neither
the one nor other had any mind to disquiet it, but were also disposed to give
the Archduke considerable assistances both in Men and Money upon the first
solicitation he should make for them, Ferdinand gave over his Plea, and lost
it. He renounced, in favor of his Son-in-law, the Testament which he had
produced, and caused to be Printed in all Languages: he signed his dimission:
he departed almost alone out of Castile, as he had entered it almost alone
thirty four years before, and retreated to Arragon. But great Prosperities are
many times followed by unexpected Misfortunes.

The Archduke was no sooner peaceable King of Castile, but that he died there;
and that accident was so far from doing prejudice to Chievres, that it was the
chief occasion of his fortune. The eldest of the two Sons whom the Archduke ^ft
was but six years old, and was named ^harles. He was destined for making up ^e
most powerful Monarchy of Christen^om, seeing he had already the Low-^ountries;
and that besides, three Suc^essions no less infallible in respect of him, ^han
great in themselves, would one day make him the Master of a prodigious number
of Provinces and Kingdoms. From his Mother he expected Castile and the Crowns
thereto annexed: from his Grandfather by the Mother the Kingdoms of Arragon,
Valentia, Naples, Sicily, Sardinia, Majorca, and Minorca, and the Principality
of Catalonia: and from the Emperor Maximilian the First, his Grandfather by
the Father, the ten Hereditary Provinces of the House of Austria in Germany;
besides his Pretensions to the Empire so well grounded, that all the Forces,
Credit, Money, and rare personal qualities of Francis the First of France,
could not afterward hinder them from taking effect.

The Education of this young Prince, who till the death of his Father was
called Duke of Luxembourg, and who afterward took the Title of Archduke, was of
such importance that hardly could there a man be found fit to take the care of
it; and if Chievres was not called to it by the unanimous Votes of those who
pretended the right of appointing a Governor to the young Archduke, yet at
least he had this advantage, that they approved the choice that was made of him.

Before we lay open so curious a mystery in Politics, it will not be amiss to
observe in this place that Sandoval, and other Spanish Historians, who have
reviled the memory of Chievres upon the motives that shall be mentioned in
their proper place, have not taken notice that their animosity against him
turned to their own prejudice; and that to blast the memory of a man, In the
first Tome of the Life of Charles the Fifth.
who in spite of their big Volumes will still continue blameless, they have
fallen into errors concerning the truth of matter of fact, which nothing but a
criminal indulgence can pardon, seeing they brag of having searched the
Originals. They form a long debate betwixt the two Grandfathers of the Archduke
by the Father and Mothers side, to which of the two it belonged to ^ominate a
Governor for him. They ^uppose that the Grandfather by the Mother laid the
matter so to heart, that he threatened oftener than once to disinherit his
Grandson, if the care of his Education were not wholly left to him. They ^dd,
that the Paternal Grandfather thwar^ed this with as much heat at least, but
with no other prospect than of making use of the Revenues of the Low Countries
^uring the minority of their Sovereign. They affirm, that the Paternal, indeed,
^arried it by his Dignity of Emperor, and ^he consent of the Flemings
accustomed to his administration; and that his Imperial Majesty having too much
to do in Germany to mind himself the institution and affairs of the Archduke,
appointed Chievres in his place to take the care of both. In a word, they will
have all absolutely believe the truth of what they write, pretending to pass
for sincere and disinteressed Historians, if there ever were any, by reason of
some disadvantageous particulars to their Nation which they relate, taken from
the weaknesses of Ferdinand in relation to his Domestic Affairs: Nevertheless
the same Authors err in matter of fact, and are mistaken for want of having
seen the piece which decides the question they treated about. They knew not
that the sudden death of their King Philip the First was not altogether
unexpected, and that that Prince had not only Civilly, but according to
Erasmus, Christianly prepared for death, though he was but seven and twenty
years of Age when it happened: That he made a Testament in ample form; and that
the chief Article of that Authentic Act consisted in a most express
recommendation of his Eldest Son Charles to the most Christian King Louis the
Twelfth, In the Testament of Philip the First.
and in an earnest desire to his Majesty to set over him the man whom he should
think fittest to educate him.

The reasons of that disposition probably were, that on the one hand Philip
understood the inconstant and prodigal humor of the Emperor his Father, and
knew by experience that Maximilian could no sooner be Master of Money but that
he squandered it away as fast; and that nevertheless so soon as he was bare
again he hunted after it with so much ^agerness and vehemence, that what way
soever he could come by it, right or wrong, all was alike to him: That he had
no other motive but that to make him after the death of Mary of Burgundy
espouse ^lanche Sforza the Daughter of a Father ^d Mother both Bastards,
although the ^ermans entertained a terrible aversion to such a kind of base
Alliance: That he had Ostner than once sent and commanded in ^rson Troops in
Italy for the service of ^ose who paid him dearest for them; ^d that there was
but little hopes that in ^s old age he would reform a fault, which ^ll then had
been his predominant Passion. In the mean time, if he lived after ^s ordinary
rate, when he was Administrator of the Government of the ^ow-Countries, he
would the more easily ^ut all things into trouble and confusion; that the
People there were naturally inclined to revolt, and that they must be governed
with a tenderness that hindered them from perceiving that they enjoyed not
entire liberty: That the least extraordinary Tax that his Imperial Majesty
might impose upon them, would stir them up to sedition, and that the constant
Revenue could not entertain him one month of the year: That the Flemings would
be no less unwilling that he should lend their Forces against their Neighbors,
with an emptier Purse than that of their Enemies, and that which of the two
happened, the Netherlands were almost in an equal danger of changing their Master
during the time of a long minority.

On the other hand, the Testator was altogether dissatisfied with the Catholic
King Ferdinand his Father-in-law, and to say the truth, not without cause,
since the affront he had received from him struck directly at his honor: For
when the same Ferdinand resolved to drive the French out of half the Kingdom of
Naples, which two years before he had divided with them, he well foresaw that
his Forces being inferior to theirs he could not be able to overcome them but
by joining Stratagem to Force. He proposed to himself to amuse and deceive
them; and that they might not mistrust the snare he laid for them, he thought
it best to cloak his treachery under the faith of a Treaty, which is the most
sacred and inviolable type of Civil Society; and chose his Son-in-law in
quality of Plenipotentiary for the Instrument of his foul play, thinking that
if the French did upon any ground conceive suspicion, they would entertain less
of a Prince, such as Philip, who was their feudatary, than of any other whom
his Catholic Majesty might send unto them. Accordingly Ferdinand entreated
Philip to go to the Court of Louis the Twelfth, and make peace betwixt France
and Spain, having for that end given him an unli^nited Commission. Philip found
Louis at Blois, and treated fairly and squarely with him. The accommodation was
signed on both hands, on condition that the division of the Kingdom of Naples
betwixt the two Nations should continue, and that which of the two did invade
any part be^nging to the other should forthwith make restitution. Louis, who
out of a ^rinciple of Religion avoided needless ex^ence as much as he could,
dismissed the Troops that he had raised for maintaining his share; and
Ferdinand on the contrary having reinforced his, they beat the French, and
drove them entirely out. Louis complained of this to all the World; But
Ferdinand having obtained what he desired, put off the Vizor. He disowned what
his Son-in-law had done, and laughed at the credulity of Louis. He still
retained what he had so unjustly usurped when Philip died; who if he had left
the disposition of his Son to him, would have given ground of suspicion that
there had been a collusion betwixt his Father in law and himself, and that he
was not altogether innocent of a cheat which he or his might one day have the
benefit of. His memory would have been too much blasted thereby; and the stain
was so foul, that he did not think he could shun it but by trusting what was
dearest to him to the Probity of Louis, and making by that means some
reparation for the injury which he had received by his Ministry. Besides, he
foresaw that if he left the administration of the Low Countries to the
Catholic King, that Prince would employ their Forces against France with so
much the more danger to the Flemings; that if they were worsted, he was too far
off to assist them; whereas by referring himself to the most Christian King in
the choice of a Governor for his Son, they would remain united with France,
and thereby maintain themselves in profound peace.

However it be, the Flemings approved the Testament of Philip, and Louis had
full liberty to provide for the Education of Charles the young Archduke. He
determined in favor of Chievres, and what hereafter follows will make it but
too evident that he could not have done better for the Pupil who was
recommended ^o him, nor worse for the Monarchy of France. Chievres employed the
first years of his Charge in studying the Genius of the young Archduke, and by
an unconceivable assiduity and attention (...) finding out in him the little
ways and ^umours that discovered what ground^ork Nature and Sin had laid there
for ^ertue and for Vice. The fruit of so long labor was, that Chievres
discovered that Charles resembled Lands newly dried after they had been long
overflowed with the waters of the Sea, which at first produce vast numbers both
of good and bad ^rbs: That in reality the chief perfections of his most
illustrious Ancestors were descended into him, but that in exchange (...)
likewise inherited the most remarkable of their imperfections: For as to the
Father's side, if he had the activity of ^hilip the hardy, he had also his
inclination of always pursuing the end which he proposed by fetches and
by-ways: if he had the undertaking humor of John without fear, In the Lives of
the last Dukes of Burgundy.
he had likewise his pertinaciousness in pushing on to the last the most unjust
enterprises: If, like Philip the good, he loved to be familiar, yet he did not
like, no more than he, that his familiarity should raise or enrich those who
were honored with it: If he was indefatigable in labor, as Charles the
terrible, so he exacted, as rigidly as he, the reward of his labors: If he was
sometimes merry, even to excess as the Emperor Maximilian, so was he no less
insupportable than he in a pensive melancholy that seized him upon the smallest
occasions: And if, as his Father, he was complaisant to those who instructed
him, he had nevertheless also a secret contempt of their Persons
notwithstanding the good office they rendered him.

On the Mothers side, if like Henry of Transtamare, he had the knack of
engaging men of extraordinary merit into his Interests, and to keep them so
engaged so long as he had need of them, he had also the weakness to forget them
as absolutely as if he had never known them, so soon as they were no more
useful unto him. If like John the Second of Castile, he employed more willingly
men of low extraction than persons of quality, yet he pardoned no more than he,
the least escapes they were guilty of in the execution of his Orders: If, in
imitation of Henry the Third of Castile, he prevented as much as ^y in his
power the troubles which ^reatened the State, he set about it also in the same
manner as he, by fomenting ^e divisions that he found kindled amongst the great
men, or by his Emissa^es cunningly sowing the seeds of them, ^hen the too good
correspondence amongst these great men began to create suspicions in him: If he
was as happy as ^hn the Second of Castile in finding men that gloried to
sacrifice themselves to (...) service, yet he rewarded them no more than he,
but by caresses and praise: If, as John of Arragon, he entertained no more
freiendship for his own, than what decorum ^uired, without going farther, he
cared as little as he, if the Public was acquaint^ with his defect of
tenderness: In a word, if, in imitation of Ferdinand the ^tholick, he exacted
from others a punctual performance of their word, and if he could not endure no
more than he that they with whom he had to do should ^eak promise to him, so
neither, no more than he, was he a slave to his own word. Not that the
perfections and defects which we have now mentioned, and which have been since
objected to Charles, were already observed in him, or indeed that he was so
soon capable of them: but that the penetrating Judgment of Chievres could even
distinguish in the Soul of that young Prince his natural inclination toward
the good things that charmed him, and toward the bad which were the effects of
original sin; and that perspicacity was in some measure like the light which
directs Philosophers in discovering effects in their causes, and Astronomers in
finding out the insluences in the Stars. Chievres observed that Charles loved
glory; and that it was enough many times to make him amend his faults, to
threaten him with divulging of them. From thence he concluded that the study
and reading of History were absolutely necessary for cultivating the good seeds
we have mentioned, and for choking the bad.

In the first of those two prospects he searched in the College of Louvain for
a Tutor to the Archduke, and pitched upon Doctor Adrian who was in great
reputation there, and who notwithstanding his want of Politeness, was
nevertheless since promoted to the Papacy; but in the other prospect he was
more reserved; and there might be ground to doubt of the truth of what we are
about to write, if the Spanish Writers did not therein agree with the Flemings.
Chievres looked upon History to be of so great importance for forming of his
young Prince, that he durst trust none but himself to teach it him.

For every thing else he assigned him Masters; but as for that he would have ^o
foreign aid, but taught him himself. The truth is, he did it with this
circumpection, that to hinder his Scholar from being tired out with the
tediousness of the ^abour, and from pressing him from time (...) time to break
off, he pretended to stu^y it with him, that he might regulate, ^s he said, his
life at the expense of another.

The order that he followed in it could ^t be more methodical, because he be^n
by giving Charles a notion of History (...) general, and then applied him to
the ^istories of the People of Europe with whom one day he was to have affairs
to ^anage; but seeing his chief business was (...) be in Spain and France, it
was his Go^rnours care to acquaint him thoroughly with the History of those two
Monarchies. under that of France the History of the ^ow Countries was at that
time compre^nded. He would have Charles also read every Author in his own
Language and Style, and not to be discouraged by the barbarisms of most of
them, nor by the superfluity of three parts in four of the things contained
therein. He convinced him at first of this maxim, That to speak properly, there
is nothing useless in matter of History; and that the matters of fact which
serve for nothing at all in the notion that one has in reading of them, will
early or late serve for something or other in the notions that one may have
hereafter.

In the mean time the Spanish Authors were already too numerous; and those who
have examined them in the Library of Cardinal Mazarin, know that the reading of
them is not very pleasant, to say nothing more slightingly of them. The number
of French Historians was not less: they had no Charms for that young Prince,
whose mind was affected with nothing but what glittered to his eyes:
Nevertheless he run them over; and it is to be observed in several passages of
his life, that he cited them to purpose when occasion offered, and that he had
retained what was most important in them.

To make a deeper impression of them in his mind, his Governor failed not to
make him observe that for the most part all the good and bad actions of his
Ancestors met with even in this life the recompense or punishment which they
deserved; And for instance, that Philip the Hardy, Duke of Burgundy, because of
his dissimulation in all great actions, and his pretending to have followed the
Counsels of others, though no man was more possessed than he of the
infallibility of his own, had fallen into a quarrel with the King of Sicily his
Brother, and the Duke of Orleans his Nephew, and left the same to his
Posterity, which had a long time employed, and at last overwhelmed him. The
Excess of his complaisance to the Heiress of Flanders his Lady, because of the
Portion she brought him, made that Princess, who was already but too haughty,
altogether insupportable, and he himself was even often constrained to bear her
slights and affronts without daring to complain. He was so very revengeful, and
nevertheless affected to appear so far from it, that on such occasions he
always employed the hands of some unknown Assassins, who knew neither who
employed them, nor what was the reason of it, and God Almighty suffered his Son
to be killed almost by the same measures. That John without fear was so
persuaded that Fortune would change her inconstancy in his favors, that he
bragged he had married her; nevertheless she so far forsook him as to suffer
him to mount a Scaffold. After Bajazet took him Prisoner.
He admired the simplicity of those who trusted to his promises, and he died
for having trusted to the promises of another. He had no more of Religion but
an outside enough to amuze good men, and he had not time enough to repent of so
prodigious an impiety. By extraordinary means he courted the affection of the
Common People, and lost that of the Nobles. That Philip the good aspired to
real Grandeur, and never any Sovereign under the degree of a King received so
much honor as he, seeing he restored Popes, Emperors of Germany, and of
Constantinople, Kings of England, and of the East. By several Mistrisses he had
nine Boys and five Girls; and by two Wives successively during the space of
above fifty years, he could have but one Son who was the last of his Family.
That in fine, Charles the Terrible sometimes reproved the Clergy of his
Territories when he saw them perform Divine Service negligently; and God
Almighty in acknowledgment of the care that he took of his Glory, rendered him
one of the most famous and powerful Princes that never was King. He executed
Justice amongst his Subjects with an exactness that cannot sufficiently be
praised; and his Subjects conceived such veneration for him, that they could
not believe that he died miserably before Nancy as they were told, but expected
him six years, much after the manner that the Jews expect the Messiah: However
on the other hand he was so cruel in War, as to be reckoned in the judgment of
Posterity the first Christian Prince in these last Ages who limited the Law of
Nations, at that time of larger extent in Military affairs than it is at
present, resusing quarters to the conquered who with most profound submission
begged it; and the Suisse who killed him, In the Journal of the Siege of Nesse.
so but cherously mangled his body that it was impossible afterward to know it
otherwise than by conjecture. He framed a design of restoring the Ancient
Monarchy of Burgundy upon the ruins of the Monarchy of France: and he lost
himself in attempting it by indirect means, when he could not succeed in it by
direct.

This was the way of Chievres to instruct Charles both usefully and Christianly
in History, by making every considerable accident he learned contribute to the
rendering him one day the better man; And Charles on his part, though he eagerly
studied matters so prepared to his hand, yet did not ply his studies without
laying violent constraints upon himself. His thoughts were very apt to ramble,
and there needed a great deal of attention to apply so many different matters
to their several particular ends, and to burden his memory with the heavy
charge of using them in the nick of time. His rambling proceeded from his
prodigious activity which could not continue a moment in repose. The famous
Brothers Peter and James du puy have given a relation to this purpose which
serves no less to inform us of the conduct of (...) than the Temper of (...).
The Emperor Max^li^n the (...) had a m^nd to have the (...) of his (...) in
the Gallery o^ his Palace in (...), and where to Cheevres (...) to the life as
possibly he could, that he might accustom the ^mans by times to the sight of a
Prince destined to be their Head. Nothing was omitted that could be done in the
punctual execution of the orders of his Imperial Majesty, and the famous Albert
Durer was consulted about the choice of the Painter: he brought a great many,
and all of them had the misfortune to be employed, and to draw one after
another without success. They all agreed to lay the blame upon Charles, who
still moving some part of his body, and changing his posture every minute,
hindered them from drawing any true Lineament. So that the Picture had not been
sinished, though it was sketched by so many hands, if Chievres had not
bethought himself of causing four Swords to be brought, and placed round
Charles in so exact a manner, that he could not stir without wounding himself.

The Historians of Spain have not dared directly to blame the assiduity which
the Governor of Charles exacted of himself History, because the (...) which
(...) Prince reaped from it would (...) to have (...) who would have strock at
that ^oot. But they have (...) and by another way pursued their (...). They
(...) ry to Charles; and that the time which he spent in the study of it, had
not been all employed, if it had been done without prejudice to other things
which in their opinion were at least as needful to him: but they add, that the
knowledge of the Latin Tongue was no less necessary to Charles than that of
History; and that nevertheless Chievres, whom they represent as the most
complete Courtier that ever was, perceiving on the one hand that his Pupil
delighted in History, and that on the other he had an aversion to the Latin
Tongue, had greater regard to the inclination of his Prince, than to his own
duty. That he wholly dispensed with his studying of Latin; and allowed him to
spend the hours that were appointed for that in Dancing, Fencing, and Riding.
That Charles paid dear for that negligence; and that when he was Emperor, he
had occasion to complain of the slattering indulgence that his Governor had
showed him. That a Latin Speech was made to him one day in Germany which
contained matters of very great importance, that required a speedy and positive
answer; and that nevertheless his Imperial Majesty was so far from answering
the Speech, that he understood it not. That he bore very impatiently the
affront which at that time he received; and that wanting an opportunity of
revenging himself for it upon the Person of Chievres who was then dead, he did
it upon his mernory, which he branded with an eternal reproach.

It is strange that the aversion of these Authors should so far transport them
as to make them heedlesly blacken Charles in the very places where they have
made his Panegyric, provided the defect which they impute to him rebound upon
Chievres; and for justifying both the one and the other, we need only
distinguish what is true from what is false in their relation. It is true,
Chievres employed Charles much more in History than in Latin: but it is not
true that both these studies were equally necessary for shaping a young Prince;
at least Chievres, who without doubt passed for a man of Wit, Judgment,
Experience, and Forecast, was not persuaded of that. He thought it enough for
Charles to understand the dead Languages, such as Latin; and that the study of
the Elegancy and Politeness thereof, and the opinion of speaking it as it was
spoken in Rome in the time of Augustus, should be left to the study of the
Critics of Schools and Universities. He was not singular in his opinion; and
most part of Persons of quality who lived in his Age, were of the same. It was
long after him a Maxim at the Court of France which has been always the most
polished of Christendom, that it was not for the honor of a King to have it
said of him that he was an excellent Latinist; and Henry the Fourth, whom no
man dare accuse of ignorance in this particular, since Causabon says, In the
Preface to his Commentaries upon Polybius.
that he had read and admired the French Translation which he made of Caesar's
Commentaries, used sometimes in Raillery, to call James the First of Great
Britain, Master James, because he valued himself too much upon his speaking and
writing Latin well; and it is further said, that his most Christian Majesty
being informed that that Prince who before was only King of Scotland, was
become King of England also, He spoke his thoughts of it in his own words, C'st
la un trop bon morceau pour un Pedant; That is too good a morcel for a Pedant.

It is likewise true, that Charles had not so great an inclination for the
Latin Tongue as for others; but it is not so, that he had an aversion to it,
and that Chievres condescended so far to him, as to excuse him from learning
it, seeing it is certain that Charles studied it not after the death of
Chievres; and though he would have applied himself to it, yet the great and
continual affairs that he had afterward, would not have allowed him the
leisure. In the mean time the Germans know that he took pleasure in reading of
Sleidan the most polite Latin Historian of his time; and that he used to say
when he called for it, Bring me hither my Liar; Nor are the Spaniards ignorant
neither, that when he retired to the Monastery of St. Just, he commonly read
the Works of S. Bernard that were not then translated, which shows that at
least he understood Latin; it being unlikely that he would lose the time which
he set apart wholly for working out his own Salvation, and which he had bought
with the price of so much worldly greatness willingly forsaken; nor that he
would pretend to jeer a Father of the Church in the sense of St. Jerome, St.
Jerome said on one, Non vis intelligi neque ego te intelligere.
by reading him constantly without understanding him.

To be short, That Juncture, mentioned by the Spaniards, where Charles was put
to a stand in Germany for want of Latin, and could neither conceive what was
said to him, nor make a positive answer to it, bears more than one character of
falsehood: For in the first place, we see that he understood Latin: In the
second place, they who bring him in conferring immediately with a German about
important affairs, know not that he never stooped the Imperial Majesty so low;
and it is so far from being true that he abased it, as is pretended, by
positive answers given upon the spot, and face to face in any matter of
consequence, that he carried it incomparably higher than any of his
Predecessors had ever done before him, or any of his Successors since. He heard
all sorts of business in the public and private Audiences which he gave in
Germany, without any other answer at the time than that he would examine them;
and, in truth, he took time to speak of them to his Council, or to resolve by
himself what he was to do, there being no instance that ever he did otherwise.
Afterward the answer was brought, or sent in his name in writing to such
affairs as could in that manner be dispatched, and for others that required
answers by word of mouth, the Emperor sent for those who expected his answer,
and made his Chancellor always give it them, even when he himself thought it
convenient to be present. If the Chancellor was absent or indisposed, the Vice
chancellor spoke for him; and both failing, he employed a Counselor of State.
So that the passage related by the Spanish Writers, would have been not only
irregular, but singular in its kind; and seeing it is not mentioned in any
Author of other Nations, and that it happened, as they would have it, in a
Country far distant from theirs, they ought not to think it strange if we
question the truth of their information. In the third place, there is no
instance in latter Ages that Emperors have spoken Latin when they treated of
affairs; and on the contrary it is very well known that Maximilian the Second,
who spoke that Language as freely as high Dutch, yet never made use of it in
public Affairs. In a word, all the Panegyricks of Charles, and the most biting
Satyrs against his Memory, agree in giving him the testimony, that if he did
not gratisie Chievres as much as he deserved, yet he rewarded him after his way
by praising him upon all occasions; and that he never let fall a word to his
prejudice, which wholly confutes the matter objected.

When Chievres by instructing the Archduke in History had given him those
general lights that he needed for the conduct of his life, he descended to
particular Maxims, in laying out to him his true Interests in relation to all
the Powers of Europe. He proposed to him two sorts of them; which he
represented as not only very different in themselves, but likewise in some
manner so opposite, that he would run the risk of undoing himself by mistaking
the one for the other. That he had present interests and future, and that the
furure were the same with those of his Grandfathers by the Father and Mothers
side, which one day he was to inherit, but that the present were directly
contrary to them in that neither the Emperor Maximilian I. nor Ferdinand the
Catholic King lived in good correspondence with Louis XII. and that if Charles
favored them abroad, he would draw into his Territories the Arms of France,
which would infallibly dispossess him of them before he could be succored, the
Catholic King being too remote, and the Emperor having neither Money nor
Credit enough for the speedy raising of an Army in case of necessity. Chievres
drew from so true a Principle this Consequence, that the Friendship of the
French was absolutely necessary to Charles, so long as he was no more but what
he was, that is, so long as he enjoyed no more but the Succession of Burgundy.
That he ought to rest satisfied with external demonstrations of honor and
civility, respect and submission in reference to his Grandfathers in all
affairs that they might have to dispute with France, but at the bottom he
should continue closely united with his most Christian Majesty. That he should
carry fair with the Emperor Maximilian, because he could not succeed to him in
the Empire if by his means he preserved not the long settled interests, which
the House of Austria had with the several Members that composed the body of the
German Empire; and that seeing the friendship of that Prince was to be bought
and sold, it was better his Grandson should purchase it than another. That he
should not therefore fail to send him as much money as he could; and that his
liberality would not be unprofitable, provided it were managed with three
precautions. First, That it should be frequent, because of the continual need
of him that received it: Secondly, That it should only consist in small Sums at
a time, seeing his Imperial Majesty was put into as good an humor by giving
him but a little, as by giving him much: And lastly, That it should be secret,
because it would be to be feared that the People of the Low Countries might
mutiny, if they came to know that what was raised from them served for no ^ther
end but to feed and entertain the ^rodigality of Maximilian, whose tem^er they
knew to be such that their mo^ey would increase rather than cure the ^isease of
that Prince. Chievres added, that since Charles had much more cause to ^e
afraid of Ferdinand the Catholic King than of the Emperor, he ought likewise
to carry to him with greater Judgment and Policy. That the young Ferdinand of
Austria, younger Brother to Charles, was born in Spain, and seemed to bring
with him from his Mothers Womb all the Spanish Inclinations: That the Catholic
King was his Godfather, and had given him his name; that he loved him tenderly,
and that it was known from good hands that he had a design to make him King of
Arragon, and perhaps of Castile also: That the Spaniards would the more
willingly consent to it, that they pretended to have a King who might
constantly live in Spain: In the mean time, if Charles were their King, the
multitude of urgent Affairs that would happen to him in all parts of Europe,
would oblige him to lead his life, as the ancient Patriarchs did, in a
continual Pilgrimage, and so to distribute his cares, time, travels, and
presence, that the Low Countries, Germany, and Italy would have the better
share o^ them, and Spain the least. That there was no other way to ward so
dangerous a blow, than by insensibly bringing back the Catholic King into the
course that Nature and the Law of Nations required of him, and by convincing
him by his own experience that the elder of his Grandsons deserved better to
succeed to him than the younger, and that so all that Charles had to do was to
become more virtuous and better qualified than Ferdinand. Chievres advised
Charles, in relation to the two other Crowns of Spain, which were those of
Navarre and Portugal, that it would be convenient to continue the Project of
the Catholic King for reuniting them to the ^est of the Spanish Monarchy by
means of ^lliances; but that there was but little appearance that that could be
so soon accomplished, seeing on the one hand Catha^ine de Frix Queen of
Navarre, and ^ohn d' Albert her Son, had such near Alli^nces with the Crown of
France, that ^ey would never dispose of their Children but with the consent and
approbation of Louis the Twelfth: And on the other hand, Manuel, King of
Potugal, had Five ^sty Sons by the Aunt of Charles his se^nd Wife, and that by
consequent the ^aughters of the same marriage could not ^pect to succeed so
soon, but that the ^gagement of the King of Navarre with the French might some
time or other be ^nare to him, and that besides, as the ^sterity of Charlemain
was extinct in the ^ce of Eighteen years, though it was so ^merous that it
consisted of thirty two ^gorous Princes all married, so that of Manuel might
fail by a like or more unhappy Fate.

England was more important in all respects to Charles, and his Governor
advised him to look upon it at all times as a Kingdom able to do him great
services, and proportionably to hurt him; for the Low Countries, in the
condition they were then in, needed not fear to succumb, unless they had France
for their Enemy, and then they could not expect any assistance greater,
speedier, more suitable to their necessity, nor nearer at hand than that of the
English. That if the necessity of that assistance did not increase after he
came to the enjoyment of the Successions which he expected, it would at least
be as great, seeing Spain would then become a Monarchy that might counterpoise
France and none but England could be in a condition then to turn the balance to
which side of the two it adhered. That Charle^ would always have the advantage
of the French when he competed with them t^ draw England over to his side;
since be sides the invincible antipathy betwixt the English and French Nation,
and the inveterate hatred fomented by so many Wars Henry the Eighth of England
was marrie^ to the last Infanta of Spain, Sister to Charle his Mother, and
constantly favored h^ Father-in-law Ferdinand the Catholic against Louis the
Twelfth.

In relation to Scotland it behoved Charles to reason from a quite opposite
Maxim; and that he must not expect upon any Juncture that could be offered to
him, to engage that King into his Interests. The Alliance of that Nation with
the French, had without interruption continued seven hundred years from King to
King, and from Crown to Crown; and though it had not been so old, nor so
strict, yet it would be enough for the Scots that Spain courted the friendship
of the English to make them declare against it for France, though they had not
as yet spoused any Party.

Italy came next in course into the thought of Chievres, of which he only
represented to the Archduke four principal Powers from whom the Inferior were
(...) receive their influence, to wit, France, ^pain, the Holy See, and the
Republic of ^enice.

France held there the Dutchies of Genoa and Milan, Spain, the Kingdom of
Naples, ^e Holy See, ten Provinces, besides the ^ity of Rome, and the Venetians
the State which is called Terra Firma. The Italians ^d no reason to fear that
the Popes or ^enetians would trouble their repose, because both had almost an
equal interest to preserve it: But if the French and Spaniards grew weary of
Peace, and took up Arms again, they must infallibly have the same success which
they already had, that is to say, that the Nation of the two which could get
the Pope on their side would overcome; and as the most Christian and the
Catholic Kings did not conquer nor divide betwixt them the Kingdom of Naples
but by the consent of Alexander the Sixth; as the Spaniards had not driven the
French from thence two years after, but in pursuance of a secret Treaty
concluded for that end betwixt the Great Captain and the same Alexander; and as
the Pope Julius the Second contributed most to hinder the most Christian King
from recovering what he had lost, by ruining the formidable Army of that Prince
upon the side of the River of Garillan, so the Spaniards in their turn would be
driven out of the Kingdom of Naples whenever it should be their misfortune to
displease the same Julius, or one of his Successors. So that the Archduke, in
the sense of his Governor ought chiesly to apply himself to entertain his
Holiness in the good disposition he was in in relation to Spain; and if the
matter was not difficult by reason that Julius hated Louis so much the more,
that formerly he loved him, no more would it be in regard of succeeding Popes,
since on the one hand their State bordered immediately upon the Kingdoms of
Naples, and that they were next Neighbors, whereas the Territories of diverse
Princes lay betwixt theirs and the Duchy of Milan, and that so the Court of
Rome were not so much exposed to be surprised by an Invasion from the French as
from the Spaniards; and on the other hand, it was not so much to be apprehended
that the Spaniards would usurp all Italy if they retained the possession of
Naples, as it would be that France might reduce Italy into a Province, if they
added the Kingdom of Naples to the Duchy of Milan, because then they could
march by Land into the Milanese; having only the Alps and Piemont to cross;
whereas the Spaniards could not go thither but by Sea, and have a Voyage of
five hundred Leagues to make.

The Republic of Venice according to Chievres was no less to be considered in
matter of Politics than the Court of Rome; but for power it was not so much,
since the Holy See, the Emperor, France and Spain having entered into a League
to ruin it, Louis the Twelfth alone had defeated all its Forces at the Battle
of Giaradadda, and taken from it all it possessed in the Terra Firma. It is
true, it afterward recovered part of that State; but seeing it was not so
easily regained as lost, and that in all appearance it would be long before the
rest could be recovered. The Venetians were too wise to engage in the mean time
in any other Affair; and if they were constrained to espouse a new Party, it
would rather be against France, which had in one day stripped them of all that
in the space of three hundred years they had acquired by extraordinary
prudence, conduct, and charge, than against Spain, which rested satisfied with
the recovery of the maritime places of Apullia and Calabria without repaying
the vast Sums lent by the Republic to the last King of Naples, for which they
were morgaged.

There was but one King for the three Kingdoms of the North, Sweden, Denmark,
and Norway, and that Prince was Christiern the Second of the House of
Oldenbourg. His Father and Grandfather had laid up vast Treasures for him: he
had for Allies most of the Princes and Hausiatick Towns of Germany: He had a
great deal of Authority in several Circles, and especially in that of the Lower
Saxony, and if Charles needed not his solicitation for obtaining one day the
Empire, yet it was of extreme importance to him, that he should not thwart it,
because he was sure he could never be chosen so long as he was against him.
That was the reason why Chievres advised him to design one of his Sisters for a
Wife to that Prince; and the Alliance was the more easy to be concluded at
that time because the barbarous numour of Christiern which made him lose his
Kingdoms, and die in a Prison, was not as yet known. Both Parties were equally
persuaded that they would find their advantage in it, because the King of
Denmark, who had had Territories in Germany, proposed to himself not only to
preserve, ^ut also to enlarge them if the eldest Son of his House died without
male Issue; by marrying the Emperors Granddaughter; and the House of Austria
also raised the Authority which it had in Germany considerably, by disposing
all the North to second the Emperor in the Pretensions which he already had of
rendering the Empire Hereditary in his Family.

Vladislaus, King of Hungary, was also King of Bohemia; and Charles was told
(...) his Governor that he was the most ^oper Prince of all to turn and manage
the Germans, provided there were as much Art employed to appease him, as there
had been imprudence committed in offending him.

To make this secret of State the more obvious to Charles, Chievres informed
him that the Kingdoms of Hungary and Bohemia were no less Elective than the
Empire; and that the House of Austria, during the space of fourscore years had
been thinking of appropriating them, for two reasons; first, because they
bordered upon the ten Hereditary Provinces, and could defend and cover them;
and secondly, if that the fundamental Laws of those two Crowns were changed
without the raising of any tumult and effusion of blood, the Germans would
insensibly be accustomend to the form of Government that might be introduced
into their Circles, and would not think it strange that their Aristocracy
turned into an absolute Monarchy. There is no mounting up to the Thrones of
Monarchies, who choose their Masters by Plurality of Voices, but by Parties and
Factions; and the^ House of Austria had formed two so^ powerful Factions in the
Kingdoms o^ Hungary and Bohemia, that there was no ground to f^ar but when they
came to be vacant it would obtain them. Nevertheless the success did not fully
answer so quaint a project; and though the measures of the House of Austria had
been long before concerted, and laid down with all possible circumspection, yet
were they not the Juster for that. Mathias Corvinus, the Son of the famous Jogn
Huniades, the terror of the Turks, stood in competition for these Crowns, and
would not be diverted from his Pretentions neither by the most advantageous
Offers, nor most terrible Menaces. He had nothing to pretend for himself but
the high reputation and merit of his Father: but that merit and reputation were
so well settled, that they were sufficient to gain the greater and sounder part
of the Estates of Hungary and Bohemia. The Faction of the House of Austria was
constrained to submit; and Ma^hias was so fortunate that the House of Austria
afterward desired an accommodation with him. That House waited for another
opportunity of competition, and promised it self a more favorable issue:
Nevertheless it was as far out in the second ^s in the first conjecture. It had
Vla^islaus for Competitor; and if that Prince ^ame short of that which caused
the Election of Mathias, he had in lieu thereof ^ersonal Charms which Nature
had de^ied to all those of the House of Austria. He had no fine nor piercing
Wit; and it was not for that that those who were more ^genious than he esteemed
him. They admired in Vladislaus an open, free, sweet, and condescending temper,
which won upon hearts for this reason alone that there was nothing
extraordinary in him, and that every one found in him something suitable to his
own humor. All the qualities which were found in him might prove advantageous
to those who should choose him for their King, and he seemed to have none that
they needed to be afraid of. They were assured beforehand, that he would not of
himself alter any of the Laws which he found established, and that if they
expected any new Law to be made by him, he must be entreated to do it. So that
the solicitations of the House of Austria hindered him not from being
recognized King of Hungary and Bohemia, and put into the possession of the two
Crowns; but the Factions that are formed in Elective States cause always
unexpected revolutions, when care has not been taken to sti^le them so soon as
they begin to appear. The Party of the House of Austria in Hungary and Bohemia
was grown so strong during the Reign of Mathias, what pains soever that great
Prince had taken to break it; and the great men of the higher Nobility of the
two Kingdoms who were engaged therein, were so strongly possessed with the
Maxims of the House of Austria, contrary to the peace of the Public, which
were fortified by the settled pensions that they duly received from thence, that
the Austrians hardly met with any opposition when they endeavored to Arm them
against, their own Country. They yielded to the first instance that was made to
them for that effect; and gave a new precedent in Politics. That no men are
sooner persuaded to disturb the Peace of their own Country, than they who are
most concerned to maintain it. They took the Field: with flying Colors marched
to join the Forces which the House of Austria kept in readiness upon the
Frontiers to second their revolt: they joined them; joined them; abandoned
Hungary and Bohemia to their Pillage; and surprising Vladislaus unprovided,
reduced him to such extremity, that he was constrained to make a In the
Treaties betwixt Hungary and Austria.
Treaty with the Emperor Maximilian the First, bearing that Vladislaus should
reign peaceably during life, and that after his decease the Estates of Hungary
and Bohemia should choose a Prince to succeed him of the House of Austria: but
that Treaty was filled with so many illegal absurdities, that no Lawyer who
examined it judged it good in Law. Two foreign Princes in respect of Hungary
and Bohemia had attempted by their own private Authority to overturn their
fundamental Laws, and to abolish their Election, to take from the People the
liberty of choosing their own Sovereign, and to subject them to the Dominion of
Austria, without asking or receiving their approbation. And therefore that
Treaty subsisted no longer than the violence that had produced it; and the
Forces of Maximilian were no sooner dispersed for want of Pay, but that the
Estates of Hungary and Bohemia, being well assured that for a long time he
could not raise others, protested against the transaction made to their
prejudice, without being called to it, as null. King Vladislaus was there
discharged of the Oath which he had taken, and the two Crowns acted with the
same independence as before in regard of the House of Austria. The People
expected not till Louis, the only Son of Vladislaus, were of Age to reign to
secure him that he should succeed to his Father. They received him in reversion
for all he was a Child, and in that particular violated the custom of their
Ancestors, though what they had done might be used as a Precedent against their
right of Election.

Affairs were in this posture when Chievres informed the Archduke of his true
Interests; and he told him that in so dangerous a matter to be stirred, it
would not be prudence in the House of Austria to pursue any more by way of Arms
its pretensions upon Hungary and Bohemia, and that it could not do it without
occasioning a fearful scandal in Christendom, nor without arming all the
Neighboring Powers against it; but since Vladislaus had but one Son and one
Daughter, and that his Son was transported with a rashness of courage that
would certainly undo him before he had Children, it was extremely important by
all means to negotiate and conclude a double Alliance betwixt the Houses of
Austria and Hungary by marrying young Ferdinand, the Brother of Charles, and
one of his Sisters with the Prince and Princess of Hungary and Bo^emia the
Children of Vladislaus, to the and that Ferdinand, or at least his Poste^ity,
might be preserved to the succession ^f the two Growns when they came to be
^oid.

In fine, Chievres obliged not the Arch^uke to make any particular reflection
upon Sigismond King of Poland. He only told him that that Prince was so closely
united with Vladislaus, that as the House of Austria was sure to have the one
for Enemy if it attacked the other, so by a contrary conduct it might have both
their friendship.

The knowledge of the Families whereof Charles was already Master, or whereof
he was one day to be, came immediately after the notices that had been given
him of the disposition of Christian Potentates in relation to him, and he was
particularly informed of the merit and several advantages of illustrious
Families. He was given to understand that in that distinct knowledge all the
Justice which he should render to the great men and Nobility of his Dominions
would consist; and that thereby he would insinuate himself more into their
affection, than by any other means: that they would not at all value his
Liberalities nor the most singular favors that he might heap upon them, in
respect of the care he took in maintaining the Lords in the several Ranks and
Privileges which they enjoyed by Birth, and that in so nice a Point he could
hardly commit a fault but which would be irreparable. Charles convinced by the
force of these reasons learned so well, and so universally retained the
honorary Rights of the Flemish, Spanish, Italian, and German Families, that
never any action of that nature was brought before him, but that he was able to
decide it upon the spot without the assistance of any other.

The speculations we have been speaking of ought to terminate in practice; and
Chievres had no sooner by them shaped the mind of the Archduke, but he put the
young Prince upon the practical part of what he had learned, though he was but
as yet in the age when nothing but pastime and recreation is talked of to those
of his quality. He would have him not only be present in his Council, but also
that he should be as assiduous in it, or more, than any of his Counselors of
State. He charged him with the examining of all Petitions of consequence that
were addressed to him from the Provinces of the Low Countries, and making
report of them afterward to his Council; and least ^e might not heed the matter
with all necessary attention, as waiting to deliver his mind concerning it
until his Counselours had spoken, to the end he might take ^he advantage of
their stating the affair, and of the reasons they might give to back their
opinion, His Governor ob^ged him regularly to speak his Judgment first.

When any important dispatch came from foreign Countries, Chievres made him lay
all things aside to read it, nay, so far, as that if he were asleep, and that
the matter required expedition, he awoke him, and obliged him to examine it in
his presence. If the Prince happened to be mistaken in the manner he understood
it, or the Judgment he passed upon it, he was immediately reproved and
corrected by his Governor; and if he was so happy as to find out at first the
knot of the difficulty, and the expedient for avoiding it, that did not serve
his turn, seeing he must besides confirm what he had said by good reasons, and
answer pertinently to the objections which Chievres never failed to make to him.

When any long Negotiation happened, and when a foreign Prince sent an
Ambassador into the Low Countries, Charles had double fatigue, because then
his Governor never gave Audience but in his presence, did nothing without him,
and dispatched no business but by him. If the Ambassador presented his
Propositions in writing, Charles had the charge of informing the Council of
them, and of declaring to them what might be said for or against the matter, to
the end that they who spoke after him might give their opinion upon full
knowledge of the Affair; and if the Ambassador was satisfied to make his
Proposals by word of mouth, and that the Affair in agitation was too secret to
be entrusted to Paper, Charles must remember precisely and distinctly what he
heard, without forgetting one Syllable; otherwise his defect of memory would
have been taken notice of in full Council, and his negligence censured in the
place where it was his greatest ambition to purchase esteem. Chievres had a
care not to inform the Public of the matters we have now represented, because
he would have attracted the indignation of those who were not so sharp-sighted
as to see at so great distance the mark he aimed at: But it is a thing almost
impossible long to conceal the manner how great Princes are Educated, when it
is not in all things conform to the Custom practiced in their Age. The most
Christian King Louis the Twelfth had an Affair to be concerted with the
Archduke, which required to be managed by so much the more skilful hands that
the Emperor and Catholic King were concerned in it. Hangist of Geulis, one of
the most noted and understanding Gentlemen of Picardy was chosen to negotiate
it for two reasons, one because his Person was acceptable to the Flemings, and
the other, that being Chievres his Kinsman he might the more easily accord with
him; but Geulis was extremely surprised when he found himself obliged to treat
hand to hand with Charles, who was then but fourteen years old complete. He was
glad of it, nevertheless, at first, as hoping to make a better bargain of it;
but when he found that the Archduke at the Age, and in the State he saw him in
was already the ablest Prince of his time in the Art of Governing, he began to
suspect the evils that that might occasion to France; and seeing it would not
have been civil to have declared his thoughts as to that openly to Chievres, he
only told him, that he did did not conceive why he put the Archduke upon so
great an application to Affairs of State, since it neither agreed with his
tender age, his quality, constitution, nor the profound Peace which the Low
Countries enjoyed: that the temper of that Prince was all fire, and that his
prodigious activity was a sufficient proof of it: that nothing was so contrary
to People of that constitution than a too long and serious meditation; and
seeing they spent incomparably more spirits than others in the exercise of
their faculties, they proportionably wore out the Organs they made use of, and
so hastened either their death, or from a continual speculation ran into
madness: that the latter of these inconveniences was the more to be feared,
that in respect of Charles it was a Family distemper; and that if his Mother
was troubled with it without application, he had reason to foresee that the
excess of application might produce in him the most terrible and most
ignominious of its effects.

Chievres gave Geulis an answer which the Spaniards have reason to match with
the Apophthegms of Antiquity. He replied, that he had heretofore reflected upon
all that he had said, and often considered of it; but that after all he was
persuaded that it was the chief duty incumbent on him, and to which he was most
obliged in conscience, according to the Commission given him, to put Charles,
as soon as he could, in a condition not to stand in need of a Tutor; and
nevertheless he must need one so long as he lived, if he did not accustom him
in his younger years to take cognizance of his own Affairs; because if they
expected till he was more advanced in age, he would never apply himself to that
so much as was necessary, whether that he would find himself at first
overcharged with the multitude of Affairs, or that he would be discouraged by
the pains he must take in determining them being but a novice therein, and by
the frequent impediments they would bring in the way of his pleasures and
recreations. However Chievres read in the thought of Guelis, what care soever
he took to conceal it, that he feared the Archduke might become too knowing,
and labored as much as he could to divert the prejudice that might redound to
the Monarchy of France from the Education of the Prince. Nay, and at first he
succeeded in it pretty fortunately; and if after he was dead the affairs which
he had well disposed changed countenance, he is no more to be blamed for that
than for the evils that happened before he was born; and those who out lived him
gave him the testimony that if his life had been longer, France and Spain had
never engaged together in War.

Louis the Twelfth had no Son, and by consequent Francis Count of Angoulesm,
first Prince of the Blood Royal, was by the Law of the State next to succeed
him. This Prince was brought up at Coignac a Town of Angumeis, but Louisia of
Savoy his Mother was commonly at Court. She had quarrelled with the Queen for
some reasons that make nothing for the clearing of this History; and there
could not be a greater misunderstanding betwixt two Princesses, than when Louis
was so ill that the Physicians despaired of his recovery. His most Christian
Majesty a few months before, had concluded two Treaties, the first with the
Emperor Maximilian; and the second with Ferdinand the Catholic King: both
Treaties carried in express terms, That the Archduke Charles of Austria should
marry Claudia of France, eldest Daughter to the most Christian King. France in
the present Juncture could not receive a greater prejudice than by that, seeing
the Marriage agreed upon, would one day render it weaker than Spain, and by
consequent would infallibly expose it to succumb under the first War that might
happen betwixt them. Bretagne, a Province of vast extent, and important in
situation had for many Ages been dismembered from the Monarchy of France, and
with extreme difficulty had been reunited to it again. The Conduct of Philip
Angust was signal in obliging the Dukes of Bretagne, Princes of the Blood, and
of the Branch of Dieux, to perform a regular Homage to France; and when the
debate for that Fief arose betwixt John of Montfort and Charles of Blois, King
Charles the Fifth evocated the cause to his Parliament, and decided it.

In a word, when there was no Males in the House of Bretagne, and that that
Duchy fell to Female; France by an irregular Conduct of those who governed it
under the Minority of Charles the Eighth was at the point of seeing that Duchy
fall into the House of Austria. The French unseasonably declared War against
the Bretons, pressed them with extraordinary violence in a time when the Laws
of War were as yet exactly enough observed, attempted to seize the State of
their Heiress without marrying of her, and thereby constrained them to cast
themselves into the Arms of Maximilian of Austria. That young Prince by a
strange good luck had married the Heiress of Burgundy, and by that means
deprived the French of their hopes of adding the Low Countries to their
Monarchy. His Wife lived no longer than was necessary to secure the property of
the Low Countries to the House of Austria, seeing she died within a few years
after their Marriage, leaving him only one Son and one Daughter. He was
therefore in a condition to engage in a second Marriage with the Heiress of
Bretagne, and again to border upon France by Normandy, Maine, Anjou, Touraine,
and Poitou, as he bordered upon it by Picardy, Champagne, and Burgundy: That
second Match the most considerable in Christendom was offered to him a second
time, as the first had been, without suing for it, and these latter Ages had
not produced any man so fortunate. It would have been folly to have refused a
Princess of twelve years of age, the most beautiful of her time, who bestowed
her self upon him to save her Portion; and Maximilian had wit enough to accept
of her, but he wanted heat enough to go and marry her in Person. He was content
to marry her by Proxy, and the Bretons took exceptions at that negligence. The
person of greatest credit amongst them was the Mareshal de Rieux, who had not
favored the House of Austria but because he had been ill treated by that of
France. He expected that Maximilian would have come into Bretagne with Forces
and Money enough to snatch out of the hands of the French what they had taken
in the Province; but perceiving that none came in his name but one Lord, so ill
accompanied that he durst not make a public entry into Reunes, and so beggarly
that the Heiress of Bretagne was obliged to maintain him, he repented of what
he had done, and was not long in finding out means to make reparation for his
fault. He represented to the French the error they committed in losing
Bretagne by the same way that they had lost Flanders: He let them know that
offensive and defensive Arms were useless in a Juncture when the Weapons of
love could overcome: he composed the greatest animosities on both sides; and
disposed Charles the Eighth not only to become Maximilians Rival, but also to
prevent him. So that whilst Maximilian solicited the Merchants of Antwerp and
Bruges to lend him money for his pretended Voyage into Bretagne, Charles went
thither, won the heart of the Heiress, banished from thence, and supplanted
Maximilian.

A Marriage solemnized by both parties in Person, carried it over another that
was on the one side only celebrated by Proxy: and Charles possessed the Heiress
of Bretagne and her Country peaceably. He had three Boys by her, who all died
Children; and Louis XII. who succeeded him, married his Widow as much through
inclination as reason of State. He had indeed the greatest Civil Interest to
preserve Bretagne, but besides he had loved the Heiress; and his flame was
easily kindled again, though seven years of imprisonment had been used to
extinguish it. They add, that he was reciprocally beloved, and that the Widow
of Charles the Eighth comforted her self for the loss of him, in hopes that she
should still reign in France. She was not mistaken in her opinion; and Louis
that he might enjoy her the more speedily, knowing that the dispensation to
marry her had been granted him, stayed not till the Legate delivered it into
his hands. He took the start and married; and the two Daughters which he soon
had, persuaded him of a numerous Posterity, and that after the Girls he would
have Boys. Trusting to that supposition he had twice promised his eldest
Daughter to Charles the Grandson of Maximilian, but his conjecture was only
verified in part. His Wife was brought to bed of some Male Children, but they
died almost as soon as they were born, and he had none remaining alive but his
two Daughters. Reasons of State and Decorum required that the Count of
Angoulesm should marry the Eldest, and the honest Frenchmen pressed the King to
it; but the Queen had got so great an ascendant over the mind of her Husband as
to keep him from disposing of his Daughter to any person without her consent.
The hopeful and lovely presence of the young Count was not disagreeable to her,
and besides in that particular she was inclinable enough to the Interests of
France: but the rebounds of the hatred of women commonly go farther than those
of men. The aversion of the Queen to the Countess of Angoulesm rebounded in a
very strange and odd manner upon the Count her Son; and her Majesty made no
account of the singular qualities which distinguished him from other Princes of
his age, and procured him the admiration of the People. She only considered him
in the natural relation and affection he had to the Countess; and as she was
not ignorant of the deference that he had for his Mother, so she thought of
nothing for the future but that when he was King, he would give her a great
deal of Authority in the State; and that so after the death of Louis the
Twelfth, the Countess would have as much credit, as the Queen had had during
his life. Ambitious people behold nothing with so jealous eyes, as those who
are like to supplant them; and the Queen was in that disquiet condition of mind
at the time the King was so ill, that the Physicians despaired of his recovery.
It is not certain whether the Queen obliged them to conceal nothing from her of
what they thought of him, or that she suspected the worst: but it is certain
that she took the same measures as if she had been persuaded of it. She durst
not, or would not forsake a Husband that had been so loving to her, but she
dreaded as the greatest of miseries to fall into the hands of the Countess. Yet
her Majesty could not avoid it if her eldest Daughter continued in France until
the death of the King, seeing his Successor would not suffer her to depart out
of the Kingdom, but would marry her. So she resolved to remove her before, and
send her into Bretagne, wh^ ^he might dispose of her according to her humor by
marrying her to the Archduke of the Low Countries, and by raising by virtue of
that Alliance an Enemy that might torment the French Monarchy, in such a manner
that the Countess should not get much by her Sons becoming King.

The Court was at Blois, and it was not far from thence to Bretagne; but most
part of women are covetous and near, and thereby often lose the occasion of
executing great designs. The fourteen Dukes of Bretagne had for the most part
been magnificent, and had left a vast quantity of most rich furniture. The
Queen had caused it to be transported into France, and could not resolve to
leave it there lest the Countess might make use of it, and at her cost live in
the luxury, wherein she so much delighted. That consideration preserved
Bretagne to France, because it hindered the Queen from sending her Daughter by
Land with a strong Guard that could not be stopped.

Her Majesty thought it necessary that the young Princess should depart with
the Baggage, to the end that the respect which would be shown her might keep it
from being searched; and seeing it was not sufficiently concealed neither as to
the quantity nor value when carried by Land in Wagons, it was thought more
convenient to send it in Boats by Water: but it seldom happens that one woman
surprises another that mistrusts her; and the Queen stood in need of too many
people to keep her project hid so long as would have been necessary.

The Countess was punctually informed of all; and seeing her Son was under age,
and that she expected to be Regent if at that time he had happened to be King,
she thought she might lawfully anticipate the function in a Juncture that could
not be more important. All the Courtiers who were of the humor to prefer the
rising Sun before the setting were her friends, and amongst these was the
Marshall de Rene of Rohan.
Gie. Gie was a complete Courtier, and the Favorite of two successive Kings,
Charles the Eighth, and Louis the Twelfth, which was rare, and without losing
the good opinion which the Public conceived of his probity during his twofold
favor, which is rarer still. He was a great lover of his Country; and if
heretofore he was the cause that the French at the Battle of Fornona did not
cut in pieces all the Italian Forces who attempted to hinder their passage, it
was because he thought the Conquerours could not gain so much by far in
obtaining a total Victory, as they might lose in the sequel of the fight by
reason of the person of Charles the Eighth, who was too deeply engaged in the
Conflict. He knew that the Queen designed her Daughter for the Archduke, and
was sensible of what consequence it would be for the Kingdom to frustrate the
accomplishment of it. So the Countess had no sooner given him notice that Madam
was embarked, and solicited him to stop her as she passed through his
Government of Anjou, but that he consented to it, though he foresaw the
troublesome consequences of so bold an enterprise in their full extent.

He omitted nothing that might sweeten the bitterness of it: His respects were
most profound in diverting Madam from prosecuting her Journey: He used her and
those of her retinue with extraordinary civility: he contracted debts to defray
her charges with greater Magnificence, which afterward encumbred his Estate;
but, to be short, if he served the Countess in what she most desired, he
provoked the Queen in the point she was most sensible in, and rendered her
irreconcilable to him. Her Majesty took it so ill that a Breton, born her
Subject, and descended of a Family so often allied to the House of Dreux should
dare to oppose what she most ardently desired, that at the very instant she
swore she would be his ruin, and endeavored to be as good as her word upon
the first occasion that offered.

The King contrary to all expectation recovered, and by incessant importunities
she forced that good Prince to abandon his Favorite. Gie was brought to a
trial, In the Memoires of Bretagne.
and it appears in the Papers of the Chamber of accounts of Bretagne that the
Queen laid out 35000 Livers for carrying on his Process, which at that time was
a vast Sum: in the mean time she had but half of her revenge, and the Mareshal
was only sentenced to be banished, and to end his days in the lovely House of
Verger, seated in the same Province of Anjou, where he had the unhappiness to
displease the Queen.

The Countess nevertheless obtained her ends, seeing the chief Persons of the
Kingdom being assembled by the King's permission, presented to his Majesty a
most humble and judicious Petition. They earnestly begged of him to grant his
loyal Subjects the favor which they most ardently, and with great Justice
desired, which was the marriage of Madam his Daughter with the Count of
Angoulesm, to the end that that Princess being one day to inherit in full the
Duchy of Bretagne, and her younger Sister having no claim but to a very little
share in the other Estates of her Mother, which might be valued at a Sum of
Money, the whole Province might be so incorporated with the French Monarchy,
that for the future it could not be dismembered from it, though the most
Christian Kings should leave none but Daughters. The Juncture was favorable,
seeing the French demanded nothing of Louis the Twelfth but what he could
honestly and with a good conscience grant. The Emperor and Catholic King were
the first that had violated the Treaty which promised Madam to their Grandson;
and their prevarication in that point was so evident, that all the Potentates
of Europe were convinced of it. So his most Christian Majesty being discharged
of his Oaths, listened to the Address with his accustomed goodness, and passed
his word that Madam should marry the Count of Angoulesm, and that the Marriage
should be consummated so soon as she was of age. The Queen, who could neither
break nor defer a resolution which was so odious to her, promised her self to
frustrate the accomplishment of it; and they who knew how easily the King had
sacrificed to her his Favorite, thought that she proposed nothing in that
beyond her power, but the Countesses good fortune levelled that difficulty when
at Court it seemed to be insuperable. The Queen who in all appearance, and
according to all the Rules of Physic was like to outlive the King, and to
hold out to an extreme old age, nevertheless died before him at the age of
thirty seven years. The Countess found no more opposition to her designs at
Court: The Friends of the Queen courted her favor; and she was presented with
what fitted her best of the Furniture and Rarities of the House of Bretagne.
Her Son married Madam; and that Princess entertained as great an affection for
her Husband as possible could be, though like that of most part of other women,
it bordered not upon Jealousy.

Most of the particulars we have now related, happened before Chievres was
Governor to Charles; and those who before him were about that young Prince
failed not to represent to him upon all occasions according to the Orders they
had received from his two Grandfathers, that the Count of Angoulesm in taking
his Wife from him had done him an irreparable injury. That it was an affront
not to be suffered without infamy, nor revenged but by the blood of him that
had given it. That, the truth was, the Count was at that time below the anger
of the Archduke, being but as yet a private person; but that he would not be
always so, and that the Monarchy of France looked upon him as Heir apparent.
That when once he was King, he ought to call him to an account by the way of
Arms, which was the only course Sovereigns had when they intended to reduce
Persons of their own quality to reason, and that in the mean time it would be a
disgrace to the Archduke to entertain any communication with him. That he ought
not to propose to himself the Example of Maximilian his Grandfather, who showed
no resentment but in word, when King Charles the Eighth robbed him of his Wife
Anne of Bretagne, for it was not for want of courage that Maximilian suffered
it, but out of an absolute impossibility of revenging himself in that he was
under the power of a Father when the injury was done to him. That the Emperor
Frederick the Third his Father, one of the most husbanding Princes that ever
was, refused to furnish him with Money and Forces for that purpose; and that
the Flemings his Sons Subjects would not engage in the quarrel of a Prince whom
they looked upon as a stranger, since his Wife was dead, and that he was no
more but the Father of their Sovereign. That after the death of Frederick when
Maximilian had succeeded, the occasion of revenge was lost by the Apoplexy
which carried Charles out of the world at the age of twenty eight years, but
that the case was not alike neither in regard of the Archduke, nor in regard of
the Count of Angoulesm. Toward the end of Philip de Comines.
That the Archduke was already Master of the Low Countries. That his Subjects
had so great a love for him that they would spend part of their Estates and
their blood in the quarrel: That he would not want neither Spanish Gold, nor
German Soldiers; and that, in short, the Count was of too strong a constitution
to give any ground to fear that he would die before the Archduke had had the
satisfaction he desired of him.

These discourses suiting with the revengeful humor of Charles, and reiterated
to him in an Age wherein the strong impressions that then are made commonly
last as long as life, had produced their effect, and so animated the Archduke
against the Count, that he was impatient not to be in a condition of entering
the Lists against his Adversary; when Crievres foresaw the troublesome
consequences that an enmity cultivated with so much care might have, and
thought it necessary to remedy it betimes, though he made no doubt but that the
Emperor and Catholic King would take it ill at his hands, and prove his
enemies if he succeeded in it.

He had formerly been acquainted in the Wars of Italy with Artas de Goussier
Lord of Boisly, Governor to the Count of Angoulesm, and reckoned him the
fittest man of the Kingdom for the Commission that was given him. He was
persuaded of his great integrity, and promised himself from that to be seconded
in the design of contracting a Friendship betwixt the Archduke and the Count,
which might procure to both a long repose, and preserve to the Flemings and
French the peace which they enjoyed. He solicited him to this by ways that are
not known: but it is to be believed that it was done without engaging the
Archdukes honor, and so prudently that neither the Count nor his Governor
might draw any advantage from it, in case the accommodation had not succeeded.
Goussier on his part contributed thereto all that could be desired, and
labored much to blot out of the Count's mind the dangerous impressions of the
Archduke which were stamped in it, as if he had been his most formidable enemy,
whilst Chievres on the other side acted efficaciously with the Archduke in
convincing him by strong reasons that the injuries of Princes were not to be
measured by the Standard of private persons; and that he neither could nor
ought to take it ill if the Count had done to him what he would have done to
the Count, if he had been in his place.

When the resentment was stifled on the one hand, and diffidence removed on the
other, the two Governors sought an occasion to settle a commerce by Letters
betwixt their two Princes, which might entertain and increase their good
intelligence, and took the first favorable opportunity that offered. Mere
chance brought it so about that it was on the Archdukes side, and that he
needed the offices of the Count in an affair of importance. Henry Count of
Nassau, who possessed in the Provinces of Flanders, Brabant, Holland, and
Zealand fair remains of vast Estates which those of his Family had purchased
there; had so far insinuated himself into the favors of the Archduke, that he
would have been his Favorite if that Prince had been of an humor to have any,
and that to caution himself against that he had not taken the same measures
almost, which chaste men commonly make use of to fortify themselves against the
lovely eyes of a Lady whom they are afraid to be smitten with; he studied, and
played with his Master; and Chievres was so far from opposing that he
contributed to it, because making it his business to place about the Archduke
young Lords who might not corrupt the good seeds that he endeavored to plant
in him, he thought Nassau not only one according to his mind, but that also he
might be useful in confirming the Archduke in the exercises of virtue; by ^ring
him up by his example to the prac^ of it.

It was at that time the custom of the Low Countries to marry the eldest Son^
of Noble Families very young, and Nassau^ relations courted for him Elizabeth
of Chalon, Sister to the Prince of Aurange. The Alliance was suitable, and could
not cause any umbrage; for besides that the Families of France and of the Low
Countries had full liberty to marry one with another without displeasing their
Sovereigns, if the House of Chalon had a great Estate in the Duchy of
Burgundy, it had more in the French County, and upon that account passed rather
for a Flemish than French Family. All the difficulty lay in the obtaining of
the consent of the King Louis the Twelfth, without which the Father of
Elizabeth had discharged her to be given in marriage; and there was but little
probability that his Majesty would give it in favors of Nassau, seeing it was
contrary to the reason of State. Prince Philibert of Chalon, the Brother of
Elizabeth, was the only Male of his Family. He gave no promises of a long life
in his youth, though afterward be became very strong, and Politicians looked
upon his Sister already as the richest Heiress in Europe. If Nassau married her
he was a person powerfully settled in the Low Countries, who would not change
his Master though the Succession of Aurange should fall to his Wife, and would
spend in the Archdukes service the Revenue of the fair Estate of the House of
Chalon in France: whereas if the King gave to Elizabeth a French Husband, the
Estate would not go out of the Kingdom as neither to the rents nor property,
and the Husband would employ them in the service of his Majesty. There needed
then a strong recommendation to the King to prevail with him, and Chievres
advised Nassau to pray the Archduke that in this prospect he would employ the
interest of the Count of Angoulesm with the King his Father-in-law. The
Archduke wrote obligingly to the Count about it; and that Prince prepared by
Goussier answered the Archduke in the same style. And seeing he already gloried
in a generosity too high for the Age he lived in, he granted more than was
demanded of him, and surmounted an obstacle which Nassau had not foreseen. He
thought it not enough to have obtained his Majesty's consent, but further won
the Prince of Aurange in favors of Nassau, who had, and always would have
opposed him, if the Count had not concerned himself in it. There had been an
ancient custom amongst the four chief Houses of Burgundy, which were Neuchatel,
Vienne, Vergy, and Chalon, which in some manner resembled the agreement of some
Sovereign Families in Germany touching their reciprocal Succession.

The custom was that when any one of the four was in danger of being extinct it
contracted no Alliance but with that of the three others which it liked best,
that the Estates of both might be joined. Now the Prince of Aurange thought
himself obliged in down right honesty to follow the example of his Ancestors.
In the House of Vienne there was a young Lord who in all things almost
sympathized with him in humor. He loved him entirely; and designed his Sister
for him upon the same consideration that he would have made him his Heir, if
she died before him. Nevertheless the Count of Angoulesm made his application
to him in so taking a way, and so dexterously insinuated the pleasure he would
do him in giving him an opportunity of obliging the Archduke in a thing that he
seemed cordially to be concerned in, that the Prince of Aurange to comply with
him strained himself extremely. He broke the custom we have been speaking of,
and slighted the Lord of Vienne whom already he had treated as his
Brother-in-law. He consented to the Marriage of his Sister with Nassau, and
laid the foundation of the greatness to which that House has been since
advanced. The Archduke thereupon testified all the acknowledgment to the Count
of Angoulesm that Goussier and Chievres expected from him. He thanked him for
it by Letters: He sent time after time Gentlemen to entertain a commerce with
him: caressed extraordinarily those whom the Count sent to him again; and that
correspondence was not as yet interrupted, when the Count succeeded to Louis
the Twelfth: but the cementing of that perfect intelligence we have been
speaking of was not the chief business of Chievres out of the Low Countries.

There were two others which demanded his more assiduous care, and troubled him
most of any thing when the least irregularity was committed in them. And that
was the friendship of the two Grandfathers of the Archduke, the more difficult
to be entertained, that seeing these Princes were of a quite contrary humor,
it was absolutely necessary to follow a different conduct with them, and
nevertheless from that diversity both took occasion at every turn to complain
of their Grandsons Governor; for though their Atipathy could not be greater
than it was, yet they expected to be treated after the same manner. The
Emperor Maximilian was insatiable as to money, and pretended that men should
find it for him as easily as he spent it. Ferdinand the Catholic King
husbanded his Revenues so frugally that he passed for covetous in the thoughts
of those who knew not that he had not the fourth part of what was necessary for
the carrying on of his vast designs. He no sooner came to understand that the
Emperor's wants were supplied with money from the Low Countries, but that he
represented his own to Chievres, and desired his assistance. It did not serve
Chievres his turn to lay before him that the Revenues of the Low Countries
could not suffice both the Emperor and him, because then he spoke no more of
money indeed; but instead of that desired the Archduke to engage in his
quarrels. It lay upon Chievres then to consider in the impossibilities he saw
himself in to comply with their Imperial and Catholic Majesty's at the same
time; which of the two Friendships it would be most important for the Archduke,
that his Governor entertained.

The Reasons for the Emperor were, that if Chievres resolved not to live with
him in a most strict union, that Prince who could not endure to perplex his
mind with the thoughts of what was to come; and who forecast no farther for the
future, than what his present profit obliged him to, would insensibly
discontinue to entertain the Party made in the Empire for the election of his
Grandson in his place, and would give occasion to the Electors who favored the
House of Austria to change sides when they found themselves slighted: Besides
if some time or other the French should have a mind to attack the Low
Countries, it would be impossible for the Catholic King to hinder them from
conquering them, and the Emperor alone would be capable to cross their design.
In the mean while, if he were slighted by the Archduke upon account of striking
in elsewhere; He would not do it, considering the temper he was of easy to be
disgusted, and more easy still to push on to the utmost extremities the
disgust which once he conceived; and though he would do it, yet he could not be
any more in a condition, seeing the Germans who esteemed him not so much for
his personal qualities as for the profit they were sure to make of him when
they were so happy as to be at Court when money came in, would no sooner see
the fountain head dried up by the cutting off his regular Supplies from
Flanders, but they would begin to slight him, and take no more care of arming
for him, nor of bringing Forces to his service when he desired it: whereas if
his Grandson's Purse were kept open to him for the future, as it had been
formerly, it would produce this odd effect, that the vice of one man would be
the virtue of the Family from which he sprung. That the prodigality of
Maximilian would become magnificence in the design of those of Austria in that
it served to continue the Empire in their Family; and that the Germans would
list themselves as readily, and with as little scruple mount on horseback to
follow the Emperor into the Low Countries, as they did when he solicited them
to accompany him in the War against the Republic of Venice.

The Reasons that made for the Catholic King in the mind of Chievres, were
that the Archduke had incomparably more to hope for, and more to fear from him
than from the Emperor. His hopes were manifest, grounded upon the Crowns
annexed to that of Arragon, as well in Spain as in Italy and the Coasts of
Africa. The fear was more hid, but the subject of it was neither smaller nor
less infallible. It consisted in this, That the Archduke, indeed, expected no
other Inheritance of his Grandfather by the Fathers side but the ten Provinces
of the House of Austria: but that Inheritance was of such a nature that he
could no ways be disappointed of it, provided he outlived his Grandfather, and
that that Prince never disposed of him to his prejudice, neither by Donation,
Alienation, nor Exchange. The Laws of Germany confirmed by all the Emperors
who reigned since Charles the Fourth, and ratified in all the general Diets
assembled since that time, bore in express terms, That the Imperial fees did so
certainly belong to the Males of the House that held them, and had once
received investiture of them, that it was not in the power of the Feudatary for
any cause or pretext that might be to frustrate his eldest Son, or the Male
Children of that eldest Son by giving them to his other Children, nor to
deprive the Paternal Cousins, how remote soever, of the same, in favors of
their own Daughters. Constant and uninterrupted custom had exactly agreed with
these Laws, and no instance could be given that they had ever been violated as
to that particular in whole, or in part.

It was not so in the Succession which the Archduke expected from the Catholic
King, and he had more reasons than one to fear that he might be disappointed of
it, though at first view it appeared to be full as sure as that of the
Emperor. For in the first place Ferdinand had sufficiently testified his
displeasure that his Dominions one day should fall to the House of Austria, by
omitting nothing that could naturally be done to prevent it. He acted not with
so much sincerity as the House of Austria in the marriage of his Son John of
Arragon Prince of Spain.
and Daughter Joan of Arragon surnamed the Fool.
with the Son Marguerite of Austria.
and Daughter The Archduke Philip.
of the Emperor; and whereas Maximilian had given him an only Daughter, he had
only given to Maximilian for Philip of Austria the second of his four
Daughters. The Eldest he married in Portugal; showing by so public a
preference, that he had rather his Succession should descend upon a Prince
whose Grandfather was a Bastard, and great Grandmother the Daughter of a
Shoemaker Jew, than be wanting in circumspection to remove his Son-in-Law the
Archduke Philip from the succession to the Crowns of Castile and Arragon.

His forecast nevertheless was vain, and in a very few years the Emperors Sons
Wife became Heir apparent of so many Kingdoms. Any but the Catholic King would
in so sudden a revolution have adored the Order of Divine Providence, and
wholly submitted to it: Nevertheless that Prince opposed it by a longer and
more steady obstinacy than that of Jonas in declining to go to Niniveh. His
Wife was no sooner dead, but that he married another in the sole prospect of
having a Son by her, and because he drew toward fifty years of age, and that
the disorders of his youth gave him ground at that age to distrust his own
vigor, he had his recourse to Physic, and took Potions that were thought fit
to supply that defect. In the second place, the Catholic King had lusty
handsome Bastards; and if he preferred them before the Children of his lawful
Daughter in succeeding to the Throne, he would in that do nothing contrary
neither to the Custom of Spain, nor the inclination of the Spaniards. It was no
new thing in that Country, the remotest of Europe on the Affrican side, to
promote Bastards to the Throne in exclusion of lawful Children, and Ferdinand
himself descended in right Line from Henry the Second, who was a Bastard. There
was besides another instance of that irregularity in his Family; For his Uncle
Alphonso of Arragon, Elder Brother to John of Arragon his Father, dying without
Children, by Testament which in that part was executed, frustrated John of
Arragon of the Kingdom of Naples, and left it to a Bastard whom he had by a
Person of quality, Educated in that prospect. In the third place, the Catholic
King could not only take from the Archduke Arragon and the Crowns that depended
upon it; but also he might by the way we shall now treat of hinder him from
reigning in Castile, and in the Monarchies annexed to it. This young Prince
drew his Title to Castile from Queen Isabella his Grandmother by the Mothers
side; and yet that Princess had not inherited it without violence, and
encroaching upon the most sacred and inviolable Laws of Civil Society. Henry
the Fourth, her Brother, King of Castile, married the Infanta of Portugal, and
that Infanta during his marriage with her was brought to bed of a Daughter, the
most beautiful, as they say, that ever was born in Spain. This Daughter by the
Fundamental Laws of the State excluded her Aunt from succeeeding to so many
Kingdoms, because she was nearest by a degree, and represented her Father:
Nevertheless the Aunt pretended that her Brother was impotent; and that the
Daughter that was fathered on him, was begotten by his Favorite Don Bertram de
la Cueva, Duke of Albuquerque. For that reason, or under that pretext she made
a great Party, and raised a War in Castile: But the Party of the Daughter
proving the stronger, the Aunt had her recourse to Ferdinand, and gave her self
to him, having no other way to engage him to espouse her interest against her
Niece. Ferdinand, having married the Aunt transported all the Forces of Arragon
into Castile. He overcame them who favored his Wives Niece, and dispossessed
her of the Kingdom: But was now in a condition to repay the injury which he had
done her, by recalling her into Castile where he had the Power, raising her to
the Throne, and marrying her to one of his Bastards.

Upon the Reasons we have been mentioning Chievres made the reflections they
deserved. He long considered with himself the prejudice that might befall the
Archduke by not entertaining an entire correspondence with his maternal
Grandfather: Nevertheless having put into the balance together the hurt that
might redound to that Prince by breaking with France during his minority, if he
Leagued too strictly with the Catholic King; and the injury the Catholic King
might do him, if he united not so closely with him, he found the first alone to
weigh far more than all the others put together, and by the boldest result of
prudence that is to be found in the History of Spain, he judged it to be
avoided rather than the rest. He kept the Archduke in friendship with the
French and Germans: He thought it enough not to give the Catholic King any
cause or pretext to complain of him in particular; and in the following Books
we shall find that his conduct in that point was as fortunate, as it had been
judicious.

The End of the First Book.
THE HISTORY OF Monsieur De Chievres.
The Second BOOK, CONTAINING The most remarkable Occurrences in the Monarchy of
Spain during the years One thousand five hundred and thirteen and One thousand
five hundred and fourteen.
THat we may conceive the motives which induced Chievres to prefer the Paternal
Grandfather of Charles of Austria his Pupil before the Maternal, and that we
may understand the advantages which Charles drew from that preference, we must
necessarily presuppose that Ferdinand the Catholic King who was the Maternal
Grandfather spoken of here, bounded not his ambition within Spain after he had
entirely driven the Moors from thence by the conquest of the Kingdom of
Granada. It troubled him to be confined to one of the extemities of Europe
without any appearance of growing greater, seeing he had the Pyrenean Mountains
for a Barriere; and crossing that Chain of Rocks which Nature seemed to have
laid to hinder the two most powerful Kings of Christendom from marrying
together, he found on the other side France so powerful in that part where it
bordered on him, that there was much greater cause to fear that it might take
from him his Territories of Biscay, Arragon, and Catalonia if he attacked
France, than there was hopes of conquering Guyenne and Languedock in it.

He resolved then to weaken it before he attacked it; and seeing it had got
footing in Spain by the acquisition that the most Christian King Louis the
Eleventh had made of the Counties of Roussillon and Cerdagne, from whence it
might easily seize Catalonia, the places whereof were not at all fortified at
that time; he made it his whole care to recover them, and succeeded therein by
a way not before practiced, Christian Princes having not been as yet accustomed
to cheat under a pretext of Religion.

Louis the Eleventh had bought of John King of Arragon, the Father of
Ferdinand, In the Contract of Engagement.
the two Counties by a Contract of Engagement which bore that his most
Christian Majesty should lend upon the Counties three hundred thousand Livers:
that both should be put into his hands for security of the debt; That the King
of Arragon should have full liberty to redeem them within nine years to be
reckoned from the Date of the Contract, upon payment of the Principal and
Interest; but that if he failed upon any cause or pretext whatsoever to do it
within the limited time, he should lose his reversion, and the propriety of
Roussillon and Cerdagne should remain to France. The King of Arragon let the
time clapse through a mere inability of redeeming the Counties; and Louis the
Eleventh perceiving the ninth year almost expired without any offer from the
King of Arragon of repaying his Money, observed a formality, which was not
necessary, and served only to give him what in Law is called abundantiam Juris.

He caused the King of Arragon to be summoned by a Herald to redeem the
Counties; and that Prince not having done it, his most Christian Majesty united
them to the French Monarchy, and left them at his death to Charles the Eighth
his only Son. Charles had been already nine years in peaceable possession of
them; and seeing by the Law of his State what had been united ten whole years
successively could not for the future be dismembered, Roussillon and Cerdagne
were no more alienable than the other Provinces of France, seeing two most
Christian Kings had enjoyed them without molestation during the space of thirty
years. But it had pleased Louis the Eleventh to bring up Charles the Eighth in
such a gross ignorance, that he had no knowledge of his own affairs; and
Ferdinand taking that young Prince on his weak side, corrupted, as they say, by
money Oliver Maillard a Monk of the observance his Confessor. That Cordelier
represented to Charles, that Christian Charity allowed not Christians of what
quality soever they were to take advantage from the misfortunes of others, and
that notwithstanding that was a thing which the late King had done, and which
his most Christian Majesty continued to do. That when Louis the Eleventh had
caused the late King of Arragon to be summoned to repay the money lent upon the
Counties of Roussillon and Cerdagne, he found him in an utter incapacity of
satisfying him, and that nevertheless his Majesty had therefrom taken all the
advantages that are allowed by the Law of Nations: That the King of Arragon was
at that time pestered in a Civil War and a Foreign War both at once; seeing on
the one hand the King of Castile, incomparably stronger than he, had entered
his Dominions with an Army, and on the other hand the Catalonians had revolted:
That his Majesty of Arragon died before these Affairs were concluded, and that
Ferdinand his Son was no more in a condition than he to redeem the two
Counties, since he was forced to employ all his own Revenue and that of the
Queen of Castile his Wife for driving the Mohammedan Moors out of the Kingdom of
Granada; and that by consequent the prescription expired not in respect of him,
because he was taken up in a Holy War: That his most Christian Majesty
therefore was no less obliged in conscience to restore him the Counties; and
that though in the Court of Man he had a very good right to demand the Money
and the Interest of the Debt which his Predecessor had lent; yet he had not so
in the Court of Heaven, since France had recovered more out of the same
Counties than amounted to the first Sum lent: That he must not neither make
deduction of the Expenses that the late most Christian King was forced to be at
in raising an Army of forty thousand men even according to the account of
Spanish Authors, and sending them into Roussillon for the reduction of the Town
of Perpignan that had revolted: That the Rebellion of that important place
ought neither to be imputed to the late King of Arragon who had no hand in it,
nor to Ferdinand his Son that had neither directly nor indirectly countenanced
it; and that so Roussillon and Cerdagne ought without farther delay to be
restored to him.

Charles who was not sharp-sighted enough to distinguish the truth from the
falsehood in this Discourse of his Confessor, obeyed the Father, but not so
implicitly as the Cordelier pretended he should. His Majesty, indeed, restored
the Counties without receiving either Principal or Interest of the money
disbursed by his Father, but in return he required two conditions of Ferdinand
which would have been no less troublesome to him than the payment of the money,
had they been as faithfully performed as they were stipulated in a solemn
Treaty In the last Treaty of France for the Counties.
. The first was that Ferdinand should enter into no League offensive or
defensive against France; the other, that he should not marry any of his four
Daughters neither in Germany, England, nor Flanders, and that he should not
give them any Husbands without the consent of the most Christian King or his
Successors; but before a year was over Ferdinand broke the first condition,
and made no more scruple afterward to violate the second. Six months after, he
entered into the Pyrenean League of Italy against Charles his Benefactor, and
had the greatest hand in robbing him of his Conquests. Not long after he formed
the project of hedging in France on the side of Picardy, Champagne, and
Burgundy, as he bordered it already on the side of Guyenne and Languedock, and
made account of bringing into his Family the Low Countries, and the ten
Hereditary Provinces of the House of Austria. That House was reduced to
Maximilian the First the Emperor, the Archduke Philip, and the Archdutchess
Margaret his Children. The Archduke was so tender, and had cost so much pains
in cockering him during his infancy, that there was no great appearance he
could live long enough to beget Children. The Archdutchess, on the contrary,
was the most vigorous and jolly Princess of her Age; and the Physicians were
free enough to say that she would carry with her the rich Successions of
Burgundy and Austria to the Family she married into, besides a numerous
Offspring of which she gave no small hopes. Ferdinand grounded upon that to
get her into his Family, and for that end laid the most Artificious and selfish
Scheme that can be found in the Records of Spain. He had one Son and four
Daughters, the Sons name was John, from the Grandfather by the Father's side,
his eldest Daughters name was Isabella, the seconds Jane, the thirds Mary, and
the youngests Catharine. The fundamental Laws of Spain gave to the Son all the
Kingdoms of Arragon which his Father possessed, and all the Kingdoms of Castile
that his Mother had brought with her in Marriage, his four Sisters having no
Pretensions to any part of them; and if he died without Children, the eldest of
his Sisters was to succeed him in full without sharing any thing with the
younger. Ferdinand was very willing that the States of Burgundy and Austria
might enter into his Family, but he would not have his own and Wifes Kingdoms
to go into a foreign House. That inconvenience seemed terrible unto him, and he
thought to remedy it by offering only to Maximilian his second Daughter for the
Archduke, because in all humane probability the marriage of the Infanto of
Spain with the Archdutchess could not be barren; and though by the greatest
mischance imaginable it should happen to be so, yet that of the eldest of the
Infanta's of Spain, designed for Manuel King of Portugal, might not be, and by
consequent if the Succession of Ferdinand and Isabella went out of the House of
Arragon, it would not go out of Spain, which by that means would be almost
united into one sole Monarchy. His Catholic Majesty then caused a double
Alliance to be proposed to the Emperor with this disproportion, that his only
Son should marry the only Daughter of his Imperial Majesty, and that
nevertheless the only Son of his Imperial Majesty should marry but the second
of his Daughters. The Proposition was in it self ridiculous as contrary to the
rules of Decency, the advantage not being equal to both sides, and nothing as
yet pressing Maximilian to marry his Children: It was nevertheless accepted by
an extraordinary disposition of Divine Providence, which intended to raise the
House of Austria by ways unknown to Maximilian and Ferdinand. The Emperor
thought he had in that double Alliance with the Catholic King such as we have
mentioned it to be, a present interest which he could find no where else; and
which was strong enough to determine him.

We have already spoken of his eager desire of money, and how it could not stay
with him. He was assured of raising three considerable Sums out of the
hereditary Provinces of the House of Austria and of the Low Countries. The two
first Sums were to be given him as a Present for the Marriages of the Archduke
and Archdutchess, and the last for the Portion of the said Archdutchess. He got
all clear to himself without disbursing a Penny, seeing in the Affair then in
agitation the Portions of the two Archdutchesses went in exchange for one
another, and that besides he had no charges almost at all to be put to, there
being but very little Magnificence at that time in the Court of Spain: whereas
if the Emperor settled his Son and Daughter in any other Family of Europe,
first, he would not find a double Alliance to be made, and besides, nothing of
what the Flemings and Austrians might give would come into his Coffers. In the
second place, the Charges of the Weddings would not be spared, and the Emperor
could have no pretext to excuse him from it.

The Subjects of his Imperial Majesty and of the Archduke acted not, indeed, in
so interested a view, but a consideration of honor inspired the same thoughts
into them. The Princess Isabella the eldest of the Infanta's of Spain was
married very young to Alphonso the Infanto of Portugal. She was not full
Eighteen years of age when she was left a Widow; but that hindered not the
Flemings and those of Austria from looking upon it as a thing undecent that the
Archduke Philip, who was to be their Sovereign, should be content with the
leavings of the Infanto of Portugal: Besides, they knew that the Infanto's
Grandfather by the Father's side was a Bastard, the Son of a Jewish Concubine;
and seeing the People of the Lower Germany conspired with those of the Upper
not to suffer their Princes to Allie into Families, and with Persons that had
the least blemish; though Maximilian would have desired the eldest Infanta of
Spain for his Son, his own and his Sons Subjects would have universally opposed
it. Nor would the Princes of Germany have willingly suffered that he should
have brought into the Empire the pernicious example of base Alliances. And
Maximilian would have cut out work for himself that he could not be able to
make an end of. So the Proposition of the Catholic King was without difficulty
accepted, and the two Marriages were concluded. There was nothing particular in
the Contracts that were made of them, except that Chievres had the care of
seeing them drawn, and the Portion as well as the Dowry of the two Spouses was
very moderate. The King of France, Charles the Eighth, complained in vain of
the infraction of his Treaty In the Contracts betwixt Spain and Austria.
with Ferdinand: and the answer which the Spanish Ambassador Ayala made him
thereupon seemed to add Railery to the Injury. He maintained that his Master
the Catholic King was free to dispose of his Son and Daughter; and that the
Treaty mentioned could not tie his hands, because it was contrary to good
manners as well as the Law of Nations; and seeing it would not be taken ill in
Spain that the most Christian King should dispense with such an Obligation if
it had been put upon him, no more ought his most Christian Majesty think it
strange that the Catholic King did the like.

Both Marriages were completed much about the same time, but they were not
alike happy neither in their beginning, nor in their consequences. It may be
observed in the Life of Louis the Eleventh, that by the last Treaty of that
Prince with Maximilian, it was stipulated that the Archdutchess Margarite so
soon as she was out of the Cradle should marry the Dauphin of France, who was
Charles the Eighth: That she should bring him in Portion the Counties of
Burgundy and Artois; and lastly, that it should not be in the power neither of
the Father of the Princess, nor of the Flemings to break their Marriage before
she was of age to consummate it, and that she should immediately after the
signing of the Treaty be delivered into the hands of the Ambassadors of
France, who should carry her to the Court of the most Christian King, to be
brought up with the Dauphin till both were in a condition to live together. The
Treaty was fully and faithfully executed; and there are some Memoires which
mention, that not only the Archdutchess was brought up with the Dauphin, but
that besides, the Ceremonies of their Marriage had been solemnized, and that
there was nothing wanting but the consummation when it was broken off by this
accident.

Maximilian, Father to the Princess, in second marriage espoused the Heiress of
Bretagne by Proxy; and thereby rendered himself so much the more formidable to
the French, that his first marriage with the Heiress of Burgundy had brought
the seventeen Provinces of the Low Countries and the Franche-County into his
Family. They found no other remedy than to oblige Charles the Eighth to prevent
him by marrying the Heiress of Bretagne, and the Archdutchess was sent home to
her Father, who married her, as has been already said, with the Infanto of
Spain. The Ceremonies of the Marriage were performed at Ghent in February One
thousand four hundred and ninety seven, and the Princess embarked immediately
after at Flushing on board the Admiral of the Fleet appointed to convoy her to
Spain: but she was no sooner out at Sea, but that she had reason to
prognosticate that her Second Marriage was not like to be more fortunate than
the First. She was tossed in a violent storm, which still increasing surpassed
the skill of the Seamen, and the experience of the Pilots; all were persuaded
that they could not avoid being cast away, and intimated no less to the
Passengers as much by their frighted and ghastly looks, as by their discourse.
The Archdutchess alone seemed unconcerned at the dismal news, and feared so
much the less to lose her life as she had greater interest than the rest to
preserve it. Nay, in so sad a Juncture she was capable of a gay thought which
seemed not suitable to an imagination that ought to have been scared with
frightful apprehensions. She made a pleasant reflection upon the oddness of her
adventures, supposing that the like had never happened in the world, and their
singularity in her opinion deserved it should be acquainted with them. She
thought that never any woman was twice married and yet died a Virgin, and
therefore to inform Posterity of it she took the following course. She had the
curiosity to make her own Epitaph, and in two Verses to express therein what
was most remarkable in her Life. She had naturally a great disposition to
Poetry, and so composed a Distich upon the spot. Manuscripts relate the words
variously, though they agree in the sense, and it will not be amiss to
transcribe them here as they have been found. The Spanish Manuscripts thus have
hem, Cy git Margot, Noble Damoiselle,
Deux fois mariee morte pucelle.
And the Flemish Manuscripts. Cy git Margot la gente Damoiselle,
Qu' eat deux maris, and si mourat pucelle.
The sense in English is, Here Maig, a Noble Lady's laid,
Twice married, and yet dead, a maid,
It was not enough for the Archdutchess to have composed her own Epitaph, if
she hindered not the Waters, wherein she expected to perish, from spoiling the
Paper on which it was written, and therefore she wrapped it up in Cerecloath.
Besides, it behoved her to oblige those on the shore, who might find her body
and Epitaph where the Sea cast them out, to give a burial to the one, and cause
the other to be engraven, and therefore she took out of the Box where her
Jewels were the richest Diamond she had, and wrapped it up in the Paper. After
all, care must be taken that that Paper should not be separated from her Body,
and therefore the Archdutchess tied the Cerecloath wherein the Diamond and
Verses were fast about her Arm. In that posture, without fear or changing her
countenance, she expected when the Ship should sink to the bottom; but her last
hour was not as yet come; and the Ship that carried her, after it had been long
beaten and tossed by the Winds and Sea, run a shore upon the Coast of St.
Andrews in Galicia. From thence she went by Land to Burgos, where the Catholic
Kings then had their residence. Her marriage with the Infanto of Spain was
there celebrated; and her big belly, which some time after began to appear,
renewed the joy of the Court: but it continued but five or six months, for the
Infanto fell sick in the City of Salamanca of a distemper whereof he died the
four and twentieth of October the same year One thousand four hundred and
ninety seven.

The beginning and progress of his distemper was discreetly concealed from his
Wife, but the same circumspection was not used at last. Instead of disposing
her by degrees to receive so strange news, and gradually acquainting her with
the loss of her young Husband, they told her plainly and point blanck that she
was a Widow. It is not exactly known who it was that was so imprudent as
unseasonably to tell her the news, because she would never discover it, lest
the party might have been too severely punished. But it is certain, that the
unhappiness of her second Widowhood brought into her mind In the Latin
Panegyric of that Princess.
the injury she received when Charles the Eighth rejected her, and that the
double grief she felt was so violent, that she was brought to bed before her
time of a dead Daughter. Ferdinand the Catholic King supported the loss of an
only Son, come to the age of ninteen years, three months, and six days, with a
constancy of mind, which gave occasion to those who loved him not to suspect
him of insensibility. He was convinced by long experience that his Queen
Isabella had a mind as great as his own; and yet he thought she could not
without falling down dead hear of the death of their Son, if the same fault
were committed in acquainting her with it, that had caused the untimely Labor
of their Daughter-in-law, and therefore he provided against it by a way that
succeeded. He had no other Philosophy but what he had from Nature, and the
violent grief wherewith he was then afflicted was the first of that kind that
ever he had had: Nevertheless he thought that though the Catholic Queen were
told but by degrees, and little and little of the death of the Infanto, all the
Lenitives that could be used in that case, would not hinder the tenderness of a
Mother so deeply wounded by so surprising an accident from producing in the
body where it lodged an universal revolution, which putting the soul out of
condition of exerting its chief functions there, would force it to be gone, and
forsake its habitation. On the contrary, the Catholic King considered that if
the same Soul could receive two excessive passions that might succeed one
another in a very short time, it could not admit of a third, because the
impression that they must have made upon the body, and the extreme violence
that the same body must have been put to in supporting of them, would have
exhausted so many spirits, that there could not remain enough for a fresh
application of so large an extent. In a word, that Prince made a farther
reflection, that if the functions of the Soul were weakened in three violent
exercises of the same force, they would be much more weakened, when these
exercises were not only different, but also contrary, because then the distance
would be greater, and the obstacles more difficult to be surmounted. From these
three Principles Ferdinand concluded, that to prevent Queen Isabella from
expiring upon the news of her Sons death, she must first be put into an extreme
grief upon a false ground: that then she must be carried from the extremity of
sadness to that of joy by setting before her sight what she bewailed as lost,
and giving her by that means the speediest and most agreeable consolation that
she could be capable of: that lastly, the person that was dearest to her, next
to her Son, should come and tell her that God had removed him, and should
sweeten the bitterness of the tidings, by so many reasons and examples, that
the grief occasioned thereby might produce no extraordinary effects.

So the Catholic King, having taken such just measures that his Wife could not
be informed of the death of her Son but from him, caused some persons of credit
to go and tell her that the King her Husband was dead of a sudden death. She
believed it the more easily that he had almost all the symptoms of those that
are subject to that kind of death. She was as deeply afflicted as she ought to
be, and in that condition she was let alone about an hour. Her first transports
of sorrow were hardly over, when Ferdinand, whom she expected to see no more,
appeared in her sight. She was thereupon so ravished with joy, that she could
neither think of complaining of the trick that was put upon her, nor of
quarrelling those that had imposed it. Her Husband let her alone in this fit of
Joy almost as long as she had been in grief, and then with very elaborate
mollifying expressions told her that their Son was gone. She was indeed moved
at it, but not so much as if it had been done in another manner, and some days
after she found her mind so much at ease again as to apply her self to Affairs
of State.

The most important Affair was to prevent the Successions of Castile and
Arragon from devolving upon a foreign Family and not a Spanish; and seeing
their Catholic Majesty's could not compass this design after the death of
their only Son but by marrying again their eldest Daughter in Portugal, they
intimated to Manuel, who had newly mounted the Throne of that Kingdom, that if
he sought her in marriage, he should have her. Manuel was too ambitious to
refuse the Match that was offered him; and seeing at that time he had a design
of conquering the Indies, and that he foresaw the advantage that the Alliance
of the Catholic Kings would afford him in the execution thereof, in the sole
prospect of hastening his Marriage, he neglected the usual Ceremonies in the
Alliances of Kings. He demanded no security for his going into Castile; but
appeared at the Court of the Catholic Kings sooner than he was expected; and
there married the Infanta Isabella to the extraordinary joy of the Spaniards,
passionate for the greatness of their Country, who thereby saw all their
Monarchies, except that of Navarre, united into one. The new married Princes
were acknowledged for Heirs apparent of In Caramnel.
Castile, and presumptive of Arragon, and Ferdinand was so afraid lest the
House of Austria, into which his second Daughter was married, might pretend any
share in the Succession, that he obliged the Queen his Wife forthwith to
assemble the Estates of Castile in the City of Toledo, where the Queen of
Portugal received the Oath of all the Deputies. Immediately after he called the
Estates of Arragon at Sarragossa, where the same Ceremony was performed. The
joy of the People was redoubled by the Queen of Portugals being with Child,
which appeared before they were dismissed. The Catholic Kings were afraid that
some inconvenience might befall her if she accompanied the King her Husband who
was upon his return into Portugal, and would not suffer her to depart from
Sarragossa before she was brought to bed. They chose rather to stay there with
her and divert her in expectation that she should give them an Heir; and in the
mean time the Castilian and Portuguese Nations conquered the Antipathy that had
continued betwixt them for so many Ages, and promiscuously spent their time at
play, Dancing, Tournaments, and running at the Ring. The hopes that seemed
almost certain of their being one day united contributed much to it; but there
have been few of such Festivals, wherein the conclusion answered the beginning.
The Queen of Portugal had had no Children by the Infanto Alphonso her first
Husband: She was already twenty eight years of age when she was first with
Child: Physicians affirm, that on such occasions the pains of Labor increase
proportionably as the woman who is brought to bed the first time is advanced in
age; and these three reasons, with a fourth, which modesty obliges me to
suppress, were the cause that her Portuguese Majesty could not be a Mother but
at the cost of her life. She was brought to bed in due time, and of a Son; but
she died of it, and all the hopes of the Catholic Kings were confined to their
Grandson, who was Christened by the name of Michael. His Grandfather and
Grandmother caused him to be acknowledged by the Estates of Castile and
Arragon; but he was so sickly, that the Spaniards began to look upon the
Archdutchess of the Low Countries and Philip of Austria her Husband as the
Heirs apparent of their Monarchy. The Catholic Queen was so persuaded of it
when she was informed that the Archdutchess was on the four and twentieth of
February, One thousand five hundred, brought to bed of a Son, who was afterward
the Archduke Charles, to whom Chievres was Governor, that by a spirit of
Prophecy she applied upon the spot these words of the Acts of the Apostles,
The lot fell upon Matthias, alluding to the Saint whose Feast was that day
celebrated in the Church, to signify that the Child was born in so favorable
a Juncture, that he would succeed to her Crowns as well as to those of her
Husband. The event soon followed the Prediction; and Charles was not as yet
complete five months old, when the Infanto Michael died the twentieth of July
the same year at the age of two years. The regrate of the Catholic Kings
therefore was not equal, though on both sides it was great, because Queen
Isabella seeing an absolute necessity that her Succession must devolve upon a
German Family, readily submitted to the orders of Divine Providence, and with
her own hand wrote to the Archdukes to hasten over to Castile, there to receive
the Allegiance of the People as next and immediate Heirs, since she was past
the age of having any more Children.

On the contrary, King Ferdinand, who was sixteen years younger than his Queen,
hoped to survive her, marry again, and of a second ventre have Male Issue that
might exclude the Archdutchess from his Succession. Upon that account he
delayed as much as he could to desire her to come into Spain, and did not do it
till the last push, when his Wife told him that she would of necessity see her
eldest Daughter recognized by the Estates of Castile. The Union formed betwixt
that Monarchy and the Monarchy of Arragon, required that the recognition should
be made in the Capital Sarragossa.
City of Arragon immediately after it had been made in the Capital Burgos.
of Castile; and the Catholic King, who for reasons that shall be mentioned by
and by, would not break it, at length consented to what his Queen desired.

The Archdukes passed through France, and arrived in Spain about the end of
February One thousand five hundred and two. They were extremely well received
by the Catholic Queen, but the reception was not so frank on the part of the
Catholic King. The pretext that Prince had to cloak his indifferency was, that
the Archduke his Son-in-law brought, with him to the Court of Spain a man that
he did not like. That was the famous John Manuel, of whom we shall speak at
large in the sequel of this History. His birth was not illustrious; and he owed
only to the sharpness of his wit, and the extraordinary talent he had of
writing well and fast, the choice that Ferdinand had made of him for his
Secretary in those dispatches that required expedition. He had not served long
in that Station, before he gave proofs that he was capable of something
greater, and his Master sent him Ambassador into Germany to the Court of
Maximilian the Emperor, where he concluded the double Alliance of the two
Children of his Imperial Majesty with the two Children of the Catholic Kings.
He went afterward in the same Character to the In the causes of the banishment
of Manuel.
Low Countries, where he so dexterously managed the Archduke, that he became his
Favorite. This success put it in his mind to devote himself to that young
Prince immediately after the death of the Infanto Michael. He demanded leave to
do so from Queen Isabella his Sovereign, who thought she ought not to refuse it
him, because it was more ways than one convenient for him to have a Castilian
about him, since after her death he was to Reign in Castile. But Ferdinand, who
at that time began to make a distinction betwixt his own Interests and those of
his Queen, liked not that a man who knew his secrets, and who besides was born
a Subject of the Catholic Queens, should have the entire confidence of the
Heirs of that Princess, because he foresaw that the desire of governing in his
own Country as well as in Flanders, would incline him immediately after the
death of Isabella to persuade the Archdukes, not to delay their taking
possession of Castile till the death of their Father-in-law. In that prospect
he omitted nothing that might oblige the Queen to recall Manuel from Flanders;
but the Queen persisted in it that he should continue there; and Manuel on his
part neglected nothing that might render his abode necessary at the Court of
the Archdukes. He behaved himself there to the full content of his Sovereign;
and Ferdinand thereupon conceived an aversion to him, which grew to that height
that he could no longer dissemble it. He made it appear upon several occasions;
and Manuel, who looked upon the enmity of that Prince as a torrent of no long
duration, that would not overslow unless means were used to stem it, pretended
not to take notice of the same. He made it only his business to inform the
Archduke in those thirteen months that he was in Spain of the Grandees of
Castile and Arragon whom he might win over from his Father-in-law to himself,
and to teach him the means how he might gain them.

The Archduke had all that was necessary for improving the Councils of Manuel.
He was the most affable Prince of his age, and was accustomed to carress all
the Flemings almost equally of what condition soever they were, if they had the
honor to approach him: However he never made himself so familiar as to render
himself contemptible to the Nobility of Spain, and on no occasion stooped so
low as to lose that gravity which they so much esteem. He so tempered his
civilities that they had all the success which he expected, and that they who
were honored with them preferred his rule before that of Ferdinand. And the
truth is, he left Spain so generally beloved, that it was no more in the power
of his Father-in-law to discredit him, though he might have had a mind to do it.

Ferdinand suffered him to stay there but as short a while as he could; and
though the Archdutchess was brought to bed in the City of Alcala of a second
Son, who was afterward Emperor Ferdinand the First, they stayed not till she
was up again to give her Husband the satisfaction of returning in company with
her. They would have him go before; and the pretext that was made use of for
sending him back with so much precipitation, was the Commission he was charged
with to negotiate at Blois where Louis the Twelfth was, an accommodation of the
clashing that had happened betwixt the French and the Spaniards about the
dividing of the Kingdom of Naples. The Archduke, as has been said in the
former Book, treated like a Gentleman, and took all the care he ought in an
Affair that nearly concerned him; since he was already assured to reap
advantage from it.

So soon as he set foot in France his most Christian Majesty and he vied in
generosity. The King sent into Flanders eight chief Lords of his Court, there
to remain as Hostages that no prejudice should be done to the Archduke in his
passage; and the Archduke, that he might testify an entire confidence in the
Kings word, wrote into Flanders that they should send back the Hostages. The
accommodation betwixt the two Nations was concluded and signed; but Ferdinand
disowned the proceedings of his Son in-law, and thereby put an affront upon
him, which in the Maxims of the World was too great and too public to be
pardoned. It was to no purpose for Ferdinand to represent to the Archduke that
it was he who would reap all the fruit of the perfidious action he complained
of, and that thereby he would have the Kingdom of Naples entire. The Archduke
was nothing the less offended thereat; and Manuel finding him in that
disposition contributed not a little, as they say, to keep him in it, being
assured to render himself necessary to his Master so long as it lasted.

There was no more Commerce betwixt the Father and Son in law but what could
not civilly be discontinued; and the Archduke to make a closer Union with the
most Christian King against his Catholic Majesty, made three agreements for
the marriage of his eldest Son with Claude of France, eldest Daughter to his
Majesty: But the Alliances which are most securely contracted in writing are
not those which most frequently succeed best. The death of Queen Isabella which
happened the seventeenth of November One thousand five hundred and four was the
cause or pretext that the three Contracts of marriage were not fulfilled; and
Ferdinand, for all he was so politic a Prince, could not ward a blow that was
so disadvantageous to him, and so favorable to his Son-in-law. In the
Testament of Queen Isabella.
There was indeed a Testament of Queen Isabella found which ordained that the
King her Husband during life should have the administration and Revenues of
Castile: but the Testament was no sooner examined, than the Courtiers and
Lawyers agreed in suspecting it to be forged. The Archduke who had a mind to
reign, and saw himself excluded for a long time, and perhaps for his whole life
by an Act so inconsistent with Motherly affection, had no regard to it; and
indeed it was hard to be believed that it could have been dictated and signed
by Queen Isabella considering her humor all her life time in relation to her
Husband, for there happened to that Princess what is but too common to Women, who
out of a Maxim of State marry Husbands as young again as themselves. When
Ferdinand and Isabella were married, Ferdinand was but sixteen years old, and
Isabella two and thirty. Her Jealousy of Ferdinand appeared soon after their
marriage; and it ought to be said here for her excuse that it was not without
ground; Ferdinand had slighted her, and been often unfaithful, though she was
very beautiful, and besides, no woman living more scrupulous in the point of
Chastity than her self. He had loved other Ladies, by whom he had the
Archbishop of Sarragossa, Don Alphonso d' Arragon, and other Bastards, who will
be more properly mentioned in another place of this History. Isabella had not
therefore behaved her self the worse toward him: but Injuries of that nature
which are most patiently born with, are not those for all that which make the
smallest impressions in peoples minds, and are soonest blotted out. If Isabella
had so much command over her self, as during her life to dissemble the
ramblings of her Husband, it is not very likely that at her death she would
reward him for them, that is to say, in a Juncture when there is no time for
counterfeiting, and when she was no longer to observe measures with him; nor
that she would have deprived her eldest Daughter of the enjoyment of the
Kingdom of Castile, which Nature, Law, Reason, and the Custom of Spain gave to
her, to leave it to a fickle Husband, who would not fail so soon as he should
be a Widower to marry again; nor to employ all sorts of means not only to
secure to the Children of the second Marriage the Crowns of Arragon, but also,
if possible, to procure for them the Kingdoms of Castile in prejudice of the
Children of his former bed.

Isabella had cause to fear it, since the Father and Mother of Ferdinand had
done as much for him, and that the unfortunate Charles Prince of Vienne, the
Son of the first Wife of John King of Arragon had been poisoned to make way for
the same Ferdinand who was only the Son of the second. Be it as it will, the
Archduke was not amused by the Couriers whom his Father in law sent to stay him
in Flanders, under pretext that it might be prejudicial to the Archdutchess his
Wife, ready to lie in of a Daughter, which was Mary Queen of Hungary. He
nevertheless departed with her for Spain in the month of January One thousand
five hundred and seven, and the new Queen of Castile had no prejudice by it.

Chievres was left Governor of the Low Countries, and Manuel accompanied the
Archduke. Ferdinand was so ill informed of the course his Daughter and
Son-in-law took, that he went to wait for them at one end of Spain whilst they
landed at the other. All the great men of the Kingdom, except two, declared for
them: they were solemnly Crowned: the People swore Allegiance to them, without
respect to the Testament of the late Queen; and Ferdinand finding himself not
to be the stronger, caused an Accommodation to be proposed to his Son-in-law,
seeing he confided far more in his own management than in that of his Agents,
he solicited with so much perseverance an interview with the King of Castile,
that he obtained it: but it cost him dear, and he must first pass through
mortifications that were so much the more sensible to him, as that he was the
less accustomed to the like.

He was constrained to go to his Son-in-law, trust himself in his hands, to be
satisfied with his bare word for a safe Conduct, and to present himself in the
posture of a Supplicant. He appeared, indeed, in that manner accompanied with a
small Retinue without Arms, and mounted on Mules. He could not have a private
Conference with his Son-in-law; and Manuel, who was the man in the world he
hated most, because he imputed to him all the harshness he found in the King of
Castile toward him, made always a third person in the Conference. Ferdinand at
first lost his hopes of retaining the administration left him by his Wife, and
condescended at length to accept one half of the Revenues. But he was
positively denied any share, and sent back extremely vexed that he had humbled
himself in vain.

Cardinal Ximenes, who was no less his Friend though he owed not his
advancement to him, mediated for him another interview with his Son-in law in
the Vestry of the Church of Remedo, a League from Vailladolid. The two Kings
discoursed alone without any other Witness but the Cardinal who kept the door.
They concluded at length, that Ferdinand should absolutely renounce the
administration of Castile upon two conditions; The one, that he should enjoy
during life the three great Masteries of the Orders of St. James, Callatrava,
and Alcantara: The other, that his Son-in-law should pay him yearly at
Sarragossa, whither he should immediately after the interview retire, a
moderate Pension, which amounted but, according to some, to three Counts of
Maravedis, or to eight Counts, at most, according to others.

Ferdinand was no sooner in Arragon but that he labored to be revenged for the
pretended indignities received from his Son-in-law. He supposed that the
personal charms of that young Prince would indeed preserve to him the
affections of the Castillians in time of Peace: but he doubted that that
inclination would not continue in time of War. Upon this he grounded his
conjecture; that the King of Castile, as shall be mentioned hereafter, being
excessively liberal, there was no appearance that he would moderate that
predominant inclination in the midst of Arms, and when every moment he would
have fresh occasions of giving. In the mean time the Revenue of Castile, and of
the Crowns that depended on it, were so scanty that they could not suffice to
carry on a long War, and at the same time supply the superfluous expensiveness
of their King. His Majesty's Treasury would thereby soon be drained; and if the
seeds of a Civil War could be sowed when money was wanting, a general
revolution would quickly follow; and the same Philip, who till then had been
the Idol of the Castillians would become their aversion.

The measures to be taken for the execution of that project ought not to be
managed but by a very cunning person, and for that purpose Ferdinand employed
the famous Raymond of Cardonna with the following instructions. In his life in
Castillian.
It has been mentioned in the preceding Book that Queen Isabella at first
reigned not peaceably in Castile: That her Brother Henry had by the Infanta of
Portugal a Daughter, the most beautiful and unfortunate of her age: That
Isabella had maintained that Henry was impotent: That Bertrand de la Cueva,
Duke of Albuquerque was her Father; and that by consequent she ought not to
succeed to the Crowns of Castile. The probability of that discourse was
grounded upon this, that Henry having no Children by the Infanta of Navarre his
first Wife had divorced her; and having been able to get none neither upon the
second, the report went, that he had rather that his Favorite La Cueva should
supply his defect, than that he should be reckoned impotent. He constantly
owned the Daughter whom his Wife brought forth for his own; and his Sister
Isabella being too weak to make her pass for illegitimate, had her recourse to
Ferdinand, and married him though she was thirty two years of age, and he but
sixteen, upon condition that he would back her interest with the Forces that he
could bring from Arragon. Ferdinand in a pitched Battle routed those who
maintained the Party of the Princess of Castile, forced her to take refuge in
Portugal, obliged the Estates of Castile to declare her Bastard, and maintained
himself in the possession of these Kingdoms during the life of Isabella.

But after her death for his own sake, he formed a design of repairing the
wrong he had done, and proposed to himself the marriage of the Princess of
Castile, to bring her back by force of Arms into the Kingdoms that had belonged
to Henry the Fourth, to raise her the Party there again which before he had
suppressed, and there to renew the Civil War, in the opinion that as at that
time when the Forces of Arragon in the dispute betwixt the Aunt and the Niece
were sufficient to give the Monarchy to her of the two Pretendents they
declared in favors of, that is, for the Aunt in prejudice of the Niece; so
they would be still sufficient to turn the balance on the Neeces side in
prejudice of the Children of the Aunt, when they should awaken the dormant
Faction, under the same pretext that had been before made use of, which was
that of marriage.

There appeared only two impediments which might cross his marriage to be
surmounted; for as to the third which was the aversion that the Princess of
Castile had to Ferdinand, because he had robbed her of her Dominions, he made
account that she would be reconciled to him so soon as he offered to
re-establish her in the Throne; and that she would choose rather by marrying him
to recover the fairest Monarchy of Spain, than as a private person to spend the
rest of her days in a forced continence. The first Impediment in the judgment
of Ferdinand would be on the part of Pope Julius the second, an undertaking
bold man, and ambitious to signalize himself, but scrupulous and reserved in
granting favors, upon the sole account of making them the more valuable. It
was to be feared that his Holiness would hardly be brought to consent that
Ferdinand should marry the Niece of his deceased Wife, and that he would
absolutely refuse the dispensation demanded, were it for nothing else but that
he might not fall out with the House of Austria, which would thereby be
irreconcilably offended. But the enmity that Julius entertained against the
French, and the resolution he had already taken by all means to engage
Ferdinand to join with him for driving them out of Italy, made a stronger
impression in the mind of that Pope, than the Canon Laws. He gave intimation to
Ferdinand that the dispensation should be no hindrance to the marriage that he
had in his head; and so all Ferdinands care was to get over the next difficulty.

It consisted in getting the Princess out of Portugal, and by consequent in
disposing Manuel to deliver her. Ferdinand expected far less opposition to his
designs on the part of that Prince, than he had found from the Pope, because
Manuel was doubly his Son-in-law. It has been said before that Ferdinand gave
him in marriage his eldest Daughter upon no other account but that he might
hinder his Succession from falling to the House of Austria, into which the
second Daughter was married; and it is to be added here, that Ferdinand's
caution proving ineffectual, he farther gave his third Daughter to his
Portuguese Majesty, who by consequent, by an odd singularity not as yet to be
parallelled in these last Ages, having for his first Wife married his Nephew's
Widow, for his second married the Sister of his former Wife He married also for
his third Wife the Daughter of the Sister of his two former Wives.
. But what appears to Kings most feisible in speculation is not so always in
practice, because self-love sometimes represents to them the interests that
sets them upon action more urgent than it seems to be to other Sovereigns, who
they think ought to second them in the execution.

Manuel King of Portugal was of the humor of Princes who come to the Crown by
chance, and without laying claim to it directly. He was only the kinsman far
remote in a collateral Line of John the second his Predecessor, and by
consequent he was afraid upon the smallest occasions to lose the good fortune
that had happened to him contrary to his expectation. He saw no advantage
neither present nor future in the proposition made to him of delivering the
Princess of Castile; and on the contrary found in it present inconveniences,
and inevitable Wars afterward. If the Princess had Children by Ferdinand,
those of Manuel would be the farther removed from the Succession of Arragon: if
she had none, and yet outlived him, she would transfer the Crowns of Castile
to him whom she should choose for a second Husband; and if she married not
again, Manuel and his Issue who were not next of kin to her, would not inherit
any thing of hers. In the mean time seeing Ferdinand only demanded the Princess
of Castile to hinder the House of Austria from settling in Spain; If Manuel
granted her, he would raise a Civil War in Castile, the success whereof it was
impossible for him to foresee: If the Arms of Ferdinand prevailed there, his
Majesty of Portugal would not be the better for it, since his Father-in-law was
neither liberal nor grateful: but if Ferdinand succumbed, Portugal would
immediately after have upon its back, besides the Forces of Castile, those of
Germany and the Low Countries, which he would be the less able to resist that
there was no communication betwixt the Kingdoms of Portugal and those of
Arragon, to receive Succors from thence. So that the Princess of Castile was
fairly In the Manual of Osorio.
denied to Ferdinand, who not being able to carry her, despaired of having her
for Wife. At the same time he lost all hopes of getting the Kingdoms of Castile
from the House of Austria, but despaired not of excluding it from his own
Succession; and that he might compass that, he chose rather to court the Niece
of his greatest Enemy than to remain a Widower.

John de Foix, Vicecount of Narbonne, married Mary Magdalen of Orleans, Sister
to Louis the Twelfth, King of France, by whom he had two Children, the
incomparable Gaston de Foix, who was afterward killed at the Battle of Ravenna,
and Germana de Foix, whom the most Christian King caused to be brought up with
his Daughters. Ferdinand pitched upon her for his second Wife; and seeing he
commonly proposed to himself more than one end in his actions, he had two in
this, as you shall see: The first was, that Germana might one day furnish him
with a plausible pretext of usurping Navarre, in that the Viscount of Narbonne,
the Father of that Princess, was concerned in that famous case of conscience
upon which Theology had always been consulted, though the determinations
thereof were never acquiesced unto, but always decided by the Sword. This is
not a proper place of giving instances of it, and the business here is only to
lay down plainly the matter of fact.

Gaston de Foix, Prince of Bearn, had a Son already of his own name, Gaston by
Leonora of Arragon his Wife, at that time when she succeeded to the Crown of
Navarre, by the death of Charles Prince of Vienne her only Brother, and of
Isabella her eldest Sister without Children. Leonora being settled in the
Succession of Navarre was brought to bed of a second Son, who was John Viscount
of Narbonne. John pretended to the Crown of Navarre in exclusion of his elder
Brother as being the Son of a Queen and a King, whereas his elder Brother was
but the Son of a Count and Countess. The difference could not be sifted to the
bottom, because the elder Brother having married Magdalen of France, Sister to
King Charles the Seventh, was put into possession of Navarre, and left it to
his Children. The Viscount left also his Pretensions to Gaston de Foix his Son,
and to Germana his Daughter, Gaston was of so warlike a temper, that it was
easy to be foreseen that he would be slain; and Ferdinand looked upon Germana
as a presumptive Heiress that might bring him a Title to the Crown of Navarre,
which he well knew how to make the best of in time and place convenient.

The second end that Ferdinand proposed to himself in his marriage with
Germana, was to strike in with France in a Juncture when possessing no longer
the Kingdoms of Castile, he was not now strong enough to return what he had
usurped upon Louis the Twelfth in Italy. In the three views then that we have
been mentioning, he caused an offer to be made to his most Christian Majesty of
treating with him upon two conditions: the one, that he would give him in
Marriage Germana his Niece; the next, that if Male Children sprung from that
Marriage, that might live to be in a condition one day to Reign, the Kingdom of
Naples should belong to them with the consent of France, which in that case
should yield to them all the claim it had to it: but if the Marriage were
barren, or at least as to Male Children capable of reigning, that then the
Kingdom of Naples should return to the Monarchy of France in exclusion of the
Daughters of Ferdinand's first marriage, and of their Posterity. Louis accepted
the offer of Ferdinand, because he only considered it on the side it was
advantageous to him. His most Christian Majesty had been unfortunate in the
Wars of Naples: he had lost three great Armies there: his Treasures were
exhausted by the prodigious charges he had been at; and his most courteous
disposition hindered him from oppressing the People, as must needs have been
done to continue that War. The occasion that presented for recovering the
Kingdom of Naples was favorable. He had the greater reason to embrace it, that
it would not cost him one drop of blood; and though it was not altogether
certain that it would succeed, yet there was but little wanting to make it
infallible. The truth was Ferdinand was not old, but his former incontinence
had so weakened him that his Physicians durst not hope for any more Children
from him. He had entertained frequent and long correspondences with the
Countess of Eboly, by whom he had had the Archbishop of Sarragossa, Alphonso d'
Arragon, and a Daughter married to Bernardin de Valesco Constable of Castile:
with the Lady Tole de Bibao, by whom he had had a Daughter that was a Nun in
the Monastery of Madrigal: and with a Portuguese Lady of the House of Perreira,
by whom he had another Daughter that was a Nun as well as the former. In the
Book of Mayerne.


It was to be presumed that that amorous inclination, seconded by the plumpness
and vigor of Germana, would quickly send Ferdinand into the other world, and
that by consequent France would not long expect to enter again into the Kingdom
of Naples. In fine, the interests of Arragon were for ever, or at least for
some time, divided from those of Castile; and France found its advantage in
both these Junctures, though it would have found it far more in the first than
in the second.

The Marriage of Ferdinand and Germana was no sooner consummated, but that
Prince made a project of securing himself entirely in the possession of the
Kingdom of Naples, upon pretext of being in a better condition of fulfilling
the Treaty which he had concluded with Louis the Twelfth. That Crown had been
partly conquered, and partly usurped by the Castillians, which gave them
occasion to pretend that it was annexed to their Monarchy, and not to that of
Arragon. The great Captain Gonsalvo de Cordova had not expelled King Frederick
and the French from thence; and seeing he was born a Subject of the late Queen
Isabella, and that it was she that had given him the command of the Spanish
Army which he had conducted with so much success, it was to be thought that he
would have preserved the Kingdom of Naples for the Heiress of that Princess, as
sixteen years before he would have had the Kingdom of Granada which he had
conquered, united to Castile, the Infidels having been chiefly subdued by the
Castillian Forces. If any thing could hinder him from doing it, it must be the
presence of Ferdinand, and that Prince upon that very account alone did not
stand deliberating if he should go to Naples. He departed from Barcelona with
his new Queen, and his Voyage was more prosperous than he expected. He found
not in Italy the resistance which he expected; and the Great Captain instead of
fortifying himself in the Kingdom of Naples against Ferdinand, who carried not
along with him Forces enough to drive him out of it, preferred the Grandeur of
the Monarchy of Spain before his own interests, merely upon the consideration
that he had enlarged it by the accession of two Crowns. He foresaw that
Ferdinand would have no more Children; and that his Grandson Charles of Austria
succeeding to him, would become the most powerful Monarch of Europe. He also
foresaw that if he resisted Ferdinand, Spain would lose the Kingdom of Naples,
because the obstinate humor of that Prince would make him rather abandon it to
France than leave it in the power of a revolted Subject.

Upon two such Metaphysical Principles the Great Captain of his own accord laid
down the Vice-royalty of Naples. He stayed not till Ferdinand should constrain
him, but reduced himself to the condition of a private man: He came out of the
Kingdom of Naples where he could do any thing; went as far as Genoa to meet the
Catholic King, received him at the Harbor of that City, and wholly submitted
himself to his discretion. That unexpected adventure was not the passage of the
Reign of Frederick that most affected him; he had two others which supervened
so pat, that he could not have drawn greater advantage from them, though he had
been the Author of the same. The one was the death of the King of Castile
Philip of Austria.
his Son-in-law, and the other the madness of the Queen of Castile Jane of
Arragon.
his Daughter. The King of Castile remaining peaceable possessour of that
Monarchy by his Father-in-laws retiring into Arragon, minded nothing but his
diversions, and lived in too great a freedom with his principal Subjects, not
to give them occasion of abusing it. The Government of Burgos, the Capital City
of old Castile, was fallen void, and the King gave it to his Favorite Manuel.
Manuel had no sooner taken possession of it, but he invited his Master to a
magnificent Feast. It is not known whether the King of Castile eat and drank
more than was fit: whether any of his Enemies or Manuel found a way to convey
Poison into the choicest dainties of the entertainment: or whether the great
exercise which the King used immediately after so extraordinary a Dinner
without giving his stomach time to concoct, ruined the health of that young
Prince, which from his Infancy had never suffered any alteration: but it is
certain that he played long at Tennis after he rose from Table; and that the
same Evening, which was the nineteenth of September One thousand five hundred
and six, he was taken ill of a Fever. Seeing there appeared a Comet at that
time; and that the great men as well as the common people are persuaded that
such Stars are not only the signs, but also the causes of the death of
Sovereigns; it made so deep an impression upon the imagination of the King of
Castile, that during his sickness, which lasted but seven days, he complained
at every moment of the Comet. Nor did he lose the fancy of it in the height of
a hot fit that seized him two days before he expired; and and when he became
lightheaded, he cried out in French even to his last gasp with a lamentable
tone, Ah Comet, ah Comet. He died the five and twentieth of September, One
thousand five hundred and six, at the age of twenty eight years, when he had
only reigned two years; and though he was a German by extraction, and a Fleming
by birth, and that the Spaniards have a natural aversion to a Foreign Dominion,
yet they never lamented the death of any of their Kings so bitterly as they did
his. The shortness of his Reign was probably the cause of it; and there is
ground to think by what follows, that if he had lived longer, he had neither
been so much, nor so universally regretted. He gave by handfuls, and without
distinction of persons. In the distribution of his favors he had not so much
regard to merit and services, as to the diligence of those who first presented
him their In his Elogy.
Petitions; and it is reported of him, that his Council having one day asked
him if he had granted the gift that they mentioned to him, he made answer, that
he did not remember; but that they might easily know it of him who they thought
had received it, if he had asked the same, seeing in that case he was sure he
had granted it.

Jane Queen of Castile loved him with too great a tenderness to be free from
Jealousy. She understood whilst she was in Flanders that he loved and was
beloved of a Lady of Brabant. That was enough to set her upon a revenge, which
was the first sign she gave of a distraction of mind. She went to the place
where her Rival was, and called her before her: She ordered two or three of her
Servants to secure her hand and foot: She fell upon her; cut off her lovely
head of hair, and with her Scissors so disfigured the lovely traits of her
face, that the most charming beauty of the Low Countries durst not show her
self any more abroad. The Archduke was extremely vexed at it: but he was
constrained to dissemble his displeasure when he perceived that the more he
upbraided her with it, the more enraged and furious she grew. He carefully
afterward avoided the giving her the least occasion of Jealousy. By her he had
two Sons, who were both Emperors, and three Daughters, who were the Queens of
Hungary, France, and Portugal; he left her with Child of a third, who was also
Queen of Portugal; and whether her grief for his death overcame her reason, or
that it only stirred up in her the dispositions to madness which were
transmitted to her with the blood of her maternal Grandmother Isabella of
Portugal; it is but too true that she lost her Judgment in so dreadful a
manner, that she never recovered a moments use of it during the whole fifty
years that she lived after. We leave it to Philosophers and Physicians to
examine how the mad Isabella of Portugal could communicate to Jane of Arragon
her Granddaughter the distemper of mind wherewith she had been afflicted,
without any blemish to the Conduit that conveyed it; and by what frekishness of
nature it happened that Isabella of Portugal in the time of her greatest
extravagance, was brought to bed of Isabella of Castile, one of the wisest
Queens that ever was: that amongst the Daughters of Isabella of Castile, the
second only was subject to the distemper of her Grandmother; and that that
distemper stopped so precisely at that second Daughter, that neither the two Sons
and sour Daughters which she left, nor the numerous Posterity since descended
from them have shown the least sign of it, unless it be her great Grandson the
Prince Don Carlos.

We shall only observe here, that the Queen, Widow of Castile, religiously kept
the body of her Husband so long as corruption hindered her not from kissing it,
and with much ado she suffered it afterward to be imbalmed, and to be put into
a Leaden Coffin: but instead of sending it into the Church appointed for his
burial, she kept it by her, and carried it about a long time all over Spain, as
if her Frenzy had moved her to verify one of the oddest Prophesies that ever
was. It has been already said, that the King her Husband was one of the
handsomest men of his Age; and it is very well known, that Princes, in whom
that perfection sets off the luster of their virtues, delight commonly to show
themselves. Philip of Anstria was no sooner peaceable King of Castile by the
accommodation that he made with his Father-in-law, which we mentioned before,
that he went to see all the Towns and places any way considerable of his new
Dominion. He joyfully received the acclamations of the People; but an old
woman, having steadfastly beheld him, thought it not enough, as the rest of the
Spanish women, to bloss the Womb of Mary of Burgundy that had born him, but she
farther added, that it was to no purpose for him to travel over Castile in his
life time; for that he should travel it much more and longer after his death.
Which was punctually fulfilled. No less extraordinary was the garb that the
poor Queen put her self into for conducting from City to City, and from Town to
Town her Husbands body. She was clothed in plain ordinary Mourning; her head
muffled up in a kind of Capuchins hood; her Sleeves covering her hands; and a
black Veil much like to that of Nuns, save only that it was much thicker,
hindered her no less from seeing than from being seen. She continued to wander
up and down Spain till the King her Son shut her up in the Castle of
Tordefillas under the care of the wise Don Ferrier of Valanca.

Tordefillas was a pleasant and delightful place, and besides nothing was
omitted that might serve to dispel the melancholy of the Queen: Nevertheless
she persisted obstinately in leading the most pitiful and wretched life that
can be found in the Histories of Princesses of these latter Ages. She chose the
least, darkest, lowest, and most incommodious Chamber of the Castle, there to
abide day and night. There she lay upon the ground; and it was after much
importunity that she suffered them to lay a board under her covered with a
Carpet. She never warmed her self by a fire in Winter: and would not be thicker
clothed in the coldest weather than she was in Summer. She continued
frequently three days and three nights without eating or drinking; and when
they spoke to her of taking any diversion, her constant answer was, that it was
unseemly for a Widow, and upon that account alone would not. She charged them
not to bring her her Victuals but in Earthen dishes; and when a great many
dishes of that sort full of meat were brought to her, she would not suffer them
to be carried away before she had touched them. Nor could she endure either to
be made clean, or to have her Chamber kept neat. So that the meat corrupted
there, and sent out a smell that none but her self could endure. She had no
intervals in her distemper but when her Father the Catholic King was with her.
The truth is, in his presence, and so long as he was there, she committed no
irregularity: but in exchange the notion that she retained of the respect she
ought to have for him to whom she owed her being was so strong, that being
neither corrected nor moderated by reason, it degenerated into a kind of
insensibility that rendered her immovable like a Statue, and took from her the
use of her tongue. At other times she was mightily prepossessed with an opinion
of the injustice that was done her in detaining her Prisoner; and the
headstrong conceit she had of Grandeur, suffered her not to forget that she was
Queen of Castile by her own right. When she was in her senses, and during the
life of her Husband, she had suffered him to Reign, nay, and to Reign alone,
and she took no exceptions at all that he gave her no share in the Government:
Nevertheless she became excessively jealous of her Authority when she was no
more in a condition of exerting it. Night and day she made her complaints to
Heaven and Earth of the inhumanity of those who confined her to Tordesillas.
She compared her self with her Mother, and thought at least that she had as
much prudence as she had for governing. She knew that Ferdinand her Father had
heretofore attempted to take upon himself alone the administration of Castile:
That Queen Isabella had opposed it: That she had demanded Justice from the
States, and that by them she had been solemnly maintained in the possession of
her right; from whence Queen Jane concluded, that since she was no less Queen
of Castile than her Mother had been, she ought upon stronger grounds to exert
the Functions of Government by reason of her Widowhood; so true it is that
though the desire of independence be the first inclination that takes
possession of the heart of man, yet it is not the last that abandons it.

The Castilians so soon deprived of their new King, and discouraged by the
extravagance of their Queen, were forced to have their recourse to Ferdinand.
There were some amongst them who made some difficulty of resolving upon that:
but it ceased when they who knew Ferdinand best, told them that the joy which
that Prince would conceive in recovering the administration of Castile would be
so great, and that the need he stood in of the Forces of that Monarchy for
securing his Dominion in Naples was so urgent, that though he might resent most
deeply the slight put upon him by the Castilians in preferring his Son-in-law
before him, yet not only he would show no outward marks thereof, but would also
for the future more cautiously manage that People. For then he would be
apprehensive through his own experience that as they had once already shaken
off his yoke when they found it too heavy, so they might again shake it off
with so much the more facility, that Maximilian the Emperor, the Father of
their late King, desired no better than to be called in to supply the place of
his Son during the minority of his Grandchild.

Thus Ferdinand, more fortunate than he expected, was invited to retake the
Government of Castile, which two and twenty months before had been
ignominiously taken from him, and did not lose so favorable an occasion. The
conjecture that had been made of his moderation proved to be exactly true, and
that politic Prince was so far from revenging himself on those who had thrust
him out, that he made it his particular care to gain them; and the first places
that fell void, as well as the favors that came to be distributed, were all
for them.

So rare and judicious a procedure had the effect that Ferdinand expected from
it. The Castilians being persuaded that he generously pardoned because he
affected to seem unmindful of their fault, on their part remembered it no more
neither but only to make amends for it, and lived afterward in so exact a
submission, that during the Reign of Ferdinand they forbore to demand, as it
was their custom to do, the Convocation of the Estates for regulating the
Government of the Monarchy; and if thereafter they were assembled, it was at
his desire. None but Manuel, who being more politic, and by consequent more
distrustful than the rest, was of a contrary opinion to that of the public,
and would never trust Ferdinand. He thought that he had too highly offended him
to refer himself absolutely to his diseretion without passing for an imprudent
man; and the instance of the Great Captain Gonsalvo.
whom his Friends proposed to him as a signal proof of the clemency of the
Catholic King, wrought nothing at all upon him. He chose rather to banish
himself from Castile than to live under an offended Master, and quitted the
great preferments that he owed to the liberality of Philip of Austria, that he
might go live without employment in Flanders with the Archduke Charles.

Chievres, who intended to make use of him for the execution of the designs
that shall be related in the sequel of this History, received him as the
services which he had rendered to their common Master deserved, and made him
his intimate friend. Ferdinand was the more incensed at the retreat of Manuel,
because he knew him to be a man capable of forming and keeping on foot,
dangerous intrigues against him in Castile, though he was in the Low Countries,
and used all means to hinder him from doing so. Nevertheless his Catholic
Majesty thought it not fit to persecute him directly, lest the other Castilians
might take umbrage thereat, but thought it enough to attack him by such ways as
concealed private revenge under a cloak of public good. However he deprived
him of what he had purchased in Spain; and endeavored as much as in him lay to
reduce him to his first state. The pretext which he took to impoverish him
without startling the Castillians deserves to be known. The profuseness of
Philip of Austria had been so great that it had encroached upon the Crown-Rents
of the Kings of Castile, which till then had never been alienated. In the
revocations of Ferdinand.
Ferdinand took the occasion he sought for to revoke all the Grants made by
that young Prince for what cause soever; and reserved to himself the liberty of
confirming those which should appear to him to be just. The Castillians took no
exceptions at that order, because it excused them from supplying the ordinary
charges of the State, and Manuel thereby lost the great settlements that he had
in Castile. He thought it not convenient to make any attempt for retaining
them; for besides that he foresaw it would be fruitless, he would not give
Ferdinand the satisfaction of refusing him, He suffered himself to be stripped of
all without complaining; and revenged himself afterward according to the
manner of the most refined Politicians, that is to say, by the help, and under
the name of another.

He seconded Chievres in his design of thrusting Ferdinand once more out of
Castile by opposing the Emperor Maximilian the First to him; and the measures
that were taken to bring that about were so just, that had it not been for
France they had succeeded. The Emperor rejected no proposition that gave him
occasion of getting much money with little pains, and upon that weak side
Chievres and Manuel attacked him. They caused it to be represented to him by
men that seemed zealous for his Interests, that the Catholic King had doubly
offended him, first in putting upon him so great an affront, that no ordinary
Gentleman would sit down with without venturing his life to have satisfaction
for it; next in doing him a notorious piece of injustice, equally contrary to
the right of private men, and to that of Sovereigns. The affront consisted in
this, that the Catholic King struck at the Emperors reputation in supposing
him incapable of the guardianship of the Children of the late King of Castile^
his Son, seeing he had taken from him the administration of the best part of
their Inheritance which was the Monarchy of Castile: that the injustice
regarded the exclusion of the noble Sex, and the substitution of the more
ignoble in the most important of civil actions, which was the Regency of
States: That all the Laws and Customs of Europe called the Fathers of young
Sovereigns to that Regency, even when their Sovereignties came by the Mother;
and that if there were no Father, the Grandfather for the same reason was
preferred before the Grandmother, and the Paternal Grandfather before the
Maternal. Nevertheless the Catholic King was gone into Castile, had received
the Oath of the People, had put himself into possession of the Guardianship of
the Children, and converted their Revenues to his own use: That the People of
the Low Countries had so universally acknowledged that they could not lawfully
frustrate the Emperor of the Guardianship of his Grandchildren, that the
seventeen Provinces had by common consent referred it to him; and that if the
Castillians had not imitated them, the blame must be cast upon the cunning of
Ferdinand who had overreached them: That there was no more needful to force
him once more out of Castile, but to represent to them that they were outwitted
by him; and that if notwithstanding they persisted to own him as Regent, it was
easy for his Imperial Majesty to bring him to reason, by sending German Forces
into the Kingdom of Naples by the Gulf of Venice.

The Emperor was so much the more sensibly moved with this discourse, that it
opened him a way of enjoying almost the whole revenues of his Grandsons, the
eldest being maintained by the Flemings, and the younger needing only a small
pension for maintaining him in the College of Alcala where he was. His
Imperial Majesty sent Ambassadors to Ferdinand to bid him leave the
administration of Castile, and to declare War against him if he failed to do it
within a time limited. Ferdinand knew Maximilian too well to be afraid of him
so long as none but he made War against him, because he was sure that in that
case his Imperial Majesty would do it but weakly, and but for a short time too:
But he apprehended that when the French saw him once engaged in the Conquest of
the Kingdom of Naples, and reduced to an inability of pursuing his point
through the want of money, they might treat with him to buy the places he had
taken, and hire the Forces employed in forcing them, for in such a Juncture it
would be impossible for Spain to preserve that Kingdom.

In that prospect Ferdinand proposed to himself by the means of France to
divert the storm that threatened him, and had his recourse to the mediation of
Louis the Twelsth to hinder Maximilian from making War once more in Italy.
Louis had received causes of dissatisfaction from the Republic of Venice that
he could not think of pardoning. It had hindered him from recovering the
Kingdom of Naples, wherein had it not been for that Republic he must have
succeeded, and they had plainly enough intimated by their Ambassadors at
Paris, that they would engage in all Leagues that might be formed against the
disturbers of the peace of Italy. Since their politic resolutions were
unalterable, and that there was no other expedient to take them off from the
execution of the Counsels taken in the Pregadi, but by attacking them so
powerfully that they should have business enough to defend themselves, Louis
labored to turn against them the four most considerable Powers of Europe,
which were the Holy See, France, Germany, and Spain. In the causes of the
League of Cambray.
The Union of so many Adversaries of so contrary humors and interests did not
appear very difficult, because there was none of them from whom the Republic
did not keep Towns which they would be very glad to recover. In the
Ecclesiastical state they possessed the most Important places of the Province
of Romania: in the Duchy of Milan the Towns lying upon the River of Adda:
Istria and Friuli, the places which heretofore the House of Austria had held by
engagement; and in the Kingdom of Naples the maritime Towns of Apulia.

France secretly negotiated the Preliminaries of that League; and they were
almost agreed, when Ferdinand represented to the most Christian King that if he
prevented not the misunderstanding that was like to degenerate into an open War
betwixt his Catholic Majesty and the Emperor; the Union of the four
Potentates would be interrupted, and perhaps would not all be formed by reason
of the distrust that Pope Julius the Second might have, that if he joined alone
with the French, seeing they had many more Forces than he, they might alone
make their prosit of all the spoils of the Venetians. Louis assaulted on the
weak side, employed his Ministers to reconcile his two most inveterate enemies,
and bestirred himself in it so vigorously, that by his patience and
perseverance he surpassed the great dissiculties that he met with therein.

The Emperor and Catholic King by his mediation disposed of the Crowns of
Castile, to which neither the one or other had any other right but that of
convenience, as if they had been uncontrovertibly their own; and though the
Laws of the Country called to the Government the eldest of their Grandchildren
when he was complete Eighteen years of age, yet they put him off by their own
private authority till he were five and twenty. The Emperor rested content
with a Pension of fifty thousand Crowns a year for all the pretensions he had
to Castile in quality of Paternal Grandfather to the two young Princes who were
the lawful Heirs of it; and the Catholic King secured himself at so easy a
rate; to reign so long as he lived as absolutely in that Monarchy as he did in
Arragon.

Chievres with extreme indignation received the news of the conclusion of so
unreasonable a Treaty, and laid two considerable intrigues to break it off
before it began to be put in execution, the one was at the Court of France by
the Countess of Angoulesm the Mother of Francis presumptive Successor to
Louis, the other in Germany by Margarite of Austria, whom we have mentioned
before. The Countess of Angoulesm represented to the most Christian King that
the Accommodation which he had made betwixt Germany and Spain was equally
contrary to the Justice which he owed to himself, and to that which he owed to
the most illustrious Feudatary of his Crown: That the three attempts made by
his most Christian Majesty for the recovery of the Kingdom of Naples in seven
years time since he lost it, were sufficient to convince him that he could not
succeed in it so long as the Germans and Spaniards acted in concert to hinder
him from entering it, as on the contrary their disunion would infallibly open
to him the way; and that notwithstanding his Majesty instead of taking all
courses to set Maximilian and Ferdinand at variance, and at least of taking the
advantage of the division fallen out betwixt them without his having a hand in
it, as he might in Conscience have done, had interposed to make them friends,
and that successfully too; which was the more insupportable to all true
Frenchmen, that they were sensible that had it not been for that Mediation, the
Kingdom of Naples would have been entirely reunited to the French Monarchy:
That the late King of Castile had upon his deathbed left the disposition of
his eldest Son to his most Christian Majesty; that besides he held of him,
because of his Counties of Flanders, Artois, and Charolois: that he had indeed
provided for the Education of that young Prince, but that it seemed at present
he had repented of the good he had done unto him, by procuring him at least as
much hurt, seeing he frustrated him for seven whole years of the possession of
the Kingdoms of Castile, which by nature and the Laws belonged to him. These
urgent reasons of the Countess made no impression upon the mind of Louis,
because his Majesty neither could nor would undo his own work; and if Chievres
was strangely troubled at it, he had occasion to take comfort, in that his
Pupil had afterward the Kingdom of Navarre, which Ferdinand could never have
seized, had he not been King of Castile as well as of Arragon, in the Juncture
that offered four years after. However he left not off to apply himself to the
Emperor by the Mediation of Margarite of Austria, whose third Marriage with
the Duke of Savoy had neither been longer nor more happy than the former with
the Dauphin of France, and the Prince of Spain, who represented to him that his
Imperial Majesty had rendered the House of Austria the most powerful Family in
Christendom; first, by his Alliance with the Heiress of Burgundy, and since by
the Alliance of his Son with the Heiress of Spain: but that if he persisted
resolute in the execution of a Treaty which he might break without being
thought unfaithful, since not only he was cheated in it more than the half of
the just value but also he reserved not thereby the hundredth part of what
belonged to him, and would ruin the Family by dividing it, in such a manner as
it could never be reunited again: That all Europe was persuaded that Ferdinand
loved the younger Son incomparably better than the elder; and that there were
such evident marks of that preference, that it could not be doubted, seeing he
had given his name to the younger: That he took a particular care of his
education: that he visited him time after time in the College of Alcala, where
he studied: and that he brought him up in the hopes of being one day King of
Castile and Arragon. That it would be very hard to hinder that odd design, if
the Catholic King reigned in CAstile till the Archduke were five and twenty
years of age complete, because that long space of time would be sufficient to
settle the young Ferdinand so firm in Spain, that though his elder Brother had
a mind to force him thence, yet he could not be able to do it; and the hatred
of the two Brothers would become indelible, in that the elder would always lay
claim to the Monarchies which his younger Brother had usurped from him; and the
younger would still be upon his guard against his elder Brother, in the sole
prospect of maintaining his Usurpation: whereas if the Emperor had the
administration of Castile during the Minority of the Archduke, he would
preserve that Monarchy for him, and his Ministers would from thence so
carefully watch all the actions of the Catholic King, that it would be almost
impossible for him to raise young Ferdinand to the Throne of Arragon. If
contrary to all appearance the Affair might still succeed, yet young Ferdinand
could not long sit on the Throne to which his Benefactor had raised him, and
there would be so little proportion betwixt his Forces and those of his elder
Brother, that he would be soon subdued: which could not befall him if he
possessed the two Monarchies of Castile and Arragon, seeing in that case his
elder Brother must cross over all France, to which the most Christian King
would never consent.

Maximilian had no more regard to the Remonstrances of Margarite of Austria,
than the most Christian King had to those of the Countess of Angoulesm, whether
it was that the word of his Imperial Majesty was already too far engaged, or
that he apprehended not the inconveniences which Chievres foresaw. His
Accommodation with the Catholic King was concluded: he had his fifty thousand
Crowns a year that were promised him duly paid; and Ferdinand reigned so long
as he lived with as much authority in Castile as Arragon, though he had no
right over the Castilians and was lawful King of the Arragonese. But it seldom
happens that private men concern themselves in the quarrels of their Sovereigns
scotfree; for if the Party they adhered to get the better of the other, they
seldom obtain a reward proportionable to the greatness of their services; and
if they succumb, the unfortunate Prince for whom they declared, abandons them
to the discretion of the happy Prince whom they have offended, or at least
takes no care to comprehend them in his Articles of Agreement, which is almost
the same as if he abandoned them. There was no mention neither of Chievres nor
of Manuel made in the reconciliation of the Emperor and Catholic King; but
the Archdukes Governor sustained no prejudice thereby, and all the storm broke
upon the Favorite of his Father.

Ferdinand durst not attempt to remove Chievres from his Grandson Charles,
because Louis the Twelfth, who had placed him there, would have been concerned
in honor to have maintained him; and besides the People of the Low Countries
would not have suffered him to have been deposed, with what pretext soever that
change had been colored. But Manuel, who had not so good a back, remained
without a Protector: Maximilian sacrificed him without scruple; and Ferdinand
made it a Principle of policy to drive him to the utmost extremity. By that
means he thought to over aw the more restless spirits of Castile; and to render
them so tractable that they would trouble him no more in the administration of
their Monarchy. It happened however that the People of the Low Countries where
Manuel had taken sanctuary seconded but in half the violence of his Catholic
Majesty. They consented, indeed, that Manuel should be committed to Prison: but
they would not comply with Ferdinand to bring him to a Trial before the Supreme
Court of Flanders. In vain his Catholic Majesty declared himself Plaintiff,
and offered to make it out in lawful form, that he had been the only cause of
the misunderstanding that had been betwixt himself and the late King of
Castile his son-in-law. They shifted his Proposition by sending him this
positive answer, That it belonged not to the Subjects of the Archduke Charles,
such as were the Judges of the Low Countries, to try an Affair that concerned
another Subject of that Prince, born in a Country far remote from theirs, and
over whom they had no Jurisdiction, the Crimes in question not having been
committed in Flanders: That they were willing to believe upon the word of his
Majesty that Manuel was guilty, because he had been so unhappy as to give him
occasion to think him so; and that it was only upon that account that they had
made sure of his Person, that they would keep him in safe custody, and be
answerable for him. But that seeing the Archduke was concerned in the Affair by
reason of his Fathers reputation which might be blemished; there was a
necessity of staying till he was of age, and that the Laws of Castile gave him
Authority to assist at the Judgment of a Castilian.

Ferdinand was not satisfied with that excuse: But it being impossible for him
to obtain any more against Manuel, he did not complain; and the Flemings denied
Manuel nothing which he desired to ease the irksomness of a Prison. He
continued there until the death of Ferdinand, and came out immediately after In
the last Negotiation of Manuel.
. His gratitude to the Archduke, who went in Person with Chievres to take him
out of Prison was such, that thereafter he stirred up in his favors all the
Princes of Italy against the French, and gave him the occasion of taking from
them the Duchy of Milan.

The big belly of the Queen Germana was more than sufficient to comfort
Ferdinand, for that the sole Castilian, whom he had proposed to undo, had
escaped from his revenge. His Catholic Majesty had in the year One thousand
five hundred and nine a Son, who without dispute ought to disappoint the
Archduke of the Kingdoms of Arragon, Valencia, Majorca, Minorca, Naples, and
Sicily. The late King of Castile agreed to that, and the Great Captain had
approved for that end the transaction passed betwixt that Prince and his
Father-in-law: But it is in vain for men to strive to avoid the Decrees of
Heaven. Ferdinand's new Son lived but an hour; and the Catholic King was more
sensibly touched with grief at the loss of him, than he had been affected with
joy at his birth. He turned his resentment against the Person in the world who
had most obliged him; and that Person defended himself in the way that ablest
Courtiers take to avoid the indignation of their Masters, which is that of a
diversion.

Cardinal Francis de Cisneros Ximenes was the man of all the Spaniards whose
outside best agreed with the inside, and in whose countenance, those who knew
least of Physiognomy could very hardly have been deceived even though they
would. He was of a goodly stature; a well proportioned body; a healthful
constitution; steady gate; strong voice; grave countenance; his countenance was
long and withered: his forehead large, and so smooth that age wrinkled it not:
his eyes small and hollow, but quick and piercing, though they were always
watery: his nose long and aquiline: his fore-teeth set so far outward, that he
went by the Nickname of the Elephant: his lips thick: his chest long, and his
head without any future, as it appeared to them who found his Skull forty years
after his death when they were repairing the Vault where his body was laid: to
which are attributed those fearful headaches wherewith he was so frequently
tormented; contrary to Cardinal Richelieu, who never felt any pain of the head,
because he had in his Crown two little holes, through which the vapors exhaled.

The prudence of Ximenes carried it from that of the Cardinal of Amboise, chief
Minister of State to the most Christian King Louis the Twelfth. It had always
inclined the advantage to the Spanish side against France, when those two
Monarchies fell into competition. The Spaniard was, indeed, slower in
deliberation than the Frenchman, but to make amends for that he prevented him
in the execution when once he had taken his side, and never remitted, as he
did, till he had accomplished what he had begun: difficulties enlivened instead
of discouraging him. Choler, to which he was subject, never so far transported
him as to make him say any thing, or do any action, that he might have cause
afterward to repent of. He was so punctual in keeping of his word, that it
never went out of his mind till he had fulfilled it. His deep Melancholy
obliged him to delight in the company of those who used to make Jests: but he
himself never spoke any, and it was perhaps for fear of meeting with sharp
repartees, for he was but the Son of a Proctor of Tortelaguna in old Castile,
and he had spent his youth amongst the Cordeliers before that Order was
reformed. The sole consideration of his worth had advanced him to be Guardian
and Provincial of his Order; and he actually discharged the last of the two
when it pleased Queen Isabella to choose him for her Confessor. He endeavored
to have excused himself, and did not embrace it but because that Princess would
needs have him to be the depositary of her greatest secrets. Nevertheless one
of his most intimate friends pleasantly complained of it as of a piece of
Infidelity committed toward him, and upbraided him that he forsook him to go
to Court. Queen Isabella was sensible already of the reach and ability of his
Genius, when by the following accident she was excited to give him the chief
Ecclesiastical Dignity of Spain.

Cardinal Hurtado de Mendoza was sick, and the Physicians despaired of his
recovery. Ferdinand and Isabella, who were extraordinarily obliged to him, did
him the honor to give him a visit, and Isabella privately conjured him to tell
her ingenuously if he had no thoughts of any who he desired might succeed to
him. The Cardinal answered, that it was indifferent to him, provided his
Successor deserved the Archbishopric of Toledo. Isabella insisted: She
conjured him to name to her the Castilian whom he judged worthiest, and the
Cardinal without hesitation replied, that Ximenes was the man. Isabella
ravished at that Authentic testimony, which gave her occasion to promote her
Confessor to the Archbishopric of Toledo without giving offense to her
Husband, caused his Brief to be expeded upon the death of the Cardinal, and
shortly after brought him into the Council of State. He acquired a prodigious
reputation there in respect that all the Counsels which he moved or seconded
hardly ever failed to succeed; as on the contrary, those which he rejected were
commonly unsuccessful: but in exchange he attracted the enmity of the greatest
Nobility of Castile and Arragon. No Minister of State in Spain that ever went
before him, possessed in so high a degree, that so rare a virtue in a
Statesman which the holy Scripture calls hunger and thirst after
righteousness. He could not endure that great men should oppress their Vassals;
and when a poor Peasant applied himself to him to demand Justice for the
oppression of his Lord, he rendered it upon the spot, if it depended solely on
him, and procured it by all his credit if it was not in his own power without
caring for what might follow. The murmurings of the persons of quality were so
much the greater at that, that for many ages they had been accustomed to treat
their Inferiors according to their fancy. That abuse proceeded from the
privilege the Nobles took to themselves because it was chiefly they who
recovered the Country from the Moors. Upon that ground alone they were
persuaded that all Castile belonged to them by the right of Conquest; and that
they did no injury to Catholic Peasants, who lived only there by their
permission, when they left them no more of the Crop they sowed and reaped, but
what they pleased.

The Kings of Castile and Arragon had always been indulgent to these petty
Tyrants, whether it was that they feared to excite the great men to revolt, who
otherwise were but too subject to it, or that they themselves had an interest
in the continuance of that disorder, because in their own Lands they used the
same violences that the Gentlemen committed in theirs. Therefore the Great men
of Castile complained to Queen Isabella oftener than once of the Cardinal, and
pressed her to send him home to his Church, where they thought he would not be
any more so troublesome to them. But Isabella always cluded their desire by
answering, that that Prelate was so useful to her, that though he were at
Toledo she must of necessity dispatch a Courrier with Orders for him instantly
to repair to Court. Thereupon she imparted to them in general the important
affairs which required the presence of that Prelate; and if she dismissed them
not with satisfaction, yet she took from them the pretext of making
Insurrections upon the account their desire had been refused. So they
separated, and returned to their Castles without daring to attempt the person
of Ximenes; In the Life of Cardinal Ximenes.
for besides that he was more powerful than any one of them in particular, not
excepting the Dukes of Alva and Infantado, and never went but well guarded; the
People, who acknowledged him for their Protector, were in all places so well
affected toward him, that the greatest Cowards in the place where he might
have been attacked, would have made no difficulty to hazard their lives to save
his. In this condition he continued till the death of the Queen his
Benefactrice; and thereafter became so useful during the Reign of Philip of
Austria for accommodating him with his Father-in-law, that Ferdinand durst not
undertake to disgrace him: but after the death of Philip and the Accommodation
betwixt the Emperor Maximilian and King Ferdinand, his Catholic Majesty
thought that there was nothing wanting to gain the general good will of the
Grandees of Spain, but to sacrifice to them Ximenes. He long considered how he
might most securely disgrace him, and at length pitched upon the following
method.

He caused it to be represented to him that he had too much wit not to perceive
that the hatred which the great men of Castile bore him was irreconcilable, and
that it would not fail to break out in time and place convenient: That hitherto
they had been restrained by the consideration they had for the late Queen, and
their affection to Philip of Austria: but that now, that Prince was dead, that
his Widow was distracted, without any hopes of recovery, and that Ferdinand
only reigned in Castile with the Title of a precarious King, that is to say, as
Administrator of that Monarchy during the nonage of his Grandchildren, his
Catholic Majesty durst not promise to protect him for the future against such
a multitude of potent enemies: that notwithstanding it would desperately
afflict him to have failed in it for two reasons; first, because he was
extremely obliged to Ximenes, and then that his weakness would appear too
evidently when it should come to be known in Europe that Ferdinand could not
snatch his Chief Minister out of the hands of incensed Castilians: That there
was no other remedy for that inconvenience but the translation of Ximenes from
the chief See of the Churches of Castile, where the Royal Authority would be no
more respected than as it pleased the Grandees, to the first See of the
Churches of Arragon where it was absolute, and all that could be done for
Ximenes was to oblige the Archbishop of Sarragossa to exchange with him.

Ximenes understood very well that Ferdinand had a mind to his Benefice, and
prudently judged that it behoved him at first to put him out of hopes of it. He
made answer to this purpose, That for his life he valued it not much, seeing he
had taken, and what in him lay executed the design of spending it wholly in the
Cloisters of Cordeliers: That the Catholic King knew very well how he was
pulled out from thence to be made espouse of the Church of Toledo: and that his
Majesty might very well remember that oftener than once he had protested to
Queen Isabella, when she commanded him to take such a Wife, that he would never
forsake her till death: that it was to no purpose then to speak to him of
exchange, nor to press him to resign, since nothing would be got by it: That if
the great men of Castile attacked him separately, they should meet with their
match; and if they united against him, he had power enough to prevent himself
from being run down at first, till he might have assistance from the King his
Master; that if that assistance failed him not, as he had ground to hope it
would not, he would easily bring his Enemies to reason; and if it failed him at
a pinch, yet he would defend himself in his Archbishopric as long as he could,
and if he were reduced to extremity, take Shipping and cross the Seas that he
might find fanctuary in another Country at least, if he were not received there
according to his quality. Ferdinand at first understood not the true meaning of
the last words of Ximenes which were faithfully reported to him; but he
understood them but too well in the sequel, when that Prelate wrote to the
Emperor, and to the Archduke Charles of Austria, that there was an apparent
design of turning him out of his Archbishopric, as a punishment for having
been the first of the Castilians that owned Philip of Austria for their King,
and because there was no hopes for raising to the Throne one of the natural
Sons of Ferdinand in prejudice of the lawful Children so long as he was Primate
of Spain. The Letters of the Cardinal grounded thereupon chiefly the protection
which he demanded from those two Princes. But Ximenes wrote a third Letter to
Chievres, acquainting him that the Archduke was chiefly concerned that he
should remain at the head of the Clergy, and by consequent of the Estates of
Castile, seeing Ferdinand would no sooner lose his hopes of raising his natural
Son to the Thrones of Castile and Arragon, In the Letters of Ximenes to
Chievres.
but that he would cast about to promote his younger Grandson in prejudice of
the Elder. That in that second attempt he would infallibly succeed, if baffled
in the first, if he made sure of him whom he should prefer in the place of
Ximenes to the Archbishopric of Toledo, because that new Prelate being the
chief of the Estates, would sway all the Propositions that might be made there:
That the Castilians and Arragonese agreed in one point, though they had a
terrible Antipathy in all things else; and that that Point was not to admit of
a Sovereign, but of one that should always live in Spain: That Ferdinand, who
knew their inclination, needed do no more to dispose first the Castilians, and
then the Arragonese to subvert the order of Nature, but to represent to them,
that if they took the Archduke for their King, the Imperial Dignity that was
like to descend upon him after the death of his Paternal Grandfather, the
hereditary Provinces of the House of Austria that he must necessarily enjoy as
being the Eldest of the Family, and the Low Countries which he already
possessed, would employ him so often, and so long, that very seldom he could
come into Spain; and so soon as he were there, he would be pressed again to be
gone: That on the contrary, if the two Monarchies of Spain took the Infanto
Ferdinand for their King, seeing he would have no other States to govern, he
would remain constantly in Spain, and not go into Italy but once at most, and
that occasionally as his Maternal Grandfather had done: That the Castilians and
Arragonese being convinced by that only reason would prefer the younger before
the elder Brother; whereas if his Catholic Majesty were not sure of the
Archbishop of Toledo, he durst not propose his intention to the Estates of
Castile, because he might suppose he would be baffled in it; and that if the
Affair passed not in Castile, it would not be in a condition to pass in Arragon.

Ximenes thereupon renewed his Protestations of fidelity to the Archduke; and
so convincingly persuaded his Governor of the necessity of maintaining him in
the Benefice to which he was provided, that Chievres inclined the Emperor and
Archduke to take infallible measures for protecting him against the Catholic
King. And in effect these two Princes wrote in concert to Ferdinand that the
reputation of Queen Isabella was concerned, that the only person whom she had
raised highest should not be depressed; and that it struck also at the honor
of the late King Philip, seeing if Ximenes were deposed, it would not fail to
be said that it was for having given bad counsels to that young Prince. That if
his Catholic Majesty pretended Ximenes had offended him, the Law was open to
call him to an account for it; and that neither the Emperor nor the Archduke
would take it ill if he brought him to a fair Trial: but that if he took a
violent course, seeing he could not do it without raising a Civil War in
Castile, and that it concerned the Emperor and Archduke to prevent it, he
ought not to take exceptions if they labored to do it in the manner they
judged most proper.

The threatening which was plainly enough intimated in the last words mentioned,
put Ferdinand to a stand, and disarmed his resentment. He foresaw that seeing
he had no lawful Male Issue he would commit an irreparable fault if he
contented not himself with the administration of Castile, and in reigning
peaceably during his life. He made reflection that he was about to deprive
himself of both these advantages if he drove Ximenes to extremity: that in that
case it would cost him more in Castile than he got out of it, and that he would
hamper himself in a quarrel that must at least last as long as he: That he
would, indeed, have the Nobility of Castile on his side, but that on the other
hand, the People and honest men would declare for Ximenes: and that so the
Forces being almost equal, the War would be long, and the Issue without doubt
unfortunate. That if his Catholic Majesty were overcome, the high reputation
which he had acquired would be wholly blasted; and the Spaniards would no more
be obliged to him for the Conquests of Granada and Naples, because he would
have caused them more prejudice by dividing them than he had done them good by
making them great: besides the shame that would redound unto him by being
beaten by a Cordelier. So that the least inconvenience that could befall him
would be to be confined to Arragon for the rest of his days; and that he would
have a continual vexation a thousand times worse than death, to see his
victorious Adversary possessing in Castile the place which by his own
imprudence he had lost. If he triumphed over Ximenes the glory of it would not
be great; and seeing the dignity and profession of his Adversary would excuse
him from venturing his Person, he would have no more to do after his Forces
were defeated, but to take Shipping and fly to Flanders. That the Archdukes
Letter gave sufficient intimation that he would be well received there, and
that nevertheless he would not fail to do Ferdinand as much mischief from
thence, as he would have done had he been victorious in Castile; that by his
intrigues he would cross all the Projects of his Catholic Majesty: That he
would raise him more business than he could make an end of: That by infinite
pains and labor he would make him purchase the pleasure of administering the
Dominions of his Grandchildren; and that perhaps he might dispose the Archduke,
who for all he was so young was already through the care of his Governor be
come fit to reign, not to stay till he were of age for going into Spain; and
for constraining Ferdinand to deliver up to him the possession of the Monarchy
of Castile as quickly and easily, as Philip of Austria had forced him to do it
before.

Princes, who comply best with the necessity of their affairs, are such as
comply soonest; and so soon as Ferdinand was convinced that he must be
reconciled to Ximenes, he did it with good grace without employing a Mediator.
Ximenes surprised to find himself so soon contrary to all expectation rid of so
troublesome an Affair; and not trusting too much to Ferdinand, considered long
what course to take for his own security. He sound no better expedient for
avoiding the Jealousy of his Catholic Majesty, than at his own charge, and by
his own credit to raise an Army of sixteen thousand men, and to command them in
person for conquering the Ports of Barbary, that lay most conveniently for the
Spaniards. He supposed that by that means he would deserve the universal
approbation of Christians; and that if he appeased not the Nobility of Spain,
he would take from them even the pretext of doing him any hurt. Ferdinand would
have no more cause to envy his vast Revenues, nor to accuse him of ill
employing them; and if nevertheless he did do so, he would purchase to himself
the indignation of all men. The Vassals of the Archbishop of Toledo would be
enured to War; and their Prelate being in the midst of them, would have no
cause to fear any thing. If his enterprise in Africa succeeded, no man in
Spain would for the future have the boldness to attack him; and if it succeeded
not, he would at least have this consolation, that his design would meet with
so much approbation, that they would still respect the Author though they
should hear that he had miscarried in the enterprise.

So Ximenes levied Forces, fitted out Ships, laid aside the Frock and
Ecclesiastic Habit, armed Cap-a-pee, and crossed over fortunately into
Barbary. The Military Profession was a new thing to him, and he understood no
more of it but what he had heard discoursed of in the Council of Spain: yet it
happened to him as to Lucullus which the Roman History cannot sufficiently
admire. He became a Captain in the short time that he was passing over the
narrow Streights which divide Spain from Africa, In the relation of that
passage.
and at first discharged the most difficult duty of a General, which is by his
single Authority to quell seditions come to maturity. He was hardly landed when
the most resolute of his Soldiers, who had thought it no small honor to be
listed under his Colors, were ashamed actually to serve under a Cordelier.
They took the first pretext that offered to decline it, and desired to be
carried back to Spain. Ximenes was not startled neither at their multitude, nor
their revolt: he rushed into the midst of them: took the boldest of the company
by the Collar, caused him to be put to death upon the spot; and so terrified
the rest, that they mutinied no more.

The City of Oran, the Capital of a Kingdom to which it gave the name, was
afterward attacked, and taken by storm: Bugy, where the University of the
Moors was, and the only place known in Africa, where they went to learn the
little of Arts and Sciences which they have, was as easily conquered. The
occasion that Ximenes had of seizing it deserves to be known, were it for no
other reason but to convince us, that if Christians took as much care to be
informed of the affairs of Infidels, as Infidels take to learn what news happen
amongst Christians, we should get more by it than they, and find a a great many
favorable occasions which are lost for want of that application.

The Uncle of the King of Bugy by the Father, a few days before the Spaniards
drew near that Kingdom, thought it not enough to dethrone his Nephew, but also
put out his eyesight with a hot Iron, that thereby he might render him
incapable of reigning, and prevent, according to the Custom of the Country, the
designs of those who pretended afterward to reestablish him upon the Throne
during the life of the Usurper, or immediately after his death. Ximenes
accidentally was informed of so barbarous an action, and presently resolved to
make his advantage of it. He sent word to the friends of the dispossessed King,
that he would exemplarily revenge the injury that was done if they would act in
concert with him, and there needed no more to raise in the Kingdom of Bugy a
second revolution as great as the former. The Party that was worsted took
courage again, and quickly settled secret correspondences with the Spaniards,
who they thought had offered themselves to them out of a principle of
generosity. They took so just measures with them that they facilitated the
taking of places that were capable to hinder them from approaching the Capital
City; and then brought them into Bugy by means that were kept so secret after
the execution of them, that the Spanish Historians disagree about the manner.
This is certain, that an accident supervened, which was so much the more
favorable to the Spaniards for winning that other Crown of Barbary, that not
being so skilful in medicine as they had been in the time of Averroes and
Avienne, they took it for a miracle.

The red-hot Iron that had been made use of to blind the King by holding it
near his eyes a quarter of an hour, had indeed deprived him of sight, but had
not wholly dried up the humors; whether it was that the Ministers of the
Usurpers cruelty had taken it out of the fire before it was hot enough for the
intended operation; or that it was not put near enough his eyes, and held there
a sufficient time for drying entirely up the humidity which serves to the
functions of sight. The Spanish Chirurgions perceived it, and undertook to cure
the Moorish King. The cure was long and difficult, but at length it succeeded,
and was looked upon as well by him upon whom it was wrought as by his Subjects,
as an evident mark that it was the purpose of heaven that they should be
Tributaries to the Spaniards. The Corsairs of Algiers, In the relation of that
Conquest.
who till then had with impunity destroyed the Christian Fleets, and spoiled
the Commerce of Europe in Africa, followed the example of those of Bugy, and
submitted to the payment of the same tribute. In a word, the Spaniards by an
excess of good fortune which they have not had since in their Wars against the
Barbarians, made themselves Masters of the Kingdom of Tripoli; and Ximenes
returned to his Church of Toledo with so much glory and booty, that Ferdinand
durst think no more of molesting him.

In this manner the Archduke Charles reaped so much advantage from the quarrel
of that Prelate and his Maternal Grandfather, that three illustrious Kingdoms
and a more famous Republic were thereby subjected to him; and shortly after,
in the year One thousand five hundred and twelve, the same good fortune brought
under his Dominion the Kingdom of Navarre, when neither he himself, nor his
Governor Chievres had any hand in it. That Monarchy had often fallen to
Daughters, and by consequent had successively passed into several Families. By
that way it was transferred from the ancient House of Navarre, to that of Leon:
from the House of Leon to that of Castile: from the House of Castile to that of
Champagne: from the House of Champagne to that of France: from the House of
France to that of Evreux: from the House of Evreux to the House of Arragon: and
from the House of Arragon to that of Foix-Grailly. Gaston de Foix married
Eleanor Queen of Navarre, second Sister to the Father of Ferdinand the
Catholic King, by whom he had twelve Children of both Sexes. The eldest Son
died at two and twenty years of age, he left a Son and a Daughter whom he had
of Magdalen, the youngest Daughter of Charles the Seventh. The Son, named
Francis Phoebus, reigned not long in Navarre, and died before he was married.
The Daughter named Catharine became thereby the richest Heiress of Europe. She
remained under the Guardianship of her Mother, who would never hear of marrying
again, though she was a Widow at the age of seventeen years. There were but few
Princes in Europe that courted not the Alliance of the young Queen of Navarre;
and the most considerable Husband that was proposed to her was the Insanto of
Spain, John the Son of Ferdinand, who was much of the same age with her. That
Prince was the only Son of Ferdinand and Isabella; and if he had married
Catharine, all the Monarchies of Spain had been reunited, except that of
Portugal. Ferdinand and Isabella designed that chiefly by the Match: But
Magdalen of France had not so great an aversion to the House she was come of,
as to contribute to the raising in Spain a Power almost equal to that of
France. She absolutely refused her Daughter to the Prince of Spain; but for all
that she had not so much kindness for the House of France as to marry her
Daughter into it, as she had not so much affection for her Daughter as to marry
her into a Sovereign Family. She gave her to John Son of Alan d' Albert a
powerful Lord, indeed, in Gascony, but who possessed not a foot of Land but
what held of the Kings of France in quality of Dukes of Guyenne.

Irregularities in Politics are of more dangerous consequence than others; and
it is rare to be found in History, that Queens of themselves have married
Husbands inferior to them in quality without having great occasions of
repenting it. John d' Albert seemed born to verisie the old Proverb, That the
best men are not always the best Kings. He had all the qualities that could
accomplish a private man; but he wanted those which distinguish Sovereigns from
those that are not, and were not cut out for being so. He delighted only in
study, and minded nothing by his good will but collecting of Manuscripts, and
setting up Libraries. There was not a House of any note in Europe but he could
upon the spot blazon its Coat of Arms, and deduce the Genealogy thereof; and
though no man knew better than he that Nobility is only the reward of merit,
and that he could not more sensibly affront the Gentry of Navarre than by
introducing amongst them persons altogether undeserving, yet he did but too
often give them occasion of vexing at his conduct in that particular; whether
it was that he suffered himself to be wheedled by flattery, or that he could
not resist long importunities. He had learned in Guyenne to treat with his
Vassals as a simple Gentleman; and that familiarity which was reckoned a virtue
in him so long as he continued in France, became his greatest vice when he was
in Spain, the People of that Country esteeming none more enormous, than that
which is most inconsistent with gravity. Royal Majesty was to him insupportable
in all the actions that were not of Ceremony: At other times he loved to live
in an equallity, which he called the Cement of Civil Society: He went willingly
to such places where he was invited to eat, provided the company consisted only
of Gentlemen of breeding; and the first thing he did when he was come, was to
forget for some time that he was King, and to be willing that the Master of the
House and the Guests should forget it as well as he, seeing he was very
pleasant company, he contributed at least as much to their mirth as they did to
his; and when he came to know of any feast made in Pampelona the chief City of
Navarre, whether out of respect they durst not invite him, he invited himself,
and put the People to no charges, for then he went commonly alone. He loved
dancing the more that in it he excelled all the Princes of his Age; and when
upon a Journey he found by the way companies of Towns or Country people who
diverted themselves that way, he struck in and danced with them. He had so
great antipathy against State affairs when he found them thorny, that he
abandoned them entirely to the care of his Ministers, who not having the same
interest in them as he had, ordered them many times according to their fancy.

The greatest abuse that proceeded from thence was, that the Magistracies,
Benefices, Offices, and Governments of Navarre were given to strangers, and
that the Remonstrances made thereupon by the Estates of the Kingdom were
fruitless. There is nothing Princes ought more to fear than the hatred and
contempt of their Subjects: However they may boast that they are not altogether
unfortunate when they fall but into the aversion alone, or into the contempt
alone of the same Subjects; because if they have only lost their affection, the
reverence that remains is sufficient to keep them in obedience; and if they
have only lost the reverence affection supplies the defect: but when there is
neither reverence nor affection, it is impossible to prevent revolutions in
States, and to hinder them from growing universal when once they are begun.

John d' Albert was no more respected by the Navarrese by reason of his too
familiar way of living, and for all that reigned no less peaceably, because he
was no less beloved of the meaner sort whom he treated as his equals, nor of
the great men who well enough foresaw that a Prince of that temper would never
invade their Privileges: but so soon as he attracted the hatred of both by
preferring before them strangers and persons of mean virtue, nothing was then
able to support him, and he succumbed under the first attack that was made
against him.

For many Ages Navarre had been divided into two almost equal Factions in
power, the one was that of Beaumont, the other that of Grammont according to
the old Titles of the House which still retains that name, and of Grammont
according to the modern. The chief of the House of Beaumont was the Count of
Lerin hereditary Constable of Navarre; and the chief of the House of Grammont
was Lord of Tutelle and High Marshal of the Kingdom. The Count of Lerin had all
the Qualities, or to say better, all the Vices that ancient and modern
Histories have observed in extraordinary men who have made themselves Heads of
Parties: His mind was the more malicious that neither Humanity nor Religion
retained it upon any occasion within bounds. He had killed the Father and only
Brother of the Count of Tutelle, and for killing them had profaned what is most
holy in the Catholic Religion. The Cardinal de Foix during the preceding Reign
had interposed to reconcile the Families of Beaumont and Grammont; and thought
he had accomplished it when he had obliged the Constable and Marshal of Navarre
to promise solemnly that they would forget what was past, and for the future
live in perfect friendship. After that he celebrated Mass, divided the Host
into two, and communicated both Parties: and yet this hindered not but that the
Constable as soon as he came out of the Church went and waylaid the Marshal
with a purpose to assassinate him. He missed his blow, indeed, but left not off
searching occasions afterward of putting it in execution.

The Marshal on the contrary was a frank man; and who in all appearance
departed not from the Maxims of Religion, but because he was not sufficiently
instructed in them. He supposed it was lawful to revenge the death of his
Father and Brother, and the murder attempted upon his own Person, provided it
were done publicly, and without treachery. The Constable and Marshal had
engaged into their quarrel all the Nobility of Navarre, and their private
difference was insensibly degenerated into a Civil War, wherein their
Neighbors had taken the part that interest or inclination suggested to them.
The French declared for the Faction of Grammont, and the Castilians out of pure
antipathy espoused that of Beaumont, which was actually the most powerful in
the City of Pampelona, when John d' Albert made his first entry into it. He
favored those of Grammont before he married the Heiress of Navarre; and the
effects of it were so visible, that the Common People had as little cause to
doubt of it as the Nobility.

Thus the Constable had cause more than enough to distrust the new King, and to
fear being born down by him, if he received him at first, and without
Conditions, into the Capital City of the Kingdom. He had thereupon the boldness
to shut the Gates upon him; and not to open them till after a Capitulation,
wherein John d' Albert obliged himself in writing, not to meddle in the quarrel
betwixt those of Beaumont and Grammont upon any ground or pretext whatsoever.
John d' Albert granted all that the Constable demanded of him, because
otherwise he could not have been Crowned with the common consent of the
Nobility of Navarre: but the affront seemed to him afterward to be too great to
be dissembled. He prosecuted the Constable first in the usual course of Law,
and then by Arms; but in so just a quarrel he was not seconded as he expected
to have been. The Faction of Grammont repaired, indeed, to his Banner, but the
Constable also received assistance from two sorts of people which he thought
ought rather to have declared against him than for him.

The first were those who feared to be plundered by the Faction that should
entirely root out the other, and the other those who being accustomed to live
under a Monarchy where the Royal Power was almost as much limited as in the
Kingdom of Navarre, In the Collection of the Laws of Navarre.
would not have their King become absolute by the overthrow of the Faction of
Beaumont, or at least that he should be in a condition of growing so, if
occasion put him upon desiring it. So that the Party was no less equal when the
King sided with those of Grammont than it was when the two Factions subsisted
only by their own Forces, and the Civil War was no less drawn out in length.
John d' Albert being impatient to have an end put to it because it hindered him
from his ordinary business, listened to the first proposals of peace that were
made to him, though they came from a Court every way to be suspected.

Ferdinand the Catholic King being frustrated of his hopes of uniting Navarre
to Arragon and Castile by the Marriage of his only Son with Catharine de Foix,
waited for an opportunity of seizing it by craft; and finding no more lawful
fomented unjust ways. He wanted a pretext of meddling in the quarrel of those of
Beaumont and Grammont before the King of Navarre interposed in it, because the
Monarchs of that time had that deference one for another not to take notice of
what was done in neighboring Kingdoms, unless they were solicited to it. But
after that the King of Navarre had declared against those of Grammont; and that
the Constable their head apprehending at long run to succumb under the force of
the Gascons, who would flock in to the succor of John d' Albert, had had his
recourse to the assistance of the Castilians; Ferdinand let not so favorable
an occasion slip, and managed it so cunningly, that at length it produced the
effect which he expected from it.

The Constable was his Brother-in-law as having married Eleanor, natural
Daughter to the late John King of Arragon, and upon that consideration chiefly
he grounded his offer of mediation to the King of Navarre for accommodating him
(...) his Constable. The King of Navarre, who perceived not the drift of such a
Proposition willingly accepted it; and Ferdinand had no sooner drawn him into
the snare so cunningly laid, but that he prepared another for him more
dangerous than the former. He passed insensibly in regard of his Majesty of
Navarre from a Mediation to a Guarranty, and overreached him by representing
to him by Agents wonderfully cunning, that the Constable was not a man
religious in keeping his word; and seeing the most sacred and solemn Tie
amongst Christians was not powerful enough to oblige him, he ought to bind him
by so considerable a Guarant, that he durst not unsay: That the King offered to
take it upon him upon no other motive but of making and entertaining peace
amongst his Neighbors; and besides, seeing there was no probability that
Navarre could be long in repose if the Constable departed not out of it for
some years, his Catholic Majesty was willing to allow him a retreat in
Castile, supposing he should refuse to remove far from his Places for fear his
Enemies might seize them in his absence. He proposed in the mean time to keep
them in Sequestration, and to put into them Garrisons sufficient to maintain
them: In a word, if nothing detained him in Navarre but the great Estates which
he possessed there, he would give him the Equivalentor better in Arragon and
Castile.

That overture at first seemed not to proceed but from a mere Principle of
generosity: Nevertheless examine it narrowly, and it could not be neither more
advantageous for Ferdinand, nor more prejudicial to John d' Albert. For the
most powerful Subject of his Majesty of Navarre was confirmed in his revolt by
making him treat on even terms with his Master, and by giving him Castile and
Arragon for Guarants of the Treaty which he should make: occasion was given to
the most formidable Enemy of Navarre to make the Constable at his devotion when
he should be retired within his Territories: that Neighbor was received into
the very Center and best Places of Navarre, from whence he might easily usurp
the rest of the Kingdom; and which was the greatest shame in the world, the
King of Navarre must consent that the Constable sold himself, if I may so say,
to the Catholic King, since it was proposed that he should receive
considerable Estates from his Majesty in recompense for his Revenues in Navarre.

Nevertheless John d' Albert signed the Treaty with all the abovementioned
conditions, and Ferdinands Garrisons took possession of the Places of the
Constable, who went and lived at the Court of his Brother-in-law. The Catholic
King was Surety for him that he should raise no stirs in Navarre, and gave him
not only the Revenue, but also the Propriety of the Marquisate of Huescar in
the Kingdom of Granada, the Revenue whereof exceeded the Rents which he had in
Navdrre. All the Politicians of the Age foretold the ruin of John d' Albert
because of that, and to speak the truth, it seemed that it could not otherwise
he than as they had predicted: But God Almighty does not always permit that
Sovereigns, who are not so skilful in the Art of Government, suffer so soon the
punishment of their imprudence; as he does not always neither permit the more
subtle in that Art, to reap the fruit of their intrigues.

John d' Albert took a Journey into Castile to solicit the restitution of
some places in the Principality of Viane, which the Predecessors of Ferdinand
had usurped from the Ancestors of the Queen of Navarre. There he found the
Count of Lerin his Constable, with whom he made so sincere a reconciliation,
that the Castilians were no less surprised than vexed at it. The Constable, who
for alliance and gratitudes sake was engaged in the concerns of Ferdinand,
leapt all of a sudden and without reserve from the Interests of his
Brother-in-law and Benefactor to those of his Master, and advised John d'
Albert not to listen to the Proposals of the Catholic King which he offered of
money to be paid within certain terms for the places that the King of Navarre
demanded from him. It was the Artifice of Ferdinand that having no intention to
restore them, and finding as yet no pretext of detaining them, he would defer
the restitution of them to another time, under color that the War he was
engaged in with the Venetians, so employed him that he had no time to examine
the question whether he ought in conscience any longer to keep the places they
treated about.

John d' Albert, who was not a man to make use of the occasion of constraining
him to it, and who besides was not moved with the money which he saw not in
ready Cash, returned to Navarre, and the Constable accompanied him thither;
whether it was that he knew him so well as to confide in him, or that the love
of his Country at that time prevailed with him over all other considerations of
policy and convenience. It is not known neither if that frankness stifled all
the remains of aversion that John d' Albert might still conceive against the
Constable; or if that which is said of his Majesty of Navarre was true, that he
easily forgot injuries received when he was persuaded that those who had done
them remembered them no more; but it is certain, that after his return into
Navarre he lived in so good a correspondence with the Constable, that he passed
from one extremity to the other; and that whereas till then he had been of the
Faction of Grammont; he entered into that of Beaumont which thereby recovered
fresh strength. The Queen his Wife detesting his inconstancy continued firm in
the Party of Grammont, but that made nothing the more for her interest, seeing
the Nobility of Navarre, seeing the Royal Family divided, took Parties also;
and the People thereby conceived a greater contempt of John d' Albert than they
had had for the excess of his familiarity.

It is said that Caesar Borgia Duke of Valentinois, Bastard Son of Pope
Alexander the Sixth, who had Toward the end of the Life of Valentinois.
married the Sister of John d' Albert, having made his escape out of Ferdinands
Prisons, came at time into Navarre, and made an accommodation betwixt his
Brother-in-law and the Queen: That he convinced John d' Albert that he had done
wrong in abandoning the Faction of Grammont, and engaged him in it again: but
if that be so, the Duke found the less resistance in it, that an unexpected
accident wrought in that particular all that he could have promised himself
from his Eloquence.

John d' Albert sent an Officer to the Constable with an Order from his
Majesty; and the Constable pretending that the Officer in the discharge of his
Commission had not shown him the respect which was due to the chief Commander
of the Armies, caused him to be cudgelled and detained Prisoner. The action in
it self was insupportable: Nevertheless it is probable John d' Albert would
have slighted the affront done him in the person of his Officer, or at least
that he would not have driven his resentment so far as it went, if the Duke of
Valentinois, whose Crimes God Almighty would no longer bear with, had not
offered to chastise the insolence of the Constable, and had not obtained
permission to do so. John d' Albert granted it more out of importunity than the
desire of revenge, and the Duke laid siege to the Castle of Viane which held
for the Faction of Beaumont. The Constable being resolved to raise it, cost
what it would, advanced with his Forces within view of the Besiegers; and the
Duke before he had resolved whether he should go out to meet him, or expect
him, within his Lines, went out to view them. He met with three Troopers, who
killed him, and John d' Albert being informed of his death, changed all of a
sudden his inclination. He hastened to his Army, gave no quarter to those of
Beaumont; took their Towns and Castles; hanged up or put to the Sword those
that defended them; burnt their Farm and Country houses; destroyed their Woods;
and his anger transported him so far that in the Town of Lerin, which he took
by storm, he ruined the stately burying-place of the Constables Ancestors.

The Forces of Ferdinand came so late to the assistance of those of Beaumont,
that the Constable after his overthrow found them in their march upon the rode
as he fled to Arragon. Seeing they were not strong enough to buoy up a forlorn
cause, he sent them back, and confined himself with his Wife within the Town of
Aranda, where some months after both died of grief. Louis of Beaumont, their
eldest Son, went to the Court of Ferdinand to solicit an assistance capable
to restore him to the rights of his Family; but he prevailed not until the year
One thousand five hundred and twelve, when a favorable Juncture of usurping
Navarre was offered to Ferdinand.

The hatred which Pope Julius the Second bore against the French was grown to
such a height, that being neither able to endure them in Italy, nor yet to
drive them thence any other way than by the Arms of Ferdinand, In the last
Treaty of Julius the Second with Ferdinand.
his Holiness acquainted him that he might expect any thing from him, provided
he would enter into a League with the holy See against Louis the Twelfth of
France. Ferdinand made answer, that he would consent to it on condition the
Pope caused a secret Bull of Excommunication to be expeded against John d'
Albert and his Queen, as favorers of Louis the Twelfth, the declared enemy of
the Church, and that his Holiness sent it to his Catholic Majesty to be made
use of in time and place as he should judge most convenient. The Bull, as it is
said, was expeded, and was kept so secret that no man ever saw either the
Original or a Copy of it. Ferdinand received it, or pretended he had, and
raised a powerful Army, the Command whereof he gave to Frederick de Toledo Duke
of Alva, under pretext of attacking Guyenne on the side of Bayonne, whilst
Henry the Eighth, King of England, his Son-in-law, should make a descent in
that Province at the mouth of the River of Garonne.

John d' Albert was so little apprehensive of being attacked, that he had not
so much as raised one Soldier, though the Maxims of good Government allowed him
not to remain disarmed amidst all his Neighbors in Arms. He suffered the Duke
of Alva to advance within Eight Leagues of Pampelona, and never took the alarm
till the Catholic King, having without any difficulty brought all his Forces
into the Center of Navarre, and taken just measures with the Constables Son,
and with the remnant of the Faction of Beaumont, sent a Herald to tell the
Queen and King of Navarre, that the King of France and all his Adherents were
Excommunicated for having called and held a Council in the City of Pisa in
Tuscany against the holy See. That the Pope had given their Dominions to him
who could first possess them, and that his Catholic Majesty had confederated
with the King of England for his seizing of Guienne, which lay equally
convenient for both: that the English Fleet was to approach thither on the one
side, at the same time when his Catholic Majesty entered it on the other; and
that to the end Ferdinand might not fail at the appointed time, there was a
necessity he should march through Navarre with what Baggage and Artillery were
needful for him to lay Siege to the City of Bourdeaux: that the same passage
was as necessary for his Armies marching back again to his own Territories; and
that for securing it in case he succeeded not in his enterprise as he expected,
their Majesty's of Navarre must needs give him the places of Esteille, May,
and St. John Pied de Port for Cautionary Towns: that he promised upon his
honor if they were freely granted him, to restore them again faithfully so
soon as his Forces were come back again into Castile and Arragon: but if they
were absolutely refused, or not presently entrusted into his hands, they must
not take it ill if he endeavored to put in execution the Bull of
Excommunication which Pope Julius the Second had just then thundered out
against their Majesty's of Navarre, as well as against Louis the Twelfth of
France. The Queen and King of Navarre gave Audience to the Herald in the Town
of Tudelle where their Estates were assembled, and made him answer, That
Navarre intended to observe an exact Neutrality betwixt the most Christian and
Catholic Kings; and as the Catholic King might have ground to complain of
their Majesty's of Navarre, if they permitted the French to pass their Country
for invading Arragon or Castile, so would the most Christian King also have, if
they opened a passage through their States for the Spaniards to enter into
Guienne.

The Duke of Alva, who only waited for that answer, marched straight to
Pampelona; and gave the signal to those of the Faction of Beaumont, who made in
one day an Insurrection in all the other Towns of Navarre, in favors of the
Spaniards, the two and twentieth of July One thousand five hundred and twelve.
The Kings of Navarre hastened also to Pampelona, but by another way, where
finding the Towns-people disposed to open the Gates to the Duke of Alva so soon
as he appeared before their Walls, they had no other course to take but to fly
into the Territories which they had in France None accompanied them in their
retreat but the chief of the Faction of Grammont; because the others being
assured that the Catholic King would receive them with open Arms, stayed at
home quietly in their houses. What was very strange in so general a revolution,
there was not one Town that showed their Loyalty to their Prince by enduring a
Siege, and the Duke of Alva had no more to do but to appear before them one
after another, to have the Keys delivered into his hands. Ferdinand having
conquered so important a Kingdom, caused his Army to stay there for securing
it, and failed in his promise both alike to the Pope, and to his Son-in-law
Henry the Eighth of England, suffered the English to lie hovering upon the
Coast of Guyenne, and did not send them word till the end of the Campaign that
they should stay no longer for him, and that if they pleased they might return
home.

The End of the Second Book.
BOOK III. Containing the most memorable Affairs that passed in the Monarchy of
Spain, during the Year One thousand five hundred and fifteen, and part of One
thousand five hundred and sixteen.
THE Spanish Historians, treating of the Invasion of Navarre, put it off with a
false Jest. Their intention is to take their Readers off from observing too
narrowly the manner how that Kingdom was united to their Monarchy; by
pleasantly amusing them whilst as tenderly as they can they touch so nice a
point; they say, that John d' Albert being come to the most distant place from
which he might still see his Capital City of Pampelona, and turning about to
take a full view of it, sell a crying bitterly; and that the Queen Catharine de
Foix his Wife, offended at so unseasonable an act of tenderness, told him in a
disdainful manner, In the relation of the flight of John d' Albert.
that he might very well cry like a woman for the loss of a Crown, which he
could not defend like a man. But these Authors have not taken notice, That John
d' Albert and his Queen departed not together from Pampelona: That seeing the
King was more hated there than she, he was the first that consulted his own
security by flying away about break of day; and that the Queen followed not her
Husband till two days after, when he was already entered the Mountains of
Aldude.

Ferdinand, after the Conquest of Navarre, had a greater desire than before to
have Children by his second Wife. He was not as yet superannuated; and his
failings were only imputed to the disorders of his youth. The Physicians made
no doubt but by their Art they might retrieve his former vigor for some time
at least, and taught the Queen Germana how to make a love Potion, which in
their opinion would prove infallible. The Queen, who would not venture upon any
thing that she might be reproached with, spoke of it to Ferdinand, who bid her
take the care of preparing it her self, that it might be kept the more secret.
She only communicated it to her Ladies of Honor in whom she had greatest
confidence, and they presented it one Evening to Ferdinand when he was going to
bed at Carrousillo a house of pleasure, where he spent the spring of the year
One thousand five hundred and thirteen. Ferdinand drank up the Potion to the
very dregs; but whether the Dose was too strong for the weakness of his
Constitution, or that it was not carefully enough prepared, it had a quite
contrary effect to the intent of those that gave it. Ferdinand fell immediately
sick upon it; and his Physicians, who knew the cause of his distemper, were at
a stand as to the cure. They caused him to be removed to Megorada, where he was
so long and so dangerously seized with all the symptoms that threatened an
approaching end, that Chievres thought it time seriously to mind the Succession
to the Monarchy of Arragon, and the possession of that of Castile.

He was persuaded that his Majesty would use his endeavors to disappoint the
Archduke Charles, and settle them upon the Infanto Ferdinand; and since that
was the chief thing which he had proposed to prevent, he was of the opinion
that the Archduke should send into Spain Adrian his Tutor, who was as yet but
Dean of Louvain. The pretext of that Voyage was the Marriage which the People
of the Low Countries desired for their own repose betwixt the Archduke and
Renee of France, second Daughter of Louis the Twelfth, King of France: but in
reality the Dean had an Authentic Power, and many blanks signed for taking
possession of the two Monarchies in case the Catholic King should die, and at
least to preserve that of Castile for the Archduke, supposing Arragon should be
given by Testament to the younger Brother.

The dispatches were expeded with all imaginable secrecy; but the Catholic
King was too mistrustful not to suspect the true reason of the intended Voyage,
and seeing what Princes on such occasions do fancy passes in their minds for
certain truth, the Catholic King received Adrian so very ill, and so many ways
tried his patience, that he tired it out. The Dean for his first essay had
undertaken a Negotiation a little too difficult; and he could not worthily
acquit himself of it, without continual attendance at the Court of the
Catholic King. In the mean time, his Majesty, who looked upon him as a Spy,
would not permit him to wait upon him any whither: Nay, he would have him to
return again to Flanders as often as he found himself any way better, so that
he was in a condition of traveling abroad in the Country; which the Castilians
took for an absolute cure. Insomuch as the Dean having to remain at Court
exhausted all the excuses that had been suggested to him in his Instructions,
found himself reduced to such streights as far surpassed the capacity of a man
bred up in the Schools.

The Courtiers whom he knew to be well affected toward the Archduke, augmented
his trouble by acquainting him from time to time with fresh instances of
kindness which the Catholic King showed the Infanto. They magnified them in
their notes; took them for so many demonstrations of an infallible preference;
persisted to press him that he would remedy it; and threatened that if it were
not done with all expedition, they would abandon the Party of the Archduke, and
strike in with the Infanto. In a word, the Dean in the short converse that he
had had with the Catholic King, observed that that Prince had an extreme
aversion to Chievres; that he imputed to him the little Authority which he had
in the Low Countries: that he was persuaded that his Grandsons Governor had
hindered him from Reigning there in the same manner as he did in Castile; and
that not being able to revenge himself upon the Governor, he would do it upon
the Pupil: That that was truly the ground of the misunderstanding betwixt the
Grandfather and Grandson, and that Chievres was the Victim to be sacrificed to
the reconciliation of the two: That if he were removed from the Archduke, it
was certain that the Catholic King would more willingly listen to Nature,
which pleaded with him in favors of the elder of his Grandchildren, that what
he said to him suited exactly with his Ambition: whereas if the Court of
Flanders continued as it was, that is, in the inflexibility that it had always
shown in giving satisfaction to the Catholic King; that Prince would complete
what he had begun; and by his last Will settle the Infanto Ferdinand so firmly
in the Monarchies of Castile and Arragon, that it would be impossible for the
Archduke to dispossess him.

This long train of reasonings engaged the Dean into a conduct equally contrary
to his humor, and to the gratitude which till then he had manifested to
Chievres his Benefactor. He thought at least that the Catholic King ought to
be amused with the vain hopes of turning out the Archdukes Governor, if he
were not fully satisfied in the point, and in that prospect caused it to be
intimated to his Majesty, that if he would act jointly with him, he promised
himself to supplant Chievres, and to put in his place the man whom his Majesty
should design for the employment.

The Proposition was so acceptable to Ferdinand, In the causes of the breach
betwixt Chievres and Adrian.
that he sent for the Dean to discourse the matter with him hand to hand
without Witnesses. The Dean who was prepared to remove, or at least to lessen
the chief difficulties in the Affair, delivered himself after his way, and in
Articles to his Majesty, that Chievres was not so securely settled but that he
might be shaken; and that Louis the Twelfth, who had given him the Commission
which he discharged, would not live long enough to maintain him in it: That
though his Pupil made a show of a great deal of friendship for him, that was
not absolutely to be relied upon, seeing that young Prince was known already to
excel in the art of dissimulation, and was besides resolved not to displease
the Emperor Maximilian his Paternal Grandfather, with whom Chievres had always
entertained a strict correspondence: but that at the bottom the Archduke was
like other young people, and that there was never any Governor who sincerely
gained the friendship of his Pupil when he discharged his duty with all
strictness as Chievres had done: That many Flemish Gentlemen, Heirs of
Families, took it impatiently that a younger Brother of the house of Croy
should be preferred before them to the Education of their Prince; and that they
would not only be well pleased at the disgrace of Chievres, but also with
emulation contribute thereunto.

The Deans discourse produced but part of the effect which he promised to
himself. Ferdinand, who had listened to him with all the attention of a
prejudiced man, to whom an expedient was offered of a revenge, which till then
he had in vain sought for, conceived an extraordinary joy at it, yet not
without the allays of fear and diffidence. He suspected part of the truth and
guessed at the Politics of the Deans conduct. Nay, he thought him an abler
Politician than indeed he was; and imagined that his design was not only to
amuse him, but also to oblige his Prince to whom he had preserved his
birthright, and Chievres whom he had served most advantageously by cluding the
most terrible effects of the hatred of the Catholic King, under pretext of
satisfying the same.

So Ferdinand replied to the Dean, that he heartily accepted the offer he made
him: But seeing the affair in hand was very ticklish in it self, it had need be
seriously thought of before it was attempted to be put into execution, and that
there was no succeeding in it unless such measures were taken as might not
easily be subject to change. That the best way would be to put it down in
writing by way of a Treaty betwixt his Catholic Majesty and the Archdukes
Praeceptor, to the end that each of them having an Authentic Copy of it, they
might have recourse to the same in all the doubts that might arise as to the
particular circumstances that they should agree upon.

The Dean very well perceived the snare that Ferdinand laid for him, in respect
that the Writing which the Catholic King might give him would oblige him no
more than his word, the Dean being neither of birth nor condition to force him
to the accomplishment of it; whereas if Ferdinand had the Deans Writing in his
hands, he might make use of it when he pleased to undo him, by showing that he
had without Orders negotiated and concluded the Deposition of Chievres.
Nevertheless since the Dean had proposed it; and by consequent that if there
were any crime in it, he was the first that began to commit it, he went on, and
treated with Ferdinand to supplant Chievres. It is unknown whether there was
any neglect on the Deans part in not sending speedy enough advice into Flanders
of what he had judged convenient to negotiate in Spain: whether his Secretary
was not faithful to him: whether Chievres was not punctually informed by the
Intelligences which he entertained at vast charges in Spain of what was
hatching to his prejudice; or whether Ferdinand by a Politic fetch which the
Dean had not foreseen was the Author himself of Chievres his being acquainted
with it, in prospect of Governing in Flanders when he had set the two most
faithful Ministers of his Grandson one against another. But it is certain that
Chievres was punctually advertised from other hands than the Deans, of what he
had transacted with Ferdinand to his prejudice, and that thereafter there was
no more solid friendship betwixt the Governor and Praeceptor of the Archduke.
However their misunderstandings appeared not but in such private occurrences as
concerned the profit or satisfaction of either of the two; and by the rarest
event that, perhaps, can be found in any History it did not the least prejudice
to the affairs of their Pupil.

Since it had only happened by the overweening application of one of the two,
that is of the Tutor to the service of the Archduke, Ferdinand reaped not from
it all the fruit which he expected; and the countenance which afterward he gave
the Dean procured him many friends at Court, because the Spaniards began to
despair of his Catholic Majesty's recovery. He recovered notwithstanding; and
since he thought it necessary to deceive people by feigning to have recovered
his former vigor, he often changed his residence, and used all the other
exercises of those who are in health. But the Physicians for all that whispered
his friends in the ear that his Dropsy was come to a height, and that some
time or other it would carry him off. Chievres was so well informed of it that
he advised the Archduke not to be any longer so great a husband of his measures
with his Maternal Grandfather, but to use all necessary caution to hinder the
effect of the kindness which he had for the Infanto Ferdinand. The most
important that he suggested to him was taken from the consideration that all
the Sovereigns of Europe Leagued together in the Year One thousand five hundred
and fifteen with the Catholic King against the new King of France Francis the
First, who succeeded to Louis the Twelfth, with design to divert him from
recovering the Duchy of Milan. This was the Count of Angoulesm, of whom we
have spoken in the First Book; and seeing till then he had made a profession of
friendship to the Archduke, it ought not to be interrupted by his advancement
to the Crown of France. Gouffiers and Chievres, the Governors of those two
young Princes, had united them principally in that prospect; and if Francis was
concerned to make sure of not being attacked by the Low Countries whilst he was
employed in Italy, Charles was incomparably more to be in a perfect
intelligence with the French when ever the Succession of Spain came to be open.
For if his younger Brother were preferred before him by the last Will of the
Catholic King; and that he offered to the new most Christian King to restore
Navarre to John d' Albert, provided France entered into a League offensive and
defensive with him against his elder Brother, the Archduke would have no other
way of reducing him but by the Ocean Sea, the more unsafe that it was exposed
to frequent tempests; and besides it would be the more uneasy to get into
Spain that way, that all the Ports would be their Enemies. If the Archdukes
Fleet were disabled by the Winds, or defeated by Ships of his younger Brother,
it would be impossible for him to fit it out again, seeing the Netherlands were
not of the humor to be at the charge of another; and if the Forces that he
landed were cut in pieces, he would hardly find any others that would venture
upon a second Expedition. If the Catholic King left only the Monarchy of
Arragon to Ferdinand, he would keep it in spite of his Brother, provided
France were not against him. In fine, if the Infanto were omitted in his
Grandfathers Will, and nevertheless he did aspire to the Thrones which had been
designed for him, the Spaniards who desired a King by themselves, would
contribute what in them lay to raise him to them; and the Archduke would not be
in a condition of opposing it, unless assisted by France: whereas by
contracting a firm Alliance with that King, those who awakened the Ambition of
the Infanto whilst they exasperated the Catholic King against the Archduke,
would refrain from both these designs when they saw no hopes of succeeding in
them. The Catholic King would not prefer a younger Brother before an elder,
when he saw that his preference would serve for no other end than to give
occasion to the elder to oppress the younger. The Infanto would submit to the
Laws of Spain, when all hopes of violating them securely were taken from him;
and whatever unexpected accident might happen, all the Paternal and Maternal
Dominions of the Archduke would be united in his person.

The Archduke being persuaded by these reasons, sent Henry Count of Nassau to
the French Court, and Chievres framed his Instructions. They consisted of three
parts with relation to the three principal Affairs which then were to be
adjusted betwixt the Archduke and the most Christian King, with this Artifice
that the most important of the three was put in the last place, and appeared
only as an accessory to the other two: whereas the other two rightly taken were
but an accessory to the last. Chievres then represented in the first place,
that it was absolutely necessary for the repose of Christendom that the King of
France and the Archduke to the friendship that was betwixt them should add a
Bond that might render it indissoluble; and that in the Juncture then no such
Bond could be but the marriage of the Archduke with Renee of France, second
Daughter to Louis the Twelfth, and younger Sister to the most Christian Queen.
The Count of Nassau was told that the chief business for which he was sent to
Paris was only to make that Proposal, and that there seemed only two Obstacles
that could thwart it, one arising from the Portion of the Princess, and the
other from her Person. As to the first, all men knew that Louis the Twelfth had
but two Daughters alive by the Heiress of Bretagne, Claudia Queen of France and
Renee; and that Claudia the Eldest, whom the Salick Law debarred from the
Succession to the Crown, carried by birthright the two Fiefs, which were in
deed and in pretension the Estates of their Father and Mother, to which the
younger Sister could lay no claim. The Fief effective was Bretagne, and the
pretended, the Duchy of Milan which Louis had lost three years before his
death, and of which Francis the First was about to attempt the recovery by
going into Italy in Person with a powerful Army. But that the Royal Family of
Dreux, which for almost three hundred years had possessed Bretagne, and that of
Visconti, which had held the Milanese as long, had purchased fair Estates
there, with Towns and Castles from several private persons: That these Estates
ought not to be considered as Crown Lands in the succession of Louis and Anne
of Bretagne, and that by consequent Renee of France ought to come in for a
share with the most Christian Queen: That upon that account it might happen
that Francis the First would refuse his Sister-in-law to the Archduke, In the
Instructions of the Count of Nassau.
as apprehending that one day the Archduke might put him to it in demanding too
rigorously his share, and in not accepting a valuable consideration, to the end
he might reserve to himself entries into France by Bretagne, and into Italy by
the Duchy of Milan, supposing France should reconquer it.

The Expedient which Chievres found for that, and which he inserted in the
Instructions, was to anticipate and declare beforehand to the Council of
Francis the First that the Archduke and Princess Renee at their Marriage should
renounce the Successions of her Father and Mother for a certain Sum of money;
and all the circumspection that was required of the Count was to drive the Sum
as high as possibly he could, without breaking up the Treaty. The second
Obstacle consisted in that the Princess Renee was ugly and ill shaped; which
made him fear that the French might take a pretext from thence to condemn her
to a single life, for this reason that she would infallibly be slighted by him
that should marry her. Whereupon the Count of Nassau had Orders to represent,
that the Archduke was early convinced by his Governor, That Sovereigns married
not for their private satisfaction, but for the good of their Subjects: That he
was fully instructed in the duties of marriage; That the Princess and he were
of the same age; and seeing the qualities of her mind made sufficient mends for
the defects of her body, the Archduke would not fail to love her tenderly, and
to use her as kindly as if she were a most charming beauty.

The second Article of the Negotiation related to the restitution of Navarre,
because Francis the First, upon his coming to the Crown had declared that he
would have it restored to John d' Albert; and that if he could not dispose the
Catholic King to it, he would break with him upon that consideration alone.
Chievres obliged Nassau to wave as much as he could treating of so nice a
point, by representing the impossibility of snatching that Crown out of the
hands of his Catholic Majesty, by any other course than that of the Sword; and
by adding that the Archduke had no hand in that usurpation, and that it
depended no more on him than it did on the most Christian King, to restore John
d' Albert: but if the Council of France stood upon it, and would not treat
without that, Nassau having protested that his Master had no power upon his
Maternal Grandfather, which was but too true; should say that the Archduke as
to that particular could do but two things, and that he offered to the
Christian King to do both. The first was sincerely to use his interest with the
Catholic King to dispose him to restore Navarre, and the next to promise
faithfully to restore it himself upon the death of his Maternal Grandfather.

The third Article remained which was properly the soul of the Negotiation. It
related to the assistance which the Archduke thought needful to him for
obtaining the succession of Spain, and Chievres expressed it in the most civil
and reserved terms that could be. No mention was made in it, neither of the
Catholic Kings design of frustrating the elder of his Grandchildren of the
Monarchies of Castile and Arragon in favors of the younger, nor of the
youngers ambitious resolution by all means to comply with the kindness that his
Grandfather had for him, though he was sufficiently sensible of the injustice
thereof. It was only expressed in general terms, that if, according to the
course of nature, the Archduke outlived his Maternal Grandfather, and that he
should meet with difficulties in obtaining the Succession of that Prince from
what hand soever they might happen; France, who acknowledged the Archduke for
next, immediate, lawful, universal, and apparent Heir of the two Monarchies to
which the Laws in that case called him to reign alone, and in exclusion of all
others, should assist him with Forces and Ships till he were peaceably settled
in the possession of those two Kingdoms, and should in no manner favor his
Competitor, even though he, to engage the King of France more powerfully to his
defense, should offer actually to restore Navarre to John d' Albert.

The Count of Nassau acquitted himself of so thorny a Commission sooner and
more easily than was expected at the Court of Bruxelles, because Francis the
First persuaded himself that nothing could hinder him from recovering the
Duchy of Milan provided his Expedition into Italy were not diverted by the
irruption of the Flemings into Picardy and Champagne; and that then it would be
at the option of his most Christian Majesty either to send an Army, or to go in
Person for the restoration of John d' Albert. In that prospect he offered
Nassau six hundred thousand Crowns for the Portion of his Sister-in-law; In the
Treaties betwixt France and Austria.
and Nassau the more willingly accepted them, that he would have been content
with four hundred thousand, if the Chancellor Du Prat, and the Commissioners
who treated with him, had stood firm not to give him any more. The second
Article was more disputed, because the French were positive that the Archduke
should promise to declare for John d' Albert against the Catholic King,
supposing he absolutely should refuse the restitution of Navarre. Nassau on the
contrary maintained, that it was no less against nature than good manners that
a Grandson should espouse the quarrel of a stranger against his own
Grandfather. Francis was so impatient to conclude, that after long debates he
remitted it; and the third Article was at length decided, his Majesty resolving
to imitate the example of Charles the Fifth, his great great Grandfather, who,
without the assistance of any other Sovereign, had at his pleasure disposed of
the Crown of Castile by the Arms of his Constable Du Guesclin. So the
Negotiation was ended at Paris in the beginning of the Summer One thousand five
hundred and fifteen; and Stephen Poncher, who had been chief Minister of State
to Louis the Twelfth, was ordered to go to Flanders to be Witness to the
Ratification of the Treaty. The Archduke was gone into Holland, and Poncher
found him at the Hague. He was received there with more Joy than Pomp: but as
the Archduke had Spies at the Court of the Catholic King, so had the Catholic
King at his, who discovered by means which Historians disagree about; that the
Grandson was taken off from the Interests of his Grandfather; and that he had
even called him an Usurper, by confessing that he had unjustly seized the
Kingdom of Navarre, and by obliging himself to restore it so soon as it was in
his power. They acquainted the Catholic King with it, who confirmed himself in
the resolution that, as we said before, he had already taken of undoing
Chievres; and frustrating the Archduke not only of what he had acquired by
Conquest, but also of what he could pretend to in Spain.

The first step he made in his revenge was to put Navarre in a condition, that
though the Archduke would restore it, yet his own Subjects might have right to
take him off from it, and to oppose the execution of his intentions. For
understanding of his Intrigue, we must call to mind that the Monarchy of
Castile was much more powerful in Spain than Arragon was before their union,
and that since, Queen Isabella had enlarged it by joining thereto the Kingdom
of Granada. It was more able than Arragon to preserve the Kingdom of Navarre
when once that Kingdom were joined to it; and that was the only motive that
made the Catholic King, who till then had held the Kingdom of Navarre annexed
to the Crown of Arragon, change his Conduct, and seek ways how he might join it
to those of Castile. He knew that John d' Albert, with consent of the most
Christian King, raised a great Army in the Provinces of France adjoining the
Pryenees, for recovery of his Crown; and seeing he needed an extraordinary
strength to resist him, the States of Arragon and Castile were assembled at the
same time, that under one and the same pretext he might raise great
Contributions in both Monarchies.

The Union of Navarre was offered to both; and it was offered upon so much the
better ground, that that Crown on the one side bordered upon Castile, and on
the other upon Arragon, so that it lay equally convenient for both. Seeing
Ferdinand had a design to impose upon those of Arragon, he would not go himself
to Sarragossa, where the Estates were to assemble, but thought it enough to
send thither the Queen Germana in his place. That Princess who had the Art of
caressing, and who besides for better deceiving the Arragonese was her Husbands
blind, made great Journeys, and hastened to Moncon where the Estates had
assembled themselves, the Arragonese having declared that it was there, and not
at Sarragossa, where according to the privileges of the Country the Estates
ought to meet. She gained the two most powerful Bodies, which were the Clergy
and Nobility: She represented to them according to the Instructions which she
had received from the Catholic King, that Arragon was much weaker than
Castile; and that if heretofore it had resisted it, there were two such
concurrent assistances of Heaven in the case, that it would be a tempting of
God to trust to the hopes of their continuance; the one, that all the Kings of
Arragon to the number of twenty eight, were always more witty and valiant than
those of Castile; and the next, that the Castilians could never make War
against the Arragonese longer than two years at a time; and that at the end of
that at farthest, they had new Enemies, or new Civil Wars to take them up,
which had obliged, or to say better, constrained them to give peace to the
Arragonese: That Arragon, indeed, was at present united to Castile, but that it
might be again separated from it, and that in that case it would again return
to its former state: That to prevent Castile from reducing it then into a
Province, no better course could be taken than to join Navarre to Arragon,
because that increase would render it so equal in strength to Castile, that the
Castilians durst not any more attempt to subject it: That the only means of
obliging the Catholic King to that, seeing Navarre was his Conquest, consisted
in supplying him with moneys for the preserving it this one time only, that is
to say, during the Campaign One thousand five hundred and fifteen, because John
d' Albert could make no other effort but that once; and if he succeeded not,
France being discouraged by so constant a misfortune would no more protect him.

The Arrogonese being persuaded by a discourse which carried the more
probability with it that they presumed themselves to be better beloved of the
Catholic King than the Castilians, by reason he was their Country man born,
and their Hereditary King, willingly taxed themselves, and furnished a vast Sum
of Money considering the barrenness of their Country. So that Queen Germana
would have acquired a great deal of glory by her Negotiation, had it not been
for an adventure from which persons of her quality might seem to be exempted.
Anthony Augustine of Arragonian extraction, but born in Catalonia, had through
his merit raised himself to the dignity of Vicechancellour of Arragon according
to most Historians, or of Chancellor according to others. His Faction and
Cabal was then strongest in the States, and if one was not sure to obtain by
his means what was desired, it was certain at least there was nothing at all to
be obtained if he opposed it. The Queen, who knew this very well, made it her
particular care to gain him; and succeeded therein beyond what she expected,
seeing she made the Chancellor in love only by endeavoring to increase his
zeal for his Masters service.

Princesses have this unhappiness as well as other of their Sex that are
inferior to them, that they cannot always captivate those whom they would, and
catch sometimes those whom they would not. The Queen was so free in her
civilities to the Chancellor; In the History of that Chancellor.
and the Chancellor so well disposed to love the Queen; that he was not aware
of the Trap when his passion already bordered upon extravagance. And the truth
is, instead of striving against it, he applauded himself therein, and valued
himself most when he ought to have reckoned himself a fool. He flattered
himself with the hopes of a success which he had neither ground nor occasion to
promise himself; and fell into the extremity of doting, by fancying that the
Queen would be overjoyed to cherish the flame which she had kindled: That the
Interest of that Princess concurred in a very nice point with the passion which
she had raised: That she had no Children, and that there was a necessity that
by all means she should: That it was but too apparent that she could have none
by her Husband: but that if she had so much modesty as not to court the help of
another, perhaps she would not have enough to refuse it when freely offered:
That there were some Junctures wherein if necessity lessened not the Crime, yet
it served to render it more excusable; and that the Arragonese would not much
care how they came by a Prince, provided they had one; because whoever he
should be, he would serve their ends in dividing them from the Castilians with
whom they could not endure to beunited, and give them a Master that would far
more depend upon them, than they upon him.

It is the blind side of love to believe the things which one desires, though
never so incredible, as firmly as those whereof we are most convinced. The
Chancellor observed no measures in declaring his passion to the Queen; and her
Majesty though thereby provoked to the highest degree, yet durst not treat him
as he deserved. She considered that her honor was concerned in managing
dexterously so nice an affair, and that though the Criminal could never be
sufficiently punished for the fault he had committed, yet the rebound of the
punishment inflicted, if it were not kept very secret, would infallibly hit the
person offended. In that prospect she thought it enough to let the Chancellor
know immediately, and without being perceived, the just resentment she received
of his impudence, and in all things else carried fair with him so long as the
States of Moncon lasted: but after they were ended, she returned to the
Catholic King her Husband, and informed him of the folly of the Chancellor.
The King commended the Queen no less for her Prudence than her Loyalty. He
waited for another opportunity of revenging himself upon that Minister; and
caused his Conduct to be so narrowly observed, that some misdemeanors were
found against him, which yet reached not his life. Upon the account of those he
was arrested without violating the Privileges of Arragon, and clapped up in
Prison, where he lay so long as Ferdinand lived, and Queen Germana was in
authority.

The Estates of Castile ended not so quickly as those of Arragon; and the
Catholic King had got what he expected from these; when he proposed to the
others what he really designed to do for them. He spoke big to them of his
Conquest of Navarre, and declared that he had taken all that pains for them: He
offered to them, without any condition, to unite that Crown to their Monarchy;
and having gained them by a Present of that importance, conjured them to assist
him in the preservation of it. Hereupon Navarre was in due form incorporated
with Castile. The Estates gave the Catholic King thrice as much as he had
received from those of Arragon, and that liberality served him for an excuse to
his Hereditary Subjects for his breach of promise to them. He sent them word,
that what they had granted him not being sufficient to defray the charges of
the defense of Navarre, he had been constrained to accept the offers of the
Castilians, and the condition they had imposed upon him: That he had, indeed,
united Navarre to their Monarchy, but that he had done nothing in that but what
his Councils of Conscience and State had advised him to: That his Counsel of
Conscience had determined, that since the Kingdom of Navarre was conquered by a
Castilian General the Duke of Alva, by an Army almost all native Castilians,
and by the Money which had been contributed by the States of Castile, His
Catholic Majesty could not, without an evident piece of injustice to them,
refuse to unite to their Monarchy a Conquest made at their charges: That his
Council of State had sesolved the same; though upon another Principle: That he
foresaw that John d' Albert finding himself too weak for recovering the Crown
of his Queen, would in despair be obliged to make over to France the Rights
that he had to it; and that in that case France having none to make head
against it but the little Monarchy of Arragon, would very easily snatch Navarre
from them: whereas the most Christian Kings would find incomparably a harder
labor of it, if they must fight a King of Castile, whose Dominions were as
large as their own, since they comprehended two thirds of all Spain.

It is to be believed, that the Arragonese were not satisfied with that
off-come, and that they were not willing so to be paid for the ready money
which he had filily drawn out of their Purses by the shamoffer of an imaginary
promotion to Grandeur. But their resentment came not to the height of an
Insurrection; and that which stopped their sliding into so slippery a Precipice,
was the reparation for the injury done unto them, that they expected from the
Successor of the Catholic King, perceiving him now drawing toward his end.
We cannot but mention briefly in this place for the full clearing of this
History, In the first Petition of the Arragonese to Charles the Fifth.
though the Occurrences which we are about to describe concern it but
indirectly, that the Army raised by John d' Albert for the recovery of Navarre,
had no success but in the beginning of Action: that is was afterward
unfortunate; that being unluckily divided, the Forces of the Catholic King
beat part of it; that the rest perished by Famine; that John d' Albert died for
grief upon it; and that Catharine de Foix his Wife outlived him but a few
months; that their Succession descended upon the eldest Son of fourteen
Children which they had, who was not then of age to carry Arms, and that in
this world the good fortune of the Catholic King in his usurpations lasted as
long as his life.

The submission that he found in Arragon, inhabited by a people most jealous of
their Privileges, on an occasion whereon no instance could be shown that they
would have suffered any such thing from the Kings his Predecessors, fully
persuaded him that he would meet with no opposition when he should demand of
the Arragonese, that they would prefer the younger of his Grandsons before the
Elder; and that then the Castilians would imitate their example in that
particular, with so much the more facility, that it was no new thing to them,
and that their History afforded an instance of a like ranversing of the of the
order of nature. He thereupon, on the fifteenth of June One thousand five
hundred and fifteen made an Authentic Testament after his own way, and couched
it so artfully, that his intentions therein appeared exactly conform to the
Precepts of the Gospel.

In the beginning he premised that his affection for the Castilians and
Arragonese whom he had governed two and forty years, overswayed with him all
other humane considerations; and he took God to witness that what he was about
to do, proceeded solely from that Principle: He added, that he had never seen
the Archduke Charles; and that on the contrary, the Infanto Ferdinand could not
be better known to him than he was: that he was born in his Palace; that he was
his Godfather; had given him his name; bred him; placed about him such persons
as would take care of his Education; and that above all things that could
endear the Infanto to him, he was his own Picture, and much more resembled him
than any of the Children whom he had immediately begotten: That he had his Air,
Countenance, Shape, Humors, and even his Gate; and that all Courtiers observed
his Genius to be the very same: but that nevertheless nothing of all that
inclined him to prefer him before the Archduke That he had three such prevalent
reasons for it, as he was willing to make public; to the end unprejudiced
Posterity might judge of his conduct. The first was, because his Catholic
Majesty had always been crossed in the care that he would have taken of the
Archduke, and thence it was that that young Prince was not fit to govern the
Spaniards: That in spite of him they had set over him Chievres a Fleming, who
not only was unacquainted with the Spanish manners, but besides, had a fearful
Antipathy to them: That this Governor had made it his whole design to get so
absolute a sway over the Genius of his Pupil, that he was become all at once,
his Governor, Chamberlain, High Steward, and Favorite: That if the Archduke
Reigned in Spain, that Gentleman alone would make up his whole Council, and the
Spaniards would be governed by a stranger, which never happened since the
usurpation of the Moors: That their Laws and Customs would be changed, their
Privileges abolished, their Magistracies sold, and the Commerce of the Indies
transported to the Low Countries.

The second reason was taken from hence, In the first Testament of King
Ferdinand.
That if Castile and Arragon had stood in need of a resident King whilst these
two Monarchies were divided, they had much more need of one since their Union;
and there was no doubt to be made but that the absence of their Monarch would
cause Revolutions amongst them, seeing it was a certain truth that they never
failed to suffer Commotions that shook the very Foundations, when their
Sovereigns were in the least absent. Nevertheless nothing was more certain than
that the Archduke would neither live always, nor yet long at a time in Spain,
supposing he were their King: That it would be unjust, and indeed foolish to
expect it: That he possessed the Low Countries which lay too conveniently for
France and England not to be usurped by one of those two Monarchies, if their
Master budged from thence; and besides, he was in Germany to succeed to the ten
Hereditary Provinces of the House of Austria, which would no less absolutely
require his presence: whereas the Infanto his Brother, who was to have no more
but the Monarchies of Castile and Arragon, would live six months of the year in
one, and the other six months in the other.

In fine, the third reason alleged, That it would be a greater prejudice to
the Archduke to leave him the Monarchies of Spain than to frustrate him of
them, seeing in the first case the Germans would be sure not to choose him
Emperor in place of his Paternal Grandfather, and would ground his Exclusion
upon their fear, lest being otherwise so powerful he might attempt the changing
of their Aristocratical State into an absolute Monarchy, as it happened to all
those Nations who had chosen Sovereigns that were able to subject them; whereas
the Archduke having no more but the Low Countries, and the ten Hereditary
Provinces of the House of Austria, though he was more powerful than any Prince
of Germany considered separately, yet he would not be near so strong as all of
them together; and by consequent durst not molest any of them, for fear they
might all League against him, depose him, and having divided the Empire among
themselves, dispossess him of his Hereditary States.

In the next place, the Catholic King disposed of the Monarchies of Castile
and Arragon by the chief Article of his Will, in the same manner as if they had
both equally belonged unto him. He left them purely and simply to the Infanto
Ferdinand his Grandson after the death of the Queen his Mother. He supposed
that the Distemper of that Princess would last as long as she lived; and would
have the Archduke to rest satisfied with the Succession of his Father, of which
he was fully in possession, and that of his paternal Grandfather which he
would not miss of; as if it had been in the power of his Catholic Majesty to
make a lawful compensation of inheritances that did not at all belong to him,
with these whereof he was but proprietor in part.

The Testament was not kept secret, whether the Catholic King sought for an
opportunity of revenging himself upon his elder Grandson and his Governor, by
the trouble it might give them, or that he did not so much stand in awe of them
as to conceal what he had done to their prejudice. The Infanto Ferdinand, his
principal Servants, the Councils of State of Castile and Arragon knew it, and
the news of it was soon brought into Flanders. All the Archdukes comfort was,
that by the assistance of the French he might recover what was unjustly given
away from him; and Chievres had not leisure to make all the Reflections which
so extraordinary a Case deserved, because he was obliged to make it his
business to break the most dangerous Conspiracy that ever was hatched against
the favor of a man of his quality.

It is not known whether the Catholic King looked upon him as the greatest
Enemy that the Infanto Ferdinand could have, or that he judged it absolutely
necessary to turn him out, not only of place but of life also, to the end that
his Majesty's Will might be punctually accomplished: But it is certain that no
measures that could be taken were omitted to oblige the Archduke to put away
his Governor, or for undoing the same Governor, in case his Pupil were
obstinate in keeping him about his Person. The manner how this was set about
deserves to be particularly mentioned, were it for no other end but to observe
the degrees by which the malice of Man advances to the greatest of Crimes, when
once it comes to deceive it self under a cloak and pretext of Devotion. It was
impossible to reach Chievres by the way of Law and Justice, because his
integrity that was known to all men secured him from any such attempt; though
after a frequent and most critical examination of all that had been acted in
the Low Countries wherein he was concerned, notice was taken of the Ceremony
which the Archduke by the advice of his Governor had established in admitting
new Knights into the Order of the Golden Fleece.

By the Laws of Institution of that Order approved by the Holy See, it is
provided that the Knights should be chosen out of the Noblest Families; and it
was pretended that Chievres had contravened this, by proposing to the Archduke
in the last Chapter that was held for making of Knights, some whose Nobility
was not sufficiently made out. In the constitutions of the Order of the Golden
Fleece.
It could not be denied but that those Men were of greater merit than the
others who had been excluded, because it was so evident a thing that it would
have served to confound the Enemies of Chievres; but the words of the
Institution must exactly be stuck to, and it was maintained that Chievres was
guilty in not having exactly observed them.

Upon this, these Cases of Conscience were proposed to several Divines of
Spain: Whether Chievres by disposing his Pupil to give the Order to such kind
of Persons had not mortally sinned against God: Whether there were not three
different sorts of Injustice in the sin he had committed; first, in regard of
his Divine Majesty, who is jealous that the Ordinances authorized by his Church
should be punctually observed; secondly, against the Order of the Golden
Fleece, of which the most important Statute was violated; and lastly, against
the Nobles of Flanders accustomed to draw the chief proofs of their Nobility
from those of their Ancestors who had had the honor to receive the Order of
the Fleece: Whether Chievres was not obliged to make restitution of the
Salaries paid to those undeserving Knights; and lastly, whether he was not an
accomplice in the false proofs of Nobility which they had produced before they
were received into the Order.

The Divines decided all the Cases to the disadvantage of Chievres, and their
resolutions were immediately sent into Flanders to the Ambassador of the
Catholic King, who showing them to the Archduke pressed him on the part of his
maternal Grandfather, that he would at least send the guilty person home to his
house seated in the Province of Haynauld, if the Services which he had rendered
him protected him from being punished in a more exemplary manner. The Archduke
instead of having any respect to the Proposition of the Ambassador and the
authority of the Casuists that backed it, defended his Governor upon the spot
by two reasons; first, that if there had been any fault committed in the
creation in question, he was as much to be blamed as Chievres, seeing they had
examined the proofs together; and that if they had been surprised in it, the
surprise was no less common to both: Secondly, that though Chievres were more
guilty than he, yet it followed not that he ought to be banished the Court, and
that a little mistake should make him forget the long and indefatigable pains
of his Education. The Catholic King, who managed the whole Intrigue, though he
acted only by such instruments as seemed to have no concerns with him, being
unsuccessful in his first essay, changed Battery, and applied himself to Henry
the Eighth, King of England his Son-in-law. He represented to him that the
greatest interest of his English Majesty consisted in opposing by all means the
Alliances betwixt the French and the Flemings: That the wisest of his
Predecessors had laid down that maxim as a fundamental in their Politics: That
they found the advantage of it so long as they practiced the same, and that on
the contrary, they lost all for having neglected it: That the late King, Henry
the Seventh had exactly observed it in the beginning and toward the middle of
his Reign; but that he had omitted it toward the end, when old age and the
extraordinary infirmities it had brought upon him, had rendered him unable to
apply himself long to business: that nevertheless that was the Juncture when he
ought to have eluded the Article of the last Will and Testament of Philip of
Austria which entreated Louis XII. King of France to take the care of the
education of his eldest Son: That his Majesty had opposed it with all his might
because he foresaw the dangerous consequences thereof, but that he could not
prevail for want of the assistance of England: That the most Christian King had
placed Chievres about the Archduke; and that Chievres being in that nature
obliged to France, strove to show himself but too grateful: That it was not
enough for him to adjust all the affairs of the Archduke to the Interests of
Louis his Benefactor so long as that Prince lived, but that after his death he
had continued the same conduct in regard of Francis the First his Successor:
That the Treaty of Marriage of the Archduke with Renee of France was an
undeniable proof of it: That there was no doubt to be made but that that
Marriage would be accomplished, and that by consequence France and the Low
Countries would act jointly so long as Chievres were about the Archduke: That
his Catholic Majesty had made it his business to oblige the Archduke to remove
him, and that there wanted only the Offices of the King of England for
succeeding in it.

Henry the Eighth, with extreme trouble understood that Francis the first, for
his first Essay had recovered the Duchy of Milan. He imputed the easiness of
that young Prince's Success to his having employed all the Forces of France in
Italy without being obliged to leave Troops for the Guard of his Frontiers of
Picardie and Champaigne. The last Negotiation of Chievres with his most
Christian Majesty was, in his Judgment, the cause of it, and the Marriage of
the Archduke with the Sister-in-law of Francis the First, was like so to secure
him in his Conquest, that neither Spain, Germany, nor Italy could snatch it out
of his hands.

These four considerations inclined his Majesty of England to send to the
Archduke, and to represent to him by the Ambassador which he had at his Court,
that seeing he had more wit for his age than any Prince mentioned in History
ever had had, and that he was already capable of Reigning alone by himself, it
was not only useless, but also disgraceful to him to retain at his Court such a
man as Chievres, who so long as he continued there would eclipse his
Reputation: That Politicians who could not call to mind that ever they had seen
or read of a Prince that at the age of fifteen years, had more prudence,
readiness of wit, address, and experience than the eldest Monarchs of Europe
had, would never believe that the Judicious Councils taken in Flanders about
the nicest matters of State, came immediately from him: That they would always
imagine Chievres to be the Author of them; that he suggested them; found out
proper expedients for putting them in execution; and that being now satisfied
with the glory which he had already acquired in Governing the Low Countries
during the nonage of the Archduke with so great wisdom that the Flemings had
found no effects of the minority of their Prince, he acted like a complete
Courtier in endeavoring to procure by times a high Reputation to his young
Master by attributing to him all the projects and important resolutions that
came from himself: whereas, if Chievres were consined to his House in Haynauld
whereof he carried the name, there to spend the rest of his days in quietness;
or if it were thought fitter to send him to the Emperors Court there to manage
the German Princes for the future Election of his Pupil to the Empire, Men
would do Justice to the Archdukes merit, and nothing would hereafter hinder the
People from admiring him as he deserved.

Henry the Eighth added that he was his Neighbor, and more, his Uncle; and
that in both these respects he could not endure that Chievres should continue
at the Court of Bruxelles: That that Fleming, to say no worse of him, was too
much French; and that as thereby he was become suspected to England, so Spain
would less suffer him to remain the chief Minister and Favorite of him whom
they looked upon as next apparent Heir of almost all their Kingdoms.

The Archduke made answer to these so urgent reasons, that the fairest
reputation he could acquire was that of being grateful, and that he neither
ought, nor would be thought so, if he were not so in reality: That he could not
tell whether he was more obliged to those who had given him life than he was to
Monsieur de Chievres who had brought him up, and that it would not vex him if
he continued all his lifetime in that doubt: but that he knew very well that
there was no man living to whom he had more disinterested obligations, and that
he should be guilty of the blackest ingratitude, if he made it not known in the
world, not only by words and declarations, but in effect and deeds: That the
least of these effects was to continue not to undertake any important Affair
without acquainting him with it; and that he was willing his Majesty of England
should know that he was so punctual in concealing nothing from his Governor,
that he had showed him the Letter which he had received from him: That he knew
Monsieur de Chievres so well, that he would answer for him, that he was no more
Frenchified than he had reason for; and that after all, God had been so
gracious to him as to make him a Sovereign: That he was free to admit of such
persons into his Council as he thought capable: That his Neighbors had no
right to take exceptions at that, provided he did them no injustice in the
case; and that his Majesty of England had far less than the rest, since he
acknowledged in his Letter that Monsieur de Chievres was a man of parts and
honesty notwithstanding all that he subjoyned to his prejudice; That he had
rather believe the best than the worst; and that the esteem which he had for
his Majesty was concerned that he should do so.

Nothing so much afflicts those who are extraordinarily sensible, as Kings for
most part are, than when they see that their firm resolutions of ruining the
fortune of a Favorite, increased instead of lessening the same. The Archdukes
answer to Henry was conceived in such terms as made it sufficiently apparent
that nothing was to be got by persisting to press him to remove Chievres; and
they who examined it were so well convinced of that, that their hatred to him
transported them to the utmost extremity. They resolved by all means to
dispatch him; and seeing the extraordinary care that the Archduke took of his
Governor from the time of the Letter we have been speaking of, put him without
all danger of being assassinated, they had recourse to the way of Poison.
Diligent search was made in Flanders for those who were discontented at
Chievres, and seeing it was difficult considering the place he held, but that a
great many thought they had reason to complain of him, because, as we shall see
hereafter, the Archduke took pleasure to bestow the chief Charges and richest
Benefices upon the Relations of his Governor without being solicited by him,
there was a Conspiracy formed to poison him. All measures for that end were
taken; and the day appointed for putting it in execution drew nigh, when God,
who suffers not always innocence to be oppressed, were it only that persons but
of ordinary virtue should not be too much scandalized, permitted Chievres to be
informed of the mischief that was a preparing for him. He acquainted the
Archduke with it, but in so unconcerned a manner as if he had not spoken in his
own Cause. He told him that he had bad news to inform him of, and that he would
not do it but upon condition that he should show no more resentment of it than
if he were ignorant of the same, or as if it did not at all concern him: That
there were some crimes that out of a principle of Policy ought to pass
unpunished; and that as God did not always punish the most enormous faults here
in this world, so neither did he sometimes take it ill that Sovereigns should
refer the punishment of them to him who would not fail to do exemplary Justice
in the other world: That the Poisoning in question was one of these; and that
it ought of necessity be winked at, seeing it must have been dissembled if it
had taken effect: That the enquiry made into it must either be exact, or but
superficial; if it were exact, it would be to no purpose on the one hand,
because the quality of the parties guilty would of it self exempt them from all
sorts of Process; and on the other hand it would do infinite prejudice both to
the Archduke who might pretend to be offended at an unseasonable time, and to
his Governor who would be exposed to a second attempt better concerted, and by
consequent more inevitable than the former. If the enquiry were but
superficial, it would still exasperate the Poysoners as much, and be no less
inconvenient for him who had escaped their rage: That in an indictment and
trial wherein the Public was so much concerned, informations and other
proceedings would go too far, and insensibly pass from the Actors to the
Authors: That perhaps, these might be found to be so nearly related to the
Archduke, that the disgrace inconsiderately put upon them would reflect upon
himself; and that in a word, there was nothing to be done but to have a care
for the future of the like inconveniences; that is to say, to be so vigilant
and circumspect that if he must needs still fall, it might be by such an
unavoidable fate as humane prudence could not prevent.

The Archduke more out of compliance than inclination followed the counsel of
his Governor: but though the matter was not brought to a trial, yet it broke
forth, and was so well known, that the Historians of Spain have not dared to
smother it, though they speak of it in most general, and consequently most
insignificant terms. The rebound of so great a mischief nevertheless must needs
hit the weaker Party, and it was the misfortune of Chievres to be in that case
at that time. The Catholic King uncertain whom to be revenged on because
Chievres was not banished, made Dean Adrian smart for it, whether it was that
he suspected him of having thwarted his design, or that he accused him of not
having seconded it with the credit which he had acquired at the Court of
Bruxelles. He confined him to Guadalupa, where he hoped that his abode would be
so uneasy as to make him desirous of returning home to the Low Countries; but
his Majesty did not foresee that his own life would be too short to tire out
the Deans patience. He had desired heretofore his Horoscope to be cast, and God
who punishes Sovereigns that are addicted to Judicial Astrology more severely
and universally than private persons, either because he is more Jealous upon
their account for the attribute which according to Scripture raises him highest
above them, I mean the knowledge of things to come, or that the scandal they
give in that particular is more insupportable to him, deferred not the
punishment of it till the next World. He began it in this, by blinding the
understanding of King Ferdinand, and permitting the Astrologers to tell him
part of the truth. They assured him that he should die at Madrigal, and that
Prediction which seemed not at all equivocal, was by his Majesty interpreted in
the most natural sense. He thought it ought to be understood of the Town of
Madrigal in Castile, upon so much the better ground that there was no other
Town of that name in all Spain. This put such fancies in his head, that he
thought he should not die but when he had a mind to it, and to express it
plainly in his own meaning, that he should live till he were weary of life. One
of his Courtiers had confirmed him in that opinion, by telling him that he had
visited a Lady in the City of Avila, whom the Public had Sainted in her
lifetime, and who in Spain was honored as the Saints in heaven: That he had
had the happiness of a quarter of an hours discourse with her, and that he had
not failed to recommend the Catholic King to her Prayers: That the holy woman
had answered him, that his Majesty should not die till he had conquered the
Kingdom of Jerusalem, and that she had not enjoined him to keep that revelation
secret. There needed no more for taking off Ferdinand from seriously thinking
on his latter end; and to complete his blindness, that which ought to have
excited him to it, served only to divert him from the same. After the drinking
of the Lovepotion we mentioned, he had been often taken with such terrible
fits, that the Physicians thought he was ready to expire: Nevertheless he came
to himself again so well, that next day after he employed himself in Affairs of
State as formerly. He thereupon fancied that the fainting fits that now and
then seized him, would be of no dangerous consequence; and when Father Martin
of Matience, a Monk of the Order of St. Dominick, his Confessor came to attend
him on Holy days, he asked him if he had any Memoires to communicate to him;
and no sooner had the Confessor answered no, but that Ferdinand presently
dismissed him. Being thus prepossessed he was informed that the best Commandery
of the Knights of Callatrava was vacant by the death of Guttierez of Padilla,
and resolved immediately to confer it upon Ferdinand of Arragon, lawful Son to
the Archbishop of Sarragossa his natural Son. He could not do it according to
the Constitutions without calling the Chapter in that sole prospect upon the
place, In the institution of the Order of Callatrava.
and therefore he set out upon his Journey thither. But about the end of the
month of January One thousand five hundred and sixteen, when he was come to the
Hamlet of Madrigalejo, through which he must of necessity pass unless he went a
great way about, his dissentery grew so great, that it was impossible for him
to proceed any further. That Hamlet, the least in all Spain, stood within the
Precincts of the Town of Trugillo; and that was all which rendered it
considerable. Ferdinand was no sooner informed of the name of it, but that he
found his mistake in the interpretation he put upon his Horoscope, and that he
had in vain with so much care shunned to go to the great Madrigal, since he
must end his days in the little one, Madrigalejo in the Spanish Tongue being a
diminutive of Madrigal. He sent for the knowing men of his Retinue; enquired of
them whether that Hamlet where he was had not always gone by the same name
since Castile was delivered from the Tyranny of the Moors; and when they had
made him answer that it had never changed name; and that it was so
inconsiderable that no man durst venture to put it into the Map, he told them,
then Ferdinand is gone.

He sent for his Confessor, and discoursed him in good earnest about the
affairs of his conscience, and having ordered them, he called for three of his
ancientest and ablest Counselors of State, who were the Licentiat Zapata,
Doctor Carvaial, and the Treasurer Vargas. He asked them what he had more to do
for the good of the Spanish Monarchy, and told them that they might speak with
all freedom. These Spaniards were so aged that they could have no interest in
the affairs that might happen after the death of Ferdinand. They expected not
to outlive him long, and therefore his Successor was a thing indifferent to
them. They had no cause to fear any change in their fortune, because they knew
that the beginnings of the most severe Reigns were always easy; and they
expected to die in the beginning. Besides, they foresaw that which soever of
the two Grandsons of the Catholic King should succeed to him, he would not
turn them out of his Council; seeing if it were the Archduke, he could not for
a long time do it because of his absence; and if it were the Infanto Ferdinand,
he could less do it by reason of his minority. Nothing then swayed with them
but the inclination which in latter Ages had been so absolutely predominant,
and is still so predominant in the Spaniards, that hardly does History mention
one who has been free from it. And that is so violent a love for their
Monarchy, that it always prevails with them over the most natural and just
considerations; which is of so vast an extent that it comprehends the whole
Earth; so constant, that it increases rather than is diminished by bad success;
and so nice and Metaphysical that it makes always a distinction betwixt the
Monarchy and the Monarch, and never confounds the inclinations for the second
with the interests of the first. The Catholic King during the two and forty
years that he had Reigned, had so accustomed those whom he admitted into his
Councils to lay down the universal Monarchy of Spain for the ground of all
their deliberations, that the three Ministers whom he consulted agreed in this
sentiment that now was the Juncture when Spain was to Reign all over Europe;
and that if the opportunity was not then nicked whatever might happen, perhaps
it would never offer again. That we may more clearly express their thoughts,
they supposed, that if the Archduke should to the Monarchies of Castile and
Arragon unite the Low Countries, the Empire, and the Hereditary Provinces of
the House of Austria in Germany, it would be his own fault if he conquered not
the Kingdom of France, and that afterward the rest of Europe would make but a
weak resistance: whereas if the States, to which the Archduke ought to succeed,
were divided, and if the Testament of the Catholic King which continued him to
the Inheritance of his Father and Paternal Grandfather held good in that
particular: If the Infanto Ferdinand had Spain, and if by that means variance
entered into the House of Austria; not only the greatness of the Monarchy of
Spain would be at a stand, but also it would lose all that it held in Italy,
and in the Neighborhood. It was only then in that prospect, and without any
respect to the Archduke and his personal qualities, that Zapata, Carvaial, and
Vargas, declared in his Favors, and the advantage he reaped from it is no less
singular for the causes of it than it is in it self.

The three Ministers represented to Ferdinand, that seeing his Majesty thought
fit that they should continue to speak to him with open heart as they had been
wont to do, He would still have the goodness to take in good part the liberty
they took to tell him that he seemed to have changed his Conduct at the end of
his life, and by his last Will and Testament condemned his most considerable
Actions, and which had acquired him greatest Reputation: That he had done them
the honor to declare when he called them to his Council, that his only
intention in this World was the enlargement of his Territories; and that though
he had not expressed himself so plainly, yet there needed no more but to study
his past life to convince them of it: That no Man in Europe was ignorant how
Ferdinand the Catholic at the age of fifteen years had espoused the Party of
the late Queen Isabella sister to Henry the fourth of Castile against the
Infanta Jane the Daughter of that King; in no other view but because Isabella
by bestowing herself upn him, had offered to unite the Crowns of Castile to
those of Arragon; and that if Jane had been so well advised as to have
preferred his Alliance before that of the Prince of Portugal who sought her in
Marriage, her Party would not have succumbed, and she had not past for a
Bastard: That after the union of Castile and Arragon, for adding the Kingdom of
Granada to them, Division had been sown betwixt him who was King of it and his
brother; and the more powerful was so weakened by supporting the weaker against
him, that both at length were oppressed: That for an accession also to Arragon
by joining thereto the Kingdom of Naples, in the City of Tarento the Prince who
carried the name of it, and who was the only Son of the King of Naples was
Besieged: That he had been prevailed with to rely upon the Faith and Truth of
the Spaniards, whose General the Great Captain had sworn to him upon the Holy
Sacrament to leave him in liberty; and that notwithstanding he had been
detained Prisoner, and under a sure Guard sent into Spain where still he
remained in Prison: That, in a word, a pretended Bull from the Pope had been
made use of for seizing the Kingdom of Navarre, and for driving from thence
John d' Albert who had Married the Heiress of it: In the mean time his
Catholic Majesty destroyed his own work by preferring the younger of his
Grandsons before the elder, and laid an everlasting impediment to the greatness
that Spain began to be raised to, by kindling betwixt the two Brothers a War
which would not end but by the entire ruin of him that should be overcome, and
such a weakening of the Conqueror, that Spain would be so far from expecting new
Conquests under him, that it would become a Prey to the first who should invade
it: That since the Spaniards had bestirred and delivered themselves from the
Slavery of the Moors, they had been oftener subject to Civil Wars than Foreign,
for no other reason but that the Nobles had been too powerful, and more apt to
give Laws to their Masters than to receive them from them: That they had not
behaved themselves more modestly nor reservedly under his Catholic Majesty,
but because after his Marriage with Queen Isabella the Nobility of Castile were
apprehensive of succumbing under the Forces of Arragon which they doubted not
but would pour in upon them, and that the Nobles of Arragon had had a juster
cause to fear their being run down by the Arms of those of Castile: That if
young Ferdinand were King, one of the two would have time during his minority
to take measures against him; and would retain so little respect for his Person
because he was but fourteen years of age and was not so well brought up as his
elder brother, that they would oblige him at least for some years to leave the
public administration to the Grandees of Castile, and the chief of Arragon,
which would infallibly renew Civil Wars in Spain: That if his Catholic Majesty
suffering things to go according to their ordinary course called the Archduke
to his Succession, the Gentlemen of Castile and Arragon would want both a
pretext and means of revolting: A pretext, in that the Archduke at sixteen
years of Age, was no less able to govern them than the wisest Kings of Spain
have been: And means, seeing their Rebellion would instantly be crushed by the
Forces which that Prince would raise in Flanders and Germany, and might easily
bring into Spain by occasion of the Treaty which he had ratified with the new
King of France.

The Catholic King strangely surprised, and nevertheless convinced with this
discourse, made answer, that seeing he could not conveniently leave Castile and
Arragon to the Infanto, In the last Council given to Ferdinand.
He must at least resign to him the three great masteries of the Order of St.
James, Calatrava, and Alcantara, the Revenue whereof would be sufficient for
the subsistence of a Prince of his quality: That his Majesty at the same time
he resolved to make him his Heir, had written to the Court of Rome, to have him
invested into these three headships of Orders: That the Affair had been
negotiated first with Julius the second, and since with Leo the tenth; and that
the chief difficulty that those two Popes had found in it proceeded from a Bull
granted before by Julius, to the Commander Padilla which assured him of
succeeding to his Catholic Majesty in the great Mastery of Calatrava, provided
he outlived him: That the Bull of Julius was insignificant, since Padilla was
dead, and that so nothing now hindered the expedition of that which allowed his
Majesty the resignation of the three Masteries in favor of the Infanto. But
the three Counselors of State, being encouraged by the success of their
Remonstrances, and persuaded that having obtained the chief point, his Majesty
would not long refuse to grant them what was but accessory, replied to the
Catholic King conjuring him to call to mind that when he and Queen Isabella
his Wife had pressed the Holy See to unite in their Royal Persons the three
Masteries in question, the most important reason specified in their address
was, that if none of the great Masters separately were so powerful as their
King, yet all three together were far more powerful. Whence it happened that when
they who were invested in those dignities confederated together to turn against
their Masters the Arms, Wealth, Vassals and Credit, which the Piety of
Believers had left them for acting against the Infidels, they reduced them to
the necessity of granting whatever they demanded without distinction and
reserve. That the Pope at that time touched with the force of that reason had
written to his Nuntio in Spain to inform himself exactly if the matter were
indeed so: That the Nuntio had sent him answer that it was but too true, and
that thereupon the three Masteries according as they became vacant, had been
conferred upon his Catholic Majesty. Whereupon they took the liberty once more
to remonstrate to the King that the brothers of Princes were sometimes so
strongly tempted to Reign, that nothing hindered them from succumbing under so
nice a temptation but the inability to which the Laws thought it necessary to
reduce them, by cutting them short of the means of succeeding in it: That there
were so many instances of it in all the Monarchies of Spain that 'twould be
superfluous to allege them; and that without judging of the thoughts of the
Infanto, it was sufficient to observe that if one day he might have a mind of
revolting against his Elder Brother, no Prince ever had or might have a fairer
pretext, or more infallible means of Success, provided he were invested in
these three Masteries. That the pretext would be that the Infanto had right to
demand a lawful share in the Succession of his Father actually dead, of his
Uncle dead in Law, and of his Grandfathers when they should be no more in
being: That neither the Roman Laws, nor those of the places where the Estates
lay, nor the Customs which in such cases stand instead of Laws having precisely
enough regulated that legal Portion, it would depend upon the good or bad
inclination of the Infanto to raise his claim so high that his elder brother
could not consent to it; and in that case the quarrel betwixt the two Brothers
would degenerate into a Civil War so much the more to be excused on the part of
the younger, as that he would only seem to demand his Portion. That he would
not want means of getting men and money, seeing all the Commanders, Officers
and Knights of the three Orders whom he had preferred to Places, and besides
depended on him, would mount on Horseback upon the first notice he should give
them; and bringing their Vassals with them would form so considerable an Army,
that his elder Brother would have much ado to be able to meet him with the
like: That it was impossible to divine what the success of that War might be;
and all that could be affirmed beforehand was, that it would be an everlasting
Reproach to the memory of his Catholic Majesty, that he had been at least the
occasion of a War betwixt two Brothers by rendering the younger so powerful,
that he might think himself in a condition of offending his elder Brother with
safety.

Though ambition be one of the first passions that takes possession of the
hearts of great Men, yet it is the last that leaves them; and as that had
always been predominant in the Catholic King, so it made its last effort upon
him to stisle the favorable thoughts that remained in him totowards the
Infanto. Not but that he still loved him as much as possibly he could, nor that
he had any inclination for the Archduke; but the Idea of an universal Monarchy,
flattering him at that moment above what can be imagined, without great
reluctance he sacrificed the Infanto to the Archduke in the extremity of his
sickness, when he foresaw that he could not long enough outlive what he was
about to do to be in a condition to make reparation for it.

We must however subjoyn in this place that before he absolutely determined to
disinherit the Infanto, he made another instance to his three Ministers in his
favors. he told them that he was extremely troubled to leave him in so poor a
condition; but they replied positively that the greatest and sole riches of the
younger of his Grandsons ought wholly to consist in the favors of his elder
Brother; In the relation of that Conference.
because that having nothing to pretend to but by that way, he would be the
more diligent in acquiring them, and more assiduous in preserving the same. The
Catholic King had hardly testified by his silence that he had nothing to
rereply, when they went to his Cabinet to look for the original Will which he
had made seven months before, and they burnt it before his face without any
show of regret on his part. He dictated and signed a new Will, so
disadvantageous to the Infanto that he made no mention of him, but only to
leave him, as if he had been a Bastard, an alimentary Pension of fifty thousand
Crowns upon some Lands in the Kingdom of Naples.

The Archduke was declared sole and universal Heir of the Monarchies of Castile
and Arragon, and of the Crowns annexed to them without any mention of the
restitution of Navarre, whatever Historians, who are not Spaniards, say to the
contrary. The three great Masteries were resigned to the Archduke; and the
Infanto, who had been as near a Throne as one could be without mounting it, was
put off with a Pension of fifty thousand Crowns, that bore no proportion to the
vast Estates whereof he was disappointed.

The Catholic King was not quitted for having stifled in his breast the three
most violent of his inclinations, which were his affection for the younger of
his Grandchildren, his indifference for the Elder, and his hatred of Chievres,
who, next to the Archduke, profited most of any by the second Testament, seeing
he was sure under him to govern Spain so long as he lived. Able Ministers never
stop unseasonably in the middle of their enterprises; and Zapata, Carvaial, and
Vargas, finding their Master in a disposition to grant them all that would have
been denied them in another Juncture; pressed him in the last place to use a
violence upon himself, which in probability must have cost him more than all
the other three put together. It has been observed in the foregoing Book that
the Catholic King could not have a greater nor more deeply rooted aversion to
Cardinal Ximenes than he had: That he had used all means to get him deposed:
That he had raised persecutions against him of a very long continuance; and
that the Cardinal had not so much maintained himself by his parts and
reputation as by the advice which Chievres had given the Archduke to support in
the person of Ximenes an intelligent and steady Minister, who would always
oppose the designs of the Catholic King upon Castile if he found them not to
be conform to the Laws of the Country. To speak the truth, His Majesty had
succumbed in the quarrel, seeing he had been forced to let the Cardinal live in
peace; and his enmity thereupon was increased toward him, whether he
apprehended the resentment of that Prelate, or that he could not think of it
with patience because it never came into his mind, but that it seemed to
upbraid him with the want of power to undo him. Nevertheless these three
Counselors took a resolution to oblige Ferdinand to pardon the Cardinal in
the most glorious manner that could be imagined for that Prelate, that is to
say, in leaving him the full administration of Arragon and Castile till the
Archduke should arrive, and he put in possession of them. They thereupon
represented to his Majesty that one thing still remained to be done by him for
the entire tranquillity of Spain after his death, and for obliging the People
whom he had so long governed in peace to bless his memory for ever: That the
Archduke was not in Spain, and that in all appearance could not suddenly be,
what diligence soever he might use, seeing it behoved him to give Orders for
the Affairs of the Low Countries during his absence, Chievres being too much a
Courtier to remain behind, and not to follow his Master: That in the mean time
the Council of Spain having no more authority would no longer be sufficient for
the Government of the Monarchies of Castile and Arragon, there being no
instance that ever it had attempted to give Orders during the interval betwixt
two Reigns, and before the lawful Successor had been owned for King in the
Estates of the two Monarchies: That therefore it was necessary to name one or
more Regents: That if more than one were named, it would strike at the most
important design of his Catholic Majesty, which consisted in uniting all the
Monarchies of Spain in so strict a manner, that they could not for the future
be divided again: That by disusing the Castilians and Arragonese from living
under one and the same administration, they would call to mind that heretofore
they had been two different Monarchies, and have reason to think that still
they might be; and seeing both the one and other desired nothing more
passionately than to return to their former state as to that particular, they
would by that means be touched in the most sensible part, and seeds of
revolting be sown amongst them which would not fail to break out in time: That
nevertheless there was nothing more difficult than to find out a single person
capable of the whole Government of Spain; and that if he were chosen from
amongst those of inferior quality, the Nobility were too haughty to obey him:
if he were taken out of the body of the Nobles, In the last Remonstrance of the
three Ministers to Ferdinand.
he must either be a Grandee, or meaner Gentleman: If he were a Grandee, seeing
there was no other Prorogative in that Order but only the erection into
Grandeeship, the other Grandees if they were more ancient in dignity than he
that should be Regent, would refuse to submit to him; and if they were not,
they would pretend that the Regency which was but a transient Commission, would
not sufficiently authorize him to command them: That thereby a plausible and
lasting pretext would without minding it be furnished to the restless Spaniards
of revolting, and to the wiser of forbearing to declare themselves till they
saw to which side victory should incline: That to remedy that there was a
necessity of pitching upon a man, who on the one hand was not noble, and on the
other was raised above the Grandees by the eminent dignities which he might be
invested with, and for which he was only indebted to his own merit, his
incomparable personal qualities, and the important services which he had
rendered to the State: That there was none other but Cardinal Ximenes, Primate
of all Spain, in quality of Archbishop of Toledo; and that to make a true
estimate of that great Man, either there would be no inconvenience in trusting
him with the administration in question, or if there were any it would be
incomparably less in him than in any other who might be preferred before him,
whether within or without Spain.

The Catholic King was never more surprised than when he heard Ximenes named
to govern Spain after his death. He thought less on the injuries he had done
than on those which he had received; and seeing he concluded that though the
Cardinal and he were reconciled, yet he was still offended with him because he
would have taken his Archbishopric from him, he did not look upon him as his
friend. Upon that consideration his Majesty replied to the three Ministers in
extraordinary disorder; That they must needs have forgot what had past betwixt
the Cardinal and him during some years, that they proposed to him of all
Spaniards the person whom he had greatest reason to distrust: That he might
tell them again upon his deaths bed what he had so many times represented unto
them, that Ximenes was an ungrateful man, who being obliged to him for all his
fortune had refused him to make an exchange of the Archbishopric of Toledo for
the Atchbishoprick of Sarragossa; but the Judgment Seat of God, before which he
was going to appear to give an account of his actions, put into his mind
thoughts more abstracted from selflove: That he was willing at present to
acknowledge that in the quarrel he had had with the Cardinal it was not
altogether clear which of the two was in the right; nay, and if it were still
alleged that his Majesty had been in the wrong, he was ready to acknowledge
it: but that it was for the very same reason he maintained that of all the
Spaniards Ximenes was the last whom he ought to design for the Government of
Spain during the absence of the Archduke, seeing he was a person offended: that
he had been put to it at an unseasonable time; that all means had been used to
depose him, instead of giving him rewards suitable to his great Services, and
that he had been reduced to sue for Foreign protection: That he would not fail
to suspect when contrary to his expectation he should learn that he were named
Regent, that it was only for fault of another subject as capable as himself of
so different a Commission; and that therefore he would not only think himself
not at all obliged to his Catholic Majesty for it, but would also think of
revenging himself upon him in the persons of his Grandsons: That he might very
well give way to the temptation of raising the younger to the Throne, were it
for no other reason than in that particular to cross the last Will of his
Catholic Majesty; and that though he might not be so bold as to attempt it,
nor so wicked as to put the same in execution, yet the least inconvenience to
be expected from him, would be that when he found himself in power, he would
labor so to settle himself in the Government, that it would be impossible for
the Archduke to take it from him when he had a mind to it; and seeing that
Cardinal was a man of extraordinary ability, either the thing was absolutely
unpracticable, or else he would succeed in it.

The Counselors of State made answer that the probity of the Cardinal so well
known to all men that even his own enemies agreed in it, made him incapable of
so horrible a piece of injustice; and that though he were, yet his former
conduct had put him out of a condition of governing Spain any other way than
under the pleasure and authority of another: That he proposed to himself at
first to cross the Grandees of Castile; and had attracted their aversion in so
implacable a manner, that it would be impossible for him for the future to be
reconciled unto them though he labored it with all the policy and perseverance
that are natural to him: That not having the Nobility on his side, In his life
by the University of Alcala.
and that body the most considerable of the State failing him when he stood
most in need of them; if notwithstanding he endeavored to continue his
administration as long as he lived, his efforts would only serve to make him
succumb the sooner.

The Catholic King agreed with them in the opinion of the Cardinals integrity;
and the Ministers finding him give that testimony to the truth, added that this
Prelate had two other qualities besides which rendered him no less
considerable; the one, that he had always had a great zeal for the enlargement
of the Monarchy of Spain; and the other that he had no Relations, and that his
Family ending with himself, as it had begun by him, nothing would take him off
from procuring by all means the interests of the Archduke. The Catholic King
pressed by his Conscience to be sincere at least in the last moments of his
life, agreed also in the second and third commendations which his Ministers
gave the Cardinal; and he had no sooner done so, but that they drew the
conclusion from thence; That seeing there was no other Spaniard bred up in the
Maxims of the present Government who had the same qualities, as he had, his
Catholic Majesty ought for the good of the Spanish Monarchy which he had
formed, to sacrifice the small resentment which he entertained against Ximenes,
and nominate him Regent of Spain during the absence of the Archduke.

The nearer People approach to death, the less able are they to resist
importunities, and the Catholic King at length yielded to the Solicitations
of his Ministers. He put the last constraint upon himself; and pardoning him
whom of all men next to Chievres he hated most, he trusted him with that which
was dearest to him in this world, that is to say, the Supreme Authority. Three
or four hours after he died; and it is not doubted but that if he had done what
we have related by the motives of the Gospel his end had been happy. Sandoval,
the Bishop of Pampelona, must needs have imagined so, since he positively
affirms that Ferdinand went straight from little Madrigal to Paradise.

They who had the care of the Education of the Infanto so little apprehended
that the late King had suppressed and altered the Testament which he had made
the seven and twentieth of June One thousand five hundred and fifteen in
favors of that young Prince, and whereof he had sent them a Copy, that they
thought themselves the Masters of the Government, when they were informed that
his Catholic Majesty died an hour and a half after Midnight the three and
twentieth of January One thousand five hundred and sixteen. They spent no time
in considering with Christian contemplation, that a Monarch who had conquered
three whole Kingdoms was dead in one of the wretchedest houses of all Spain.
They left that reflection to those who had a mind to check their own ambition,
and thought of nothing but of putting themselves as soon as they could into the
possession of the Authority which they pretended to be devolved upon them. They
framed a Letter for the Infanto to the Counselors of State of Spain, wherein
he spoke to them as their Master, and commanded them to come to him to
Guadaluppa.

History and the Manuscripts have not retained the name of him to whom it was
directed to be communicated to the rest, and no body can tell whether it was
not to one of those three who had done the Infanto the bad office we have been
speaking of; but it is certain, that he suffered not the Courtiers of young
Ferdinand long to flatter themselves in their imaginary good fortune. However
having conferred with his Colleagues he judged it not fit to answer in Writing,
because that would have seemed in some sense to have approved the Contents of
the Letter; and besides, it would have been very hard to have found terms that
would not have given the Infanto ground of offense if the answer had been
Categorical. The Minister therefore made answer only by word of mouth, that the
Council should not fail to come with all expedition to Guadaluppa, and
discharge themselves to the Infanto of the duty they owed to the only Brother
of their Sovereign: but that seeing the Infanto was too much a Gentleman to
pretend to any thing more, the Ministers took the liberty to tell him that they
owned no other King but Caesar. So plain a Declaration that passed since for a
Prophecy when the Archduke was chosen Emperor, so strangely surprised the
chief Servants of the Infanto, that they remained immovable whilst the Council
of Spain took necessary measures for establishing the Archduke in the Monarchy
which they had saved for him. The Infanto himself, though too young to lay to
heart discontents of the nature of that which he had received, was nevertheless
so touched with it, that he fell into a quartan Ague, which held him a long
time.

The first care of the Council was in all haste to send for Cardinal Ximenes
and Doctor Adrian, In the History of his Education.
who in Spain went by the name of the Dean of Louvain. So soon as they were
come the Late Kings Testament was opened in their presence; and the Dean was no
less astonished to find no mention of himself in it, than the Cardinal was to
see himself named Regent. The Dean supposed that since his Catholic Majesty at
his death had rendered Justice to the Archduke, he should have crowned the work
by leaving the administration of the Spanish Monarchy to the sole Minister of
the Archdukes in Spain, which was himself; and the Cardinal could not
sufficiently admire that good fortune had advanced him to a dignity, from which
no man in Spain seemed more remote than himself. But at the very instant he
intended to take possession of it, the Dean opposed it in a manner that would
have long perplexed the Ministers, if he had not remitted after that it had
been represented to him that an Affair of that importance so happily carried on
till then, would go near to be discomposed by the least resistance on his part.
However he showed them a Commission in ample form from the Archduke for
governing in his name the Monarchies of Castile and Arragon in case the King
his Grandfather should die; and demanded at least that he might be allowed to
execute one half of his Commission with the Cardinal, seeing the occasion was
come, and that they would not suffer him to execute it alone: But the Cardinal,
who was not a man to yield, replied, that it should cost him his life, but that
the Will of his Catholic Majesty should be fulfilled in its full extent. The
Council of Spain, who knew him well, had no hopes of bending him, and did not
indeed think it convenient to endeavor it. They thought it better to apply
themselves to the Dean; and to tell him that in Spain they were so well
satisfied with his great integrity, that they could make him Judge in his own
cause, they were so well assured that he would condemn himself when he should
be convinced of the badness of it. That they thought it not strange that he who
was a Fleming, and by consequent born in a Country far distant from Spain, was
ignorant, that Queen Isabella foreseeing the distemper of mind to which her
eldest Daughter had some disposition, had substituted the Archduke her eldest
Son to her, upon two conditions; first, that he should not reign in Castile
before he were twenty years of age complete: and secondly, that he could not
during his Minority trust the administration of that Monarchy in the hands of
any stranger: whence it was necessarily to be concluded, that seeing the Dean
was debarred from the Government of Castile by so plain an Exclusion, he could
not as a man of honor pretend to it.

They further added, that he was no less formally excluded from the
administration of Arragon, seeing the late Catholic King to whom it belonged
as Castile had belonged to the Queen his Wife, had left the Government of it to
Cardinal Ximenes. That if notwithstanding he undertook to make use of his
Commission which he brought with him from Flanders, he would raise a Civil War
in Spain, and must answer to God for all the murders and other crimes that
might be committed in it, as he himself had acknowledged beforehand in his
excellent Commentary upon the Master of Sentences, where he taught that a man
raising troubles in a State when he could hinder them without injury to his
Conscience or his Honor, was answerable for all the evils that might thereupon
ensue.

We have taken notice before that the Dean was an honest man, and that he
understood not fully the Trade he meddled in. He was so charmed with the
deference that the Spaniards testified for him in referring to himself an
Affair wherein he was a Party, and with the honor they did him in citing the
Writings which he had heretofore dictated in the University of Louvain, and
caused afterward to be Printed, that he promised to submit to what the Council
of Spain should determine, provided an expedient might be found to secure his
reputation, and might not expose the Commissions of the Archduke to be thought
ridiculous. The Council of Spain, who did not expect that the Dean would
condescend so far, took him at his word, and proposed to him to be satisfied
with some share that the Cardinal should give him in the Government. The offer
was plausible in appearance, but in effect was doubly captious: For in the
first place to share the Regency with a native Spaniard was to make him his
Master, seeing his Sentiments in the Council of Spain would always prevail over
those of a Fleming; and in the second place, the reputation of the Cardinal so
far surpassed that of the Dean, that whatever might be his merit, yet it was
only to foresee that if there were two Regents, it would happen in Spain as it
commonly happens in the Heavens, that the light of a higher Planet wholly
obscures that of the lower Star, and that the Dean would have no greater share
in the Government than if he were not at all associated in it.

Nevertheless he condescended to the expedient on the terms proposed to him
without desiring time to write about it to the Archduke and Chievres, and
without waiting for the resolution which the Council of Bruxelles might take
upon an Affair of that importance. And, indeed, he was the first that repented
of his precipitancy, because he had no sooner consented that the Cardinal
should act jointly with him in the administration of Affairs, than that Prelate
left him no more but the name of Regent. He dispatched without him all Affairs
that concerned not the Sovereign Authority, and for the others he did indeed
propose them in the Council where the Dean was present, and they were exactly
enough examined there. If the resolution that was taken in Council were equally
conform to the mind of the Cardinal and Dean, In the Deans complaints to the
Archduke.
it was the better for the Dean whose opinion was then followed. But if the
Cardinal and Dean were of contrary opinions, as it happened but too often, the
Dean must comply with the Cardinals opinion, and if he did not, yet the
business still went as the Cardinal decided in it. The Dean was then obliged to
sign in the second place the Acts that passed against his advice; and if he
persisted to refuse to set his name to the resolutions which he had
disapproved, they were for all that put in execution. It was to no purpose for
him to take exceptions at it: his complaints were patiently heard; and that was
all the satisfaction he had, seeing after all there was no more regard had to
them than if he had held his peace.

They showed him a little more respect in the dispatches that were to be sent
to the Low Countries, and none were sent thither unless he had signed them: but
that Society was prejudicial instead of being advantageous to him, since most
of the Affairs that were treated there were not molded as the Archdukes
Council would have had them. That Council instead of imputing all the fault to
the Cardinal, who alone was concerned in it, attributed it to the Dean as
thinking him sufficiently authorized to have prevented if he had pleased the
Archduke from being importuned with such like dispatches.

Chievres nevertheless spied in the Cardinals Conduct that it aimed at fixing
himself during life in an administration which was only given him during the
time of a short minority; and at rendering the Archduke contemptible upon his
coming to the enjoyment of the two chief Monarchies of Spain, when he stood
most in need of purchasing the esteem of his new Subjects. It was evident that
a condescension in that case would have been equally mean and dangerous; and
the expedient which Chievres devised to remedy it as quietly as he could, was
to counsel the Archduke to multiply the number of Regents in Spain. The reason
he gave for it was, that so long as that dignity was only exercised by the
Cardinal and Dean, the first of the two would always carry it over the second
because he had the better of him in all respects. That nevertheless he must
have a care not to recall the Dean, seeing the Spaniards being generally too
quaint and sharp-sighted in their conjectures, would presently guess that the
Council of Flanders were sensible of, and endeavored to repair the fault that
they had committed in sending into Spain a man absolutely incapable of
discharging the Commission that was put upon him: but that if a new Colleague
more cunning in intrigues and expert in business than himself were joined with
him, the Cardinal durst not dare to refuse the admitting of him into the
Councils; and the Flemings having there two voices to one, would become the
absolute Masters of all the resolutions that might be taken there.

The chief difficulty that appeared, was the choice of the Minister that should
discharge the place of a third Regent: and by this means it was mastered. The
Archduke had no sooner been informed of the death of his Maternal Grandfather
but that by the advice of Chievres he went and took John Manuel, of whom we
have already spoken, out of the Prison where he had lain so long through the
obstinate resolution of the Catholic King that he should be kept there: The
pretext that was made use of for giving that Spaniard his liberty, was the
kindness that the Archdukes Father had had for him, and the important services
that he had rendered to him: but the true cause was, that Chievres intended to
oppose Manuel to the Cardinal, and by means of this man to hinder him from
taking to himself greater Authority in Spain than it was convenient for the
interests of the Archduke that he should have. Chievres his conjecture was not
ill-grounded, seeing the Cardinal had crossed, as much as lay in his power, the
promotion of Manuel. He had attempted to have obliged Philip the First to turn
him away: he had since openly persecuted him; and if he did not put the late
Catholic King upon obliging his Grandson to commit, and detain him long in
Prison, yet at least it was believed that he had been assistant in confirming
his Majesty in the resolution he had taken about it: Nevertheless Chievres
changed his opinion afterward, and thought he had reason to do so. It would be
hard to tell precisely whether he did well or ill in that particular: but if he
did well, Posterity ought not to find fault with his Conduct; and if he did
ill, his fault was lessened by the cause that Manuel gave him not to look upon
him any more as his friend.

No men in the world are so impatient of imprisonment as those who are cut out
for Intrigues, because they then reckon for lost all the Minutes of their life
which have not been employed in actions that are inconsistent with a Prison.
Manuel had been a Prisoner ten whole years, and that was more than enough to
put him out of humor, and the rather that during so long a space he had lost
all the acquaintance and correspondence that he had made and entertained in
Spain and the Low Countries. He knew not whom to blame for it; and it was more
for want of another object than the conviction of the pretended infidelity of
Chievres that he suspected he had abandoned him. He thought that if there was
no malice on the part of that Governor, yet at least there was negligence; and
that in either case he was to be blamed, though nothing near so much for the
latter as for the former. The friendship of Politicians is more inconstant than
that of other men, because it is hardly ever proof against the least suspicion.
Manuel quickly added a second thought to his former, much more disadvantageous
to Chievres, in supposing that he had suffered him to languish in a Prison, for
fear lest if he had taken him out, or that if he had procured his deliverance,
he might have supplanted him by becoming the chief Minister and Favorite of
the Archdukes as he had been of his Father. So that when Chievres went to wait
upon the Archduke when he set Manuel at liberty, Manuel embraced him not so
kindly as he used to do, and that was the first mark of his indifference. The
second appeared in that he would have no particular correspondence with
Chievres; and the third in that, that at the time when he was enlarged, finding
the Archdukes Court divided into two Factions, one which stuck to Chievres and
the other that had forsaken him, and owned the Bishop of Badajos for chief,
Manuel, having regained his liberty, instantly took his Party, and declared for
the Bishop against his Benefactor.

That was enough to give Chievres cause to foresee that if Manuel were sent
into Spain he would make his reconciliation with Ximenes: He would second his
opinions in the Council, and render those of the Dean ineffectual. That was the
real cause of the Archdukes refusing to give him the Commission, though he
solicited it with extraordinary importunity; and the Archduke to comfort him
told him, that he thought him so necessary about his person, to consult with
concerning the dispatches that came to him from Spain, and the Answers that he
was to make to them, that he could not resolve to part with him out of sight.

So that for a third Regent was chosen the Lord de la Chau, of younger standing
than the Dean in the Council of Flanders, but more knowing in Politics, and
more accustomed to dissemble than he. La Chau was without difficulty received
by the Cardinal and Dean for a Colleague; but he was not the more advanced for
that, and Affairs went no better for the Flemings in the Council of Spain.
Ximenes was no less powerful there than he had been before; and as his sole
voice carried it from the Dean when he had no other Colleague but him; so it
carried it still notwithstanding he had two Flemings against him in most
Affairs that came under debate. The Dean was so well accustomed to that usage,
that he was scarcely any more scandalized at it, and perhaps it was by that
compliance that he obliged Ximenes to give him the Bishopric of Torlosa in
Catalonia: But La Chau could not endure not to enjoy the full exercise of his
Commission, after that his Letters Patents for it were verified. He complained
of it next day after; and upon the refusal of the Justice which he demanded, he
wrote to Chievres a full account of the affront which the Archduke received in
his Person, and in the Person of the Bishop of Torlosa his Colleague.

The Archduke and Chievres were put to an extraordinary plunge what to do. If
they offended Ximenes, they would afford him the pretext which, perhaps, he
looked for of revolting, by reducing him to a necessity of raising the Infanto
to the Throne, to the end he might maintain himself in his Regency; and if they
offended him not, they would give occasion to the Spaniards so to slight the
Archduke, that that people persuaded naturally that Sovereigns ought not to
suffer any thing but what they cannot avoid, would of themselves desire the
Infanto for their King. There was much casting about for a mean that was
equally distant from those two dreadful extremes, and Chievres having weighed
the matter well, at length found out two.

The first was to refuse Ximenes what he most sollicitously demanded of the
Archduke. This cannot be well understood without observing that the late
Catholic King in complying with the advice of the three Ministers who
counseled him to give the Regency to Ximenes, had done it after the manner of
Kings, who are not much troubled that Posterity should know, that their last
Wills have not been altogether free. He had limited the Regency of the Cardinal
with so many restrictions, that hardly had he authority enough to make the
Archduke be obeyed in Spain when he should send such Orders as required an
extraordinary severity. The three Ministers perceived that very well, In the
last Will of Ferdinand.
but they judged it not pertinent to insist upon the enlargement of the power
of the Regent, either because they had no hopes of obtaining it, or that they
thought Ximenes a man able enough in the process of time and affairs to give a
sufficient extent to the Authority which was left him with too great
limitation. The Catholic King died in the interim; and Ximenes having taken
possession of the Regency had dispatched many Couriers to the Archduke, to
desire that the restrictions whereof he complained, might be left out in the
confirmation which was to be sent him from Flanders.

He had represented that the Spaniards, who outwardly boasted of an entire
submission, not only to their Monarchs, but also to those who had the honor to
represent them, were inwardly more reserved in matter of submission than any
other People in Europe: That they would not punctually obey but in things that
they could not avoid, and that in all things else the great Men of the Country
would pretend the Royal Authority was devolved upon them, and that so there
would be an Anarchy in Spain, from which the least mischief that could ensue
would be a Civil War.

The Archduke and Chievres did not disagree but that the reasons of Ximenes
were strong and true; but they were so prepossessed with an opinion that that
Cardinal would abuse the Royal Authority if it were wholly put into his hands,
that the Letters of La Chau made them absolutely resolve to send no more to
Ximenes but a bare confirmation of the power which he had from the Catholic
King without addition, diminution, or alteration of any thing in it, and the
Cardinal was as much nettled thereat as they who mortified him intended he
should: but as on the one hand to show any resentment would have increased
their Joy, and that on the other, he would have discovered thereby his weakness
to the Spaniards, who would not have failed to make their advantage of it, so
he hit upon an expedient which alone might rank him above all the Politicians
that went before him. He pretended to have received from the Archduke an
unlimited power, and governed in as absolute a manner as if he had really
obtained it. In the mean time he doubled his instances at the Court of Flanders
for procuring it in a more ample form; and plainly declared to the Archduke,
that if it were obstinately denied him, he would neither answer for Castile nor
Arragon. But the Grandees of Spain were too impatient to recover the credit
they were fallen from during the Reign of Ferdinand and Isabella, to be long
led by the nose by the Cardinal.

Their Friends at the Court of Flanders gave them advice that the Prelate was
not in so great favor there as they imagined; and that so far from enlarging
the power which the Catholic King had left him, as with much ado it was
confirmed, nay, and in danger of being recalled. This was pleasant News; and
the Grandees no sooner received it, but they met to consult what use they
should make thereof. They unanimously resolved, that three of the greatest
quality, who were the Duke of Infantado, the Constable of Castile, and the
Count of Benevent, should go to Ximenes, and ask him by what authority he who
was but a Priest, and held the Regency only of a bare Administrator of Castile,
yet disposed of all things as Imperiously as if he were the Archduke himself.

Ximenes, who had Spies amongst them, was acquainted with the deputation almost
as soon as it was resolved upon, and prepared to elude it in the manner
following. He would not exercise the Regency in the City of Burgos, because he
foresaw that his Person would not be secure there, and had chosen Madrid for
that purpose, a Town which properly belonged to the Archbishopric of Toledo.
He had put himself in a condition there of withstanding any Riot, and as to an
open War he had taken other measures, as we shall see in the sequel of this
History. The three above mentioned Grandees went to him there, and discharged
their Commission after their way, that is, in a very haughty manner. Ximenes
commanded his passion so much as not to reply to them in the same strain, and
only told them civilly that he held his power of the late King of glorious
memory, to whom the Monarchy of Spain was sufficiently endebted to oblige them
to fulfill his last Will, though he was but Administrator of Castile. The
Grandees were not satisfied with the answer of Ximenes, yet they durst not
neither contradict it openly. They replied, that the Testament he spoke of did
not give him authority to govern in a more absolute manner than the Catholic
King had done, whose Commissioner nevertheless he only pretended to be, in
derogating from the custom introduced by that wise Prince and Queen Isabella
his Wife into the Council of State, by proposing matters there only
superficially, and as of course, and then in deciding them by himself alone,
without respect to the plurality of voices.

Ximenes made answer without any greater heat, In the Collection of the
Sentiments of the Cardinal.
that seeing the Order of the late King their common Master seemed not
sufficient, he would show them another. Having spoken these words, he led them
to a Window of the Hall of Audience, from whence might be seen what was in the
back Court of his Palace, and there let them see ten or twelve Pieces of Cannon
mounted on Carriages, and all sorts of Firearms ready to discharge. He had no
sooner given the signal but they who expected it fired, and during the space of
more than a quarter of an hour nothing was to be heard but a terrible noise.
Ximenes and the Grandees changed countenance then, and the Cardinal looked as
if he had been all on fire. He uttered not one word, but the sparkling of his
eyes sufficiently supplied the use of his tongue; and made them sensible that
they had provoked him as much as possibly he could be.

The Grandees on the contrary were as low as they had been high before. They
spoke no more than the Cardinal did, but their silence proceeded from another
cause. They had declared themselves his enemies, forced him out of patience,
come to his House to threaten him; and they judged their death the nearer that
they had heard the most astonishing forerunners of it. But when the noise was
over, Ximenes reassured them by telling them in a Magisterial tone that the
Artillery which they saw was the amplest power that he had to show them. That
they who would suffer him to act with that extent of power which was necessary
for the good of Spain in general, and for the interests of the Archduke in
particular, should have no cause to be afraid: but that he was willing to let
them know and give them notice beforehand, that the Artillery whereof they had
now heard the roaring, was designed to thunder against those who having no
sufficient title to ask him a reason of his Conduct, were nevertheless so
pragmatical as to do it. He thereupon dismissed the three Grandees, and such a
bold action of a man bred up amongst Cordeliers as cannot be paralelled by any
other in the History of Spain, was of no hurtful consequence to its Author.

The other mortification that the Archduke and Chievres thought fit to give to
Ximenes, was to render his Regency ridiculous by dividing it amongst too many.
We have already mentioned that the Bishop of Tortosa and La Chau were put upon
him for Colleagues; and these two Ministers being neither able to counterpoise
his Authority, nor to lessen it by sharing therein, they gave him a fourth
Colleague more daring than they, and less reserved when it came to the push of
putting himself into the possession of the full power that might be given him.
His name was Amerstorf, descended of one of the most ancient and illustrious
families of Holland. He was a man of wit, and the humor of his Country
inclined him never to give over what once he had undertaken. His arrival at
Madrid was acceptable to Ximenes instead of being troublesome to him, because he
furnished him with the pretext which he had been long looking out for of
ridding himself of the Bishop of Tortosa and La Chau. The truth is these two
Ministers though they were more submissive than he durst have promised himself,
were nevertheless very uneasy to him, seeing it was still to be feared that
they would shake off the yoke. He received then Amerstorf with as much civility
as he had received the other two, and brought him into the Council of Spain;
but afterward he took his time privately to represent to all the Spanish
Ministers of State who had the honor to sit there; That the Archduke, who was
not as yet their King, began to strike at the most considerable root of their
Privileges, which consisted in not being governed by strangers: That already
two Flemings and a Hollander were slipped into the Council; and if that
encroachment were not instantly opposed, others would be sent over in so great
number that they would exceed the native Spaniards: That the inconvenience
could not be avoided but by hindering the Council of Flanders for the future
from introducing into that of Spain as many persons as they pleased, which
could not be accomplished but by two means: First, not to communicate Affairs
of greatest importance to the three foreign Regents; and secondly, not to
suffer them to sign dispatches. That the first might easily be brought about by
referring the most important matters to be adjusted in secret meetings which
should be held in the Cardinals Palace, and by reserving only smaller
businesses for the Council of State. For the second, there needed no more but
to make the Castilians complain of the multitude of persons who must sign all
that was granted them in favor or in justice; and to put them in the head of
grounding their grievances upon the op^sition that their Predecessors made to
the designs of the Catholic King, when after he had married Queen Isabella he
would have signed with her the Grants and Expeditions that concerned the
Monarchy of Castile.

The Council of Spain acknowledged the expedients proposed by Ximenes to be
necessary, and consented that there should be Cabinet Councils in the Cardinals
Palace. Soon after the Castilians were heard to murmur about the tediousness of
expeditions which they imputed to the number of those who were to sign them,
and thereupon Ximenes was prayed to sign them alone. None but the Bishop of
Tortosa and Amerstorf opposed it; but the Council baffled their resistance by
asking them the question if they were willing alone to bear the blame of an
insurrection which was like to happen all over Spain, in case the people of
that vast Country were refused the satisfaction which they desired.

The Archduke and Chievres being informed of the attempt of Ximenes, and of the
affront they received in Castile, bethought themselves a long time of means how
they might punish the first, and revenge the second. But having reflected upon
the matter as seriously as so nice an Affair deserved, they thought best at
that time to wink at it; seeing all the threatenings that could be employed
without having power in hand to force them, would only serve to confirm the
Spaniards in their bad intentions if they had any, and make them more remiss in
the good which they might have. Immediately after an occasion offered wherein
the Court of Flanders had so much need of the Cardinals wisdom, and of the
authority which he had acquired, and retained in spite of them, that though
they had made a public rupture with him, they must have been forced to have
courted his friendship. It ran in Chievres his head that so long as the
Archduke was satisfied with the Title of Heir apparent of the Monarchies of
Castile and Arragon, he would not be sure of succeeding to them; and that the
Spaniards might think themselves in right to prefer his younger brother before
him, founded upon this, that the case had not as yet happened since they had
shaken off the yoke of the Moors, that a stranger had reigned over them. That
it was convenient then to ply them on the side of conscience, and to oblige
them to the Archduke by a particular Oath, engaging them to acknowledge him for
their King, before he was actually so by the death of his Mother the Queen.
That could not be done but by the resignation of that Princess; for though she
had lost her judgment in so deplorable a manner that her ordinary employment
was to fight with Cats, in which ridiculous Combat she received scratches that
disfigured her face, yet she retained so lively and present an Idea of the
Grandeur to which she was advanced by the death of her elder Brother and Sister
without Children, that she continually thought on it, and never confounded it
with any other fancy: as if it had been the design of God Almighty to show in
her by the most evident and remarkable instance that ever was, that the deepest
wound that ever was, that the deepest wound of original sin consists in the
desire of independance, and that that remains when all the rest are cured, or
cease through the incapacity of their subject.

Jane the foolish in the height of her extravagnncies remembered very well that
she was in her own right Queen of Castile and Arragon; and though the
extraordinary love she had for her Husband kept her from taking it ill that he
gave her no share in the Government of Castile, yet after his death she was not
so complesant to her own Father; and told those who wondered at it, That near
was her smock, but nearer her skin.

Seeing it is the most usual mark of madness in those who are altogether so, to
think themselves very wise; Jane could not endure that the Catholic King had
confined her to the Castle of Tordesilas, and kept her there shut up contrary
to her inclination. She called him her Tyrant instead of her Father: She called
all the Castilians that came to wait upon her Rebels; she never beheld them
without upbraiding them with disloyalty, and constantly expected that they
should rise in Arms to deliver her out of captivity, and to place her on the
Throne. Her passion to Reign instead of diminishing as she grew in age,
increased by the death of the Catholic King, which was not thought necessary
to be kept from her. Then she pretended to the Sovereignty of Arragon as well
as to that of Castile; and when she was put to it, as many times she was, what
share she would give her Children in it, it was her constant answer, that
seeing she had long expected the death of her Father, who was but Administrator
of Castile, that she might reign in it, it was but reason that her Children
should wait for hers with so much the less impatience that she was equally
proprietary both of Arragon and Castile, and that they had no right but by her
to either of the two Monarchies.

Chievres, who was ignorant of none of those particulars, well foresaw that the
Queen could not be induced to resign her rights; and to say the truth, though
she could have been prevailed upon to do it, yet it would have signified
nothing, seeing the Spaniards would have judged it null, all that knew her
being witnesses of her civil incapacity of contracting. There was a necessity
then of making application to the States of Castile and Arragon, but in that
Chievres foresaw no less difficulty in respect of the three bodies of which
they were composed: For on the one hand it concerned them not to condescend to
a sharing in their Sovereignty, which might give occasion to an infinite number
of troublesome accidents; and on the other hand there had no like case happened
since the Christian Religion had been established in Spain. The interest as to
the Clergy consisted in the three Masteries of St. James, Callatrava, and
Alcantara, which had been seized by the Catholic Kings Ferdinand and Isabella,
though their Predecessors had left them to the ordinary course, and the use of
those for whom they were designed. These dignities the richest and most
considerable in Spain next to the Royal, because of the multitude of
Commanderies they had the disposal of, had as well as the Commanderies always
been reckoned Ecclesiastical Revenues and Preferments; and they who were
invested in them in that quality had place in the body of the Clergy, and
rendered it incomparably more powerful than the two other Estates. Nevertheless
it was but too probable that the design of the Catholic Kings in impropriating
those three great Masteries, was in process of time to secularise them, under
pretext that they were no longer necessary after that the Moors had no more
dominion in Spain. If that design were put in execution, the Clergy lessened to
a half by so notable a retrenchment, would no more be respected in Spain, as it
was wont to be, and would fall to be the last of the three Estates, from the
first that it was before. If the Archduke succeeded to the Crowns of Castile
and Arragon immediately after the death of his Maternal Grandfather, he would
be powerful enough at the Court of Rome to obtain the entire secularisation of
the three Orders: whereas if his Mother were inviolably maintained in her right
of reigning fallen to her by Nature and Law, as it was known by experience that
fools and mad people were long lived, so the Clergy would have time to
solicit the holy See that these Masteries might be reestablished into their
Primitive State.

The Nobility had lost no less of their luster than the Clergy, and were no
less sollicitous to recover it. They had been more the Masters than Subjects of
their Kings before the Reign of Ferdinand and Isabella; and there needs no more
but to read their History to be convinced that they oftener revolted against
their Kings, than they had sought against the Moors. But they had been since
constrained to show their Inferiors an example of an implicit submission to
their Sovereigns; and their condition in that particular was become like to
that of the meanest Peasants, though they had made it their glory to be
distinguished from them principally in that they would securely revolt, and
that others always bore the punishment of their rebellion. In fine, the people
had been exceedingly burdened under the late Reign. He foresaw that the
Archduke would not ease them, seeing he would flatter himself with the glory of
prosecuting the ambitious designs of his Maternal Grandfather: whereas seeing
all that was required of Spain during the Reign of Jane, was to maintain it
self, the ordinary Revenues of Castile and Arragon would be sufficient for that
Princess; and besides, they who should govern in her name would rather receive
the Law from the Estates, than the Estates from them.

The pretext was not a little plausible of refusing the Royalty to the
Archduke, seeing it would be taken from the fundamental Laws of the two
Monarchies, which so precisely called to the Crown the next Heir of the King
deceased, that so long as that Heir lived it would be Treason to acknowledge a
more remote for their Monarch. The Laws in that respect made no distinction
betwixt Sexes; and so the elder Brother and Sister of Jane were n^ sooner dead,
but the three Estates of Castile and Arragon, assembled upon that sol^ account,
had acknowledged her for Hei^ apparent in the presence of her Father an^
Mother. She had come expressly from Flanders, where she was married into Spai^
to receive their Oath. They had solem^ly given it her, and nothing could
discharg^ them from it so long as she lived. The Oat^ had been confirmed
immediately after the death of Queen Isabella, and the right o^ Queen Jane had
been consummated when she took first with her Husband, and sinc^ by her self
alone, the actual possession o^ Castile.

The End of the Third Book.
BOOK IV. Containing the most memorable Affairs that happened in the Monarchy
of Spain during the rest of the Year One Thousand Five Hundred and Sixteen, and
part of One Thousand Five Hundred and Seventeen.
THE difficulties that I now mentioned were not so insuperable, but that
Chievres procured the Archduke Charles to be acknowledged King of Castille and
Arragon, du^ing the life of Jean his Mother, to whom ^ese Monarchies belonged;
and seeing (...) nice an affair could not be brought ^out by ordinary methods,
Posterity ^erhaps will not take it ill that here I re^te the singular course
that was taken (...) it.

The first step was on the side of Maxi^ilian the Emperor, to whom Chievres
^aving communicated his design, sent ^im word, that the greatest Humane ^ncern
his Imperial Majesty had, was ^o employ all his Power in the advancement of the
Archduke his Grandson; and that he ought the more willingly to contribute to
it, that what was desired of him was only a bare Title. That it was to be
feared that the Archduke having frequent calls to go from Spain to Italy, the
Low Countries and Germany, if he were no more but Governor of Castille and
Arragon for the Queen his Mother, the Spaniards impatient at his too frequent
absence, might choose another Governor, who might in the sequel take measures
for changing his Dignity into that of a Monarch. That there were but too many
instances of the like attempt in Spain, and that the only way to avoid it, was
to bind by a solemn Oath the Spaniards to the Archduke as soon as possible, and
to oblige them presently to own him for their King; because no Nation in Europe
being more jealous of their Reputation than that People, and less able to
endure to be upbraided with the violation of a public Oath, they would be true
to that which they made to the Archduke, what occasion soever he might give
them by his ordinary removes. That in all times it belonged to Emperors to
adjust the Titles of other Christian Sovereigns; and that it would not be
thought strange if his Imperial Majesty made use of that right in relation to
the Archduke. That in the mean time his example would pass for a Law all over
Europe; and that other Potentates would not refuse to give the Archduke the
Title of King, when they saw that the Emperor had done so.

Maximilian found no inconvenience in the Proposition of Chievres; In the
Letters of Maximilian the First to his Grandson the Archduke.
and for direction of the Letter which immediately after he wrote from Vienna
to the Archduke the Twentieth of June, One Thousand Five Hundred and Sixteen,
he wrote with his own hand, To the Catholic King, and in following Letters
continued to give him the same Title. The rumor of it presently flew all over
Europe; but other Sovereigns refused to imitate the Emperor, because it was not
his Court then that the Reputation of Princes issued from, or that distributed
the Titles of Honor which were due unto them, and that many Ages were already
past since the Holy See was in Possession of that Prerogative. Chievres was
sensible of the necessity of that, and in the second place addressed himself to
Pope Leo X. He knew that his Holiness was extremely vexed that the French had
recovered the Duchy of Milan the Year before, One Thousand Five Hundred and
Fifteen, and that he sought for an occasion to drive them thence, as Julius his
Predecessor had done. Chievres his Agents thereupon represented to him, that
the execution of his design depended solely on the greatness of the Archduke;
and that if that Prince were in possession of the Kingdoms of Castille and
Arragon, without expecting the death of his Mother, he would be in a condition
to help the Holy See to purge Italy of the French: Whereas if he were
necessitated to follow the course of Nature, either he would not at all be King
of Spain, the Infanta his Brother wanting neither Inclination nor Friends to
supplant him; or it would be so late, that the French would in the mean time
have more than enough of time so to fortify themselves in the Milanese, that
it would be impossible afterward to get them out of it.

The Reason of Chievres appeared to the Pope so solid, that he wrote to the
Archduke, exhorting him to take the Title of Catholic King, and gave it him.
There remained a third step which Chievres found to be incomparably more
difficult than the former two. It stood upon the Spaniard's giving the Archduke
the Title of King immediately after the Imperial Court and that of Rome;
because if it had been demanded before of other Courts, and that they had
refused it, the Spaniards, who were not very inclinable to grant it, would take
that pretext for their excuse. Neither was it necessary in desiring that favor
to give them ground to think that it depended wholly on them, because they
would have drawn their advantage from that; and if once they refused it, there
was no after attempt to be used, and there would have been a necessity to wait
till the death of Queen Jean. But there are few Cabinet affairs, which a
Prudence refined by long Experience cannot unravel.

Chievres drew up a Letter so artificially, and got the Archduke to sign it,
that on the one hand the Archduke intimated of what importance it was for the
Spaniards, that they should give him the Title of King, yet without desiring it
or exposing himself to a denial; and on the other hand, he so put them to it,
that they could not excuse themselves without putting into compromise the thing
in the world that was dearest unto them, which was the Glory of their Monarchy.
He insinuated at first into their minds, without abating any thing of his
Gravity, and then acquainted them, that his Grandfather the Emperor and the
Pope had represented to him, that it was absolutely necessary for the honor of
God, for the ease of the Catholic Queen in the infirmity wherewith Divine
Majesty had thought fit to visit her: for the repose of the Monarchies of
Castille and Arragon, and for preventing the designs of their Enemies, that he
should presently jointly with his Mother, take the name of King, and discharge
the duties of it: That he had put an extreme violence upon himself, Amongst the
Letters of Charles to the Spaniards.
in consenting to it; and that he had not yielded to the importunities of the
two Heads of the Christian Religion, for the Spiritual and Temporal, till after
he was convinced of the Maxim which Queen Isabelle his Grandmother had so often
in her mouth, Los Reyes no tienen parientes.
That those who were called to the Government of People had no Kindred: That he
was willing to acquaint the Spaniards with it, not that he thought he needed
their approbation, but because he knew that his conduct in that particular
would not be unacceptable to them, and that he hoped to find them in a perfect
submission.

The Letter was sent to Ximenes, with orders to communicate it to the
Spaniards, after he had taken such necessary cautions as might hinder them from
being exasperated by it; but the Cardinal perceived at first that the words,
jointly with the Queen, which were inserted in it, were only a cloak for the
ambition of the Archduke; seeing it was certain, that so soon as the Spaniards
had owned and sworn to him as King, all the share of Royalty that he would
leave to the Queen his Mother, would only be to put her Name with his own to
the beginning of public Acts, and in all things else he would Reign as
absolutely as if he had no Mother at all. That so no sooner would he have set
his Foot in Spain, but that the administration of Ximenes would entirely cease,
and no greater part be allowed him in the affairs of State, than what he had
during the Reign of the late King, from the time that he had refused to resign
his Archbishopric. But whether it was that he foresaw that he should
immediately die after the arrival of that young Prince in Spain, as the
Professors of the University of Alcala, who have written his Life, suspect; or
that he entertained such another thought, as that of the famous Agrippina the
Mother of Nero, that she cared not though it cost her her life, provided her
Son Reigned, he approved of the Letter which tended to his deposition; and that
he might complete his victory over himself, he employed all his credit with the
Spaniards, that it might obtain the effect which Chievres expected from it.
Wherein it cannot be sufficiently admired, that this Prelate, who had acted so
many different parts for gaining an unlimited Authority during a Regency of
short continuance, and for maintaining himself independent of all when once he
had acquired it; could so easily, and without constraint become in a trice so
unlike to himself, as to consent to a Recognition which he foresaw must reduce
him to a private condition; and which is worse, to make himself the Solicitor
of it, as being convinced that it could never succeed but by his means. All
that can be said of it is, that as there never was any machine which has not
sometimes been out of order, or at least whose springs that put it in motion,
have not at some time been unbended; so neither is there any Humane prudence
which by involuntary irregularities that now and then escape it, does not in
spite of it self render homage to the wisdom of God, which is so much the more
eminently above that of Man, as that it is always uniform in its conduct.
Ximenes presented the Archdukes Letter to the States of Spain, with all the
circumspection that makes the most difficult affairs succeed. He made use of
the Counselor of State, Carvaial mentioned before, who by a premeditated
discourse maintained in the Assembly, that the Archduke demanded nothing that
was unjust or new. The first part of his Proposition he proved by the
extraordinary high parts, whereof that young Prince had given so many marks,
and by his Education, which had rendered him at sixteen years of age as capable
of Reigning as the ablest Princes, who have governed at a more mature age. He
touched only by the bye at the infirmity of Queen Jean, nevertheless he said
enough to insinuate that her distemper was incurable; and that by consequent
there was ground more than enough to look upon that Princess as if she were no
more in Being, though she were still alive, and in appearance like long to
continue so. He farther added, That it was more to be feared that her folly
would degenerate into madness and fury, than it was to be hoped that it would
lessen with age. Thereby he pretended to oblige his Auditors to make this
Conclusion, That the unfortunate Queen was civilly Dead; and that in respect of
her, the same measures were to be taken, as if Spain had already lost her. The
second part of the discourse of Carvaial was grounded chiefly upon an example
taken out of the ancient Chronicles of Spain, which seemed exactly to quadrate
with the case in question, though to speak the truth, it was much disguised.
Alphonso the Seventh, King of Castille and Leon, had been by the Estates put in
possession, and acknowledged for King of both the Kingdoms, in the lifetime of
Queen Vrraca his Mother, to whom they belonged. They who were thoroughly
acquainted with the History of Spain, might have replied to Carvaial, that he
was not very knowing in the Politics of his Country, or that he impudently
abused the honor which the chief Heads of Castille and Arragon did him in
listening to his discourse: For Queen Vrraca was only a fool in her love, and
acted only by that principle, that is to say, like a woman who had wholly
renounced modesty. She entertained in sight, and to the extreme vexation of her
Subjects, a simple Gentleman called Don Pedro de Lara: She had got her self to
be unmarried; that she might live with him in all licentiousness: She had
proposed to her self to raise him to the Throne in exclusion of her own Son
Alphonso; and the misfortune of that young Prince, who had deserved no such
thing, and who besides was of Age and very capable of Reigning, had wrought
upon the Estates of the Country. They met together for preserving the Crown for
him; and seeing they could not do it, but by dividing the Royal Authority
betwixt his Mother and him, In the History of Urraca by Moralez.
because if she had retained it wholly, she would have infallibly made use of
it to oppress Alphonso, they acknowledged him for King jointly with her.

There was nothing like to this in the affair of the Archduke in the manner as
Carvaial had stated it. Queen Jean thought so little of frustrating him of the
Succession, that in her greatest extravagancies she never failed when she spoke
of him, to call him Prince of Spain, that is to say, that she acknowledged him
to be her only next lawful Heir; and though she had had a mind to disappoint
him, it was evident she could not do it, her distemper not suffering her to
dispose of her self, and far less of her Crowns. Besides, she had till then led
a life without reproach, and her folly hindered her not from being still a
pattern of Chastity. The sad condition she was in spoke eloquently enough in
her favors to oblige the Spaniards to preserve to her the Monarchies that were
fallen to her by the Successions of her Father and Mother; and to take it
strictly, they could not excuse themselves from doing so, without committing a
great injustice, seeing by owning the Archduke for King during the life of his
Mother, they put him actually in possession of a right, which by the consent of
all civilized Nations, did not belong to him till after the death of that
Princess.

So that neither the factions of the Cardinal, nor the reasons of Carvaial were
sufficient to render the Archdukes party the stronger. The Admiral of Castille,
and Duke of Alva declared openly, that it was not in their power to grant the
Archduke what he demanded: That twelve years ago, upon the death of Queen
Isabelle, they had received and sworn Allegiance to Jean her eldest Daughter as
their only Sovereign: That it would be a violation of their Oath to make her
eldest Son her Colleague, who was not to Reign till after her death, and would
furnish Historians an ample ground of blackening their memory: That the
Archduke had gone too far in taking of himself the title of King; and that if
the Queen recovered her health, Nature might very well make peace betwixt them,
without any necessity of a Foreign mediation or intercession: But if the chief
men of Castille and Arragon favored him in that excess of boldness, they run
the risk of being abandoned by himself, and by consequent of being looked upon
as Rebels.

The Marquess of Villena started a second Opinion more politic than prudent,
and more proper for avoiding than resolving the difficulty. He said, that
seeing the Archduke did not demand their counsel, he thought it not fit that
they should give it him, nor that they should expose themselves to the
inconvenience just before mentioned. The first of the two Opinions appeared to
be so just, and the second so safe, that the one or other of them had
infallibly prevailed in the Assembly, if the Cardinal, who foresaw it, had not
put in practice a piece of boldness that succeeded with him. He interrupted the
course of Voting, and told them that it was not the case in hand to deliberate
about a thing to be done, but to approve of a matter already done. That if the
Archduke had done him the honor to have proposed to him the design which he
had of taking the title of King, he would perhaps have endeavored to dissuade
him from it; but since he had proceeded in it without communicating any thing
of it to the Spaniards, their glory and interest were equally concerned, not to
make a young Prince, born to be their Master, ridiculous upon his first entry
into the World, seeing he was bred up in the best dispositions that ever were
for enlarging one day the Spanish Monarchy. That to oblige him to quit the name
and ensigns of Royalty when once he had taken them, would draw upon him the
contempt of all the Nations of Europe; render him the object of their scorn,
spoil his credit with them as long as he lived; and so baulk his courage, that
he would not dare for the future to undertake any thing, either for invading or
resisting an Enemy. That he, Ximenes himself, thought it fit to take the
Assembly off from committing a mistake, by informing them of that most
important Truth, that in that juncture there was no mean betwixt taking from
the Archduke the title of King, and declaring him absolutely incapable of
Reigning one day in Spain when it came to his turn; and that if the Spaniards
were so imprudent, as to make the first of those two steps in relation to him,
it would be impossible for them to clear themselves of the second, and not to
submit hereafter to the rule of a Prince, whom they had shamefully degraded.

Ximenes having spoken in so positive a strain, gave not them the time of
taking the Votes. He sternly commanded Don Pedro Correa, his intimate friend,
whom he had made Corregidor of Madrid, To go and proclaim through the Town
Queen Jean and Don Carlos her Son jointly Kings of Castille and Arragon. The
Corregidor, who was one of the Assembly, and who apparently had put all things
in a readiness for execution of the orders which he had received, went out
immediately, and soon after the solemnity of the Proclamation was heard. The
Deputies, who had not as yet given their Votes, seeing that if they spoke
against what was actually a doing, they would instantly occasion a Civil War,
for which they and their relations must be accountable, approved the Cardinals
discourse, and the Orders that he had given.

Thus the boldest project that has happened in the memory of man, In the act
of Proclamation.
was brought about with little intrigue, and without any opposition; and the
Bishop of Tortosa gave account of it to the new Catholic King, whom hereafter
we shall name Charles, and to Chievres, without robbing Ximenes of the praise
he merited by it. Both of them were so well satisfied with it, that they
heartily pardoned that Cardinal for all that had displeased them in his former
conduct; and all the business in Flanders was the hastening of Charles his
voyage into Spain, for taking possession of the Kingdoms he now was installed
in. They foresaw but one impediment to it, which concerned the Treaty concluded
with France by the ministry of the Count of Nassau. It has been said before,
that Charles, when as yet but Archduke, had engaged himself to restore the
Kingdoms of Naples and Navarre to the most Christian King, and to John d'
Albert, so soon as the Catholic King his Grandfather were dead. The condition
was come, and the French Ambassador at Bruxelles pressed the accomplishment
thereof. There was no pretext of delaying the restitution of the two Crowns,
seeing if Charles did not resolve to do it willingly, and frankly to perform
his promise, Francis the First was in a better condition to force him to it by
way of Arms, than ever he had been before, or perhaps, than ever he could be
for the future. He had at the field of Warignan quelled the insupportable pride
of the Swisse; and forced that warlike Nation, who thought they could domineer
over Kings, to make peace with him as he himself had desired. He had recovered
the Duchy of Milan from Maximilian Sforza. He had confirmed himself in that
Conquest in the year One Thousand Five Hundred and Sixteen, by the utter
overthrow of that formidable Army which the Emperor had led in person into the
Milanese. The Forces of his most Christian Majesty, which he had opposed
against that Army were still on foot; and it would have been easy for him to
have taken Flanders, by causing them to march thither as soon as Charles were
gone. In the mean time his Catholic Majesty was not in a condition to ward so
dangerous a blow. He had no more Soldiers than were necessary for his Convoy in
his voyage to Spain; and the Flemings would not have assisted him in levying of
more, if they should have known that he only needed them for maintaining the
usurpations of Naples and Navarre. So they would have been exposed to the
invasions of Francis the First, and Charles would have lost incomparably more
than the two Crowns we last named were worth. Nevertheless, in the juncture
that then happened, he could not restore them, nor so much as pretend it was
his intention, without entirely forfeiting the Succession of his Mother: For if
he had attempted of his own Authority, and without the consent of the
Monarchies to which the two Kingdoms were annexed, to write to the Viceroys to
restore them, they would not have obeyed him; and if by Proxy he had demanded
the consent of the Estates of Castille for the restitution of Navarre, and the
approbation of the Estates of Arragon for rendering Naples It would not only
have been denied him, but more, the two Monarchies would have joined in an
interest common to both, and passed immediately from Disobedience to a Revolt.
There was a necessity then of waiting till the Catholic King were in
possession of his Kingdoms of Spain; and till he had taken such just measures
for the Restitutions in question, as might assure him of success; and upon so
well grounded reasons Chievres wrote to Gouffier, great Master of the Household
to the most Christian King, That it was absolutely necessary for preserving
peace betwixt the two young Kings, whom they had had the honor to Educate,
that they should have a conference together; and that they should adjust a
Treaty so advantageous to their Masters, that neither of them might be ^empted
to violate it, what favorable occasion soever might present. Gouffier ^hew'd
the Letter to Francis the First, ^ho thought it not enough to approve ^he
interview, but besides proposed the ^lace where it should be, and for that and
named the Town of Noyon in Picar^y, which was accepted of in the Coun^il of
Bruxelles.

Chievres on his part disposed Charles to ^ve him an unlimited power; and as if
^e two Kings had agreed to leave to the ^scretion of the two persons, who had
^een their Governors, all the prelimi^ary difficulties to the Negotiation,
they ^justed them after their own way to ^e satisfaction of the Councils of
both ^ings. In consideration of the more ^vanced age of the most Christian
King, ^e preference was given to Gouffier, ^at Chievres went to meet him at
Noyon, ^here he staid for him in the beginning of Summer One Thousand Five
Hundred and Seventeen; and their ancient Friendship hindered them not from
maintaining with equal vigor the Interests of their Masters. They were longer
than was expected in agreeing about their Affairs, and Gouffier pretended that
the Crowns of Naples and Navarre should be restored before the Catholic King
went over to Spain.

His Reasons were, that his Catholic Majesty was engaged to it by the Treaty
of the Count of Nassau, and that it was not the business to Negotiate of new,
In the Negotiation of Noyon.
but only to put in execution what was in formal terms resolved upon: That the
honor of Francis the First was concerned in the speediness of the Restitution;
and that if it was deferred, the delay would be imputed to the weakness of his
most Christian Majesty, and by consequence would redound to his shame: That the
Kingdoms of Naples and Navarre had both been Usurped, the first by the
Infidelity, and the second by the Juggling of the late King of Spain; and that
the matter was so evident, that no man in all Europe doubted of it, what care
soever that cunning Prince had taken to dazzle the eyes of the World by
Manifesto's stuffed with Falsehoods, and the discourses of his Agents: That it was
enough to France that Naples was directly Usurped from them, and that John d'
Albert had lost Navarre upon the only consideration that he would not break
with Louis the Twelfth, to make them with equal zeal solicit, that the first
of the two last mentioned Kingdoms should be restored to the King of France,
and the second to his Ally; and that seeing there was no appearance that France
could be in a better condition for the future than it was then in for
recovering them, nor that the Catholic King could be in a worse state for
maintaining them by the way of Arms, as wanting both men and money; Francis the
First would be for ever blamed if he let slip so favorable an occasion, and
Gouffier would in History pass for a notorious Prevaricator, if he contributed
to it in any manner whatsoever.

Chievres, who had no satisfactory answer to make directly to such solid
motives, thought it enough to reply indirectly, that the King his Master had
the best and most sincere intentions in the World as to the matter in hand; and
seeing he knew him better than any man else, he ought more to be credited than
those who might have insinuated contrary thoughts into his most Christian
Majesty: But that Sovereigns as well as other men were liable to necessities;
and that that to which Charles was then reduced was the more excusable in that
it was extreme. That it was true indeed, he had fallen to a very large
Succession: but that it would wholly escape him, if it were not managed with
all imaginable care and industry: That Navarre lay so very conveniently for the
Monarchies of Castille and Arragon, that they had no cause of fear from abroad,
but from thence, and that the Pyrenean Mountains, and the two Seas secured them
on all other hands: That as their Enemies being Masters of Navarre could
presently bring whole Armies into the heart of their Countries, so without that
they could but weakly attack their Frontiers: That, to judge things aright, the
Kingdom of Naples was of no less importance to them, seeing if they lost it,
they were certain not to keep Sicily long: That nevertheless that was the
Kingdom from whence Spain had Corn in the frequent scarcities to which it was
subject; and that these two motives would be enough to engage the Spaniards in
a general Revolt, if their new King obliged them presently to restore Naples
and Navarre: That it would be thought stranger, that he should meddle in so
nice an Affair upon his coming to the Crown, in that he was a stranger: That
during the space of a Thousand years Spain had not been governed by Monarchs of
that kind: That they had never as yet seen Charles; and that hardly any thing
could make them endure that an absent stranger, before he had taken possession
of his Crowns, should cut them short by two: That before any such thing was
attempted, an infinite number of cautions must be taken, and that he must begin
the work by obtaining from the Estates an unlimited Authority: That afterward a
powerful Faction should be formed in the three Bodies which make up his
Estates, for disposing them to give an entire satisfaction to the most
Christian King: And that in fine, when the Catholic King were once assured of
obtaining what he desired by proposing it, the matter should be varnished over
with so plausible colors, that if it were not frankly consented to, yet at
least it should pass in Form, and without Sedition: That the Catholic King
expected an happy success in this, provided he were suffered to take his own
way in Negotiating it, and that Chievres durst undertake for it upon two
conditions; one that his Master were allowed time to go to Spain, and there to
dispose the minds of the People; and the other that the promise of restoring in
convenient time the two Kingdoms to the most Christian King, and John d' Albert
should be kept so secret, that no Spaniard might dive into it.

The discourse of Chievres, if rightly taken, was captious, seeing he demanded
a present and most important favor, such as the security of the Low Countries
during the absence of Charles, for hopes so much the more uncertain, that the
fulfilling of them was remote, and would absolutely depend upon the
faithfulness of his Catholic Majesty, who having obtained beforehand all that
he could have desired, perhaps would not take much care of performing his
promise. Nevertheless, whether it was that Gouffier did not sufficiently
reflect upon that, or that he yielded to the importunities of inferior
Ministers, who were appointed to Negotiate under him, whom Chievres had charmed
with his caresses; the Court of France committed an irreparable fault, and
suffered themselves to be choused by a man whom then they had but too great
ground to distrust. They consented that Gouffier and Chievres should confer
together about finding out an expedient that might a little more bind the
Catholic King, and nevertheless leave him as much liberty as he desired for
disposing his new Subjects to satisfy France. Several were proposed; and that
which the two Plenipotentiaries at length agreed upon, was, that there should
be two Treaties of Noyon of the same date; one which should be kept secret by
the Parties concerned, until the time of its execution; and another which
should be made public so soon as it was signed. By the first, In the two
Treaties of Noyon.
Charles obliged himself not to lose any time in the restitution of the
Kingdoms of Naples and Navarre, after he had taken possession of his maternal
Crowns; and to do it himself by his own absolute Authority, if he could not
obtain the consent of the Spaniards. But the second only contained, that the
most Christian and Catholic Kings should agree upon Arbitrators, who within a
prefixed time should declare, whether the Crowns of Arragon and Castille had
any right or not to Naples and Navarre. That if these Arbitrators decided in
favor of Spain, the two Kingdoms should remain united to it; and that if their
Sentence were to the disadvantage thereof, the Catholic King should instantly
restore them.

The other Articles of the two Treaties were in all things alike, which may
have given occasion to think that there was but one. The three most
considerable were, that until the Arbitrators should decide to which of the
two, France or Spain, the Kingdom of Naples belonged, the Catholic King should
pay to the most Christian King one hundred thousand Crowns a year as a
quit-Rent: That the Catholic King should espouse Lovisia of France, who was
yet but a year old; and that if that young Princess died before the Marriage
were consummated, the Catholic King should Marry another of the most Christian
King's Daughters, in case he had more; and that if he had none, the Marriage of
the Catholic King with Renee of France, Sister-in-law to his most Christian
Majesty, should be accomplished, as it was agreed upon in the former Treaty:
That in fine, the Emperor Maximilian should restore to the Republic of Venice
the City of Verona with this caution, that he should put it into the hands of
the French, who should immediately after deliver it over to the Venetians; and
that the Senate of that Republic should pay to the Emperor two hundred
thousand Crowns, to reimburse the charges he had been at in Conquering that
City.

Gouffier in this matter concluded the Treaty of Noyon; and Politicians judged
that he lost in it as much reputation as Chievres had acquired. And truly if we
may judge of the satisfaction of the two Kings, with their Plenipotentiaries,
by the reward which they gave them; it is certain on the one hand, that
Gouffier received none of Francis the First; and on the other, that Chievres
was so well recompensed by Charles, that he became the richest Subject in
Christendom. Maximilian the First and Philip had already given him the
forfeiture of the Estate of the house of Gaure, the Government of Nivelle, the
Collar of the Golden Fleece, the great Bailliage of Haynault, and two thousand
Crowns for his extraordinary Embassy in France in the year One Thousand Five
Hundred and One, where he had made himself known to Louis the Twelfth,
according to his value, though there was nothing concluded in the Peace which
he went to Negotiate betwixt his most Christian Majesty and Ferdinand the
Catholic King. Charles added to these, by his Letters Patents of the twenty
third of June, C^e Thousand Five Hundred and Seventeen, the charges of High
Admiral of the Kingdom of Naples: of Captain General of his Armies by Sea, of
al^ the Kingdoms, Territories and Principalities of his Catholic Majesty: o^
High Chamberlain: and of chief Minister of State: and by other Letters Patents
of the fifteenth of December the same year, the Dutchies of Sovia and Atri i^
the Kingdom of Naples: the particula^ Government of the Town of Escluse it
Flanders: the erection of the Barony o^ Arscot into a Marquisat: a Company o^
an hundred Armed men maintained i^ time of Peace, as well as War; and lastly,
the erection of the Lands of Beaumont into a County.

The multitude of these favors is upon two accounts remarkable: First, because
Charles was not liberal; and that besides, he had the more reason to divid^ his
bounty amongst several persons, tha^ never Prince was so well served as he was,
and by consequence was obliged to give so many Rewards as he: and secondly,
because Chievres, as has been observed before, never begged any thing of him,
neither for himself nor his Relations, and thought it enough to deserve from a
grateful Prince the Favors that he heaped upon him.

Seeing the accommodation of Noyon had surmounted all the obstacles that could
obstruct Charles in taking possession of his maternal Estates, he had not so
great cause any more to fear the excess of Authority which Cardinal Ximenes
took to himself in Spain; and Chievres was of the opinion, that he should be
let alone to do so, provided his actions struck neither directly nor indirectly
at the personal advantages of his Catholic Majesty. The Cardinal on his side
vied in gratitude; and served Charles with as great application, as if he had
been indebted to him for the Regency. He obliged the Grandees of Castille to
receive his Orders, and to execute them with as much expedition and submission,
as if they had had their King in the midst of Spain; and seeing he foresaw that
those Grandees, who had a design to revolt, could find but two plausible
pretexts for so doing, one upon account of the Queen Germana, and the other on
the part of the Infanta; he caused both to be so narrowly observed, and yet
treated them so civilly, that he took from them no less the occasions of
attempting against his administration, than the grounds of complaining of him.

It has been observed, that Queen Germana de Foix was not tempted with
ambition, and coveted no more, but to live pleasantly, and without trouble, in
Feasting and Dancing. The late Catholic King left her at his death by a
Codicil, fifty thousand Ducats of Rent, (besides her Dowry) assigned upon the
Kingdom of Naples; and if she had not been punctually paid it, the Arragonese
would have taken it ill, as an affront done to the memory of their Hereditary
King, and have revenged themselves by raising troubles in Castille, or by
fomenting those which they found raised there to their hand. In the mean time
King Ferdinand on the one hand had left the Royal Treasury empty; and on the
other the Kingdom of Naples, as affairs stood then, was not able to pay the
Catholic Queen the Sum that it was Rated at; because the French having
marched into Italy for the recovery of the Duchy of Milan, Raimond of
Cardonna, Viceroy of Naples, was apprehensive that they might march next
against him, and that he might not be surprised, had made extraordinary levies
of Soldiers, which had drained not only the Revenues of the Crown, but also the
purses of all the private persons who had been willing to lend him money. The
question was, how all these Creditors should be paid; and if it had not been
done with all expedition, considering the juncture of a minority, they would
not have failed to have risen. All that Spain had from Naples was set apart for
their re-imbursement; and Cardinal Ximenes, as bold as he was, durst not have
employed so necessary a Fund for other uses. Nevertheless the Queen importuned
him to be paid quarterly; and the only expedient he found to satisfy her, was
to pay her with his own money, upon assurances which Chievres sent him under
the hand of the Catholic King, that what he laid out for his Majesty upon that
account, should be faithfully repaid him.

The Infanta put the Cardinal to greater trouble, because he was still
possessed with a fancy, that he should one day Reign in Castille, and that
others labored to feed him in that conceit. Whilst he was a hunting, an
Apparition had presented it self before him in the shape of a Hermit, which
told him as from God, that he should be Monarch of all Spain, and presently
disappeared, having left him in an anxious expectation of the future His Vision
he had communicated to the Marquess Denia his Governor, and to the Bishop
Alvaro Osorio his Tutor; and as men easily believe what they desire, and are
not undeceived but very late, so the Governor and Tutor promised themselves
the chief Dignities of Spain upon that idle Prediction. Their whimsey was not
the less durable for being so ill grounded; and neither the last Will of King
Ferdinand, nor the public recognition of the Archduke Charles, as King by the
Estates of both Monarchies, were sufficient to undeceive them. They constantly
solicited Ximenes to give them leave to carry back the Infanto to the Town of
Simancas, appointed for his Education; and though this Cardinal did not as yet
foresee their real design, yet he suspected it, and plainly told them that the
person of the Infanto was so dear to him, that there might be fault found with
his administration, if he let him go out of his sight. It was soon after
discovered, that his distrust was not without cause; and that it was the
intention of the chief Officers of the Infanto to expect at Simancas the
favorable juncture which Heaven had promised, and in the mean time to engage
into the parties of that young Princes as many of the Grandees as possibly they
could, without discovering themselves too much: The Spies whom the Cardinal
entertained about them, informed him of all the proceedings of the Marquess and
Bishop; and in all appearance it was to make such reports continue, that he
long detained the Infanto at Madrid under various pretexts. But when he would
no longer amuse him, he told him plainly, that his presence was so necessary
for the public good, that he would not absent himself from the place where the
Council of State was kept, without disobliging the Catholic King his Brother.
When he thus spoke, he observed the looks of the Marquess and Bishop; and
perceiving that it put them to extreme pain, he took measures to prevent the
Infanto's being carried away from him. The cautions that he used were so
quaint, that this young Prince and his Servants were under restraint without
perceiving it.

So that there being no more danger from the two chief persons of the State;
the Cardinal in the following manner reduced into order the most considerable
of the Grandees. This was Don Pedro Porto Carero, called the Deuff, who had
carried on a long intriegue to get himself chosen Great Master of the Order of
S. James after the death of King Ferdinand. In the motives of the disgrace of
the Great Captain.
He was Brother to the Duke of Escalone, and an intimate friend of the Great
Captain Gonsalvo, who had made him privy to the Bulls which heretofore he had
obtained from Pope Julius the Second, for that Mastery, in case he outlived
the Catholic King. The Great Captain dying before his Majesty, Porto Carero
supposed that seeing the Court of Rome had granted Gonsalvo the Bulls we have
been mentioning, it appeared that that Court had a design by all means to
disunite those three great Masteries from the Crown of Castille; and that by
consequence such a favor having been granted, not so much in consideration of
the particular merit of him that had obtained it, as for fear of rendering the
Kings of Castille too powerful, Porto Carero had ground to hope for it, though
his personal qualities came not near those of the Great Captain. He had credit
at the Court of Leo the Tenth; and he employed it so dexterously, that he
obtained from his Holiness Bulls conform to those which had been granted by
Julius, but upon condition still not to make use of them till after the death
of Ferdinand. He had not as yet received them when his Catholic Majesty died,
but a few days after they arrived; and there being no juncture more favorable
to him, than the division betwixt the Cardinal and the Governors of the
Infanto; he wrote to all the Commanders of the Order to meet in the City of
Compostella in Galicia, there to hold a Chapter for receiving him in quality of
Great Master, conform to the Bulls sent him from the Pope. The chief Commanders
were his Kinsmen or Allies; and besides, it was so much their interest, that
the Great Mastery should be cut off from the Crown, that they made no scruple
to obey him, seeing in that case there was none of them who might not hope to
be raised to it, either by merit or faction: whereas they must all be
frustrated, if it continued united to the Crown.

However the Assembly could not be kept so secret, but that the Cardinal had
notice of it; and since there was a necessity of carrying high to chastize the
attempt of Porto Carero, or not at all to meddle in it; he sent the Alcaide
Villafanno with Forces to put a stop to the Chapter by fair means or foul. The
Commanders, who were not prepared to fight, separated so soon as the Alcaide
had signified to them the Orders of the Cardinal; and pretended to submit
willingly to the Authority which they would not have regarded, if it had been
unarmed. The Cardinal having sent them back to their several Commanderies,
caused them to be so narrowly observed there, that it was impossible for them
afterward to meet again, till the new Catholic King had obtained from the
Pope the three great Masteries, as vacant by the death of his Grandfather. But
the counter-blows in Politics are sometimes more dangerous than the blows.

The Nobility of Castille took it ill that the Cardinal had so imperiously
dispersed the Assembly of Galicia, and accused him for having in that
particular usurped a power which was not given him, neither by the Testament of
the late King, nor by the Laws of the Monarchy whereof he was the Regent. The
Grandees made it a point of honor, not to suffer the continuance of a
procedure so unsuitable to a Priest and Monk, and took the first occasion that
they found to shake off a yoke which they called Tyrannical. The occasion was
this, It had come into Ximenes his mind at an unseasonable time, to endeavor
the reformation of three abuses, which in all likelihood ought to have been
born with in the absence of the Sovereign, if the Maxims of common Politics
had been followed. The first was of some Officers of Court, who by favor had
obtained an augmentation of their Salaries: the second of Pensions granted to
Courtiers of Castille and Arragon, who were known not to be deserving, or not
to have merited them by honest courses; and the third consisted in recovering
Crown Lands that had been alienated, upon occasion of the Conquests of Grenada,
Naples and Navarre.

Before Ximenes put his design in execution, he had demanded the advice of
Chievres, who counseled him to stay till the Catholic King were come into
Castille: But whether it was that he thought himself strong enough to bring
about so bold a project without the assistance of his Master, or that he
imagined Chievres envied him the glory which he might thereby obtain; he went
on still with his work. He moderated at first, with pretty good success, the
new augmentations of Salaries; and the Grandees of Spain were very well pleased
with the reduction of Wages to the Ancient standard, because on the one hand
the high Nobility had hardly any concern in that; and on the other, those who
were prejudiced by the Cardinals regulation, were satisfied to repine at it in
secret. The retrenching of Pensions caused him more trouble, by reason that the
murmuring was more universal and more public: But the recovery of the Crown
Lands reached too high not to meet with terrible impediments at the very first
step. It was pretended that the Catholic King must not only enter again into
the Lands sold at an under-rate, or given in gratuities, but also into those
which the detainers could not make out to have been alienated by good
Contracts, and for lawful causes. There were but few Lords of the high
Nobility, who possessed not some of this nature; and if they had no favor
showed them, it was almost certain they would be excited to a Revolt.
Nevertheless they were summoned as well as others, and a shortenough time
assigned them for making good their Titles. The indignation that this wrought
in them gave occasion to Pedro Giron, eldest Son to the Count of Vregna, to
think that the time was now come for recovering the Duchy of Medina Sidonia,
which he had been turned out of.

For understanding this Affair which raised all Spain almost, we must know that
Don Juan de Gusman, Duke of Medina Sidonia Espoused in first marriage the
eldest Daughter of the Duke of Bejar, by whom he had a Son called Henry, and a
Daughter named Mentia: Henry was importent, and Mentia married to the Count of
Vregna, had by him Pedro Giron. The Duke of Medina Sidonia enjoyed not long his
first Wife, having lost her the third year after their Marriage. He was still
young, and his first alliance had given him often occasion of seeing the second
Daughter of the Duke of Bejar his Sister-in-Law. He had been extremely much
taken with her; and if the inclination that he had for her remained within the
bounds of a bare respect so long as he was married to her Sister, it
degenerated into love so soon as he became a Widower. He was without
contradiction the richest Lord of Andalusia, had lived very well with his
former Wife; offered to marry her Sister upon the same conditions, that is to
say, without a portion: The great men of Spain minded not much at that time the
proximity of blood in their Alliances; and the Duke of Bejar had a numerous
Family. These five considerations moved Bejar to condescend to accept of Medina
Sidonia for his Son-in-Law a second time; and seeing all ways were taken for
obtaining a dispensation from the Holy See in the most favorable Form that
then was in fashion, In the History of Medina Sidonia.
it was at length granted. Of the second Marriage he had a Son famous in
History, by the name of Alvaro de Gusman; and the Duke his Father bred him up
as the next lawful Heir of his vast Estate, so soon as the impotency of Henry
de Gusman, the only Son of his first Bed, came to be known. Alvaro grew to be
so accomplished a Lord, that the Catholic King Ferdinand pitched upon him for
a Husband to Anne of Arragon, lawful Daughter to Alphonso of Arragon his
Majesty's Natural Son: But there are few signal Incests amongst Christians,
which wholly escape unpunished till the other World; and God commonly begins in
this by dreadful chastisements, to show his aversion to such promiscuous
mixtures, which he only suffered in the beginning of the World, and for the
multiplication of Mankind. Pedro Giron, eldest Son of Mentia, Daughter by the
first Marriage to the Duke of Medina Sidonia, claimed to be sole and universal
Heir to his maternal Grandfather, and alleged for his reasons, that Alvaro de
Gusman his Uncle was illegitimate: that he was the odious offspring of a
monstrous conjunction: That Divine and Humane Laws equally condemned the
Marriage of two Sisters; and that if they had been sometimes suffered in
Christian Religion, it was only for causes that concerned the public, certain
and present good of the State, and Royal Persons: That there was no such thing
in the case in question, and that by consequence the Dispensation obtained from
Rome was null. But for all that the Catholic King gave his Granddaughter to
Alvaro Gusman, and made answer to those who would have dissuaded him from it,
that it belonged not to Pedro Giron to quarrel at the Dispensation obtained by
his Grandfather; and that though there might be ground to find fault with it,
yet the presence of his Majesty and of the Queen Isabelle, who signed the
contract, had supplied all defects of Law and Fact that would have intervened.

The Duke of Medina Sidonia died sometime after the Marriage of Alvaro his Son,
who took possession of all the Estate of the Family, without any other
opposition than that of some protestations in writing made in behalf of Pedro
Giron. But after the death of the Catholic King; when Alvaro had lost in him
his greatest supporter, Pedro Giron thought the time was come for him to take
possession of the Estate of the Family of Medina Sidonia. He got of his Friends
what money they thought fit to lend him: he implored the assistance of his
nearest Relations, his Father excusing himself to engage in the quarrel,
because of his great Age: He found a great many young men, who had known him in
the Armies, disposed to assist him; and from those three stocks he procured
Forces enough to lay a regular Siege before St. Lucar, one of the most noted
Towns of Andalusia, because of the commodiousness of its Harbor. Seeing it
properly belonged to the Dukes of Medins Sidonia, and that it was part of the
Entail of their eldest Sons, which could neither be sold nor morgaged; the
Kings of Castille had no Garrison in it, and only kept one in the Castle which
commanded the place, nor had they done so, till first they gave the Dukes of
Medina Sidonia authentic Declarations, that it was not for any pretensions
they had to it, but only for the security of the Coast of Andalusia, the most
important of their Monarchy. Alvaro put himself into the Town to defend it; and
received there so great a re-inforcement by Pontio d'Ar^os his Cousin German,
that Pedro Giron despairing to take it in a long time by the usual ways,
endeavored to corrupt Gonez de Solis, who commanded the Castle. Solis was
inflexible; and all that Pedro Giron could draw from him, was that ^he late
Catholic King, when he put ^im in St. Lucar, had commanded him ^o live in good
correspondence with the Duke Alvaro, and to act jointly with ^im in all things
that were not contrary ^o the interest of the Monarchy of Spain ^n general, and
of Castille in particular. He told him that he could not excuse himself from
obeying that Order, until ^e had another from Flanders, or that ^he Cardinal
commanded him to obey Pedro Giron; and that there was no other ^xpedients but
these for entering into St. Lucar, unless he thought it better to ^orce his way
in.

Thus the Siege drew in length; and Kimenes being persuaded that the
disposition of the late King must by all means ^e maintained, wrote to
Chievres, that that was the only way to hinder the Nobility of Spain from
rising; and that as ^hey were naturally inclined to Idleness, so they would
infallibly betake themselves to it again, when they saw their first attempt
suppressed with as much authority in the absence of the Catholic King, as if
his Majesty were present, and acted in person. The Cardinal then prayed
Chievres to procure what he was about to do, to be approved in the Council of
Bruxelles, and enclosed a Letter for the King, In the Letters of Ximenes to
Chievres.
which contained the same thing expressed only in more respectful terms; and
without any other caution, in a few days he mustered together the old Troops
which he kept in several places in a readiness; and sen^ them so suddenly to
St. Lucar, that they fell upon Pedro Giron before he had notice that they were
in the field. The consternation which seized the Besiege^ at the sight of them,
in a moment broke all the measures that had been taken for carrying the Duchy
of Medina Sidoni^ Don Pedro was abandoned of all his Soldiers, and himself
forced to fly to a Country House, where he was no^ known to be, there to
continue till his Friends should make his peace with Ximenes. The cause of so
odd an adventure was, because most of the Besiegers were Volunteers, and only
served in hopes, as they were made believe, that the Cardinal would approve
what they did. They knew him to be extraordinarily jealous of his Authority,
and inexorable when once he had been constrained to come to force. From thence
they concluded, that if the Besiegers were defeated, those of them that
remained would suffer by the hand of the Executioner. By their small number in
comparison of those who came to the assistance of Duke Alvaro, they judged that
the match was not equal, and thereupon disbanded themselves, expecting till
Pedro Giron could make his party stronger. They were not altogether mistaken in
their conjecture; and the Enemies of Ximenes labored with so much application
and success to make him receive an affront in the affair of Medina Sidonia,
that Giron thought, having got his Uncle the Constable of Castille, and many
other Grandees to League with him, that he had no more to fear, and that he
might securely brave the Cardinal. He went to Madrid, supposing that that
Prelate extraordinarily nice in matter of offense, and easy to be provoked by
slights offered to his Dignity, would send him Orders to be gone with all
expedition, and thereby furnish him with a pretext, as he desired, to complain
of him. But the Cardinal, who saw into Giron's thoughts, carried himself as if
he had not known of his arrival at Madrid, or as if he had not been concerned
at it. He gave him time to try his patience; and Giron finding his first trick
baffled by the affected insensibility of Ximenes, invented a second. He sent
word to the Cardinal, that he was come to Madrid, upon no other design, but to
visit his Relations and Friends, and that he would return immediately after. He
expected that the Cardinal would have replied to the Gentleman who brought him
that word, That Giron was not so great a man, but that he might have come
himself, and given him the first notice of his arrival: But the Cardinal
dissembled still, and made no other reply but, In a good time.

Nothing so much displeases those that seek for a quarrel, as a moderation
practiced most unseasonably as to them, that is to say, at the time when they
are most exasperated. Giron whom Ximenes punished more severely by neglecting
him than if he had put him in prison, resolved to have his turn, and to be even
with him by a third way. He told before some, who he knew would acquaint the
Cardinal with it, the true cause why he had not gone to see that Prelate,
saying, that it was to put a difference betwixt the Catholic King and those
who had the honor to represent his person; because the Grandees of Castille,
as often as they passed by the place where their King was, were accustomed to
visit him; and if they did so in respect of the Cardinal, the Catholic King
might have cause to find fault with them for it. That was reported to Ximenes,
who wondering no more at that than at all the rest, forced Giron to attack him
in a fair way, by making a great party against him upon the old pretexts of
discontent which the high Nobility had against him. The Constable of Castille
was the first that engaged in it, because there was a talk of taking from him a
Royal right which he had upon the Coasts of Andalusia: The Duke of Bonevento
was drawn in next, out of spite, because he had been hindered to finish a Fort
which he had begun in the Territory of Cigalez: The Duke of Albuquerque, and
the Duke of Medina Coeli followed their example, because of Rents which they
had out of the Crown Lands; and the Bishop of Signensca was the fifth, upon the
account that being born in Portugal, he apprehended to lose his Bishopric
lying in Castille, supposing the Cardinal might be inclined of himself, or
might be desired to re-establish the Castillians in the possession of one of
their fairest Privileges, which consisted in that neither their Offices nor
Benefices could be held by strangers.

There remained no more to raise the other Heads of the high Nobility, but to
gain the Duke of Infantado, the chief of the Family of Mendosa, to whom the
other Lords of Spain yielded in Birth, Estate, Riches and Merit. It seemed no
difficult thing to dispose him to a Revolt, by reason of what had passed
betwixt Ximenes and him. He had heretofore courted the Alliance of that
Cardinal; and had offered to him notwithstanding the extreme disproportion of
their Families, to marry Diego de Mendosa his Brothers Son with Isabelle of
Cisnero, the Cardinals Niece. It is not known whether or no the Duke was
tempted with ambition, or that he only intended to unite more closely with that
Favorite; or lastly, if he acted in prospect of augmenting the vast Estates of
his Family, by joining thereto the great Treasure which the Cardinal was
thought to have, with his Heiress: But it is certain that the Duke himself one
day made the proposition to the Cardinal; and that he surprised at the honor
that was done ^im, incomparably greater than he durst ^ave hoped for, and
wanting time to ^ok upon the reverse of the Medal, which was shown him by the
fair side, granted the Duke's desire. But he re^ented it so soon as going into
his Closet, and calling to mind what had befallen ^im; he found that he had
made too much haste, and that self-love had so far ^linded him, as to make him
guilty of a ^ross fault against the maxims of quainest policy. He had exposed
himself by ^iving his consent too soon to the jealou^e which Ferdinand the
Catholic King ^is Master, who was then alive, had al^eady conceived of him,
when his Majesty should perceive that he renounced his ^ncient maxims; and that
instead of ^ontinuing to declare himself against the ^igh Nobility, he began at
long run to Ally with them, by giving his Niece and Heiress to the Nephew and
Heir of ^he Duke, who had all the Lords of Spain for his Kinsmen or Allies:
Whence Kimenes concluded, In the Elogies of the House of Mendosa.
that if is Majesty had endeavou^ed to depose him, when he ^ad no reasonable
cause for it, he would for the future set about it with so much the more
ground, that all the Spaniards were persuaded, that if the Treasure of the
Cardinal, which was given out to be sufficient to raise and maintain a
formidable Army, were joined to the power and credit of the Duke of Infantado,
the Heirs of both together might render themselves Masters of Castille, if they
had the ambition.

That was enough to make the Cardinal eat his words; and seeing he never wanted
ways to retrieve a false step when he had time to do it, he excused the
irregularity of his word in so many different manners; that if the Duke was no^
fully satisfied, yet he had no sufficient occasion to break with him. They were
then, to speak properly, neither Friend nor Enemies when Giron's party proposed
to have the Duke to head them; and the six before mentioned Grandees wen^ upon
that design to wait on him in the Town of Guada Caira, where he past the Winter
in the year One Thousand Five Hundred and Seventeen.

They represented to him, that the Spanish Nobility had gained a great
reputation in the World, by delivering their Country from the Tyranny of the
Mores, but that they were about to lose it, i^ they persisted in the
insensibility that at present they were in: That they had already suffered but
too long a man of base birth, who had judged himself so incapable of
commanding, that he had made a vow of obedience so long as he lived; and who
having only learnt to govern in the Cloisters where Authority is wholly
absolute, imagined that the Grandees of Spain were to be Ruled as absolutely,
as Cordeliers of the strictest observance: That if the power he took to himself
had any ground in the Laws of Spain, it ought to be submitted unto; but that
these Laws favored not a Monk, who had only raised and did maintain himself by
violating them: That he could show no other title for his pretended Regency,
but the Article of the last Will and Testament of the late Catholic King,
which bequeathed it to him; but that there were three things to be found fault
with in that Article, the least whereof was sufficient to evacuate the
execution thereof. First, that it was suggested by Carvaial the Counselor of
State, to whom the Cardinal for reward had promised the Bishopric of Siguenca,
so soon as he had outed the Portuguese Prelate, who was provided to it contrary
to the custom of Castille. Secondly, that the Cardinal stretched his power
infinitely beyond what he said was given him, which stood in need of no proof,
seeing it was a thing so public that no body was ignorant of it; and lastly,
that granting it were true, that the late Catholic King had granted him the
Regency in the full extent that he exercised it in, yet he ought not to be
suffered to enjoy it, seeing by the fundamental Laws of the Monarchy of
Castille, the Royal Authority devolved upon the high Nobility during the time
of minority or infirmity of their Kings, when they were of long continuance;
and if the Nobility condescended that the late King Ferdinand should retain the
Government for life, yet it followed not that they had given him leave to
dispose of it after his death.

The Duke of Infantado answered, that he had at least as much ground to
complain of the Cardinal, as any other Grandee of Castille; and that his
Ancestors having left him considerable Estates of that nature, which was
pretended to be Lands of the Crown; by consequence he had occasion to be
apprehensive that they would begin at him in retrieving them, that others might
think it the less strange when they were dispossessed next, that no favor had
been shown to the most considerable Lord of Spain. But that notwithstanding he
was not of the opinion that any thing should be attempted in prejudice of the
last Will of the late King, nor contrary to the orders of the Catholic King
Reigning, though it was known that they were only provisional in what concerned
Ximenes: That that Cardinal had more experience and more ready money than they;
and that there was no doubt to be made, but that he would root them out
altogether, if they gave him occasion to put the people on his side, by letting
them know that the Lords of Castille struck at the memory of the late King, who
had chosen him for Regent, and at the Authority of the new King, who had
confirmed the Regency unto him: That it was then absolutely necessary to find
out another expedient, than that of violence for degrading of him; and that
when such an one were found, the Duke of Infantado should willingly declare
himself for the common cause against the Favorite.

That was not an expedient to be fallen upon at first; In the Chronicle of the
M^ndosa's.
and the Lords of Castille after many days thinking of it, found none other
that could relish with the Duke of Infantado, but a Petition to the new King
Charles, which all of them signed, beseeching him to give them another Regent
than Ximenes. It was an easy matter to foresee that it would not be granted;
and that his Majesty would wave giving an answer to it until his arrival in
Spain, whither he promised to go day after day. The Cardinal was so sure of it,
that he did not give himself the trouble of writing about it, neither to the
King nor Chievres. Nay, his foresight went a little further; and as he was
exceeding watchful to make the best of occurrences that were capable to
increase his Power, so the Conspiracy of the Nobles offered him two means for
that, which he did not let slip. The first was to lay before Chievres in a long
Letter the absolute necessity of his Catholic Majesty's sending him an^
unlimited power, if it was expected that he should in a signal manner reduce so
many malcontents to reason: And secondly, to put himself in a posture, not
only not to be surprised, but also to stifle the Sedition so soon as it should
begin to break out.

Seeing it had been chiefly by the valor of the Castillian Nobility that the
Mores were driven out of Spain, they ^ad for a long time enjoyed the privilege
of carrying Arms both for themselves and Attendants, which Towns^eople and
Peasants had not, but when ^hey were employed by Gentlemen. If that custom had
continued, the Cardinal ^ad one time or other been oppressed, because he could
not be able in all places through which he was to go, to have Armed men enough
in readiness to resist ^he frequent attempts of the Nobility upon his person:
Whereas if he put Arms into the hands of the Plebeians, he would ^repare for
himself in all places a vast ^umber of Guards, who would think themselves
exceedingly obliged to him ^or that favor, and would not be wan^ing to him in
time of need. He took ^he occasion from the descent that the ^amous Corsair
Barbarossa had then made (...) the Kingdom of Granada, from whence he had
carried away several ^housand Spaniards; and thereupon he ^ublished an Edict in
name of Queen ^ean and King Charles, hearing that since ^he Nobility whose
Lands were upon the Coasts of Spain, and the Garrisons which ^he Catholic
Kings were wont to main^ain there, were not sufficient to hinder ^he spoils of
the Infidels, it was necessa^y to remedy such surprises for the future, by
opposing so many men capable of resisting the Turkish Pirates, that they should
not dare to set foot on Shore in a Country which they should find so well
guarded: That their Catholic Majesty's had not thought it fit to Arm the
Peasants, because that would take them off from laboring the Land, nor all the
Inhabitants of Towns neither, by reason that Commerce might thereby be
interrupted; but that they had only chosen the honest Burghers, who having much
to lose, would take the greater care to keep it: That those who would list
themselves in that Militia, should be exempted from the harder offices of the
State: That they should afterward have privileges granted to them
proportionable to the Services which they rendered: That care should be taken
to set Officers over them to instruct them; and that all that was demanded of
them at present, was to perform exercise every Sunday.

The Nobility at first perceived the intention of Ximenes, and with all their
might opposed it. The Towns where they had got greater credit than he, would
not suffer the Commissaries appointed for the Musters, to put the Edict in
execution, and the others received them with open Arms; for besides that they
were acceptable to the Burghers for the novelty of the Order which they brought
them, they rendered them masters of the State, and opened to them the fair way,
which was that of Arms, of raising themselves above the condition wherein they
were born, and of meriting the most important charges in the Monarchy: which in
progress of time would have so debased the Nobility, that scarcely would there
have been any more talk of them.

Thus Castille was divided into two Factions; and as there are Mountains that
cut it almost into two equal parts, so the other side of the Hills was almost
wholly for the Nobility, and this side for Ximenes. The Cardinals party was not
the least, seeing he had the bravest and most expert Soldiers of his
Countrymen for him; and the only circumspection he was to use, was to hinder
his Enemies from possessing the Court of Bruxelles with bad impressions of his
design. In prospect of that he wrote to Chievres, praying him to represent to
the Catholic King in full Council, that there was no other expedient than what
he had put in practice, for preserving his two Monarchies entire for him, and
without a farthing charge, until his arrival in Spain: That it was no new thing
in Castille to Arm the People; and that the Kings his Predecessors had done it
as often as it was necessary to stop or punish the insolency of the Nobility:
That King Henry the Fourth, his Grandfathers Brother, had put it in practice;
and that the Historians of Spain impute all the misfortunes that befell him to
no other cause, but the pernicious counsel that was given him, and which he had
followed, in disbanding the Plebeian Troops which he had raised, and putting
Gentlemen in their place, who had shamefully betrayed him.

Chievres approved the project of Ximenes, and got it to be approved by
Charles, but it was for another reason than what the Cardinal had mentioned in
his Letter. The actual possession of the Low Countries, the Hereditary
Provinces of the House of Austria in Germany, which were to fall to his
Catholic Majesty after the death of his paternal Grandfather, and the Empire
which he intended to canvass for, were three very important motives that
suffered him not to make a long stay in Spain, and would in all appearance call
him from thence as soon as he should be acknowledged there for King: Whence
Chievres concluded, that it would be impossible then to conceal it from the
Nobility, that they could not long enjoy the presence of Charles; and that in
that case they would make it their whole care to deliver themselves from the
subjection under which they pretended the late Kings Ferdinand and Isabelle had
held them, and to re-establish themselves in the right; or to say better, in
the licentiousness which they had taken to themselves many Ages before, of
securely revolting when ever the whimsey took them in the head. Their
Rebellions, indeed, had been frequent, yet they never proceeded to the
deposition of Kings; because these Princes having never gone out of their
Territories, came seasonably enough to the places where the Revolt had begun,
to suppress it at first; and as they had always reserved to themselves Friends
amongst the discontented Grandees, so their defection was never universal:
Whereas if they had a mind to rise in the absence of Charles, nothing could
cross their union; and the Infanto Ferdinand being amongst them, they would
choose him for their King, which must needs give birth to a War that could no
otherwise be ended, but by the death of one of the two Brothers, whom the
Castillian Nobility had set together by the Ears. It was therefore, in the
opinion of Chievres, a masterpiece of State Policy, above all things to
prevent that Revolt of the Nobility, by means the less suspected, that the
Catholic King had no hand in it; and the means offered freely without being
invented or sought out by the Council of Bruxelles. There was no more to be
done, but to confirm by Royal Authority the Militia of the honest Burghers,
which in every Town would oppose the attempts of the Nobility, and keep the
People in duty; and as Ximenes denied not to be the inventer of it, so would he
bear all the hatred, and all the benefit thereof would redound to his Catholic
Majesty,

This discourse animated with the vigor which Chievres used to back the
propositions that he would have pass without contradiction, was applauded so in
the Council of Bruxelles, and the conduct of Ximenes, as that the settling of
the Militia of honest Burghers in Castille, was unanimously approved. He
received praises for it; Letters were directed to the Kings Officers to see it
put in execution; and those that opposed the same, were declared guilty of High
Treason, of what quality soever they were. Ayala was sent to the Cardinal to
carry him the News; and the Nobles seeing themselves abandoned of the Court,
were soon divided. The Constable was the first of them that made his
reconciliation with Ximenes; and the rest, in stead of taking it ill that he
had forsaken their company, prayed him to make their peace. He served as
Mediator for the Grandees of his Faction; and the Cardinal having embraced
them, thought it necessary for hindering them from ruining his work, when any
occasion offered, to establish in every Town of Spain four new Syndicks, to
take care of the subsistence of the Militia, and to inform the Court of any
enterprise that might be made for suppressing it. It is amazing, that the
greatest men as well as others should sometimes be subject to the fault of
being more touched with injuries than favors, and more apt to take offense
than to be grateful. Ximenes knew very well, that he owed the preservation of
his Dignity, and perhaps of his Life also, to the last Letters written in his
favors from Bruxelles; and that if they had not seconded him according to his
desire, he must have been over-poured in the business of the Militia: But
instead of taking it by that handle which showed his own weakness, he took it
by another that pleased him. That was the obligation which the Catholic King
had to him, for having so entirely brought under the Nobility of Spain, that
his Majesty might for the time to come absent himself from his Maternal
Dominions as long as he pleased, and take his own time to canvass for the
Empire. He thought that having done so much for his Master, that young Prince
ought to do any thing for him; and renewed his instances for obtaining an
unlimited Power, not with an express declaration as he had hither to done, that
he would take that savor as a pure grace of his Majesty, but in the strain
that he used to demand those things which were his due.

Chievres knew the temper of the Spaniards, to be apt to pass from a
haughtiness that is natural to them, to an extreme contempt of their Sovereign,
so soon as ever they think they have persuaded him that he cannot be without
them. He told the Catholic King, that if in the present juncture he granted
Ximenes what he desired, he would render him insupportable, and confirm him in
an absolute independance on his Majesty. That he would consult him no more, but
as in course; concerning what he was to do: That he would not read the Orders
which he might receive from him; or if he did read them, it would only be after
he had acted in his own way, and merely out of curiosity to see if they were
conform to what he had done: whereas if the power of the Cardinal were at
present left within the limits to which the late King confined it, and from
time to time afterward augmented, according as circumstances might require, as
had been done in the case of the Militia; the Cardinal would be more pliant,
and the Gentlemen would not so impatiently bear his administration. The
Catholic King judged the advice to be sound, and refused Ximenes, who
suspecting that Chievres had been against him, reciprocally opposed Chievres in
an affair that follows.

The Indians were too weak to support the digging in Mines and other painful
labor that the Spaniards put them to. They commonly died within six or seven
weeks after they had been employed in that drudgery, and the strongest of them
in that case did not outlive two months. Most frequently they were forced to
labor; and the inhumanity of constraining them in this manner to shorten their
days for the profit of others, obliged Chievres to look out for means of easing
them. He hit upon a great many; and that which he most approved, because it was
least chargeable to the Spaniards, was to procure them other slaves at a cheap
rate. The greatest traffic on the Coast of Guinee consisted in Men, whom they
went to buy from all parts of the World. Fathers sold their Children, and the
Husbands their Wives. And these Slaves being Blacks, they were called Negroes:
They were strong: labor, how hard soever, was no strange thing to them,
because they were accustomed to it from their youth: They were subject to few
diseases; and though they were exposed to all the injuries of the Seasons, yet
they lived long, and by consequence enriched those who bought them for a Crown
a head, provided they were not used with too much severity: But if they were so
used, they immediately destroyed themselves, by stopping their own breath upon
no other account but to vex their pitiless Masters. Chievres caused six hundred
of them to be bought, and sent into America, where the Spaniards who lived in
that new part of the World were informed of the advantage they might have in
making use of those Black Slaves, seeing they might have them so cheap. But
Cardinal Ximenes found a great deal to be said against it; and pretended that
if the Spaniards by not making use of the Slaves of Guinee had the displeasure
to see their Works many times unfinished, they had, to make amends for that,
the satisfaction to be assured that the West-Indians, whom they brought into
their Houses, would never wrong them, by conspiring and rising against them:
Whereas the Negroes, who were as malicious as strong, would no sooner perceive
themselves to be more numerous in the new World than the Spaniards, but that
they would lay their heads together to put the Chains upon them, which now they
carried for them.

Ayala was sent back to the Court of Bruxelles to exaggerate that
inconvenience, but Chievres was not satisfied with it. He thought it was
something else that set Ximenes at work, and attributed to him a more refined
consideration. He drew it from the jealousy of the Spaniards for the Indies,
which went so far, as not to suffer any other Nation but themselves to set
footing there, lest they might have a mind to divide the Wealth thereof with
them. Nevertheless if Negroes were transported thither, there was ground to
foresee that they would increase and multiply much; hard labor and bad usage
not hindering that people from being extraordinarily fruitful; and it being the
interest of those who bought them to marry them together, thereby to augment
the number of their Slaves: It would no longer then depend on the prudence of
Spain to resist the multitude of Negroes. They would no sooner know their own
strength, but that they would think of recovering their liberty; and if their
Insurrection prospered in one Region of America, it would soon become
universal, by the assistance that those who had freed themselves would give to
the rest, to make them revolt after their example.

Besides, the Spaniards were not sit for transporting of Slaves from one
extremity of the World to the other, and had not shipping enough to supply
America and Peru with sufficient numbers; whence it followed, that in that case
they stood in need of the Flemings and Hollanders, the Subjects of the
Catholic King; and that so those People getting more knowledge in the Indies
than it was fit they should, would infallibly labor to settle there. However
the Catholic King notwithstanding the Remonstrance of Ximenes, sent to the
Island of Hispaniola the Negrees which Chievres had caused to be bought: But
sive years after he had occasion to repent of it, because the Negroes revolted;
and had infallibly taken the Island, if by singular good fortune just when
their Rebellion broke out, two Spanish Captains, Melchior de Castro, and
Francis d' Avila had not come, and more by cunning than strength put them again
into Chains.

That irregularity of Chievres was probably the cause that he afterward
seconded the Cardinal in the execution of a design which appeared not to be
much juster, nor less interested, and of which nothing but humane malice
hindered the success. The Indians complained that they were used by the
Spaniards like Beasts, and the complaint was but too true. There was no Justice
nor Magistrates for them: They preached the Gospel to them in a manner that
might make them abhor it: No great care was taken to Baptize them; nor were
they more kindly used after they had received it. Ximenes proposed the sending
of Commissioners to them, Louis de Figueroa, Alphonso of St. John, Monks of the
Order of St. Jerome, and the Alcaide Manzanedo, for settling amongst the Indians
Subjects of the Monarchy of Spain, a Policy much like to that of the Pesants in
Spain; as if the three persons named had been sufficient for a work of that
importance. In the relation of the Fathers of St Jerome.
However Chievres got it to be approved in the Council of Bruxelles, and the
Commissioners set fail from the Coast of Andalusia. They arrived without any
hinderance in America; but there they found so great opposition from their
Countrymen, that they put hardly any thing of the Order which they had
received from Ximenes in execution; those who ought to have aided them by their
Authority being the first that constrained them to Embark again, and return
back to the place from whence they came.

John d' Albert had no success in the recovery of his Kingdom of Navarre,
though the Treaty of Noyon had facilitated his entry into it; and, indeed it
must be acknowledged for the justification of Chievres in the juncture we are
to speak of, that it was not his fault that that dispossessed King was not
restored. The measures that had been taken for that great design were so just,
that nothing hindered them from succeeding, but the ill luck or bad conduct of
John d' Albert. King Francis the First had suffered him to raise in the
Provinces lying betwixt the Loire and the Pyrenean Hills, an Army almost all
old Soldiers, and so much the better disciplined, that they were punctually
paid out of the moneys borrowed upon the Jewels of the Crown of N^varre. If it
had marched into that Kingdom, the Towns and Forts would have striven who
should first have opened their Gates; because four years subjection to the
Monarchy of Castille was sufficient to make those of Navarre come to themselves
again, and find their deplorable mistake in delivering themselves up to their
ancient and irreconcilable Enemies. They could not endure that their Kingdom
should be reduced into a Province; and as it was the Faction of Beaumont which
had been the cause of it, so they also were the first that endeavored to
repair the fault. The chief Gentlemen of that party wrote so submissive Letters
to John d' Albert, that in every line there appeared evident marks of sorrow
for what was past, and of more than ordinary obedience for the future. They
conjured him to return into Navarre; assured him that as soon as he were over
the Pyrenees he should find it all in Arms, and ready to increase his Forces:
They promised to make him Master at first of one half of the Kingdom, and did
not think the rest could hold out above two or three months longer. But it is
not always true that the mutual love of married persons surpasses that of their
Country; and there may be found in History almost as many Wives who have
betrayed their Husbands for the good of their Country, as have sacrificed their
Country to the welfare of their Husbands.

The Hereditary Constable of Navarre, Son and Successor to him who called the
Spaniards into it, had gone so far as to resolve in time and place convenient
to put himself at the head of a party formed to drive them out of it. It
consisted of twenty thousand men; and which was very strange, there was not one
Soldier of all that great number, who discovered the conspiracy to the
Spaniards. Had the Constable married a Navarrese woman, Navarre would not have
been reduced unto a Province to Castille, but his project was discovered by the
Castillian whom his Father had chosen him for a Wife. Pedro Maurique, Duke of
Nagera had a fair Estate in Castille, upon the borders of Navarre. The leading
men of the Faction of Beaumont could find a refuge there in case they were too
much pressed by the party of Grammont, or by John d' Albert; and the Constables
Father had no other view but that, in marrying him with Briande, Daughter to
the Duke of Nagera. But that signified nothing to him when he had put Navarre
under subjection to Ferdinand the Catholic King, and to complete the
misfortune of the young Constable his Son, it proved his utter ruin. There was
a necessity seeing he was to form a revolution in his Country that might repair
his Fathers fault, by restoring John d' Albert, that he must write an insinite
number of Letters, and receive as many. It is not known by what accident, but
one of them came to his Ladies hands, who without deliberating and considering
the consequences of what she was about to do, carried it to Ferdinand d'
Acugua, Viceroy of Navarre, who in all have sent it to Ximenes.

The Cardinal perceiving that the Conspiracy was ready formed, and that it
would suddenly break out, took two extreme resolutions very hard to be excused,
especially in a man of his character. He sent into Navarre all the Forces he
could draw together under the command of Ferdinand Vilalva, the best Officer in
War that he knew; and gave him orders at first to labor only to disperse the
Faction of Beaumont without making the leading men prisoners, to the end he
might not lose the time which he might more usefully employ in guarding the
passage of Roucevaux. If he were so successful as to defend it, and there to
cut in pieces the Army of John d' Albert, as the Gascons heretofore had
defeated the Rear-guard of Charlemagne; he had Orders, upon his return only, to
raze all the strong places of Navarre, except Pampelona, which he should secure
with a good Citadel; that if at any other time the Navarrese might have a mind
to revolt against the Kings of Castille, they might be diverted from it by the
consideration, that having no Fortresses, they would be oppressed by the
Spaniards, before the French could come to their succor. But if he could not,
upon what occasion soever, hinder John d' Albert from passing the Pyrenees, he
should in all have march back again, and set Fire to all the Towns, Castles,
Buroughs, Villages, and Country-houses of Navarre; to the end that the French
finding no subsistence there, might return as fast as they came.

Vilalva obeyed the Cardinal, In the Chronicle of Vilalva.
and yet put in execution but the first of the Orders which he had received,
because the extraordinary confidence of his adversaries gave him an easier
opportunity of overcoming them than he hoped for. John d' Albert being come to
the foot of the Pyrenees on the side of France, divided his Army into three
Bodies; and gave the first, wherein was almost the whole Faction of Grammont,
and the other Navarrese, who chose rather to be banished than to be disloyal to
him, to be commanded by Don Pedro Peralta, Marshall of Navarre. The second,
which was the main Body, was commanded by the Count and Cardinal de Foix, the
Paternal Uncles of Queen Catherine of Navarre; and John d' Albert, who by the
maxims of Military discipline at that time, ought to have been there, yet kept
in the reserve. He made a stop very unseasonably with the Rear to besiege the
Fort of St. John, when he ought to have followed close the Van and main Body,
to oblige them by his presence to stand the better upon their guard; and the
first Body knowing that the Faction of Beaumont was for them, and by
consequence not expecting to find the passages of the Pyrenees guarded, marched
with so little circumspection, that they fell wholly into the Ambushes that
Vilalva had laid for them. The Spaniards besetting them on all hands, forced
them to yield upon discretion, having scarcely fought for it: Vilalva sent the
chief of them, with the Marshall, prisoners to Castille, where, by their own
hands, or through misery, they perished. He put the rest to the Sword, because
there needed more men than he had to guard them; and falling immediately after
upon the main Body, he put it to the rout. The fugitives coming to the reserve
where John d' Albert was, put them into such a consternation, that they
immediately raised the Siege of the Castle of St. John, and retreated into the
Principality of Bearn. John d' Albert either could not or would not outlive a
second misfortune: He died for grief at Pau, and the Queen his Wife lived but
seven months after him.

Vilalva returning victorious, obeyed but too punctually the Orders which he
had received from Ximenes, in demolishing the strong places of Navarre, seeing
it cost him his life. Only one escaped his fury, which was that of Marsilla. It
belonged to Anne de Velasco, Marchioness of Falsez, who was there when one of
the Commissioners for the demolitions demanded entrance. She refused him
admittance; and gave this reason for it, that she would faithfully keep to the
young Catholic King Charles the Oath which the late Marquess her Husband had
taken to the late King, of preserving to him the Castle of Marsilla in the
condition he had received it. The Constables Lady had so much credit with
Ximenes, by means of the Duke of Nagera her Brother, to whom the Cardinal
immediately after gave the Vice-Royalty of Navarre, that she saved her Husbands
person and Estate: Nevertheless, she was so strongly persuaded that he would
never pardon the offense that she had given him in discovering the Conspiracy,
whereof he was the Head, that she left him presently after she had revealed it,
and went to her Brothers house, where she continued till she died, without ever
suffering any motion to be made to her of returning to her Husband. It appeared
by the sequel that her fear was not ill grounded, seeing the Constable having
one day met Vilalva near his Castle of Lerin, which they had been demolishing
and silling up the Ditches of, invited him to dinner in his House. Vilalva at
that time stood in extreme need of such an invitation, and besides he could not
in civility refuse it. He was but half way on his journey, and had still a long
way to go before he could come to the Castle of Eteille, whither he was going.
He therefore accepted the Constables offer, and dined in the Castle of Lerin:
But he had quickly cause to repent it, seeing he died upon his arrival at the
Castle of Eteille, in the opinion of being poisoned. There was no great care
taken in sifting the matter; and the Constable was thought sufficiently
punished by the inability he and his Faction were reduced to, of any more
rising against the Castillians, for want of places of retreat. Thus Navarre was
preserved to the Catholic King, and neither his Majesty nor Chievres had any
hand in it; and Ximenes thinking nothing impossible for him after the success
of such an enterprise, thought he might take his own course, and do his worst
to the Queen Dowager Germana de Foix, by wholly depriving her of what rendered
her considerable in Spain after the death of King Ferdinand her Husband.

It has been mentioned before, that that Prince sent her to hold the Estates
of Arragon; and the certain advice that she received of the extremity to which
he was reduced, had obliged her to make all have back again unto him. She came
only a few hours before he expired, and nevertheless timely enough to represent
to him that she was in great danger of being miserable, and even of wanting
necessaries for her subsistence, if he provided not against it before his
death: That he was obliged to do so in Conscience, seeing she was upon no other
account deprived of the Estate which belonged to her Family in France, but
because she had married him: That the late most Christian King Louis the
Twelfth, her Mothers Brother, who had promised himself great advantages by
marrying her to his Majesty, had on the contrary found that that Alliance was
more than one way fatal to him; and that Francis the First his Successor looked
upon her as another Helena, who had brought Fire into her Country: That the
last of these Monarchs had given all the Estate which she ought to inherit, to
the younger Brothers of the Lautrec Asparant, and Lescun.
House, and that there was no more support for her in France: Lautrec in the
d^nations of Francis the First.
That all the Friends she had in her own Country were dead, with Gaston de Foix
her only Brother; and that if his Catholic Majesty were taken from her, she
could find none, neither in Spain under the Reign of young Charles, seeing he
would not look upon her but with horror, when he should call to mind that she
was within an Ace of depriving him of the Succession of Arragon, and perhaps
also of that of Castille, which he would not have obtained if the Son she was
brought to Bed of had lived, to whom besides, the Succession of Navarre was
due. That in fine, to put so unwelcome an object out of her sight, she
earnestly besought her dear Husband to leave her in the remotest corner of his
Kingdoms, which was that of Naples, an alimentary Pension sufficient to
maintain her in Widowhood for the rest of her days, according to her quality:
That there she would prepare to follow him to Heaven, by praying incessantly
night and day for him, and by leading a life as much as lay in her power
suitable to the purity of the Gospel. So pathetick a discourse prevailed with
Ferdinand, to leave the Queen Germana, besides her Dowry, thirty thousand
Ducats a year upon the Kingdom of Naples; and the Article of the Testament, as
it was changed, came immediately after that, which gave Castille and Arragon
solely to Charles. But the three Ministers whom we mentioned before were not
pleased with it, though they thought it not proper at that time to oppose it;
the thing being but a trifle in comparison of what they had obtained of King
Ferdinand, which was the preferring of the elder of his Grandsons before the
younger, not only as to the Monarchies last named, but also as to the three
great Masteries.

Ximenes, who had approved no more than they that Pension for life, saw himself
no sooner in a condition to revoke the grant made to Queen Germana, by a
Husband who otherwise had never been liberal, but that without any scruple he
both attempted and performed it. It is true it was not done after his way, that
is to say, openly, and without fetching a compass; seeing he thought it enough
at first to pray Chievres to represent to the Catholic King that the Kingdom
of Naples had been a long time French, and that the Faction of Anjou was not as
yet wholly extinct in it: That it was too dangerous to suffer a French Queen to
have any Revenue there, because she might foment discontents in it, and
increase the number of his Majesty's Enemies: That the thirty thousand Ducats
ought to be allotted her upon another Fund, and that Fund to be pitched upon in
the middle of Castille: That in all times the Towns of Arevalo, Olmedo,
Madrigal, and St. Mary of Nieva, which came to the same Revenue, had served for
Dowry to the Dowagers of Castille: That by good fortune they were not engaged
to any Grandee of Spain; and that Queen Germana could have no cause to find
fault that they were given her in exchange for her Pension out of the Kingdom
of Naples.

Chievres thought Ximenes was in the right, and was confirmed in his opinion,
when he understood that Queen Germana weary of Widowhood thought of marrying
the unfortunate Prince of Tarento, the only Son of Frederick King of Naples,
whom the Great Captain had made prisoner, and sent into Spain, after he had
sworn upon the Holy Sacrament to leave him in liberty. The occasion that
offered was the most favorable that could be desired, because it was unseemly
for the Catholic King to meddle with the Testament of his Grandfather, which
was so advantageous to him, and for Chievres to propose it, since he had
Negotiated the Treaty of Noyon, whereby the Kingdom of Naples was to return to
France: Whereas the Cardinal acting immediately of himself, and of his own
proper motion, would solely also procure the envy to which his action might be
exposed, and the hatred of Queen Germana. Chievres gave it that cast to his
Catholic Majesty, who failed not immediately to write to Ximenes, that he
might act in that point as he thought best, In the Letters of Charles the Fifth
to Ximenes.
provided he acted as of himself, and without dipping the Royal Authority in
the least in it. Ximenes immediately put the Officers of Queen Germana into
possession of the four Towns which we have named, and reunited to the Revenue
of the Crown the thirty thousand Ducats assigned to that Princess upon the
Kingdom of Naples. But the Queen was beyond imagination vexed at it; and
expressed her resentment with the less reserve, that she thought no body to be
blamed for it, but Ximenes. She saw her self obliged to spend the rest of her
days in Spain; and to make her Court to her Husbands Grandchildren, by whom she
never expected to be well looked upon. She made no doubt, but that their design
was to oblige her to a single life, by letting her see the impossibility of
ever finding a Husband of the quality of the former: and as Women wounded in so
nice a point, give way for most part to the temptation of having recourse to
indirect means of revenge, when the direct are wanting; so Queen Germans, not
being able of her self to hurt Ximenes, espoused the contrary party, and
intriegued with his most dangerous Enemies, who were the Governor and Tutor of
the Infanto Ferdinand. She promised to back them with all her credit against
the Cardinal, and offered them the four Towns that were given her, to serve
them for a refuge in case of necessity. But the Cardinal's Spies pried into the
secret of that new intelligence, and made him sensible that he had committed a
signal fault in matter of Politics. He ingenuously confessed it to the
Catholic King and Chievres, in the first Letters which he thereupon wrote to
them, and solicited both of them to help him with all diligence to repair it.
He granted that his memory had been treacherous to him; and that he had not
called to mind the example of John King of Navarre and Arragon, Father to King
Ferdinand, and great Grandfather to his Catholic Majesty, who holding the four
places which were given to the Queen, made use of their situation, and the
Works that he added to them, for maintaining above thirty years a Civil War in
Castille: That the same thing was to be feared from Queen Germana, and perhaps
a worse in the present juncture: That she kept intelligence with those whom the
late King had entrusted with the Education of the Infanto; and that the
inconveniences which might arise from thence, to the disturbance of the public
tranquillity, could not too soon be prevented.

The Cardinals Letter was examined in the Council of Bruxelles; and Chievres
found the affair to be difficult, not only in it self, but also in respect of
the persons that were concerned in it. For if the Testament of King Ferdinand
were twice on end disappointed, his Successor would pass for ungrateful, and
his Ministers for fickle, and not well seen in the interests of their Ma^er.
The Spanish Counselors of State, who were already but too jealous of them,
would thereby take occasion to decry them; and to render their conduct so
odious, that their reputation would be lost when they accompanied his Catholic
Majesty into Spain: Whence it would follow, that if he intended to satisfy his
new Subjects, he would be obliged no more to consult the Flemings, whom he
brought along with him. If the Cardinal were refused, they would provoke him at
an unseasonable time, and discourage him from putting in execution the
resolution which he had taken of opposing all that was great in Spain below the
King, which was altogether advantageous to his Majesty during his absence: They
would be exposed to the danger which Ximenes foresaw, and kindle a fire in
Castille of long continuance before they could arrive to quench it.

The expedient that Chievres found out to avoid splitting upon either of these
two rocks, was to write an answer to Ximenes, that the Catholic King thought
it not fit to meddle a second time with the affair in question, until he
himself were arrived in Spain: But that nevertheless the Cardinal might put
into Arevalo and Olmedo, which were the best of the four places, so many trusty
persons, that he might be sure to be Master of them, in case Queen Germana
attempted any stirs: That the two other places would be useless to her without
them; and that the surest conduct that he could then follow in relation to that
Princess, was to observe her narrowly, but without giving her cause or pretext
of complaining.

Ximenes was not satisfied with this expedient, yet nevertheless he put it in
execution, because it answered in some measures his ends, by putting his
adversaries out of condition of doing him prejudice. He made himself insensibly
the stronger in Arevalo and Olmedo; and the intriegue he used for slipping into
those two places near a thousand Soldiers disguised, of whom he was sure, was
so neatly managed, that Queen Germana perceived it not. He visited from time to
time Queen Jean in the Castle of Tordesillas, where the late King her Father
had shut her up, and with extreme trouble found that the folly of that Princess
increased with Age. The distemper was incurable; but for want of a cure, which
was not possible to be effected by humane means, he found ways of easing the
Patient. He attentively studied her humor, and observed that of all the
passions to which she had been subject, whilst she had the use of reason, there
remained none, now her Reason was gone, but Ambition, whether that had been
then her predominant passion, or that the Organ that served to retain it was
alone preserved free from the alteration wrought upon all the other Organs of
the rational functions. By that he endeavored to dispose her to suffer her
self to be made clean from the filth she was encompassed with, In the last
years of the life of Jean.
and that they might dispel at least for some hours of the day, that
Hypochondriacal Melancholy which infes^ed her, and which nevertheless she
cherished instead of shaking it off.

He caused several persons who had a way of fooling with them, tell her
Majesty, that the Castillians were sorry they had not acknowledged her for
their only Sovereign from the time that Queen Isabelle her Mother died; and
that the Arragonese were mad with themselves, that they had fallen into the
same fault after the death of her Father: That both of them were about sending
Deputies to beg her pardon for it, but that it behoved her also on her part to
put her self in a condition to receive them, as it became a great Queen: That
her Apartment was so nasty, that it would turn their stomachs to come into it;
and that it would be convenient to begin by times to make it clean, to the end
no offense might be given to their Eyes and Noses: That they must be received
by her in great pomp, and by consequence with good company: That her Majesty
gave access but to too few people about her, and that she must admit of a more
numerous Train: That she ought to Eat in public at least once a day; and that
that was the time when the Musicians desired by their harmony to dispose her
stomach to a more quick and easy digestion.

He made her afterward accept of certain pleasant companies of both Sexes,
instructed to imitate her extravagancies, and above all things to contradict
her in nothing directly; and not to cross her humors indirectly, but by making
her believe that they suited not with the Majesty of the greatest Queen in the
World. He so tamed her by that means, that she was checked with the least wink
of an eye of Ferdinand Talavera, whom the Cardinal placed about her, instead of
Leo Ferriera, too old and grave for the discharge of the Commission of
Governing her, which the late King had given him; and at length they accustomed
her on Sundays and Holy Days to hear Mass in a Church at some distance from
Tordesillas, upon pretext that she would receive by the way, and on the place,
the acclamations of God save the Queen, from people who were drawn thither out
of curiosity to see her, or who were desired to be there on purpose, to the end
her weak mind might be convinced, that these were undoubted signs that she was
acknowledged for their Sovereign.

Ximenes received for this more acknowledgments of gratitude, than for any
other of his actions, though it was not the most important of all. The
Catholic King thanked him for it in writing: Chievres complemented him in the
same manner: Spain resounded his praises; and the Grandees were so satisfied
with it, that they were not heard to murmur any more against him. But shortly
after there happened a revolt in the Kingdom of Granada, the more difficult to
be quelled, because the Council o^ Bruxelles fomented it when they thought of
no such thing. It was the Law o^ Spain, that the Admirals of each Kingdom,
which reached to the Mediterranean Sea, or to the Ocean, should have their
Judicatures fixed in the most frequented Ports of their Coasts, and that their
Judges should there try all Criminal and Civil Causes that happened to Seamen,
Soldiers on board of Ships, Passengers, and to the Militia appointed for the
guard of the Seaports: But in process of time an abuse had crept in, which
grew daily more and more insupportable. The Coasts of Spain upon the
Mediterranean Sea were not now so much exposed to the incursions of the Infidel
Pirates, after that Ximenes had taken Oran, and the other places on the Coast of
Barbary, which we have mentioned, and by consequence had no more need of so
many Vessels nor Soldiers to guard them. So the number of Justiceable persons
in the Admiralties was diminished; and the multitude of their Officers not
having been proportionably suppressed, their Courts for most part had nothing to
do. They were therefore reduced to seek for practice, if they had a mind to
exercise their Jurisdictions, and they found some, by a means that tended to
the establishment of Impunity for all sorts of Crimes in the Towns where it was
in use. Those who had been guilty of enormous Crimes, and were by Royal Justice
condemned to Death, found ways to prove, that they had been Seamen, Soldiers,
Passengers, or Coastguards, and under that pretext demanded to be referred to
the Courts of the Admiralty. It durst not be refused them, because the Admiral
would have immediately interposed in the affair for the preservation of his
Privileges, and would have had it examined in the Supreme Council of Castille
and Arragon. Nevertheless so soon as the Prisoner was removed unto the Prisons
of the Admiralty, he was almost sure of his life, seeing a little money could
always bring him off. In the complaints of the Malaguins.
The Town of Malaga, in the Kingdom of Granada, had the greatest Traffic of
any, because of its excellent Wines; and as strangers came there in greatest
numbers, so the Officers of the Admiralty there absolved also more Criminals.
The Burghers had often complained of it to King Ferdinand; and had besought him
entirely to abolish the Courts of Admiralty, or to diminish the number of the
Judges: But his Majesty had had no regard to their petitions; whether he feared
to disoblige all the Admirals of Spain, whose cause in that particular was
common with the Admiral of Granada; or that he thought the Burghers of Malaga
would be too free, and by consequence grow insolent, if the Court they
complained of were abolished. But after his death the Burghers of that Town
applied themselves immediately to the new Catholic King, without first
addressing themselves to Ximenes. They demanded of him no more the alternative
of the suppression of the Offices of the Admiralty, or of their reduction to a
smaller number, but purely the total suppression; and by their Deputies, whom
they sent to the Court of Bruxelles, maintained, that since the reasons which
heretofore obliged the Kings of Spain to enlarge the privileges of Admirals,
ceased, these privileges ought to be reduced to Common Law. The new King
caused their ^proposition to be examined in his Council; and Chievres thought
it not convenient, either absolutely to grant their petition, or yet to defer
the answering of it. The first seemed to him to be too severe and mortifying,
and the next too uncivil. He gave advice to answer the Malaguins, that his
Majesty at such a distance could not determine what was to be reformed in the
Admiralty of Granada; but that he would quickly be upon the places, and there
endeavor to give satisfaction to his good Subjects of Malaga. The advice was
followed; and the Cardinal had no sooner learnt it, but he wrote positively to
Chievres, that he had committed a considerable Error, and that it would not be
long before he had cause to repent it. That he was not well enough acquainted
as yet with the Genius of the Spaniards, and that that Nation haughty toward
all kinds of men, became infallibly insolent toward their Superiors, when they
seem to be afraid of them, by managing them with too much circumspection: That
he thought he had only written a complement in the last words of his answer to
the Malaguins; but that he would soo^ see them explain those words as seriously
as if they were part of the chief Article of a Treaty, nay, and give them a
more ample signification than he had intended. The event was more troublesome
that Ximenes had predicted; and the Malsguins imagined that they had obtained
what they desired, for this only reason that on the one hand it had not been
refused them; and on the other, that they had been civilly answered. They
thereupon made an Insurrection; banished the Officers of the Admiralty; they
converted to other uses the places of Judicature, threw down their Gibbets; and
left neither in their City nor Precincts any mark of the Jurisdiction of the
Admiralty. Ximenes made an offer of reclaiming them by mildness, sending
peaceful men to represent to them, that seeing the Council of Bruxelles had
re^erred them to the arrival of the Catho^ick King in Spain, they ought not
till then have made any innovation: but the Malaguins persuaded that the
Cardinal sent messengers to him merely out of jealousy, for the favor which
they pretended to have obtained, grew more ^utragious, and made their Rebellion
public. They took Arms against the Government; chose Commanders; mounted upon
their walls what Artille^ry they had; and cast a new Piece of a prodigious size
and length, with this Inscription, In the relation of that Insurrection.
The defenders of the Liberties of Malaga will speak by my mouth.

The Cardinal who at first had only used lenitive medicines to convince the
Council of Bruxelles, that they would increase rather than cure the evil, sent
strict orders to the Militia of the Kingdom of Granada, to draw together into a
Body, and under the Command of Anthony de la Queva, an experienced Commander,
march instantly to reduce the revolted Malaguins. The Militia drew out into the
Field, with as much expedition, as if they had been a Body of old Troops
separated for a week or a fortnight into quarters of refreshment. They advanced
as far as Antequerra, in so good order, that the Malaguins all of a sudden
changed from the extremity of presumption in their strength, into a general
despair of being able to defend themselves. They prayed La Queva to put a stop
to his march, and to permit them to send two Deputies to Ximenes, for imploring
his mercy, and freely submitting to his discretion. La Quev^ was for some time
irresolute what to do, seeing on the one hand the Cardinal was of an inflexible
temper; and on the other, it concerned the Monarchy of Spain not to ruin the
richest Town of Traffic it had at that time, the Indies not having as yet
enriched Seville. Nevertheless he inclined to clemency, and stopped till he
should be informed of the effect of the Deputation. The two wretched Malaguins,
who in a most humble posture presented themselves before the Cardinal, expected
to be made Sacrifices for their Country, and in that prospect cast themselves
at his feet. They begged his pardon in a discourse mingled with sighs at every
word, and that he would vouchsafe at least to preserve Malaga from violence,
blood, fire and plunder. The Cardinal who pretended to use indulgence, thought
it enough to give the Deputies a severe reprimand, and sent them back to
Malaga, with Orders to repeat the same to their fellow Citizens. Immediately
after he wrote to La Queva to enter the Town; and after he had caused five of
the most guilty Burghers to be hanged, and the Jurisdiction of the Admiral
fully restored, to proclaim a general pardon there. La Quiva acted his part
incomparably well, and the blessings of the Malaguins was not the only
advantage that Ximenes got by remitting severity in such a juncture. He took
besides, the liberty to represent to Chievres, and afterward to his Catholic
Majesty, that it was the interest of the Monarchy of Spain to support him in
all things that were not contrary to the service of the King. He protested that
so long as he were Regent, his Authority should go along with the Royal
Authority: That the rebound of the one would infallibly glance upon the other:
That his own and Masters Reputation went hand in hand; and that having so
signally re-established it in regard of the Malaguins, he had reason to hope,
that if at any other time it were to be put into the balance, they would
consider a little better on it first in Flanders.

He went farther in the following Order which he received from the Catholic
King; and it was upon so nice an occasion, that he let fall one of the best
sayings that is to be found in the Chronicles of Spain, though those that have
read them know they are full of such. His Catholic Majesty ordered him to
reduce the expenses of the Crowns o^ Castille and Arragon to their ancient
state that is to say, to the rate they were at be fore they were united. He
found it to be very hard; and complained of it with the more reason, that
thereby he was rendered the object of all the Courtiers hatred, and constrained
to fall out with those Friends he had still remaining i^ both Monarchies, by
cutting them short of what they yearly received out of the Royal Exchequer.
Nevertheless he punctually obeyed; but before he set about it, he thought fit
to acquaint the Catholic King, that it was not the want of foresight that made
him so implicitly obedient to his commands. He wrote to his Majesty, That he
did with him as God did with the Devil, and that he always made use of him when
people were to be afflicted and punished, In the collection of his sayings.
but never employed him when there was a design to save or bestow favors upon
them. He still continued for all that to Govern after his own way, in rewarding
merit ^ven when he discovered it in those whom he did not take to be his
friends. He procured a Cardinals Hat for the Bishop of Tortosa, who was
afterward ^ope, by the name of Adrian the Sixth; and desired Doctor Mota for
his Co-ad^tor in the Archbishopric of Toledo, though he was persuaded that
both of them were in Spain upon no other acount, but to spy his actions, and
thwart them; which to speak sincerely, was ^ue enough. The Order is still to be
^en which Chievres for that end expe^ed to the Bishop, by command of the
Catholic King; and as for Mota, he was a Spaniard, born in the City of Bur^os,
of no Estate, but by his parts ca^able of acquiring one. There was not ^n
Castille a more profound Divine than ^e, nor a Preacher more generally
followed: He spoke his own Language ele^antly and neatly; and that was
princi^ally the reason why Philip of Austria, Father to the Catholic King, who
aspi^ed to the purity of the Spanish Tongue, ^ook Mota for his Preacher, and
for con^ersing familiarly with him at his leisure^hours. King Ferdinand,
Philip's Father-in-Law, consented to it, and received no prejudice thereby, so
long as Queen Isabelle his Wife was alive: But after the death of that
Princess, he had cause to repent of it, seeing Mota was one of those who most
zealously seconded Philip in the design of sending Ferdinand his Father-in-Law
home to Arragon. That design was fully put in execution, but Mota, who had most
contributed thereto, though only in secret, had not time to make his advantage
of it. Philip died before he had done any considerable thing for him, and
Ferdinand returned again to the administration of Castille. Mota finding
himself exposed to his resentment, and there being no security for him to stay
in his Country without support, bethought himself of looking out for a
protector abroad: He wrote to the Emperor Maximilian, Philip's Father, that it
belonged to him to Govern Castille and Arragon, during the infirmity of his
Daughter-in-Law, and the minority of his Grandchildren: He suppsied him with a
great many Articles of Castillian and Arragonese Laws, which deferred the
Regency to him in the case then in question: He gave him the instances of it,
that were to be found in the History of the Country: And intimated to him, that
his reputation would be blasted, if he suffered the Catholic King to supplant
him. It is not known by what trick the Letter came to be intercepted: But
certain enough it was; and that Mota being afraid of his life, or at least of
his liberty, sought for a refuge out of Spain, though he well foresaw, that if
he left his Country, he would deprive himself of the best quality he had for
advancing himself, which was that of Preaching before those who perfectly
understood Spanish. It came first into his mind to withdraw to Rome, but he
rejected that notion, because King Ferdinand was too powerful there. Nor could
he six upon France or Germany, where his Catholic Majesty was not beloved,
because he was afraid not to find means of subsistence in either of them; but
out of mere necessity chose the Low Countries. All the caution he took for
being the better received there, was to procure from the Grandees of Castille,
Letters of recommendation to the Archduke and Chievres, to the end he might
receive from the Son a reward for the services rendered to the Father. But his
proceedings were so nearly observed, that King Ferdinand knew upon the spot,
from whom he had received his Letters of recommendation, and the Box he had put
them in. His Majesty was not troubled that he went out of Spain, seeing he
expected more hurt than good from him if he continued there. He valued him not
so much as to get the ill will of the Castillians, by stopping him, or
attempting upon his life, and would not commit a crime upon his person. So that
he thought it enough to frustrate him of his Letters of recommendation; and
wrote to Bernardin de Velasco, Governor of Burgos, who had married one of his
Natural Daughters, to take such measures, as that Mota might go out of Spain,
without Letters of recommendation, and yet still believe he had them.
Pickpockets in Spain are called Knights of Industry.
Velasco treated with some Knights of Industry, who pretended to travel the
same way as Mots did, insinuated into his acquaintance, contracted a kind of
intimacy with him: knew the Box by the marks that were given them: picked it,
took out the Letters of recommendation, put as many Blank-papers made up in the
same fashion in their place; locked the Box again with so much art, that it
appeared no^ to have been opened; took their leave civilly of Mota; returned to
Burgos, and delivering to Velasco what he had demanded of them, received the
money that they had agreed with him for. Mota continued his journey, and in
Galicia embarked for Dunkerk, where he landed without any other misfortune. He
went straight to Bruxelles; but when he was about to present his Letters, he
found none in the Box where he had put them; and that had infallibly put him
into despair, if Chievres, who was informed of the acciddent that befell him,
had not been so civil as to comfort him. He got the Archduke to settle a
considerable Pension upon him; and after the death of Ferdinand, procured him a
Commission to go into Spain, where the Cardinal knowing his value, made him
Bishop of Badajox, and endeavored to make him Coadjutor of his Archbishopric
of Toledo.

There are but few people so ill-natured as to envy the rewards which they see
given to the rarest merit, and the Grandees of Spain made the promotion of Mota
a pretext for letting Ximenes alone peaceably to Govern Castille and Arragon,
so long as he was fortunate: But from the first misfortune that befell him, they
took fresh occasion to endeavor his degradation. Horuc the elder Brother of
Barbarossa, had seized Algier in Africa: From thence he ravaged and molested
the Coasts of Spain; and threatened to take from the Spaniards their Conquests
in Barbary. He blocked up their places; and the Cardinal, who was the more
zealous to preserve them, as that it was he that had conquered them, sent
thither under the Command of General Vera, an Army, which without trouble,
raised the Blocade of the Infidels, because Horuc not daring to stay, shut
himself up in Algiers upon the approach of the Spaniards. But Vera instead of
being satisfied with that success, pursued his advantage as far as Algiers, and
laid Siege to it, without considering well enough if he wanted nothing that was
necessary for a regular Siege in the modern way: Horuc who was an expert
Soldier, at first amused the Besiegers: Then weakened them by frequent Sallies:
Tired them out by false Alarms, which the Mores ever now and then gave them
both by day and by night; and at length defeated them in a general Sally. With
much a do Vera saved himself; and the Cardinal was more blamed for that vain
attempt, than he was applauded for the Conquest of Oran, so unjust are men in
their Judgments. His Enemies at the Court of Bruxelles stood not so much in awe
as they had done till then: They moved that he might be sent home to his
Church, and turned against him the greatest part of the Counselors of State,
who were offended that he would not share the principal Functions of the
Regency with any one of their number, whom they had sent him for Colleagues.

The Cardinal withstood not that shock in the same manner as he had hitherto
maintained himself. He abated a little of his haughtiness; and justified
himself from the slight which he was accused to have put upon his Colleagues,
by showing Authentic proofs, that he had acted jointly with them, so long as
his Dignity, which was no more esteemed than as he could make it to be valued,
could suffer him; and that he had not separated from them, but by their own
fault, and when he was constrained to it, that he might not break with the
Court of Rome. He unfolded this little Court-mystery, by adding, that they had
had the impudence to sign before him the dispatches of the Council of Spain,
though one of them was as yet but a Dean, and the other a Layman: That if that
injury against the Roman Purple, with which he had the honor to be clothed,
had been suffered, there had been ground for divesting him of it; and that all
Spaniards, as well in general as particular, not excepting his own Enemies, had
so much approved that his Colleagues should be chastized, by hindering them to
exercise their Commission; that none took exceptions at, or complained of it.

As to the Regency the Cardinal wrote to the Catholic King, importuning him to
discharge him of it, and to suffer him to withdraw to his own Diocese, there to
mind the Spiritual concerns of himself and his Flock: That he had raised
himself too many Enemies, to be for the future in a condition of rendering his
Country the same services, which till then it had received from him: That he
foresaw Civil Wars like to break out again in Spain, which for so many years
had been so fatal to it, and yet so common; and that it was very decent for a
Prelate, such as he was, to be no more but a spectator of them.

The Catholic King, before he had examined the Letter of Ximenes in the
Council of Bruxelles, showed it to Chievres, who supposed that since the
Cardinal himself solicited his own deposition, he must of necessity have
certain information that a storm was gathering in Spain, which he despaired of
being able to dissipate: That if he judged himself unable to resist it, he was
without doubt more convinced of the insufficiency of him that should be given
him for Successor, and that by consequence, what way soever the matter were
examined, there could be no hazard in continuing the Cardinal in the Regency;
seeing if he appeased the Tumult he spoke of, there would be no cause to repent
of having continued him in Office; and if he quelled it not, this would be
their comsort, that it was certain none could have succeeded better in it than
he. Upon that consideration then, his Catholic Majesty made answer to Ximenes,
that Spain had more need than ever of his administration: That he prayed him as
a Cardinal, and commanded him as a Spaniard not to abandon public affairs:
That he promised him nothing of reward, because there was none but what was too
low for him; and that he thought it enough therefore to tell him, that if he
stood no more in need of his Catholic Majesty, his Catholic Majesty stood
extremely in need of him.

Ximenes of all the Ministers that went before him, or that came after, until
Cardinal Richelieu the ablest in Negotiating with their Masters; called then to
mind the Spanish Proverb, That well-grounded Fortunes are not safely shaken,
and that every time men fail to overturn them, they fix them the more. He
resolved to make his advantage of all the attempts that had been made to depose
him; and the more earnest the Catholic King showed himself that he should
retain the Regency, the more solicitous he seemed to be discharged of it. Many
Letters went to and fro upon so new and nice a subject; and the end of the
Comedy was, that the Cardinal condescended not to continue as he was, till
after he had treated on even terms with his Master, and by the mediation of
Chievres, articled with him, that the Catholic King should reserve to himself
the disposal of Bishoprics, In the comparisons of the Cardinals Ximenes and
Richelieu.
Comanderies, Benesices, Military Orders, and of the Revenue of the Crown Lands
of Castille and Arragon; and that the Cardinal should have for his share the
entire and unlimited disposal of Magistracies, places of Judicature,
governments of Provinces, extraordinary Revenues, of the Soldiers and their
Officers in both Monarchies. Ximenes kept the Catholic to his word so long as
he lived, and yet never abused that half of Royal Authority which was given
him: But Humane Providence is almost ever defective in those things which men
think they have examined with greatest exactness. From that extraordinary power
which the Cardinal had cunningly snatched from the Court of Bruxelles, there
happened an inconvenience the more terrible, that it seemed God intended to
show him, that he is as jealous of the Sovereignty which he communicates, as of
that which he reserves to himself; and that he does no more willingly suffer,
that men born for a private life should offer to Govern independently, than he
endures Creatures to rob him of his Glory.

No sooner had the Courtiers of Bruxelles had intelligence of the death of King
Ferdinand, but that immediately they conceived hopes of dividing amongst them
the chief Dignities of Castille and Arragon, as soon as they became vacant. The
Regency of Ximenes had not undeceived them, because they thought it would cease
upon the arrival of the Catholic King in Spain: But when they understood that
his Majesty had tied his owns hands in favor of that Cardinal, and had
remitted to him the more substantial part of the Government, until he was
completely of Age, they were as much offended thereat, as if their Master had
robbed them of what he had put himself out of condition of granting to them.
They foresaw that Ximenes would bestow no favors but upon Native Spaniards;
and the fear they were in of dying before their Master was of Age, made them
hasten to be rich before that happened. They knew that the Revenue of the
Low Countries would suffice to maintain him so long as he were in Flanders; and
in that prospect they inclined him to grant them by way of gratuity almost the
whole Revenue of the Royal Demain of Castille, the Revenue of Arragon remaining
in the hands of the Estates of the Country, by the fundamental Laws of that
Monarchy, till the new King went tither in person, and had solemnly sworn to
maintain the privileges of the Arragonese.

The money which the Counselors of State of Bruxelles drew from Castille,
increased their greediness instead of satisfying it; and gave the Spaniards the
greater disgust, that they had never till then seen the public Revenue go out
of their Country. They would have suffered it nevertheless without repining any
other way but in secret, if the Flemish Courtiers had stopped there, and been
satisfied with the Revenues which their trusty Receivers transmitted to Antwerp
by Bills of Exchange: But shortly after they added the Sale of places and
Simony to their avarice, in such an excessive manner as we shall now relate.

Amongst the Graces which the Catholic Kings had reserved to themselves, there
were many whereof Native Spaniards were only capable; besides the Commanderies
which ought solely to be conferred on them by the Institutions of the Orders of
St. James, Calatrava, and Alcantara. The Flemings though they could not be
ignorant of this, yet for all that were not willing to consent that those two
kinds of profits should escape them; and when they came to be vacant, and that
Spaniards came to Bruxelles to sue for them, they prevented them by procuring
blank Provisions, and afterward filling them up with the name of him that
offered most money. They acted almost in the same manner in relation to
Benefices, not excepting Bishoprics; and when Ximenes complained of it, they
stopped his mouth by answering him, that since he was not contradicted in the
exercise of the share of Royal Authority, which had liberally been granted him,
he had no reason to find fault that his Majesty took his own way in disposing
the other part which he had reserved to himself, as a supply to his bounty and
magnificence.

The End of the Fourth Book.
BOOK V. Containing the most memorable Affairs that happened in the Monarchy of
Spain, during the rest of the Year One Thousand Five Hundred and Seventeen, and
the Years One Thousand Five Hundred and Eighteen, and One Thousand Five Hundred
and Nineteen.
THE Spaniards, who for want of money had not obtained the Charges and
Benefices which they had gone to Bruxelles to solicit for; and those of the
same Nation, who had straightened themselves by purchasing them for ready money,
returned for most part both alike dissatisfied. They conspired in like manner
to revenge themselves of the repulse they had sustained, and of the draining of
their Purses, by publishing, that that which Jugurtha, a King of Numidia, said
heretofore of the City of Rome in particular, That it was to be sold, was
exactly true of the Monarchies of Castille and Arragon in general; and that it
was the good fortune of Rome that it found no buyers: whereas to the ill luck
of Spain, its own Inhabitants consumed their Revenues, and impoverished
themselves to purchase it: That Benefices were no more granted to Piety and
Learning, In the first Manifesto of the Spaniards against the Flemings.
nor any favor depending on the Catholic King Charles of Austria, given as a
reward of Virtue and Merit: That in the most eminent Functions of the
Ecclesiastical Hierarchy none for the future were to be seen but Simoniacal and
Impious persons, nor in the chief Magistracies but unworthy men; and that the
Flemings received too great profit from these counterband Goods, that it should
be hoped they would refrain from that infamous Traffic for the time to come:
That the Chancellor John Savage.
of the Low Countries alone had in the space of four months already got by it
Five Hundred Thousand Crowns; and that if the rest of the Courtiers of Flanders
made their advantage accordingly, Spain could not disagree about it, but that
they would be reduced to slavery: That there was no other way to avoid that
inconvenience, but to oblige the Catholic King to make no more use of Flemings
for Counselors of State and Favorites, and not to dispose of the Graces of
Castille, but by the advice of the Council of Spain.

These discourses at first whispered only in the Ear, and afterward spread in
public Assemblies, and even in Sermons, made so great impression upon the
Cities of Leon, Burgos and Vailladolid, that they resolved to send Deputies to
the Catholic King, for the universal and absolute removing of Flemish
Ministers, and for the distribution of Grants by the advice of the Council of
Madrid. It was to no purpose for Cardinal Ximenes to represent to them that
they offered too much for the first Essay, by attempting to bind the hands of
their Sovereign in such a manner as had never as yet been practiced in Spain:
That if he had not the liberty to choose those of his Council, nor to do
kindnesses to whom he pleased, he would be more unhappy than the meanest of his
Subjects, who fully enjoyed both these privileges; and that it was not always
necessary for remedying of public no more than of natural evils, to cut off
even to the root.

So great was the obstinacy of the People, that the Cardinal not being able to
bend it, imitated the skill of Pilots, who yielding in part to the violence of
the Winds, make use of them for conveying them to the Ports they are bound for.
He wrote to Chievres, that a Convocation of Estates must be allowed the
Spaniards: But that it behoved also to be in such a manner as that the
Catholic King might receive no disadvantage thereby: That it should be put off
until his Majesty's arrival in Spain, which would not be before Autumn, One
Thousand Five Hundred and Seventeen: That his Catholic Majesty in all
appearance would be ready to part about the middle of Summer, and that upon
that design a Fleet should be sent to expect him upon the Coast of Flanders:
That the pleasantness of the Season would infallibly shorten his Voyage, and
that on all hazards the Harvest Season was the most secure, provided it were in
the beginning of it: That the Spaniards would be so charmed with the presence
of their new King, that they would have no more thoughts of limiting his power,
nor any thing else; and that the Assembly of the Estates would be wholly taken
up in reciprocal civilities of the Deputies to his Majesty, and of his Majesty
to the Deputies.

The Convocation was in effect proclaimed to be held in the end of September
the same Year, and the Spanish Fleet parted from the Coast of Galicia in July;
But the Grandees of Castille, who did not foresee that the power of Ximenes
would last no longer than till the com^ng of his Majesty, resolved to rid
themselves of that Cardinal beforehand; and ^e of all others, The Duke of
Infantado.
who till ^hen had appeared most ^oderate, put himself at ^he head of the rest.
We have mention^d that Ximenes had disobliged the Duke ^f Infantado, by
refusing his Niece to ^is Nephew; and it is to be subjoyned (...) this place,
that a Lawsuit having ^appened betwixt the Duke and the Count of Castro, the
Cardinal, who ^ould not let slip the occasion of exerci^ng his Authority in so
rare a juncture, ^ould have the deciding of it. The ^uke, who took him for his
Enemy, ^rote to Flanders to the Catholic King, ^aying him that he would
suspend the ^ecision of the cause, until his Majesty ^ere present in Council,
where the mat^r should be examined. The King wil^gly granted it: But the
Cardinal ha^ng complained thereof, as a contra^ntion of the power which had
been given him; and Chievres being of the opinion that he should be permitted
to act, the case was decided, and the Duke cast. He did not presently resent
it; but sometime after he took the occasion when the Cardinal sent a Promoter
from the Town of Alcala where he was, to Guadalaj^a, about some formalities of
Ecclesiastical Jurisdiction. Bernardin de Mendoza the Dukes Brother, was
Archdeacon of the place; and the Duke took a pretext, that the Promoter had
invaded the Jurisdiction of his Brother. He caused him to be cudgelled, and
threatened him with worse if he came again. The Promoter complained to Ximenes,
who the more willingly promised him the Justice which he demanded, for that the
Duke in causing him to be abused, had committed two crimes; one in opposing the
execution of Ecclesiastical Justice, for which he had incurred the Censures:
and another in using uncivilly an Officer of the Regent of Spain, in the
execution of the Orders which he had received, and in becoming thereby guilty
of Treason The Duke exasperated, that Ximenes ha^ threatened him with a double
punishment sent his Chaplain to tell him what the most envenomed Satyrs reviled
him with. It was a harder part to be acte^ than one was aware of, and the
Chaplain only accepted it for fear of losing his place. He went and fell on his
knees before Ximenes, and begged his pardon for the injury that he was
constrained to do him: Having used that caution, he repeated word for word all
that he was charged to tell him; and the Cardinal, who no less admired the
simplicity than the blind obedience of the Churchman, heard him as peaceably
as if he had been speaking verses to his praise. He did not interrupt him;
changed neither countenance nor posture; and replied only two things with as
moderate a tone, as if what he had heard had been altogether indifferent to
him; first, That a Priest as he was, ought not to have undertaken a Commission
so mis-becoming his character; and next, that he should make have back again to
the Duke; and that he would find him sorry for the impertinent words that he
had put into his mouth. It is not known what ground there was for the prophecy,
but it is certain it proved true. In the relation of that quarrel.
The Duke whose passion had hindered him from reflecting upon the command that
he had given to his Chaplain, judged it ridiculous so soon as it was over. He
chid those that were then about him, for having suffered him to do it, and
hardly forbore punishing his Chaplain at his return, for having so readily and
faithfully obeyed him. He sent him back immediately to make an Apology to
Ximenes, who still remembering the obligation that he had to the Duke, for
having refused to engage in the interests of Pedro Giron, consented that the
Constable of Castille should interpose for an accommodation. It was no hard
matter for the Constable to conclude it, seeing both parties desired it with
equal earnestness: But just as the Articles were finished, a circumstance
intervened that was within an Ace of breaking it up in an irreparable manner.

The Cardinal and Duke had their interview at Fon-Carrallio, where the two
parties and Mediator judged it not fit to bring almost any body along with
them, to the end they might confer together with greater freedom. The Cardinal
had even concealed the matter from Don Juan de Spinosa, Captain of his Guards,
who coming to know of it by another way, thought that his place obliged him to
go and Guard him at least upon his return, since he would not be attended when
he went. He caused his Troop to mount on Horseback, and arrived with it at
Fon-Carrallio about the end of the interview. The Duke and Constable no sooner
heard the Neighing of the Horses, and the Trumpet that sounded before the
Troop, but they imagined that Ximenes dealt treacherously with them, and had
ordered Forces to come and seize their persons. They openly resented it; and
Ximenes who knew himself to be innocent, fell a laughing at their panick fear.
He looked out at the window; perceived Spinosa, made him a sign to come to him;
sharply reproved him for his unseasonable diligence; threatened to turn him out
if he did the ^ike again; and sending him presently ^ack as fast as he came, he
returned some time after with the Duke and Constable.

He came not off so soon, nor so easily ^n another clashing that he had with
the Count of Vregna, seeing in all appearance the poison that was given him
proceeded from that. There was a cause depending betwixt the Count and
Quichada, for the property of Villa fra^re near Vailladolid; and the Count who
was more powerful and of greater qua^ity than the other, had by his own
Authority put himself into possession of the controverted Estate. So he pleaded
with a full hand; and Quichada who had the better title, demanded that the
Estate might be put into sequestration. The Council of Spain granted the
petition, and Ximenes sent a Messenger and Sergeants to take up the Rent of
Villafratre. These inferior Officers of Justice were abused in the execution
of their Commission by the Son of the Count of Vregna, assisted by his Friends,
wh^ were the Sons of the Constable, Admiral, and of the Duke of Albuquerqu^ The
Messenger on whom blows had not been spared, complained of it to the Court of
Vailladolid, which forthwith ordered the Militia of the Country to g^ and be
assistant to the Officers of Justice. The Bishop of Malaga President of that
Court went to command them; and the Constable of Castille, who saw his Son for
company-sake, engaged in an ugly business, went himself to take it up a^
Villa-fratre, where the young Lords fortified themselves with their Fathers
Vassals, whom they had called to their assistance. His Authority over his Son
his persuasions to the other Lords, hi^ Prayers, importunities and menaces
prevailed upon them at length to com^ out of the place, and to leave the Bisho^
in full liberty of executing the Sentence of the Court, whereof he was
Commissary; and seeing that Prelate was a moderate man, he stopped there; that is
to say, there was no prosecution on his part against the young men, who had
beaten the Messenger and the Sergeants.

It is to be believed, that if Ximenes had been of his humor, there would have
been no more of the matter: But there was not in all the world two men of a
more different temper, though otherwise they were intimate friends. Ximenes
thought there could not be a more enormous fault in Politics, than any way, or
for any cause whasoever, to connive at attempts against the Sovereign Power,
and in such a case never made any distinction betwixt high and low conditions.
The Bishop on the contrary was possessed with an opinion, that there was flesh
and blood in actions against Sovereignty, as well as in others; and that though
the consequence of the former required a greater severity to be used against
them than against the latter, yet it followed not from thence that pity and
mercy should be absolutely banished from them. So Ximenes ordered all those who
had resisted Justice, to be apprehended, and sent the Alcaide Sarmiento to
prosecute them, with orders, neither to make an end of, nor desist in the Suit,
until the Criminals were brought to exemplary punishment, and Villafratre,
which had served them for a place of retreat, demolished.

By that means all the high Nobility were attacked; because there was not a
Lord in all Castille, who was not related, either in blood or affinity, to
these four young Lords, or at least who aspired not to be so. And, indeed, the
Criminals fearing to be apprehended in the Field, or in the Castles of their
Fathers, returned to Villa-fratre, which they defended stoutly enough: But
Sarmiento laid a formal Siege to them, and in process of time reduced them to
great extremities. He bore with all the railleries that they put upon Him and
Ximenes, whose Images they dragged about the Streets; and put them so hard to
it, that they were come to the last bit of Bread, when finding by chance a
quarter in the Lines worse guarded than the rest, they forced through with
Sword in hand, and so saved themselves in the mountains of the Asturias.

Ximenes having missed the prey which had escaped from him, turned his anger
against Villa-fratre, which he caused to be demolished to the very foundations.
By his orders the place where it stood was Ploughed up, and Salt sown therein.
Seven of the chief Burghers were whipped, for having affronted the Messenger
whilst they were a beating of him; and a Servant of the Admiral of Castille was
served in the like manner, for having carried Soldiers to his Masters Son. The
Grandees of Spain incensed at this rigor, wrote both publicly and privately
to their King in Flanders, importuning him by all means to deliver them from
the tyranny of Ximenes. They prayed Chievres to join his credit to their
requests; and this is a proper place to convict the Historians of Castille and
Arragon of falsehood, who pretend that the Cardinal had not a greater Enemy at
the Court of Bruxelles than Chievres. Certainly if his aversion had been such
as they set it forth to have been, Chievres found the most favorable occasion
that he could have wished for, for supplanting of Ximenes, seeing he needed not
so much as to be seen in the disgrace of that Cardinal. He had no more to do,
but to stand aside, and leave him alone to defend his Cause against so many
Enemies combined for his ruin. He would infallibly have lost it, and the
Catholic King seeing himself reduced to the necessity of discontenting
irreconcileably the Nobility of Castille, or of sacrificing Ximenes unto them,
would have preferred the second before the first: But Chievres forsook not the
Cardinal at such a pinch, where he absolutely stood in need of assistance to
save him from an utter disgrace. He represented to his Catholic Majesty, that
now it was his true interest more than ever to support Ximenes; and if he
yielded but the least in that point, he would immediately have cause of
repenting it. That so long as the Cardinal was protected, the Royal Authority
was in no danger in Spain, seeing on the one hand he would keep the Nobles in
their duty, by a strict observation of the Laws; and on the other hand the
People loved him too well, and were too much obliged to him for the Justice he
rendered them against the Nobles, to make any Insurrection, or to second the
discontents of the great men: But if it appeared that the Cardinal were no more
in so great favor at Court, the Nobility would instantly rise in Arms, under
pretext of deposing him, but in reality to raise the Infanto Ferdinand to the
Throne; and the People beginning to despise the Regent, as they commonly do
those who are out of favor what way soever their misfortune befall them, would
be less reserved in following the example of the Gentlemen.

Chievres's discourse had the effect which he promised himself; In the Letters
of Charles the Fifth to Ximenes.
and the young King approved the Cardinals conduct so steadfastly, that the
Grandees of Castille having in vain solicited the Citizens of Leon, Burgos and
Vailladolid, who remained in obedience, were forced to receive the Law which
the Cardinal was pleased to impose upon them. It appears not neither by the
Orders which at that time he received from the Court of Bruxelles, nor by the
Letters that Chievres wrote to him, that he was enjoined to manage the affair
that then was upon the stage with more moderation than he was wont to do:
Nevertheless he did it, and the clemency which he used was the more admired,
that he had never till then practiced the like, nor did ever any more for the
future.

He at first rejected the overtures of accommodation which his friends made to
him in favor of the four Criminals; and seemed so inflexible to those who
spoke to him of pardoning, that they despaired of disposing him to it. The
Criminals were forced by their own Fathers to go and deliver themselves up to
prison in Vailladolid, and to submit to what the Magistrate should order
concerning their persons. The Sentence of the Judges was conform to the
severity of the Laws; but Ximenes, who had the Royal Authority in his hands,
grew milder when it was least expected. He not only suspended the execution
which would have drawn tears from all Castille; but gave them an absolute
pardon; and did it in so noble a manner, that the severity, whereof he had
given so many instances, appeared not to be natural to him; and that if he used
not indulgence often, it was because he thought it not possible to keep the
Castillians from abusing it under a Regency.

He had the better on it also of the Duke of Alva, in a controversy they had
together about the richest Priory of the Order of St. John of Jerusalem that
was in all Spain. Anthony of Zuniga had been provided to it in the usual forms,
but King Ferdinand had taken it from him by his own absolute power, and given
it to Diego of Toledo, third Son to the Duke of Alva, by reason of the services
which that Duke had done him in the Conquest of Navarre. Ximenes so much hated
Injustice, that he could not suffer it even in his Master, though otherwise he
was extremely obliged to the Duke. He heard favorably the complaint that
Zuniga made to him, of being contrary to all right, turned out of his Benefice,
and promised to do him justice. The Duke of Alva, who was sufficiently
persuaded that the Cardinal would be as good as his word, would not suffer his
Son to appear before the Council of Madrid, at the day to which he was cited by
his adverse party. He evaded the decision of the Process by all the tricks of
Law, and in the mean time made friends with the Catholic King, to have the
Cause evocated to the Council of Bruxelles. He could not, indeed, obtain it,
because his Majesty, as has been said, was engaged to Ximenes, not to allow
any more evocations from Spain to Flanders. But notwithstanding there was so
great a faction. for the Duke of Alva, that the Kings of France and England
wrote to the Catholic King in his favors; and their Ambassadors in their
Masters names solicited Chievres to use his interest, that Diego of Toledo
might not be molested. The same Kings pressed Ximenes also to suspend the
decision of the Suit till the arrival of King Charles in Spain: But the
Cardinal, who made no doubt but that Zuniga as being the weaker would be cast
by the Catholic King, caused the Process to be tried before his Majesty's
coming; and represented so strongly to the Judges, that they ought to consider
nothing but right, that the Son of the Duke of Alva was cast by unanimous
voice. However it was not so easy a matter to put the Sentence in execution as
to pronounce it, because the Son of the Duke of Alva gathered together Forces,
and took the Field to preserve his Priory: But the Militia of the Country
falling upon him before he had taken his measures for the defensive part, so
totally defeated him, that he was obliged in his turn to submit to the
discretion of Ximenes, who used him with no greater severity than he had
treated the four young Lords we mentioned before. That was the last action
wherein the Cardinal employed all his power to make himself to be obeyed; and
it so awed the Spaniards, that he found them afterward as flexible as if he had
been their lawful Monarch. But it is with humane prosperities as with bodily
health: The more settled they seem to be, the nearer they are to an alteration.

Ximenes having speeded out the Fleet from Spain, for convoying the Catholic
King from Flanders to Galicia, was taken up about two necessary affairs; the
first was to cause all the Seacoasts where his Master might land, to be
exactly visited, that he might discover if the rumor that was spread abroad of
the Plagues being there was true or not, that so he might give him notice in
that case to put in at other places: And the other, to send into the Seaports
that should be found clear from suspicion, all ^orts of refreshments, that so
the Court might find them ready at hand in case ^hey put a shore there. Upon
that design he came to Tordelagula, the place of his Birth, and went to dine in
the Bourg de Bos-Eguillas, where he had sent word ^o Manguino Provincial of the
Cordeliers, ^o come and meet him. The Provincial was upon the Rode when he met
a Horseman unknown to him, who bid him hasten his pace, and if it was possible
get to Bos-Eguillas before Ximenes sat down to Table, that he might give him
notice not to eat of a great Trout which would be served up to him, because it
was poisoned: That if he came too late, ^he would exhort the Cardinal seriously
^o mind his Conscience, because there was no remedy for him. The Gentleman
having said these very words, spurred a way so fast from the Provincial, that
he was quickly got out of sight, and the Monk made so much have, that he was
all in a sweat: Yet he came not to Ximenes till he was just rising from Table,
when the Fish had wrought its first effect, which was to draw from him a great
deal of blood by the Ears, and the parts where the Nails touch the flesh.
Carillo, who had tasted the Trout, was also ill; bu^ because he had not eaten
so much of that Fish, he recovered, after a long and dangerous sickness. The
Provincial stil^ out of breath, told Ximenes the adventure he met with; and the
Cardinal being convinced by these three evidences, that his life was gone,
answered like a Christian, that he was ready to part from it when it pleased
God. He made no more of it; and employed himself as formerly, about business of
State, during the intervals which the Poison he had taken gave him, till it had
wholly bere^ his Body of his Soul: Which it did but slowly, because the
constitution it met with was exceeding strong.

It was certainly believed, though the matter was not made out, that
Barracaldo, Secretary to Ximenes, had conveyed the Poison into the dish where
the Trout was: Nevertheless the Cardinal still made use of him as before in his
most secret affairs, until his very last breath. The great difficulty was, and
still is, to know at whose solicitation it was that Barracaldo poisoned his
Master. The Flemish writers maintain, that it was by the intriegue of the
Grandees of Spain; and prove it as well by the quarrels which we related
before, as by a Letter of the Constable of Castille intercepted by Chievres
some days before. The Constable expressed himself, that he was not sincerely
reconciled to the Cardinal; and that he was no less heartily his Enemy, though
he had pretended to be neutral in the quarrel that his Son had had with him.

The writers of Spain on the contrary publish, that the Flemish Courtiers of
their King were the Authors of such a villainy; and in their turn prove it by a
Letter of Ximenes to the Catholic King, wherein that Cardinal used all
endeavors to dispose his Majesty to make use of none but Native Spaniards in
his Councils and Negotiations. They add, that Ximenes the very same day that he
ate the poison at Bos-Eguillas, told those that were about him, that that was
not the first time that it had been given him; and that two or three months
before, opening a Letter that came to him from Flanders, in his Closet at
Madrid, a very subtle powder which seemed to have been dusted upon the Paper to
dry the writing, had by his Nose mounted up to his Brain; and that since he had
been continually troubled with insupportable pains in the head, which increased
with time rather than diminished, and that he told his Physicians over and over
again, that he should die by the hands of strangers: But however it be, what
follows will make it appear, that the Cardinal did not suspect Chievres to have
had any hand in his poisoning, seeing he employed the last of his remarkable
actions to satisfy him in the thing that he most ardently desired, which was
to put the Infanto Ferdinand out of condition of pretending any thing in the
succession of his maternal Grandfather and Grandmother.

For understanding this intriegue which is not sufficiently cleared in the
History of Spain, we must know that Ferdinand the Catholic King having a
design, as has been said, to raise the Infanto to the Thrones of Castille and
Arragon, had placed thirty two Servants about him, picked out of the quaintest
wits of Spain, to bring him up in that prospect. These Servants had not
deceived him in the Commission he gave them; and seeing he had distributed the
Offices of the Infanto's household according to the capacity of his Servants, In
the History of the Education of the Infanto.
the four principal were given to men who discharged them to all the intents
and purposes that were proposed in bestowing of them. The Governor of that
young Prince was Pedro Nugnez de Gusman, already invested into one of the chief
dignities of the Order of Calatrava, which is that of Claviary, or chief
Chamberlain: His Tutor, Alvaro Ozorio, Bishop of Astorga, who had been a Monk
of the Order of St. Dominick: His Chamberlain, Gonsalo de Gusman; and the
Steward of his household, Sancho de Paredez.

Men never serve better, than when they act for their own interest in doing
what they are bid; and the Servants of the Infanto being sure of the most
important Offices of State, as fast as they fell, so soon as their young Master
should be King, took all occasions to inspire into him the thoughts of
Sovereignty which were desired he might have. They continued till the death of
his Catholic Majesty, who by an omission, which it cost trouble enough
afterward to repair, put not into his last Will and Testament, that the
Servants of the Infanto should be changed, a thing absolutely necessary, seeing
he deprived him of the Crowns which he left him by his former Will; and in so
contrary a disposition, policy required that such persons should be placed
about that young Prince, as might make him forget what was past, and patiently
support the strange revolution of fortune that had befallen him. It is not
known whether the three Counselors of State, who suggested the last Testament
forgot to propose that caution; or that not judging it so necessary, as indeed
it was, they thought it enough that they had obtained the chief, which was to
exclude the Infanto from the Throne, and neglected the accessory that consisted
in putting new Servants about him: But it is certain, that whatever Ximenes
could do afterward, he could not wholly remedy that inconvenience: For though
he obliged the Infanto to live always with him, and employed more time in
observing the Servants of that young Prince, than in all the other affairs of
State besides; yet he could not prevent but that Gusman his Governor treated
secretly with the chief Lords of Arragon, who promised that if he could
cunningly get his Pupil away from the Cardinal, and bring him to them, they
would immediately place him upon the Throne, and acknowledge him for their King.

The Bishop of Astorga, the Infanto's Tutor, Negotiated also with the Emperor
Maximilian, to persuade him to come to Spain, and depose Ximenes, and proposed
to him the two motives which he thought would be most prevalent to engage him
to that expedition; one, the ^eizing of the Royal Treasury, which ^he frugality
of Ximenes had filled; and the other the marriage of his Imperial Majesty with
Queen Germana, whom the Bishop had entirely engaged into his ^nterests, by
promising to make her Emperess.

The two Treaties were already far advanced before the spies of Ximenes
discovered that of Gusman with the Arragonese, and informed him of it, eight or
ten days before it was to be put in execution. The Cardinal took two measures
to render it ineffectual; one was to send a Copy of it to Chievres; and the
other to double his diligence in observing the Infanto and his Servants.

The Negotiation of the Bishop of Astorga was discovered by another way.
Maximilian, who bordered upon sixty years of Age, was but weakly tempted to
marry again; and to rouse him up to take Queen Germana for a fourth Wife, there
was a necessity that she should have had for portion six hundred thousand
Ducats in ready money, as Bonna Sforza his third Wife had; or that she should
have brought along with her the Low Countries and Bretagne, as Mary of Burgundy
his first Wife, and Anne of Dreus his second had done. In the mean while Queen
Germana, who was no less liberal in her way than Maximilian was in his had
saved nothing of the gratuities that she had drawn from the Catholic King her
Husband; and besides, though she had succeeded to the Estate of Gast on de Foix
her Brother, who was killed at the Battle of Ravenna, yet Francis the First, as
we shall see more at length in the following Book, would not consent that she
should sell it and carry the money to the Emperor, for fear that Prince might
take a conceit to lay it out to the disadvantage of France. Maximilian,
moreover was as bare of credit as of money; In the Titles of the house of Foix.
and seeing he could not borrow so much money as he needed to make a journey
into Spain, with an equipage suitable to his dignity, he was forced to lay
aside his design of marrying Queen Germana. He was not very reserved naturally;
and it being to no purpose for him to conceal any longer the intriegue of the
Bishop of Astorga, he imparted it to Chievres; and by so doing absolutely
convinced him, that for the interest of the Catholic King it was necessary to
remove from the Infanto all the Servants whom the late King had placed about
him, and to give him others that should be devoted to the Court of Bruxelles.
He had written to Ximenes several times to that purpose, who acknowledged the
necessity which Chievres represented to him, but excused himself from
undertaking the execution of it so long as he was in health: Whether it was
that he feared to attract the hatred that would rebound upon him from so
rigorous an action; or that he foresaw that the Catholic King would not have
so much need of him after that the Servants of the Infanto were sent home to
their houses, as he had whilst these Servants were a Bugbear to the Council of
State of Bruxelles. But when he found himself consumed by an internal heat,
which the prodigious quantity of water and other cooling things he drank did
but more and more augment, he observed no more measures, but sent word to
Chievres, that he was ready to fulfill what was desired of him. The only
condition which he required was, that the Catholic King should write him a
Letter according to the draught that he sent, without altering a syllable in
it. The draught contained an absolute and precise order to Ximenes, to remove
from the person of the Infanto his Governor, Tutor, Chamberlain, and Steward
of his Household, by making known to these four Servants, that if his Catholic
Majesty sent them home to their houses, it was not that he was displeased with
them, and that he approved not the conduct which they had hitherto observed in
his Brothers service; but only because he had respect to their Age, and that he
might not be accused of inhumanity, if he gave them not time to take their ease
when the Infanto, who was entered into the sixteenth year of his Age, needed no
more their presence about him: That he should remember their services, and
reward them in such a manner as should show that he was not ungrateful.

The draught added, That for the other Servants of the Infanto, his Majesty
left it to the disposition of the Cardinal, to dismiss or entertain them as he
should judge convenient. Chievres failed not to expede the Letter in the
precise terms demanded, and to send it to the Cardinal. But too much caution
had like to have spoilt all, not only by rendering the Letter useless, but also
hurtful. Chievres who knew the importance of it, recommended it particularly to
the Courier, who was to Post it through France, that he might carry it with
greater expedition into Spain. The Courier discharged his duty, and delivered
faithfully the Letter to the Postmaster: But withal forgot not to tell him,
that Chievres had recommended it to his particular care; and upon that account
alone the Postmaster imagined, that it was the advice which the Catholic King
sent to Ximenes, that he was actually embarked for Spain. The Cardinal at that
time was in the Monastery of Aguera, where it was a hard matter to speak to
him, because he was under a course of Physic. The Postmaster took that
pretext to excuse himself for not carrying him the Letter, and kept it full
five days. He sent in the mean while to the houses of all the Grandees in
Spain, to give them the false news that the King was at Sea, because it was the
custom of the Spanish Lords, to make Presents to those who told them the news
of any extraordinary good fortune, that concerned the State. That buffle-head
to heighten his imprudence on the fifth day carried not the Letter directly,
according to its address; but delivered it to the Bishop of Tortosa, thinking
that Ximenes, who whilst he was in health, communicated to him none of the
principal affairs of the Regency, would not take it ill that he were acquainted
with them during his sickness, were it only to ease himself of so much pains.
The Bishop instead of acknowledging the obligation which he had to Ximenes for
the Cardinals Hat, which he had procured him in the promotion of one and thirty
Cardinals made by Leo the Tenth, thought it not enough to open the Letter, but
besides, showed it to the Infanto, who on that sad occasion reflected with
trouble upon all the displeasures he had received since the death of his
Grandfather, and was convinced that he was about to be totally deprived of the
infallible hopes, and even of the certain Inheritance which he had by Birth. He
communicated the matter to his four principal Servants, who having greater
interest ^n the affair than himself, and resolving ^o animate him for their own
preservati^n as much as he could be; thought it not enough to confirm him in
the opinion he had already, and which was so fa^ourable to them. They added
that the ^lteration in hand must not of necessity have come first, neither into
the thoughts of the Catholic King, nor of Chievres, ^or of the Counselors of
State of Madrid; because if the matter had happen^d any of these three ways,
the order for ^utting it in execution would not have ^een solely sent to the
Cardinal, but to ^he two other Regents with him, or at ^east to one of the two,
that an alterati^n of such importance might not be left ^o the ministry of a
dying man. They concluded that the overture came from Ximenes; and that he had
made it to Chie^res his Correspondent in terms that intimated, that none but he
was capable of putting it in execution. That he could not give a more evident
proof, than that of his terrible aversion to the Infanto; seeing instead of
employing in the works of Repentance the little time he had to ^ive, he lost it
for ever, by spending it in reducing a young Prince born and bred up to Reign,
to the condition of a private man.

The Infanto by this discourse conceived the greatest indignation imaginable,
and went instantly to make his grievances known to Ximenes. He resolved to have
two at least to accompany him, who might serve for witnesses of what past in
the conference; and seeing his Governor was sick, he took his Tutor, and sent
to pray the Cardinal of Tortosa to bear him company. The Cardinal declined it;
and to say the truth, he wanted confidence to appear before Ximenes, having so
offended him, though it was only by a mistake. He had opened the Packet, and
showed it to the Infanto, without foreseeing the advantages which the Servants
of that young Prince might draw from that previous light, in engaging their
Master in their interests; and so soon as he was sensible of his fault, he had
sent the Packet to Ximenes, with most humble excuses for having opened it. So
that the Infanto having by all means essayed to get the Cardinal of Tortosa to
accompany him, In the Life of Adrian the Sixth.
was forced to go with his Tutor, without him, to the house of Ximenes. He
hardly had the patience to salute him, but made his complaint, with Tears in
his Eyes, of the wrong he did him, by depriving him at an unseasonable time,
and without cause of his good and faithful Servants. He added, that he would
not have thought such a procedure so strange, if it had come from Chievres, or
the other Ministers of Bruxelles, seeing he was born in Spain, and that it was
but too well known in the World, what Antipathy there was betwixt the Flemings
and Spaniards: but that it was insupportable to him to find himself ill used by
Ximenes, whom he had till then looked upon as his best friend. He prayed him to
leave those about him who were men without reproach, and with whom he was fully
satisfied, and adjured him to do so by the memory of Queen Isabelle his
Grandmother, to whom he had so often acknowledged, that he was solely indebted
for his Fortune.

Ximenes carried it high proportionably as the Infanto humbled himself: For
besides, that he was persuaded that the affair must be managed with the height
of Authority, and that he would spoil all, if he abated in the least; he was
also of the opinion, and the event showed, that he was not mistaken, that if in
so nice a juncture the Infanto was treated with as much severity as the other
Subjects of the King his Brother, he would think on it so long as he lived, and
that he would begin betimes to obey him as implicitly as if he were infinitely
above him in birth. And, indeed, Ximenes spent no time in telling the Infanto
the reasons why his Catholic Majesty would have him part from his Servants. He
pretended that that young Prince ought as all other Spaniards, to suppose that
all the resolutions flowing from his Majesty's Counsel were just; and upon that
ground alone made him answer with a firm and sedate voice, that his condition
was not so deplorable as he gave it out to be, and that what he judged at that
time to be bad and insupportable, would one day redound to his Glory and
advancement provided he cheerfully gave the other Subjects of the King his
Brother an example of perfect submission, and taugh^ them, that as he had the
honor to be the first Subject of the Monarchy of Spain^ so also he gloried in
obeying his Monard more implicitly than the rest. That h^ was not sensible of
any injury done unt^ him, by taking from him his old Servants, and giving of
him new: That h^ was old enough, and had sufficient experience in such kind of
Politic affairs and that he ought not to be blamed for it, more than a great
many others who were not so much concerned as he, for the real greatness of the
Infanto: That the kindness he showed to his Servants would be commendable on
other occasions; but that it was not to be put into the balance with the
submission which he ^ought to have to the most powerful King of Christendom, In
the relation of that conference.
whose Orders it was neither reason^ble nor safe to resist; and that, in short,
if he persist^d to complain out of time, and show his ^iscontents at the last
Order come from ^landers, he would endanger his Person, is Quality, his Hopes,
and those whom ^e obstinately protected.

The Infanto, who was not accustomed ^o such free repartees, replied to
Ximenes, That he had heretofore felt the effects of is good will, but that at
present when ^e stood most in need of it, he found him wholly changed as to
him: That he had ^ense enough, as young as he was, to ^now that Ximenes was the
Author of ^he affair in agitation; seeing by suspen^ing for some time the
execution of the ^rders of Court, he would give the In^nto leisure to remove
those dangerous ^mpressions which the Catholic King had of his Servants: That
that was the only favor that was demanded of the Cardinal: And that if he
refused it, he hoped he would not take exceptions if the Infanto and his
Servants took their measures, for securing themselves against the ruin
wherewith they were threatened.

Ximenes not so much startled at this menace as he made show of being,
cunningly made use of it to break up the conference. He pretended to be in so
great a passion, that he could no longer continue it, and only told the
Infanto, that he might do as he pleased; but that he swore to him by the life
of the King his Brother, their common Master, that before to morrow night his
Orders should be punctually obeyed. The Infanto perceiving that that was all he
could get of him, left him, and returned to his house. He was no sooner at home
again, but that Espinosa and Cabanish Officers of the Cardinals Guards,
invested him with their Soldiers in the same manner, as if they had had a
design to force his house. Yet all they did was to hinder the Infanto and his
Servants from coming out, and entertaining any communication with others
abroad, and cause Victuals and all other necessaries to be brought them by
trusty persons. The rest of the day and all the following night past in a
profound silence without, and in an extreme agitation within. Neither the
Infanto nor his Servants went to bed, and he deliberated with them during all
that time what he had best to do. The first hours were spent in threats against
the life of Ximenes; and in this they continued till a more sedate temper gave
them leisure to think that they were not in a condition of putting their
menaces in execution. Then were proposed all sorts of expedients, good and bad,
ordinary and extraordinary, rational and whimsical, lawful and prohibited, that
could fall into the imagination of man for declining their obedience; but they
stuck to none, whether that they disliked them, or that they judged them
insufficient. One thing only was agreed upon, which was put in execution upon
the spot. And that was, that the Infan^o should oblige himself in writing to
every one of his Servants in particular, to take them again so soon as ever he
had ^he liberty, and to reward them according to the services they had rendered
^im. He was a long time in signing those promises in the Air, which were ^ever
accomplished; and no sooner was it day, but that the two Officers of Ximenes
his Guards pressed the Servants of the Infanto to leave the house, carry or
cause to be carried out what things they had, to separate, and all return to
the condition they were in before they entered into his service. Then had the
Infanto recourse to his last expedient, which was to send and entreat the
Council of State and the two Nuncio's of the Pope, who then were with Ximenes,
to come to him. Ximenes suffered them to go; and the Infanto in as sad a
posture as he had been in with the Cardinal the day before, but not with Tears
in his Eyes, as he had then had, told the Council and the Nuncio's that the
Catholic King his Brother had ordered all his Household to be changed: That he
could not without putting extreme violence upon himself, comply with so strange
an order: That nevertheless he would obey: But that in quality of Infanto of
Castille he prayed the company by Letters to complain with him to his Catholic
Majesty, of the injury that was done unto him, and to desire that the Order
might be recalled The company willingly undertook that Office, which was but
civil; and Ximenes immediately upon it sent for the Governor, Tutor, and
Chamberlain o^ the Infanto, who were now turned out, to come to him to the
Monastery of Aguilleria. He there received them with looks that showed neither
grief nor joy for their misfortune; and showed them what concerned them in the
Kings Letters, which they had sufficiently examined before. He listened to the
complaints they made thereupon, and fell into a conference with them, wherein
he made it his business to justify the conduct of the Court, which was indeed
his own. He suffered them to reply; but his design was to have caused them all
three to be arrested, if they had not before they took their leave of him
seemed wholly submitted to his pleasure. The Officers of his Guards, who were
present, waited only for the signal to seize their persons, and it is not known
whether the Infanto's Servants suspected it or not: But it is certain there was
no necessity of coming to that extremity, seeing they ended the conference with
a protestation to Ximenes, that they were ready to do all that he commanded
them; and that they only prayed him to have some regard to their honor and
interests, when he should write to the Catholic King.

At this rate they were suffered to go free out of the Monastery, and they
faithfully performed the promise which they had made. All the other Servants
were next sent a going, one only excepted, who by good luck was neither exposed
to the aversion nor jealousy of Ximenes. And that was the famous Alphonso
Castillego, who was in his time, what Lopes de Vega was in the time of our
Fathers. As he was more happy than all other Spaniards in the Poetry of his
Country, so he gave himself wholly to it, and spent therein all the hours
wherein he was not obliged to attend the Infanto. For that end he lived in his
Masters house much after the manner of a Hermit; and meddled in nothing but
versifying, when he was in the vein, and in polishing them when his rapture was
over. He was so far from intrieguing in other men's affairs, that he wholly
neglected his own; and Ximenes, who knew him to be a man of that temper, had no
mistrust that he could inspire into the Infanto any other sentiments but for
the Muses. He continued him in his place of Gentleman ordinary, and augmented
his Salary, that he might make it appear, that at the same time when he
chastized the ambition of thirty two Servants of the presumptive Heir of the
Monarchy, he also rewarded the moderation of the three and thirtieth. He cast
his Eyes upon Alphonso Tellez, one of the wisest Signiors of all Spain, for
succeeding to Gusman in the place of Governor to the Infanto, upon the only
account that Chievres had recommended him to him. But because Tellez was then
at Bruxelles, whither the Catholic King had called him, Ximenes in expectation
of his return, put in his place the Marquess of Aguilat, who afterward got so
much into his young Masters favor, that he continued to be chief Governor:
The Infanto sometime after having begged of the King his Brother to continue
him in the place he had about him, which was granted. All the other new
Officers of the Infanto were chosen by the Cardinal, who in an action of that
importance trusted no man but himself. None were preferred but for merit; but
in the preference of merit, Ximenes followed two measures, first, that they
should be of mean extraction, and then that they should be obliged to no man
but himself for their fortune. He thought that these considerations would be
sufficient to take them off from cabelling, wherein their predecessors had
imprudently engaged; and if they were not sufficient, yet on all hazards it
would be the easier to turn them off also, that they had no relations to
protect them.

The Spaniards seemed very indifferent as to the alteration of all the Servants
of the Infanto, save only in the removal of the young Viscount of Altamira. He
was of the same Age with his Master, and was placed about him as a Page of
Honor. They at first contented themselves to play together at the Infanto's
vacant hours: But afterward the Sympathy of their humors had linked them into
a stricter friendship, than their young years and the disproportion of their
quality seemed to allow of. The truth is, the Viscount had extraordinary
complaisant dispositions to engage his Master. He was a perfect Courtier before
he knew what was fit to be done to become so, and without any other guide but
nature and his duty: It was not enough for him to second the inclinations of
the Infanto with all imaginable exactness; but he prevented them by his
foresight, and he was observed never to have proposed any thing to him but what
was agreeable. The Infanto, who on his part loved him most tenderly, In the
Elegics of the Altamites.
used all means possible to retain him. He besought, wept, importuned, and for
the space of twenty four hours refrained eating and drinking: But Ximenes was
as inexorable upon the account of that Servant, as he had been in respect of
the rest. The Viscount had an original sin which barred him from all favor. He
was the Nephew of the Bishop of Ozorio the Infanto's Tutor; and if he had lived
with that Prince, he might have inspired into him such sentiments as his Uncle
pleased. The fear of this was not without ground, and Ximenes sent the Viscount
home to his Father with Orders to tarry there, until the arrival of the
Catholic King in Spain. Thus the boldest action that was ever seen in Castille
since the Mores made no more war against it, was put in execution by a man who
hardly showed any more signs of life, but in enduring the sharp pains which he
felt; and that with such absolute Authority, that he would employ none in it
but himself alone. Posterity perhaps will find it now difficult still to
believe what we are about to relate: But it is so true, that there is no
circumstance nor evidence of truth wanting to it.

Chievres had wisely apprehended that Ximenes was not powerful enough to change
the Infanto's household at his pleasure; and the reason of his fear was, that
the Governor and Tutor of that young Prince had for kinsmen and intimate
friends two Spanish Lords of great credit and resolution, who would not suffer
without raising some Tumult, that men from whom they expected much, in case of
a revolution in affairs, should be turned out of place. These two Lords were
the Marquess of Astorga and the Count of Lemos, both which, allied to many
Noble Families of the Country, personally valiant, and expert in War: If they
were to be kept in their duty, it could only be by Letters, which the Catholic
King should write to them with his own hand, to inform them, that for the good
of the Monarchy he had resolved to order Ximenes to change all the household of
the Infanto his Brother; and that his Majesty looked upon the Marquess and
Count as faithful Subjects, who would be so far from opposing the execution of
his pleasure, that they would facilitate it as much as they could. The two
Letters were sent open to Ximenes; and it was referred to his discretion to
cause them to be delivered, or to suppress them as he should judge convenient.
But he was offended at it, answered haughtily, that he could do very well
without them, and threw them into the fire. It appeared in the sequel, that ^e
had no better opinion of himself than ^e ought to have, seeing the Marquess and
Count did no more but murmur against him in secret; and perceiving themselves
watched by Soldiers, who ^vaited only for the least stirring on their ^art to
apprehend them, they took no ^xceptions outwardly at the disgrace of their
friends.

In fine, Ximenes having preserved to ^pain the Town of Algiers, had the good
^ck also once more to save Oran, which ^as besieged by the Mores. He received
^he news of it a few days before he had ^he intelligence that the Catholic
King, ^ho had embarked in the beginning of ^eptember one thousand five hundred
and ^eventeen, in the Fleet which he had ^ent to him, was about the end of the
^ame month landed in the Coast of the ^sturias. He was so overjoyed thereat,
that for some days he seemed to have re^overed his health: He rose out of the
^ed, where it was expected he should ^ave died, said Mass, applied himself ^o
public affairs, and ate with the Cor^leliers in their Refectory. At that time
^e received a Letter from Chievres, who ^onsulted him about two businesses of
ex^ream importance: One, to know what should be done with the Infanto; and the
other, if the Catholic King should visit the Kingdoms of Arragon before those
of Castille. The reason why Chievres doubted of the first point was, that it
did not seem probable on the one hand that the Infanto could be left in a
Country where he had been brought up in almost certain hopes of Reigning,
without exposing the people to a perpetual temptation of revolting: And on the
other hand, it was not secure for his Br^ther the King, to send him into any
other of his Dominions. For were it into the Low Countries, the Flemings would
make him their Sovereign, were it for no other reason but to hinder their
Country from being reduced into a Province of the Sp^nish Monarchy; and if it
were into It a^ they who loved their freedom would solicit the Infanto to
seize the Kingdom^ of Naples, Sicily, Sardinia, Majorca an^ Minorca; to the end
that in a Country which was heretofore head of the World there might be no
foreign Sovereign bu^ the King of France, who holding n^thing there but the
Duchy of Milan might easily be driven from thence.

As to the other point Chievres represented that his Catholic Majesty having
by storm been forced upon the Coast o^ the Asturias in Castille, and
necessitated ^o land there, the Castillians might think themselves slighted, if
he went out of their Country to go to Arragon, before ^e were acknowledged
amongst them. That they would ground their discon^ents upon that pretext, that
their Coun^ry was in all respects more considerable ^han that which was
seemingly preferred before it; and that their grievances would be the more
universal, that they would be reckoned just. But to look upon the reverse side
of the Medal, Arra^on dreaded nothing so much, as to be ^o closely united to
Castille, that there was no more distinction made betwixt them. It had many
times testified a di^trust of this to the late King; who to remove the same had
united the Kingdom of Naples to the Crown of Arragon, notwithstanding it was
chiefly conquered and preserved by the Forces of Castille. It was to be feared
that this apprehension might again be revived, if the Catholic King held the
Estates of Castille, before those of Arragon; seeing the Arragonese, who would
then suppose that the preference was due to them, In the last Letters of
Chievres to the Cardinal.
by reason that their Monarchy was more ancient than that of Castille, would
imagine that there was a design of incorporating them into one: Whereas if they
were first visited, and the preservation of their privileges solemnly sworn
to, whereof the principal was to leave them in the state they were in, they
would continue in that profound tranquillity which it was the Kings interest to
maintain them in, that so in the process of time and affairs they might not
cross his designs.

Ximenes made answer, that there was reason to consider what was to be done
with the person of the Infanto, and that that was the thing which had most
perplexed him during his Regency. That that young Prince alone had cut him out
more work than all Spain together, but that he ought not to create so much
trouble to the Catholic King his elder Brother and Master: That his Majesty
would do well once for all to take a course as to that, and that he agreed it
was not fit to send him into any of the Dominions whereof he was actually in
possession; but that he ought to be sent and settled in Germany, so that he
might there render the house of Austria more considerable by forming a second
branch which might constantly remain there, whilst the first made its ordinary
abode in Spain: That the ten Hereditary Provinces were a very handsome allowance
for a younger Brother; and that the Infanto ought to rest satisfied, provided
his Catholic Majesty consented that he might have them upon condition that he
should renounce the successions of his Father and Mother: That by means of
these Provinces the Infanto might marry the Princess of Hungary and Bohemia,
and one day facilitate the Election of the Catholic King to the Empire:
Whereas if he were disposed of in any other manner whatsoever, the advantages
would not be the same, neither as to the house of Austria in gene^al, nor to
the Spanish branch in particu^ar.

As to the Monarchy which the Catholic King ought first to honor with his
presence, Ximenes wrote to Chievres, that it was not a thing to be deliberated
about; and that seeing it was the good fortune of the Castillians that he
landed first in their Country, they might have occasion to take it ill, if he
denied them that preference which the storm that forced him thither had given
them: That the same consideration would hinder the Arragonese from repining at
it; and that however it was, his Catholic Majesty would never Reign absolutely
in Spain, unless he laid down this as a fundamental Maxim of Policy, That
Arragon was but as an accessory in respect of Castille, which was to him in
place of a principal; and that since the two Monarchies were united, and that
Navarre was incorporated into Castille, the Arragonese would be so invested by
the Castillians, that upon what occasion soever they might revolt, the Forces
of the Castillians alone would be sufficient to reduce them to obedience.
Whereas if the discontent of the Castillians might at any time break out into a
Rebellion, who just (...) unjust soever the cause might be, not only the
Arragonese would be too weak (...) quell them, but besides, no human means
appeared capable to hinder the Arragonese from imitating them in their
Insurrection; and then his Majesty would utterly lose Spain, without any hopes
o^ recovering it again.

The advice of Ximenes was exactly followed in these two Articles; but thoug^
the Catholic King had so great a deserence for him; yet it was very difficu^
for the Spaniards, who expected hi^ death every minute, to preserve the sam^
reverence toward him, which till the^ they had had. Anthony de Rojas, Bisho^
of Granada, President of the Council o^ Castille, bore envy to Ximenes, which
^s but too common to those who having but the second place in a famous Society,
think however that they deserve ^he first. He valued himself at least as much
as he valued Ximenes; and imagined, that if that Cardinal had died before the
coming of the Catholic King unto Spain, he would have succeeded to ^im in the
Regency. He had been also ^etled that Ximenes had done a great ma^y important
businesses without commu^icating any thing of them to him, and ^eeing the death
of Ximenes would have ^eprived him of the means of resenting (...), he resolved
not to stay for that. He ^id hold on the occasion that he judged ^ost proper
for baulking Ximenes; and ^epresented in Council, when the Re^ent was not in a
condition to be present, that seeing they had the Royal Authori^y in their
hands, they ought to make ^ll have to go meet the Catholic King to ^emand of
him the confirmation thereof. That it mattered not much whether Xi^enes was or
was not at their head, when they discharged themselves of that ^rst duty,
because his Regency also was ^xpired by the Kings arrival in Spain, or ^t least
so diminished, that he was no ^ore to be considered but upon the account count
of civility: That the sickness of Ximenes afforded him a good excuse, so long
as he pleased, for not rendering in person his duties to his Majesty: but it was
not the same case with the Council, which ought always to be in action; and
lost proportionably its luster as it continued absent from its Master.

It was not the Presidents interest alone, who spoke to this purpose, to make
all have to Court, the other Counselors of State were no less earnest to
appear there. They knew that there had been a resolution taken of reducing
their number to one half, that as many Flemings might be put into their places;
and since none of them in particular were sure of staying in, all of them took
their measures already, to go and solicit to be continued in Commission. So
they all accepted the offer of their President, who to render himself the more
acceptable or to give a more authentic proof of his power, endeavored to have
carried the Infanto with the Council. But it was not in his power, as it would
have been had Gusman been still Governor to tha^ young Prince; and in that
juncture the foresight of Ximenes was chiefly admired^ for the Marquess of
Aguillar, who hel^ the place of Gusman, and found himself only indeb^ed to
Ximenes for his dignity, made answer to the President of the Council, That the
Infanto should not part without orders from the King his Brother, or from the
Cardinal. The President notwithstanding set out on his journey, until Ximenes
stopped him, by sending him the Kings Letters, which served for a regulation of
the action he was about. His Majesty in express terms declared, that he would
not see the Council, until Ximenes were in a condition to come at their head.
The President nevertheless obeyed not as yet, because he had his excuse ready,
that Ximenes was so bad, that he could not be brought before his Majesty; and
that in the mean while the Council of Castille thought it inconsistent with
their dignity, to suffer, that many Lords of the Country should anticipate
them, in rendering their duty to the King. But Ximenes being informed, that the
Council went on in their journey, dispatched a Courier to Chievres, and
complained to him of the slight put upon his person. He sent him word that the
affront would reflect upon the King: He assured him, that the arrival of his
Catholic Majesty ^n Spain, was the sole cause of the bold^ess of the Council
in general, and of the President in particular; protesting, that if before,
they had had the boldness to disobey him, he would have instantly deposed them
all, as he had changed the Servants of the Infanto; and desired that he might
have leave to conclude his Regency with the same ascendant as he had begun, and
till then continued it.

Chievres found nothing in the Letter of Ximenes but what was just, and was of
opinion, that the King should in that particular give him all the satisfaction
he desired. His Catholic Majesty therefore sent commands to the President and
Council, to return back the way they came: To meet as formerly in the City of
Aranda, near the Convent of Aguillera, where Ximenes lay sick; not to budge
from thence without new orders; and above all, not to appear before him, unless
Ximenes were at their head. This was an extreme mortification to the President
and Council; but Ximenes in stead of augmenting it, by insulting over them at
their return, as they apprehended diminished it as much as possibly he could.
The Admiral of Castille, and other Grandees being vexed at the affront which
the President and Council would have put upon him, offered to accompany him
when he should go to wait upon the King: But Ximenes was too wise to run the
risk of giving his Master jealousy, by accepting of an unseasonable attendance
of persons of such quality. He thanked them for their civility; and told them,
that as he had found fault, that the Council went without him to kiss the Kings
hand, so his Majesty's Council of State might have reason to take exceptions,
if he went without them. He therefore prepared to part with the Council upon
the first orders; and seeing he perceived his end drawing near, he could never
have thought that his life should out-last his favor. In the mean time he
found it but too true; and since it is in this place that the Spanish writers
fall foulest upon Chievres, it is fit we should know what hand he had in the
disgrace of Ximenes.

It is certain that this Cardinal, whether it was that he had a singular
affection for his Countrymen, or that he thought they could not suffer
strangers to have any authority in Spain, had written oftener than once to the
Catholic King, that he should bring with him no Flemings at all, or that he
should bring so few as might give no umbrage. His Majesty, who kept nothing
from Chievres, had showed him the Letters of Ximenes, and Chievres at first was
not scandalized thereat, because he did not think they concerned him; whether
he grounded his thoughts upon the alternative, contained in them, in these
words, That his Majesty should bring no Flemings at all, or that he should
bring but a few, and that he judged that that alternative ought to be
understood of him, and the rather, because the Spaniards had no reason to think
it strange, that their King was accompanied by him who had been his Governor,
granting he were no Spaniard; or that he wholly confided in the friendship that
Ximenes had expressed to him, and in the good offices which he had rendered him.
But he changed his opinion, when he came to understand that Ximenes was out of
all patience, that his Majesty before he parted from Bruxelles, had there
chosen the Council, which he was to make use of in Spain, and named all the
Ministers whom he was to employ in it. Not but that a great many Spaniards were
chosen among the rest: But besides, that there were more Flemings than
Spaniards; he had also admitted into his Council Germans, who were altogether
as unacceptable to the Spaniards as the Flemings were.

The Catholic King had done the same as to the principal Offices of Castille
and Arragon that were not Hereditary; which was the more unsupportable to
Ximenes, that during his whole life he had been extraordinarily jealous of the
grandeur of his Nation. He thought it so great an evil, that in his opinion
there was no other remedy for it, but to bar all strangers in general from
place in Council, and from the Offices of the Monarchy of Castille, and to
leave them none, but such as concerned the Catholic King, as he was Archduke
of the Low Countries. There was no appearance that Chievres was excepted out of
that regulation, seeing he was the first that was provided for, and that he
actually enjoyed the two fairest places of the Royal Family, which was that of
high Steward, and of Comtador Major, which answers to that of Lord high
Treasurer; and that by consequence, if the reformation began at him, the other
Officers would have no cause to think it strange, that it came next to them:
Whereas if any regard were had to his merit and services ^n so nice a juncture,
the rest would not ^ail to pretend also that respect should be had to theirs.

Thus Ximenes finding no mean betwixt those two extremes, fell a soliciting the
Catholic King to send home to Flanders all the strangers without exception,
who had accompanied him to Spain. He was the most forward man in the World, to
put in execution what he undertook; and so soon as he had once opened his mind
to his Master, he wrote to him so often about it, that he became troublesome.
Chievres, whom Ximenes would have ruined, and wh^ could not maintain himself,
but by undoing Ximenes, made his advantage o^ the occasion, which he afforded
him o^ heaving at him by turn. He represented to the Catholic King, that the
violence of Ximenes was become so excessive, that it concerned the Royal
Majesty to put a stop to it: That it was convenient to suffer that Cardinal to
act in his own way so long as there was no King in Spain because then the
Sovereign Authority was to be entrusted into the hands of on^ or other, and
that there was no Spaniard in whose hands it run less risk: Bu^ that at
present, if his Majesty still acte^ by his Councils, his Countrymen would be
accustomed to acknowledge no other King but him: That there was no instance in
History, that a Sovereign had been constrained to change his Council and
Household upon his succeeding to new Dominions; and that if his Majesty
subjected himself to so hard a Law, he would be in a worse condition than
private men, who take those whom they love for their Servants, and without
distinction or reserve consult those whom they esteem: That he must betimes
make the Spaniards sensible, that they ought to submit to the pleasure of their
King, and not their King to receive the Law from them; and that the shortest
and easiest way of accomplishing that, was to begin with Ximenes.

The Catholic King had a particular kindness for his Countrymen; and though
he used all imaginable circumspection to conceal it, yet those who saw him
often, believed it to be no less than that which Ximenes had for the Spaniards.
He was not as yet possessed with the Maxim of Queen Isabelle his Grandmother,
That Kings ought not to be touched with the sentiments which Nature inspires.
No body had put him upon the choosing of his Council after the death of his
Grandfather. He had done it of himself; and the sequel made it apparent, that
it was done with greater prudence than his Age seemed to allow. In the mean
time he would have been reckoned imprudent, if he had turned off and sent home
into the Low Countries so many deserving men, from whom he expected no less
services than his maternal Ancestors had received from the Spaniards. It would
have so reflected upon his reputation in his entering into the World, that it
would have been hard for him to have retrieved it again; and nevertheless it
was absolutely necessary for him to have it unblemished in the design which he
had already conceived of taking just measures for succeeding to his paternal
Grandfather in the Empire.

So that the answers he made to Ximenes were not positive; and that Cardinal
being persuaded, that his Eloquence would carry what his Letters could not
obtain, pressed the King to suffer him to come to him with all expedition; and
to allow him long and secret Audiences, wherein he might inform his Catholic
Majesty of many things, which he could not exactly learn but from his mouth.
But his Majesty made answer, That his health was too precious to the State not
to be minded, and that he thought it not fit to expose him to a long journey,
which would too much incommode him. That the Court should suddenly draw near to
the Monastery where he was; and that then his Catholic Majesty would not fail
to see and confer with him as long as he should think it convenient, and to
make use of his Councils.

Ximenes perceived very well then that his desire was eluded, but he was better
persuaded of it, when he was informed that his Catholic Majesty resolved to
call the Estates of Castille without asking his advice about it. He concluded
that he would not have been neglected in an affair of that importance, unless
he had been disgraced; and nevertheless, the fault that they were about to
commit, seemed to him to be so considerable, that ^e thought he ought to make
an effort for preventing it. He wrote not to Chievres, from whose hand he
supposed the blow to come, but immediately to the King, to represent to him,
that it was now more necessary in Spain than elsewhere, that the first
interview betwixt a Sovereign and his subjects, should be on the one hand with
much affection, and on the other with great submission; and that it had been
ever observed in all the Country, and especially in Castille, that the Reigns
had always continued as they ^ad begun: That in the mean time the Castillians
were not so calm as to be safely assembled; and that it was the more dangerous
to grant them the Convocation of the Estates, that they were more pressing in
demanding it: That they pretended to have the same liberty again, which they
had before the Reign of Ferdinand and Isabelle, and that they had drawn up the
Articles of it: That they would press his Catholic Majesty to sign them
immediately after the opening of the Estates; and that if he signed them, all
the labor of his Grandfather, Grandmother, and of the Regency, would be
utterly lost; if he refused to sign them, he would engage himself in a civil
War.

Ximenes added, that the sole expedient to be taken, was to Reign absolutely at
first: Not to grant the Spaniards the Convocation of the Estates; and so to
accustom them to the yoke during the first years of his Catholic Majestie^
Reign, that they should have no ground to think it strange, when they might
have occasion to complain of it. It is no^ known how Ximenes came to discove^
the disposition of the Castillians, but i^ the sequel it appeared to be but too
true Nevertheless he was but little credited because it was thought that he had
onl^ written out of interest; and that he only endeavored to put off the
holding of the Estates, because he foresaw that all that could be done for
lessening his Authority, yet he must still retain a good deal of it till then,
the King without him not being able to determine the affairs of consequence
that were begun during the Regency: Whereas he would be no longer necessary to
his Catholic Majesty, after he had given an account of his administration in
the Estates.

His Majesty then persisted in the resolution of calling them; and it being out
of the power of Ximenes to delay the execution of it, he labored to obtain
that at least a place that might be convenient for him might be chosen: He did
not himself propose his Metropolitan City of Toledo; but he brought it about,
that the Inhabitants of that City went and represented to the Catholic King,
that they had been almost in continual possession of having the Estates, and
desired that that favor might be continued to them. But it was not thought fit
to call them in a place where Ximenes was too powerful; and it was feared that
the Grandees, who were not fully reconciled to him, would take it ill. So that
the City of Vailladolid was chosen; and Ximenes no sooner knew of it, but he
sent to hire for him the house of Doctor Bernardin, commodious for a sick
person, because it was out of the hearing of noise, and yet near enough the
Hall where the Assembly was to sit: But Terremonde, a Flemish Gentleman,
provided to the charge of high Marshal of the Court, appointed it
notwithstanding for another; and that the Cardinal might have less pretext of
complaining of it, that house was appointed for Queen Germana.

Ximenes being persuaded, that since he had taken the Lodgings, he was
concerned in honor to keep them, wrote to the King, and complained of the
harshness of Terremonde, sending withal a Gentleman to Queen Germana, to pray
her to have some respect to his indisposition. The King did him justice; and
the Queen civilly sent him word, that she would rather lie in a Cottage than
dislodge him. His house was then prepared for him; but Terremonde put another
trick upon him worse than the former. He appointed Lodgings for Ximenes his
Train in a little Town at a pretty distance from Vailladolid, to hinder his
Servants from giving him the attendance that was necessary for a sick person;
and Ximenes being informed that this last affront was put upon him at the
solicitation of the Duke of Alva, In the relation of his disgrace.
was the less able to dissemble it. He lost patience, and was heard to say with
a sigh, That he had never been so treated at Court, when he followed it in the
bare quality of Confessor to Queen Isabelle, nor even when he was under the
disgrace of King Ferdinand. That he had oftener than once been present at the
Estates in those two times; and that his Servants were always left about him,
though the Court of the Kings of Castille was then more numerous than that of
their Grandson, and that they had more Horse and Foot Guards than he had: That
that was not a reward suitable to the importance of his Services; and that
calumnies must have been more believed than they ought, since he was used so
ill.

There is nothing more dangerous to disgraced Favorites, than to complain,
because they who have supplanted them commonly envenom such kind of complaints.
It is probable the same course was taken with Ximenes, since the
disadvantageous relation that was made of it to the Catholic King, procured to
the Cardinal that terrible Letter which dispatched him: But there is no
positive proof that it was Chievres, rather than the Cardinal of Tortosa, the
Chancellor Savage, Lanoy Master of the Horse, the Referendary Galtinara, and
the other chief Courtiers of his Majesty, who knowing that Ximenes struck no
less at them than at Chievres; and finding that they were not so able as he to
maintain themselves, were so much the more concerned to prevent the di^mission
wherewith they were threatened, by the disgrace of him who demanded it.

However it be, occasion was taken from the words which, as we said, had
escaped Ximenes, to represent to the Catholic King, that that Cardinal was a
man the more to be feared, that he could never be dispossessed of his
prejudices; and that having once disapproved the Convocation of the Estates of
Castille, he would endeavor, if he were present in them, to make it out, that
his foresight was not vain, and by consequence would so bring things about,
that they should not conclude to his Majestie^ advantage. It was thereupon
resolve^ to hinder him from coming there; and the Catholic King drawing near
the place where he was, wrote him a Letter which ended not in the same strain
as i^ began. His Majesty having signified unto him that he desired to see him
at Moyados, to confer with him, and to receive his instructions and counsels
how he ought to Reign in Spain, added, that he would also wholly discharge him
from ^he weight of affairs, and immediately after send him home to his Church
of To^edo, where he might end his days in greater tranquillity. That the
services which he had rendered to Spain were so considerable, that none but God
could ^eward him for them. That his Catho^ick Majesty would think of him as
long ^s he lived, and always honor him as ^is Father.

The Pill was no less bitter for being gilt, and it was the ill luck of
Ximenes, ^o have relapsed into his Fever the day before. He could never imagine
that so ^uch ingratitude would have been ^hew'd toward him; and to complete his
affliction, he found the Letter to have ^een written by Mota, whom he design^d
for his successor in the Archbishopric ^f Toledo, though it was signed by the
Catholic King, and written in his ^ame. These four circumstances made ^uch an
impression in the mind of Xime^es, as surpassed all which his experience and
reason could do to efface it; and his (...) it so increased upon it, that
within four or five hours after he died, the Ninth of December, one thousand
five hundred and seventeen. His Enemies as well as Friends confessed, that he
was the most eminent Minister of State in Europe, in having during the space of
two and twenty months only that his administration lasted, brought the high
Nobility of Spain to an entire submission: appeased the Tumults of Andalusia:
taken from John d' Albert all hopes of recovering Navarre: publicly chastised
the Rebellion of the Malaguins: found out the secret of keeping standing Forces
in Castille and Arragon, without a penny charge to the King or State: cleared
the Coasts of Spain: besieged Algiers with Forces able to have taken it, if
they had been well commanded: defended Bugie, Melills, and Le Pegnon de Velez
against the furious attacks of the Elder Barbarossa: preserved the Fortress of
Arsilla to the Crown of Portugal; and paid the va^debts of Ferdinand and
Isabelle, without having imposed any Tax upon the People.

The Archbishop of Sarragossa, natural Uncle to the Catholic King, who as has
been mentioned before, had pretended to the Archbishopric of Tolea^ during the
life of Ximenes, and was b^ consequence the cause of his disgrace, imagined
that the Benefice would not be refused him now it was vacant. He hunted it
hard; but his diligence was prevented by the Marquess of Villena, and some
other Grandees of Spain, who being desirous to procure the friendship of
Chievres, demanded the Archbishopric for William de Croy his Nephew and
Godson, whom he loved more than all his other relations. The Catholic King
before he left Flanders, had procured for ^im, though he was but Nineteen years
^f Age, the Bishopric of Cambray, and ^iven him several other Benesices; and
^nce his Majesty's arrival in Spain, he ^ad dispatched a Courier to the Court
^f Rome to solicit the Pope for a Cardi^als Hat for him, which was granted ^m
at the next promotion. So that better settlement could not be wished ^r him in
Spain, than that of the chief ^cclesiastical dignity of the Country, ^d that
was the motive which inclined ^e great men to speak in his favors. ^he
Catholic King, who would not ^at the Spaniards should suspect him of
gratitude, and foresaw not the hatred at he was about to draw upon Chievres,
^earfully bestowed the Benefice in the ^astle of Tordesillas, where he was gone
out of a desire of seeing his Mother. He was there almost alone, and would see
no body, because nature inclined him to hide as much as he could the
extravagances of a Princess, of whom he held his life and Crowns: Nevertheless,
his Uncle came thither, being impatiently persuaded, that he could not be soon
enough Primate of all Spain in general, as he was already of Arragon in
particular, because of the Archbishopric of Sarragossa. But he was denied
entry into Tordesillas with the same severity, that all others were treated,
whom the Catholic King had not brought along with him; and he was bid as well
as the rest to go and expect his Majesty at Vailladolid, where the States were
in a few days to be opened.

He loudly complained of this, and pretended that his Birth had deserved some
preference in that particular. Nevertheless he obeyed, and took his journey to
Vailladolid; and his Majesty was no sooner come thither, but that h^ begged of
him the Archbishopric of T^ledo. He answered him, that he ha^ given it to the
Bishop of Cambray; an^ that the Brief of it was expeded at Tord^sillas, where
the Grandees of Castille ha^ solicited him for that Bishop. The vex^tion that
that reply put the Archbishop of Sarragossa into, made him entertain two
thoughts equally false: The one was, that Chievres desiring to procure his
Nephew the same Ascendant over the Clergy of Spain, that he himself had at
Court; and not daring to do it directly, because his ambition would thereby
have been too visible, had for that end employed the Marquess of Villena, and
the other Grandees who were with the King: And the other, that the entry into
the Castle of Tordesillas had only been denied him by the intriegue of
Chievres, who needed all the time that the King spent there, to dispose his
Majesty to name his Nephew to the Archbishopric, and who foresaw that the
presence of the Archbishop of Sarragossa would have been enough to have broken
all his measures, if he had appeared at Court before the expedition of the
Brief.

What favors a designed revenge easily gets place in ones mind; and the King's
Uncle was so much comforted in his misfortune, that he found the person he was
to aim at, that he gave himself no more trouble in examining whether his
conjecture was well grounded or not. He took his leave of the Catholic King so
soon as he had been refused; and the same day left Vailladolid, upon pretext
that he could stay no longer with honor, since he had neither place nor rank
in the Estates of Castille. He went back Post into Arragon, where his
complaints against the Government were heard in all parts, at the same time
that the report was spread at Vailladolid, that the Nephew of Chievres was
Archbishop of Toledo. The Deputies of the Towns, and Commonalty of Castille,
who were come thither for the opening of the Estates, were the more surprised
at it, that it was without example, that the best Benefice of the Country
should be conferred upon a stranger. At first however, they thought it enough
to exaggerate their amazement to those who had a mind to hear them: But
afterward, as there is no Nation in the World that trouble their heads more
with what is to come than the Spaniards, so through much reasoning about the
future they apprehended, that the Flemings encouraged by the success of their
first essay, would take a liking to the other Benefices of Spain, and beg them
as fast as they fell. How to hinder them was a very great difficulty, because
on the one hand there was no standing Law against it and on the other, there
was no appearance that they could impose upon the new King a restraint from
which his Predecessors had been exempted.

For understanding this mystery of Policy, which employed the prudence of
Chievres for six whole weeks, it is to be supposed that the Kingdom of Castille
having been at first one of the least of Spain, had not thought fit to take
measures to hinder strangers from enjoying the Benefices thereof, seeing
strangers went only thither to serve in the Armies as being Crossed, and to
return home again to the several Provinces of Europe, from whence they came,
when the time was expired wherein they had made a vow to Fight; and if they
stayed in the Country, they were no more looked upon as strangers, but as
Castillians, because they lived and commonly died there, and their Children
without contradiction enjoyed all the privileges of Native Castillians.
Matters had continued in that state when Castille was enlarged, because their
conquests were made upon the Mores, who, if they would change their Religion,
became Castillians; and if they persisted in the belief of the Alcoran, were
forced to go and live elsewhere. The Lands which they left were given to Native
Castilli^ns; and it could not be taken ill, that these should enjoy the
Benefices of the conquered places, because they themselves or their Ancestors
had founded them. In fine, the disposition of Benefices had not been changed
there when Isabelle married Ferdinand, because that Queen had reserved it
wholly to her self by her contract of Marriage, and named none but Native
Castillians to fill them. But after that Charles of Austria had joined the
Low Countries to Castille, he two ways contravened the custom established in
Castille, concerning Offices and Benefices. He provided Arragonese to
Magistracies and Church-revenues lying in Castille, with the same liberty as he
reciprocally gave to the Castillians the Ecclesiastical and Secular dignities
of Arragon, and he nominated sometimes Flemings to Offices and Benefices of
Castille and Arragon. The Castillians received two prejudices by that
Innovation; one in that their Offices and Benefices being more numerous and of
greater Revenue than the Offices and Benefices of Arragon for two Castillians
that profited of the Ecclesiastical and Secular Revenues lying in Arragon,
twenty Arragonese profite^ of those of Castille: The other prejudic^ was, that
the reciprocal liberty established betwixt the Castillians and Arragonese
concerned neither of the two Nations, in regard of the Flemings, seeing it was
certain, that the Catholic King durst nominate no Spaniard to the Offices and
Benefices of the Low Countries; and if he had attempted to do it, the Seventeen
Provinces would sooner have revolted than suffered it.

The Castillians, who were nothing short of the Flemings in haughtiness, and
far surpassed them in cunning, resolved to maintain themselves as well as they
in their ancient custom; and there could not be a more ingenious device than
they invented for accomplishing it. They resolved to confound their ancient
customs with their privileges; and amongst these they inserted, that no
stranger, for what cause, and under what pretext it might be, should hold any
Magistracy or Benefice in Castille. Nay, their forecast went a little farther;
and seeing they knew that the Arragonese and Flemings aspired only to their
Offices and Benefices, that they might convert the vast Revenues that belonged
to them into ready money, and transmit it into their own Country: They revived
one of their ancient Laws, which upon pain of death, prohibited the Exportation
of Gold or Silver out of their Country, without the consent of the States. They
inserted both these into the Articles which the Catholic King was to swear,
before he was owned for Monarch of Castille, and presented them to him
altogether. He examined them with Chievres, who immediately made his Master
observe the cunning of the Castillians. He represented to him, that they
intended to oblige him to conditions unknown to his Predecessors; and that if
he condescended to them, the consequences thereof would be very bad for the
house of Austria in general, and in particular for him who ought to be the head
of it. That that house, indeed, was in a fair way of making the most powerful
Monarchy that ever was in Christendom, since the Family of Charlemagne; but
that that Monarchy would have a defect, to which that of Charlemagne was not
subject, seeing the Territories of the house of Austria would be too remote one
from another, to afford mutual assistance in time of urgent necessity: That
there was no other remedy for that, but to do in the Monarchy of Spain with
some proportion what God has done in the making of the Body of man, wherein
the parts are engaged by their own interest for the preservation one of
another: That if the Flemings and Arragonese were frustrated of the
Magistracies and Benefices of Castille; they would not put themselves to the
trouble of assisting the Castillians against the Turks and Mores; as, if the
Castillians enjoyed not the same privileges in Arragon, they would not
vigorously oppose the French, who threatened to take Arms again for restoring
the posterity of John d' Albert to the Throne of Navarre: That it was not the
same in respect of the Flemings, who could not, indeed, neither assist nor be
assisted by Spain by Land, France lying betwixt them: But passage was open by
Sea; and as the Maritine Forces of the Low Countries infinitely surpast those
of Spain, so Spain had incomparably more need of the Low Countries, than the
Low Countries had of it: That the custom of giving Offices and Benefices to the
Flemings in Castille must not be broken off then, though the Castillians might
not reciprocally have the like privileges in Flanders, and by consequence his
Catholic Majesty ought not to engage himself in any thing to the contrary.

The Council approved the Arguments of Chievres, who was afterward
Commissionated to adjust with the Deputies of Castille, the manner how the King
before he was acknowledged should take his Oath to maintain the privileges of
the Country. The first conference was not over before Doctor Zumel, who in
quality of Deputy of the City of Burgos was as yet the capital City of Castille.
Burgos, was the chief of the rest, and by consequence had right to speak
before them, perceived that Chievres was so well informed of the Laws and
Customs of Castille, that it would be impossible to impose upon him: For
Chievres made appear by a discourse no less eloquent than solid, that the Kings
of Castille had never engaged themselves, neither not to bestow the Offices and
Benefices of the Country upon strangers, nor yet to hinder the Transportation
of Gold and Silver out of the Kingdom. He added, that there had been no ground,
neither on the Castillians part to impose that obligation upon their Kings, nor
on the part of their Kings to charge themselves with it; and proved it
invincibly, because Castille was neither delivered from the Tyranny of the
Mores, nor erected into a Monarchy, nor enlarged at the cost of the Insidels,
but by the assistance of the French, English, and other Nations, which the
Croisadoes had drawn thither; and the Castillians were so far from discouraging
them by Laws and Customs, which frustrated them of the Offices and Benefices of
the Country, that on the contrary there was a famous example of Alphonso the
beloved, who to hinder Henry of Burgundy from returning into France, gave him
his Daughter and Portugal: That that Prince, whose memory was so precious to
the Spaniards, and the other wise Founders of the Monarchy of Castille, would
have gone directly contrary to their own interests, if they had acted
otherwise, seeing their Subjects not sufficing to inhabit the Countries, which
from time to time they recovered from the Mores, nor to maintain them; if they
had reserved the Magistracies and Revenues of the Church for the Native
Castillians, they would have encouraged but a few to become their Countrymen:
Whereas by admitting indifferently to the Offices and Benefices of Castille
strangers as well as Natives, they engaged them to their Country, by the same
bonds that they themselves were engaged to it. That the same conduct was no
less necessary in respect of Silver and Gold, seeing it was known that most
part of the excessive sums which the Kings of Castille had spent in their
Conquests, were not drawn neither from the Revenue of the Crown, nor out of the
purses of their subjects, but had been furnished by the voluntary contributions
of strangers concerned in the enlargement of the Christian Religion; and that
these strangers would not have continued, as they did for many Ages, their
liberalities, if the Castillians, who received so much Gold and Silver from
other people, had been so ungrateful, as to suffer none of it to return back
into the places from whence it came.

By this discourse Zumel found that the Mine had taken vent, and spent no more
time in maintaining, that the Articles in question were not novel. He turned
the affair another way; and only told Chievres, that if the thing were rightly
taken, neither he nor his Nephew were any way concerned in it: That a long
while ago their Letters of Naturalization had past in Castille, and that his
great places of high Chamberlain, high Treasurer, Steward of the Kings House,
and Head of the Council, were in no danger, no more than the Archbishopric of
Toledo, to which his Nephew was provided: That Castille being for the future to
be the Center of the Monarchy of the house of Austria, it were fit that it
should have some privilege more than the other Dominions, which in respect of
it would only be looked upon as Provinces; and that it desired no other, but
that the Native Castillians might be assured of their Offices, Benefices, their
Gold and Silver, and the wealth that might come to them from the Indies.

Chievres could not endure the opinion that the Spaniards had of him, as if
interest were capable to sway him. He cunningly replied to Zumel, that he well
knew, that neither he nor his Nephew had any way solicited for the Letters of
Naturalization whereof he spoke, and that they had been sent to him before ever
it had entered his thoughts to sue for them: That he thought it not proper to
slight them, seeing they gave him an opportunity of serving his Master in Spain
with the same privileges that he had served him in Flanders; but that he
valued them not so much as to prefer them before the interests of his Catholic
Majesty, whom they would so far debase, as to impose upon him Articles to be
sworn to, which they never durst have offered to the Kings his Predecessors,
even when they were no more but barely Kings of Castille: That if his word
might be taken, the Catholic King would let them see that he was the most
powerful Monarch of Europe; and that if till then he could be very well without
them, he could for the future make them comply with their duty.

Zumel being convinced by so smart and firm a reply, that he had driven
Chievres too far, essayed to soften him again, and prayed him to find out an
expedient, which on the one hand might not too much choke the Castillians, and
on the other should not too far engage the Catholic King; and Chievres having
well considered on it, proposed one which was accepted. It was that the Estates
of Castille should indeed present Articles to be signed by the King, wherein
the two in debate should be inserted, but that his Catholic Majesty should
only swear in general, to observe them in the manner that his Predecessors had
been obliged to it. The Oath was taken on both parts with this qualification;
and so soon as the Estates were dismissed, on the Seventh of February, one
thousand five hundred and eighteen, Chievres advised the King, that then was
the juncture for sending the Infanto Ferdinand his only Brother into the
Low Countries, and from thence into Germany; and that if he delayed it longer,
it would be far more difficult for him to be acknowledged King by the
Arragonese, it being the humor of that people to have a great respect for the
Princes of the Royal Family, when they were present, and easily forget them
when absent. The Fleet for transporting him was ready; and the Catholic King
having visited the Infanto at ARanda, and kept him sometime at Court, told him,
that it was absolutely necessary for the grandeur of their Family, that he
should go to the Emperor their Grandfather, who, according to the opinion of
Physicians, could not live above a year longer: That the presence of his
Catholic Majesty in Spain was necessary for two or three years at least; and
that if neither of the two of the Grandsons of his Imperial Majesty were with
him at his death, it was to be feared that the Germans might not choose one of
them for his Successor; and if the house of Austria lost the Empire, it could
not long preserve the Hereditary Provinces belonging to it: That besides, it
was incomparably more proper that the Infanto should be then in Germany, than
that the Catholic King should; seeing his Majesty being resolved to give him
these Provinces for his share, the Electors who would look upon him as a Prince
of Germany, would prefer him before his Majesty, who possessing nothing longer
amongst them, would be a stranger as to them, and would make them jealous,
because of the greatness of his power.

The Infanto listened not to this discourse with that submission which the
Historians of Spain attribute unto him. He complained of the inhumanity that
was used toward him: He affirmed that it came near to that of the Ottoman
Emperors in regard of their younger Brothers: He upbraided his elder Brother,
that having taken from him the Crowns of Spain, he would also deprive him of
the only comfort that could remain to him, which was the hopes of succeeding to
him one time or other: He seemed to slight the share that was proposed to him:
He exaggerated the disproportion, or to say better, the prodigious difference
betwixt the allowance of the Hereditary Provinces, and the lot of Spain and the
Low Countries; protesting against the violence that was done to him, and
threatening upon the first occasion to resent it: But all the notice that was
taken of him, was to let him safely discharge his Choler. There was no other
answer made to him, but that he must obey; and that if he stayed till he were
by force sent out of Spain, he would expose himself to the danger of obtaining
neither the Hereditary Provinces, nor any thing else for his share.

None dread poverty so much, as they who being upon the point of possessing
vast Estates, are disappointed of them by sudden and unexpected accidents;
because their distracted imagination never fails to represent to them, that the
state wherein they are, is not so far distant from misery, as the mediocrity
which they enjoy is from the plentifulness they thought themselves sure of. The
Infanto, before he was fourteen years of Age, saw himself within a step of the
Crown of Spain: He had fallen from his so well-grounded hopes by a mere trick
of two or three Ministers of State with the Catholic King his Grandfather: In
lieu of that he was offered the Hereditary Provinces, with hopes of marrying
the Princess of Hungary. The establishment was far inferior to that wherewith
he had been so long flattered; but after all, it was better to have that, such
as it was, than to have nothing at all; and in that consideration only the
Infanto submitted to his Brothers pleasure in such a manner, as nothing
appeared outwardly of the constraint he felt within.

Seeing the Spanish Servants, In the Voyage of the Infanto.
whom he might have carried with him into Germany, would not have been well
received there, and that they could not easily have complied with the customs
of the Country, he was obliged to admit of another change in his Family, and to
accept of Flemish and German Servants. The Count of Buce, a near kinsman to
Chievres, had the chief place in it, and the rest were only conferred upon
those whom he thought most deserving. The Infanto sailed to Flanders with a
fair wind, and stayed but a short while there. He hastened to the Imperial
Court, where, as we shall see in the sequel of this History, he found the same
fortune, that he had met with in Spain.

Leonora of Austria, his eldest Sister was already marriageable; and the
Catholic King, who had carried her with him from Flanders, thought of
disposing of her in marriage. She was beautiful, and would bring with her into
the House wherein she should Marry, the hopes of succeeding to all the
Dominions of the Monarchy of Spain, failing her two Brothers. Margaret of
Austria, her Aunt, had taken the care of her Education, and had inspired into
her such early resolutions of sacrificing her self for the interests of her
Family, as stuck to her so long as she lived. The Catholic King, her elder
Brother, had no ready money to give her: Nevertheless in one and the same
Family she had two Lovers that deserved her, who offered to take her without
putting her Brother to any trouble for a Portion. We have taken notice before,
that Manuel King of Portugal Espoused in first marriage his Nephews Widow,
eldest Sister to the Mother of the Catholic King, by whom he had a Son, who if
he had lived, would have put by the Catholic King from the successions of
Castille and Arragon. But the Mother dying of her first Child, and the Child
not surviving her above two years, Manuel for his second Wife married the
Sister of his former, younger than the Catholic Kings Mother, by whom he had
five Sons and four Daughters. She also had left him a Widower at the Age of
forty nine years; and seeing he was not of the humor to spend the rest of his
life in Widowhood, he courted for a third Wife the elder Sister of the
Catholic King, and Niece to his two former Wives: But he was rivall'd by his
own eldest Son John Infanto of Portugal, who pretended to the Infanta Leonora
upon better ground, as being of the same Age with her. So that the Catholic
King was to choose Father or Son, which he pleased; and Chievres inclined him in
favor of the Father, by representing to him, that if he took the Infanto of
Portugal for his Brother-in-law, he could draw no assistance from him when he
stood in need of it for canvassing for the Empire; it being the custom of
Portugal that the eldest Sons of the Kings had no more subsistence but their
Fathers Table, with a small Pension, until the Law of Nature and of the State
called them to the Crown. That in the mean time they ate with their Fathers;
their Servants of whom they had but a small number, were paid with the Kings;
and that they received for Clothes and their small pleasures but about a
thousand Crowns a month: Whereas Manuel being the King of Europe that had most
money, and having been governed by his two former Wives, he would give the
third no less dominion over him; and would not have the power to refuse her
when she should desire him to lend the King her Brother the vast sums of money
that he would stand in need of, for disposing the more scrupulous Electors to
give him their Voices.

The Catholic King being prevailed upon by that Argument, employed Chievres to
persuade the Infanta his Sister to prefer the Father before the Son, and
Chievres for completing what he had begun, had no more to do, but to take the
Infanta by her weak side, which was ambition. He represented to her that
Manuel, Amongst the Pictures of Portugal.
who had always been reckoned the handsomest Monarch of his Age, had not as yet
lost any of his personal Charms: That few men of his Age matched him in vigor:
That he had all the signs of a long life, and by consequence the Prince of
Portugal must wait long before he could come to the Crown: That the Princess
that should marry him would be in danger of never being Queen; whereas she that
married his Father, would be sure of it the first day.

The Infanta Leonora was of the Age wherein Maids are only taken with what
glisters to their Eyes: She considered nothing but the outside of Royalty, was
charmed with it, and fancied that she could not too soon be a Queen. So she
willingly fell into the snare that Chievres said for her, and consented to
marry Manuel. She was not long left in that inclination without giving her
satisfaction, for fear she might change her mind; and she was Crowned the same
day she was married by Proxy, though it was still the custom to delay such
Ceremonies till the Marriage were in effect consummated.

The Catholic King being thus discharged of his Brother and elder Sister, went
merrily into Arragon, where he found a fresh the usefulness of the Council that
Chievres had given him, of removing with all expedition, and by all means, the
Infanto Ferdinand out of Spain. The Estates of Arragon assembled at Sarragossa,
in the Palace of the Archbishop, made greater difficulty of acknowledging the
Catholic King for their King during the life of the Queen his Mother, than the
Estates of Castille had done. They demanded in the first place, that they might
be allowed to give their Oath at the same time to the Infanto Ferdinand, as
presumptive Heir of their Monarchy; and it was the more positively refused
them, that it was seen that they thereby sought a pretext of revolting when
they pleased, by refusing to put in execution afterward the Orders of the
Catholic King, that might in the least seem uneasy to them, upon the only
account that the concurrence of the Infanto might be wanting to them.

The Estates solicited that Article with so much zeal, as made it visible, that
they would never have yielded in it, had that young Prince been still in Spain:
And the truth is, they yielded not till it was slily insinuated to them, that
their efforts were so far from recalling the Infanto back into Spain, that they
would hinder him from ever setting foot there again, as it happened.

The second proposition which they added to the former, had no better
reception. They condescended to acknowledge the Catholic King; but they
pretended it should be as Guardian and Administrator of the Estates of his
Mother, during her infirmity, and not in quality of King. It was easy to be
seen, that their design was to Reign amongst themselves during the life of the
Queen, and the Grandees of Castille, who had in honor to the Catholic King
waited on him to Sarragossa, were so scandalized at it, that some of them went
to words about it with the Deputies of Arragon, and raised quarrels, which
occasioned bloodshed: But at length Chievres appeased them; and the Catholic
King was acknowledged for Monarch of Arragon, without any other condition but
that of confirming the privileges of the Country, as he had been acknowledged
in Castille. The ceremony of it was performed in the beginning of May, one
thousand five hundred and eighteen, and six weeks after Chievres had much ado
to ward the reverse blow of the Infanto's travels into Germany; so hard a thing
it is in Politics to give good counsels in one sense, which are not bad in
another.

The Infanto Ferdinand being come to the Emperor Maximilian his Grandfather to
Vienna in Austria, moved him with pity at his misery, and affected him with the
same sentiments that Ferdinand the Catholic had heretofore had for him. His
Imperial Majesty resolved to make over to him the Territories which the house
of Austria possessed in Germany, and to assure to him the Succession to the
Empire. He needed the consent of the Catholic King for putting in execution
the first of these projects, but not of the second, and that made him delay the
one, that he might mind the other.

The Diet was summoned at Ausbourg, against the end of the year one thousand
five hundred and eighteen, and there was not much opposition expected to be
made in it by the Electors of the Empire: For though Ferdinand was born in
Spain, In the instruction of the Infanto.
it was not to be doubted, but that he would become German by the necessity to
which his Brother would be reduced, of abandoning to him the Hereditary
Provinces of the house of Austria in Germany for supporting the Imperial
Dignity, if the Infanto were promoted to it: But the friends whom Chievres had
made in the Empire, gave him timely enough notice of what was hatching to the
prejudice of the Catholic King, for him to discompose the measures of it.

The Relations agree not about the person, who was employed to Negotiate with
Maximilian on the part of his Catholic Majesty, to persuade him to change his
inclinations. The Spaniards name the Cardinal of Trent, and the Flemings choose
rather to attribute it to the Cardinal of Sion: But to which soever of these
two Prelates the instruction was addressed, it is certain Chiovres framed it,
and gave the reasons of it the full extent, of which this is the sum. He
alleged that the Emperor was sufficiently convinced of the designs of the
house of Austria, since the establishment thereof in the Low Countries and
Spain, not to attempt any thing that might in the least obstruct them; and he
was only prayed to observe, that it was altogether necessary for the
accomplishing of them, that the whole power of that House should be united in
one single person. That the Catholic King was already so considerable, by the
prodigious number, and vast extent of his Dominions, that he wanted nothing but
the Empire to set him above all other Christian Princes, and by consequence to
give them the Law when he thought fit to do it: Whereas if the Empire escaped
him, the most Christian King Francis the First, would be his equal, and the
counter-balance of France would keep him so long as he lived from making
himself greater. That his Imperial Majesty had before his Eyes an example which
he was the more obliged to imitate, that he was incomparably more concerned in
it than he that gave it. That it was so much the less necessary for Ferdinand
the Catholic to choose for his Successor the eldest of his Grandsons, that his
Family, which was that of Arragon, ended in him, and the eldest of his
Grandsons was also less able to restore it than the younger; and besides, he
had brought up the younger, and had never seen the elder. Nevertheless he had
preferred the elder before the younger upon no other consideration, but that
Spain would thereby become more powerful; and that so Maximilian ought the more
indispensably to stick to the preference of the Catholic King for the Empire,
that he would be revived more gloriously in him than in the person of
Ferdinand, and that his name and Arms would then more effectually be employed
for the ruin of Infidels.

Maximilian, who had all his life long been inconstant, as has been already
observed, was so still in the last of his most important actions; and was so
after his own way, that is to say, in a very odd and whimsical manner. He was
born with qualities both of body and mind quite contrary to those of Ferdinand
the Catholic: He had a strange Antipathy to him; and it was enough heretofore
to have taken him off of any action, to tell him that Ferdinand had done so:
Nevertheless the example which for a long time he had abominated, seemed
charming to him now; and he affected to imitate him when dead, whom he detested
whilst alive. He was not satisfied only to renounce the design he had of
advancing the younger of his Grandsons to the Empire: But farther, it is the
opinion of the Spaniards, that he would have procured the dignity of King of
the Romans for the elder, if Cardinal Cajetan, Pope Leo the Tenths Legate in
Germany had not opposed it by orders from his Holiness, who had discovered the
intriegue, and enjoined his Minister to cross it.

Chievres lost no time during the six months that Maximilian lived after the
Diet of Ausbourg. He supplied him with money, to the end he might entertain him
in favorable dispositions toward the Catholic King; and so skilfully made
his advantage of the extraordinary passion that Manuel King of Portugal had for
his third Wife, that he drew from him two hundred thousand Crowns, which was
sufficient to buy the Empire, so well that money was employed. The discontents
of the Cardinal de la Mark, Bishop of Liege, and of Colonel Seguinguen, had
alienated them from the King of France. The business was to engage them in the
interests of the King o^ Spain, and Chievres succeeded in it more easily than
he thought he could: But he had a very hard work on it, to dispose^ those two
able Negotiators jointly to manage the affair which he absolutely referred to
them. Either of them singly thought himself able enough by his own credit to
raise the Catholic King to the Throne of the Empire, and by consequence would
not in that particular admit, either of a superior or partner. Nevertheless
Chievres was persuaded, that the Catholic King could not have too much of the
intriegues of the Cardinal and Colonel for obtaining the Dignity he canvassed
for, and the event made it appear, that he was not mistaken. He labored long
to oblige them to communicate to one another the measures that they had already
taken, and those which they should take for the future; and he had hardly
surmounted the difficulties that he found in it, when Maximilian died, about
the beginning of the year one thousand five hundred and nineteen. The Kings of
France and Spain pretended ^o the Empire, and the latter carried it, because
the Faction which Chievres had ^ormed in the Electoral College was more early
begun, and by consequence stronger than that which Bonnivet the ^avourite of
Francis the First had made afterward.

This is not a place to speak more large^ of the Election of the Catholic
King, which was performed at Franckfort the twentieth of June, one thousand
five hundred and nineteen, because Chievres, who was above three hundred
Leagues from it, contributed nothing thereunto, but in the manner just now
described. But he acted directly, and by himself in the two following
Negotiations, which he thought ought to precede his Majesty's Voyage into
Germany for receiving the Imperial Crown, and certainly they were absolutely
necessary for keeping peace in Spain during his absence: The one was the
marriage of Queen Germana, and the other the Treaty of Montpellier.

Queen Germana was weary of her Widowhood, and had openly declared, that she
would not spend her life in that condition. She was neither now beautiful, nor
young enough to hope to find a Husband of the quality of the former, and she
would have been satisfied with a Prince: But there were none in Spain, and
besides, the Catholic King would not have suffered her to take one in France.
Marquess George of Brandenbourg, Brother to that Elector, and the Elector of
Mayence had courted her in the usual form; but she refused him, because that
Prince being a younger Brother, and by consequence poor, could not have
maintained a quarter of the Train she had, and besides, she dreaded the rigor
of the German Climat, having been brought up in the mild Climats of Guyenne and
Spain. No other Lover presented and in all probability she had died a Widow, if
Chievres had not persuaded the Catholic King to give her a Husband, who
thought as little of being her Husband, as she thought of being his Wife.

It was already eighteen years since the unfortunate Ferdinand of Arragon, Duke
of Calabria, only Son and Heir of the last King of Naples, of the bastard
branch of Arragon, had been detained in Spain in a kind of Prison, which,
though it was gentile, was nevertheless strict enough. They who had deprived
him of his Crown and liberty, so carefully observed his person and actions,
that he would not have failed of being shut up close, upon the first sign he
gave, that he remembered the condition wherein God was pleased to send him into
the world. It is not clear whether his long abode in Spain, under the
constraint he was kept, had cowed his Spirit; or that knowing the temper of the
Spaniards, who watched him, he acted in all things with so great
circumspection, that nothing escaped him that could give them the least
suspicion: But it is certain, that he had all along carried himself like a man,
who had wholly forgot what he was, and minded nothing but to satisfy himself
in two things; the one never to engage in any affair that was in the least
troublesome and perplexing; and the other to take his pleasure as often as ever
he found occasion for it. Chievres, who perceived him too much taken up in an
easy and soft way of living, to fear that he would change his course, was of
the opinion, that he should be married to Queen Germana. His reasons were, that
they would make the best matched couple in Spain; and that the Queen would be
so far from taking the Duke off of his pleasures, that she would engage him
more deeply in them: That she would spare the public the charges of Spies
about him; and that he might safely be left upon his word, if once he had such
a Wife: That they would live together free from cares; and that neither of them
would ever think of troubling the public peace, provided their Pensions for
life, on which they subsisted, and which were all their Revenues, were duly
paid them: That it was thought strange all over Europe, that Ferdinand the
Catholic, and Cardinal Ximenes should have obliged the Duke, whether he would
or not, to lead a single life; and that for avoiding the same reproach, he
ought to give him a Wife, by whom there was no fear that he would have any
Children.

The Catholic King approved the proposition, and Chievres had orders from his
Majesty to move it to the parties: The Duke was ravished at it, and the Queen
seemed only to scruple the matter, for fear of losing her rank: But that was
removed, by assuring her she should not; and the expedient that was used for
that end was, that the Catho^ick King was at the wedding, and after the
celebration of it, called Queen Germana Mother, as he did before. The Courtiers
durst not but imitate their King; and Germana thought her self so much obliged
for it to Chievres, that she ^referred him before all her kindred in a
particular case too rare to be forgot^en.

She had an Estate in France: And did ^ot think that Francis the First would
^ive her leave to dispose of it at her plea^re, since she had married the Duke
of ^alabria, without acquainting his most Christian Majesty with it; so she
made it over to Chievres, by a free donation, upon this supposition, that none
at the Court of Spain deserved it better than he; and that if the King of
France would condescend in favors of any stranger, it would certainly be in
favor of him.

The End of the Fifth Book.
BOOK VI. Containing the most remarkable Affairs that past in Europe, during
the Year One Thousand Five Hundred and Twenty, and part of the Year One
Thousand Five Hundred and Twenty One.
THOUGH the Kings of France and Spain, who stood Candidates for the Empire, in
their competition transgressed not the terms of civility; it was nevertheless
to be seared, that it would breed ill blood, and sow the seeds of enmity
betwixt Francis the First and Charles the Fifth, which might last as long as
themselves; and trouble the repose of Europe, at least during the life of one
of the two, if they descended not to their posterity. Francis, by being baffled
in his pretensions, received the rudest check of Fortune that could befall him;
and what care soever he took, both in his actions, and by Letters to his
Ambassadors in Courts abroad to disguise it, In the Letters of Francis I. in
1519.
it was nevertheless discernable, that it would not be long before he measured
the length of Swords with his Competitor, for no other reason than that he had
been more fortunate than himself.

The truth is, Charles had not the same causes of discontent, but he had others
of jealousy, that no less animated him to the ruin of Francis. He wanted
nothing now at Nineteen years of Age, but Reputation, and his design was to
acquire it. He could not do it, by declaring War against Solomon Emperor of the
Turks: For besides, that he must have absolutely left residing in Spain, and
fixed his settled abode in Germany, to which the Spaniards would never have
consented, it was to be feared, that the most Christian King and Henry d'
Albert might have recovered from him the Kingdoms of Naples and Navarre, when
they saw him engaged with the Infidels.

It was then more difficult for the Emperor to refrain from exercising his
Warlike disposition against France; and that Prince was the more inclinable to
it, that he expected a more easy success therein; seeing if good fortune
wherewith he flattered himself proved so favorable to him, as to bring France
under his subjection, it would have been nothing to him to conquer the rest of
Christendom, and afterward the Turks: Whereas beginning with the Turks, he
would give the French leisure to render themselves so powerful, that it would
be in vain for him to attack them thereafter.

Gouffier and Chievres were the two who knew the inclinations of Francis and
Charles, the best. They were too sharpsighted not to foresee the effects
thereof in their full extent, and too religious not to use their endeavors to
prevent them. And, indeed, they procured from their Masters unlimited
Commissions, not only to maintain them in good correspondence concerning the
differences that were betwixt them about Naples and Navarre, but also to
prevent all causes of misunderstanding, which the change of time and the malice
of men might for the future raise to disturb their friendship. They met in the
Town of Montpellier in Languedock, in the beginning of Autumn, one thousand
five hundred and nineteen; and it is not doubted, but that they would have
concluded a Peace of long duration betwixt the two Monarchies, if God, who
thought fit to chastise the French by the Spaniards, and the Spaniards by the
French, had not broken up the Negotiation by the death of Gousfier. The Spanish
writers, who here do double their calumnies against the memory of Chievres,
have not been sensible that they wronged themselves more than him. They blame
him in the first place, for having accepted a French Town for the interview,
and for not having stood upon it, that the Conferences should be held upon the
Frontiers of the two Kingdoms: But it is easy to answer them, that a neutral
place had been good, if there had been open War betwixt the two Crowns. But
seeing at that time they were in Peace, and that a rupture betwixt them was
only to be feared for the future, it was not the custom to use any caution for
the place of the Assembly; and though it had been, the question was decided in
the preceding Negotiation. The same Plenipotentiaries met in the Town of Noyon
in Picardie, for the same reason that obliged Henry the Fourth of Castille to
pass the River Bidasloa, and Treat in Guyenne with Louis the Eleventh of
France, that is to say, by reason of the pre eminence of the French Monarchy,
before that of Spain, and nothing had supervened since that which exempted
Gouffier and Chievres from that rule: For Charles was only Empero^ Elect, and
not Crowned; and though he had, the Imperial Dignity hindering not, but that he
held the Counties of Flanders, Artois, and Charolois, in Fee of the most
Christian King, the least thing he owed to his Lord superior was, to send his
Plenipotentiary into his Country.

The same writers in the second place, accuse Chievres of having imprudently
trusted himself in a Town of Languedock, where he was not in full liberty to
Negotiate as was necessary: But they mention not that Chievres could not take
more security than he did; and that it was so far from being violated, that the
Bishop of Badajox and Doctor Carvajal, who seconded him in the Negotiation of
Montpellier, never complained of it. Lastly, they find fault in the third
place, that Chievres put himself in danger of being stopped, when the Conferences
ended, by the death of Gouffier; and their blindness in that particular is the
more ridiculous, that they see not that the fault which they impute to Chievres
reflects upon Charles the Fifth, who twenty years after put himself into the
hands of Francis the First, by crossing over all France upon the word of that
Prince, upon no other motive, but the appeasing of the tumult of Ghent.

What the same writers add, that Chievres had been Arrested in Montpellier if
he had not left it at the very instant that he heard of the death of Gouffier,
and escaped with all diligence to Roussillon, is no truer than the rest: For it
appears by the Journal of the Conferences, written by the Secretary Robertet,
who was present at them, that Chievres stayed in Montpellier some days after
the death of Gouffier; that he paid his last duties to his friend: That he did
not break up the Conferences, but because the power of concluding for France
was committed solely to Gouffier, who was dead; and that before he departed he
took leave of Poucher, Bishop of Orleans, Robertet and the rest of the French
who were concerned in the Treaty of Montpellier, as Subaltern Ministers.

He had one cause to regret the death of Gouffier, which he had not foreseen;
and which all the advantages that Charles obtained afterward over France, were
not able to repair. Gouffier promised Chievres to procure for him from the most
Christian King, peaceable possession of the Estate of Gaston de Foix, which
Queen Germana had made over to him; and the thing had infallibly been
accomplished after the separation of the Plenipotentiaries, and the signing of
the Articles. But these well-grounded hopes so totally evanished by the death
of Gouffier, that whatever Chievres could do afterward, the Estate that Gaston
had possessed, was given to his three Cousingermans by the Fathers side,
Lautrec, Asparant, and the Marshall de Foix, without any recompense made to
the Heirs of Chievres.

The unsuccessfulness of the Negotiation of Montpellier obliged the Catholic
King to use as great caution before he departed out of Spain, as if the French
had already declared War against him. He appointed a whole Army for the Guard
of the Pyrenees, and hastened his Voyage for Germany, that he might engage in
his interests Henry the Eight his Uncle, by touching at England. He durst not
leave a Grandee of Spain to govern the Country in his absence, for the same
reasons which diverted his Grandfather upon his deathbed from choosing one of
them; and seeing he had occasion to make use of Chievres in England and
Germany, whither he was going, and that he had already, as has been said, cast
his eyes upon the Cardinal of Tortosa, for discharging that office in
conjunction with Ximenes, he thought it his best to continue him both in
gratitude and civility. He had no regard in that particular to the
Remonstrances which were made to him thereupon by the Castillians on the one
hand, and the Arragonese on the other, when he assembled them with design to
bid them farewell; and the Agents whom he entertained at the Court of England,
having given him advice, that Henry the Eight would be at Calais the first of
June, one thousand five hundred and twenty, for an interview with Francis the
First, near the Town of Ardres, he apprehended, and not without reason, that
these two Monarchs might unite against him. In that case England would have
cast the balance to the side of France, and upon the account only to take the
King of England off of that, he hastened his departure out of Spain. He
embarked in the Port of Corugna, the twentieth of May, and was so happy as to
make his Voyage into England with so much expedition, as was necessary to break
the most Christian Kings measures with Wolsey, Cardinal of York, the Favorite
of Henry. A favorable Wind in six days time brought him in the very nick to
Dover, where he found the Court of England making ready to go over into France.
He conferred two whole days with Henry, none being present but Chievres and the
Cardinal of York, the two chief Ministers of the two Princes; and the effects
of extraordinary civilities in interviews appeared as much in that rencounter
as ever. It seemed that the Catholic King had forgot that he was chosen
Emperor, so respectful he was to his English Majesty; and his complaisance
condescended so far, as to call the Cardinal of York Father, though he was not
ignorant that that Prelate was a Butchers Son.

Chievres, who had taught him the art of insinuating into the affections of
men, seconded him so well; that if the Court of England could with honor not
have gone over to Calais, it would have immediately returned to London. But
matters being now too far advanced; and the Court of France being already in
the Frontiers of Picardie, the Emperor was satisfied with the promise that the
King of England his Uncle gave him, not to conclude any thing to his
disadvantage at Ardres, whither he was going to confer with the most Christian
King, and afterward to grant his Imperial Majesty a second interview, wherein
an Offensive and Defensive League betwixt Spain and England should be
Negotiated. The promise was fulfilled in its whole extent: The Conferences of
Ardres ended; and no new engagement entered into by the English with France:
Henry received a second visit from the Emperor, so soon as he had dispatched
his affairs in Germany; In the Treaties betwixt Charles the Fifth and Henry the
Eight.
and Chievres so effectually persuaded his Majesty of England, that it was his
interest to have the French driven out of Italy, that he promised in writing to
contribute to it.

The fruit that Spain reaped from that, was the conquest of the Duchy of
Milan: But Chievres, who lived not to see it, lived long enough to see himself
levelled at by the Castillians and Arragonese, in the strangest manner that a
Subject could be, without falling. It has been already observed, that the
Spaniards could not endure that he should be President of their Council and
their Treasurer; and that it was chiefly to deprive him of those two Offices,
that they attempted to frustrate strangers of the Dignities and Benefices of
Spain. The Emperor had taken so little notice of it, that they were offended
thereat; and seeing his Voyage into Germany, in their opinion, furnished a
singular occasion of snatching from his Imperial Majesty by force, what he
would not grant them by fair means, they engaged into a revolt for the space of
two years, by the following degrees.

The great men of the Country, by their Emissaries and Agents, disposed the
Burghers and Country people of Castille, first to complain in secret, and then
openly, that their Laws were violated, and no regard had to their privileges:
That in less than three years time the Flemings had plundered Spain, and
transmitted into their Country so much robbed and stolen money, as amounted to
the sum of six millions of Livres: That no Office nor Benefice escaped them,
seeing if either the one or other were convenient for them, they appropriated
them; and if they were not, they procured grants of them for such of the Native
Spaniards as offered them most money: That hitherto it had been suffered, not
only out of the reverence that they had for the Catholic King, but also
because they believed, that his Majesty would condescend to the prayers, and be
moved with the Remonstrances of his most humble Subjects, who begged him to
deliver them from those Leeches: But now that he was gone to Germany, and had
abandoned the Spaniards to the mercy of the same Flemings, notwithstanding the
infinite number of Petitions that had been presented to him to the contrary;
there was no other remedy for the evils which Spain actually suffered, and for
those wherewith it was threatened, but that the Spaniards themselves should put
in execution, during the absence of their King, what could not justly be denied
them, that is to say, by their own Forces to recover their ancient Liberties.

The Burghers of the Towns of Andalusia moved at these discourses, were the
first that mutinied, and in less than a fortnights time, the revolt was
propagated in the other Kingdoms of Spain. They refused to receive the Orders
of the Cardinal of Tortosa, and the City of Segovia had the boldness to declare
against them. The Cardinal thinking to quiet the Sedition, by dividing the
power that had been given him, with Native Spaniards, shared it first with the
Constable, and afterward with the Admiral of Castille: But the Seditious, who
had now obtained part of what they demanded, without drawing a Sword, abused
the easiness of the Cardinal, and pressed him with greater heat than before to be
gone out of Spain, and to carry with him all the Flemings who were there.

That instance was too audacious to be suffered; and the Spaniards, whom the
Emperor had left to be Counselors to the Cardinal, thought it ought to be
exemplarily punished; and that the commission for doing it ought to be given to
the boldest and severest Provost of Spain, who was the Aclayde Ronchillo. Upon
that advice the Cardinal gave him Troops, and commanded him to reduce the
Segovians to their duty. Ronchillo put it in execution the more punctually,
that the Order which he had received agreed best with his temper. He marched
straight to Segovia, commanded the Burghers in a haughty manner to open the
Gates to him; threatened them with utmost extremity if they delayed a moment;
took the desire of some hours to deliberate in, which they made to him, as a
premeditated refusal; instantly began the Judiciary procedures prescribed by
the Laws of Castille in such cases; hastened the conclusion of them; and had no
sooner finished his verbal Processes, but that he executed the Cardinals Orders
more like a common Executioner than a Commissary. He fell to burning,
demolishing, oppressing, killing, and desolating in all the Territory of
Segovia.

The Burghers of Toledo, who waited only for a plausible pretext for an
Insurrection, took that of the Military executions which were practiced in
their neighborhood; and went out to put a stop to them, with the greater
licentiousness, that as yet they had not a head, their young Archbishop being
gone with the Emperor. They met Rouchillo when the Officers were in a negligent
posture, not apprehending that they had any to fight with, but those whom they
securely abused: They defeat him; returned back in triumph within their walls;
and that first advantage was enough to engage into a public Rebellion the
Towns of Burgos, Vailladolid, Salamanca, Avila, Zamorra, Leon, and Toro. The
Great men, who had Estates in their Territories, followed their example; and
the Cardinal of Tortosa, who had chosen Vailladolid for the place of his
ordinary residence, and for the sitting of the Council that was left with him,
not being able to hinder the Town from confederating with the rest, thought he
could not with honor continue there. He pretended to yield to the entreaties
of Pedro Giron, and John de Padilla, who came to wait on him in name of the
Inhabitants, to assure him that he might stay in the house where he was: That
neither he nor his Servants should suffer any prejudice: That they were
persuaded of his innocence; and that they had nothing to say against him; but
he gained a Priest, who made his escape out of Vailladolid, through a hole
which he made in the walls that were nearest to his Garden.

After he was gone, they cared not for detaining those of his Council; and they
only narrowly observed the famous Vargas, to whom the Seditious imputed the
cause of their calamities, because he had been one of the three who had
persuaded Ferdinand the Catholic to recall his first Testament made in favors
of the Infanto. It is not known whether it was the design of the Burghers of
Vailladolid only, to make sure of the person of Vargas, to keep him for an
exchange, in case one of the Lords, who had declared for them, should be taken;
or that they delayed his punishment until the meeting of the Estates, which
they intended should speedily be called: But it is certain, that Vargas
impatient of living in so dangerous an uncertainty, seasonably bethought
himself, that one of the first Commissions which heretofore he had had from
Queen Isabelle, was to cause a Sink or common-Sewer in Vailladolid to be
scoured. He had observed that the common-Sewer had been forme^ly an Aqueduct;
and that there was room enough for the passage of the Conduitmaker, who had the
care of the Waters, when he went to visit them. Vargas concluded from thence,
that perhaps it would not be impossible for him to make his escape through that
passage; and he caused a trial to be made by one of his skilfullest Servants,
who having fortunately gone through, entered it again with him, and assisted him
in passing it.

The revolted Towns set up a kind of Republic among themselves, which gave but
too much cause to judge, that they would not so soon lay down their Arms. In
Avila they established a Council, much like to that which has been since
settled in the Low Countries. Each of them sent thither a Deputy with a
sufficient power: The high Nobility were invited to be there in person, or to
send some in their name: The Lords who had espoused the party, retained their
rank; and the others were proceeded against according to the forms of the
Spanish Law. They were cited to come and take their places in the Assembly,
which was not called, but only for the desence of the Laws and Liberty of the
Country: Their failing to appear passed for a formal refuse: Thereupon they
were proceeded against, and condemned as Traitors to their Country. So the
Rector of Segovia was hanged betwixt two Lords, for having dared to say, that
he owned not the Assembly for lawful. The house of Pedro Poncio, in the same
Town of Avila, was razed to the Foundation, because he had left it, that he
might not be constrained to sign the union. For the same reason the Constable
of Castille, and the Count of Alva, lost all the Furniture they had in the City
of Burgos; and the Family of Guevara was upon the point of being extirpated,
because they would have deliberated, whether or not they should accept the
Commissions that were given them by the Seditious.

It was of extreme importance for the Rebels to have the Town of Medina del
Campo, and chance contributed more than they to engage it into their interests.
The Cardinal of Tortosa had need of Artillery, and the fairest in all Spain
were in Medina. He sent Colonel Fonseca to fetch them away, and the
Towns-people absolutely refused to part from them in the present juncture.
Fonseca, who had not men enough to carry them away by force, used a stratagem.
He caused the Town to be set on fire in several quarters, and especially where
the richest Goods were, thinking that they who most withstood his design, would
run to the putting out of the fire: But he was deceived in so probable a
conjecture; and the Burghers of Medina chose rather to lose their most precious
Goods, than to abandon their Artillery. What the fire consumed was of an
inestimable value, and yet they prised it not so much, as to save it by
dividing themselves. They stood to their Arms, as long as was necessary to make
Fonseca be gone; and then when there was no more danger of him within, they
divided themselves into two almost equal bodies, the one was employed for the
guard of the walls, and the other run to put out the fire. Fonseca, who was not
strong enough to besiege the Town, thought it enough to ravage the Country
about; and when the Inhabitants saw themselves treated as Enemies, they entered
into the confederacy so soon as the Rebels, to color their cause, were gone to
Tordesillas; where their design was not so much to raise Queen Jean to the
Throne, as to Reign in her name, and to asperse their adversaries with the
crime of High Treason. They presented themselves before that Princess in the
posture of men, who were come expressly to set her at full liberty; and seeing
we have already observed that her solly had not at all changed her in the
matter of Ambition, she was so overjoyed to see her self treated as a
Sovereign, that it hindered her from any extravagancies, so long as the
Seditious were in her presence. She received John Padilla, who spoke to her in
name of the rest, with the same haughtiness that she had heretofore seen Queen
Isabelle her Mother receive the Deputies of Castille: She complained but
transiently, that she had now been sixteen years kept prisoner: She imputed the
evils wherewith Padilla told her Spain had been afflicted, to that horrible
disloyalty of her Subjects: She sent Padilla and the other Deputies to consult
with the Grandees about the means that might be taken to remedy them; and
promised to approve if she found them just.

They returned two or three days after with an Order which they had drawn up,
for all the Castillians and Arragonese to join in the union, and she signed it.
Immediately they banished from her the Marquess of Degnia, who had been so long
her Governor, and put in his place the most extravagant Guard that ever was.
The Bishop of Zamorra was the most hotheaded of all the Conspirators, though
he was already threescore years of Age. No man living was ever more unfit for
the Ecclesiastical profession than he; for besides, that he was a Bastardson of
the Bishop of Burgos, a Gentleman of the house of Acugnia, he had no qualities,
but what were Secular. He played and danced to admiration: He was equally good
at all Military exercises: He led the most scandalous life in the world; and
never uttered a word without Blasphemy: He had chosen out of his Diocese thirty
or forty Priests fit to carry Arms, and had for a long time trained them up to
them himself: He had rendered them the most accursed wretches of the party, by
rendering them the best Soldiers in Spain; and it is reported of him, that he
would have soundly cudgelled them, if he had seen a Breviary in their hands.

This Mitered Captain, and these irregular Soldiers were the Guard of Queen
Jean, and out of mere maliciousness committed a thousand disorders, which she
commanded them at the times when she was most besides her self. They made her
write and sign wh^ (...) ^ey pleased; and seeing the com^ (...) ^ople of Spain
idolized that Princess (...) easily believed the Seditious, wh^ persuaded them
that she had, inde^ ^mmediately after the death of her Husband been subject to
some disorders of mind, occasioned by the extraordinary love that she had for
him. But that she soon came to her self again, and notwithstanding she was
still confined as before, by a piece of injustice, so much the more enormous,
that her own Father, that he might Reign in Castille, was the Author of it.
That Cardinal Ximenes had continued it, to keep himself from succumbing under
the aversion of the Grandees; and that her Son persisted therein for the same
reason, that his maternal Grandfather had done it: But that God, who had not
bestowed the Catholic Queen upon Spain to remain always useless to them, had
now set her at liberty, and that her good and faithful Subjects would quickly
see the astonishing effects of her wisdom in governing them.

The Cardinal of Tortosa gave the Emperor advice of all these particulars now
related, as fast as they happened; and Chievres, who did not think them
dangerous before the Rebels had seized the person of the Queen, was of another
judgment, when he had intelligence sent him, that they were Masters of
Tordesillas. He was of the opinion, that the Emperor should write to the
Cardinal, Constable, and Admiral, by all means to compose the trouble, and to
begin with mildness. If the Rebels were not reclaimed by that, they should next
endeavor to divide them; and if they continued firm in their confederacy, they
must, if possible, be fought in a pitched Battle, before they should take full
measures for a long resistance. The three Governors punctually obeyed; and
they made offer to the Spaniards, that for the future no Fleming should be
preferred to any dignity Ecclesiastical or Secular in Spain, provided those who
already had such should enjoy them during life. The proposition was not only
rejected, but also called ridiculous; and the Rebels stood upon it so
obstinately, that all the Flemings should forth with be banished, that now they
excepted not Chievres as hitherto they had done, nor yet the Cardinal his
Nephew. The Bishop of Zamorra aspired to the Archbishopric of Toledo; and
there was not one of his listed Priests, who promised not to himself the first
vacant Benefice in the same Church. So they had recourse to the second
expedient which Chievres had proposed, if the first failed, and at first they
addressed themselves to the Bishop of Zamorra. That Prelate told his mind
without much ceremony; and assured them, that if he renounced the Union, it
should only be to be Primate of Spain. But that had been a way to reward
Rebellion too liberally; and it would have been a precedent of too dangerous
consequence, especially in Spain, where the minds of the people being once set
upon Rebellion, are not so easily taken off of it as in France.

They made application in the second place to Padilla, who was as untractable
as the Bishop of Zamorra. He was governed by his Wife, whose capricious impiety
is too remarkable not to find a place in this History. She had need of money to
send to her Husband, who commanded the Forces of the League; and the Purses of
the Citizens of Toledo, where then she was, were drained, under pretext that
Queen Jean would punctually pay those who had contributed their money for
raising her to the Throne. The Plate of the Metropolitan Church was so well hid
by the Treasurer, who had the care of it, that it had in vain been sought for
in all places where it could be imagined it was. There was no way of putting
that Churchman to the Rack, to make him confess where he had put that which
was entrusted with him; for besides, that the privileges of his Dignity, and
of his Church, protected him from that, the common people would not have
suffered him to have been Racked. But the Shrines of Relics were not locked
up, because it was thought that the San^ity of the Bones that were shut up in
them, would be sufficient to keep them from being touched, especially seeing
the Wife of Padilla affected an extraordinary devotion: But the good Lady
having sometime considered what she had best do, thought she had found out a
rare expedient, to adjust Sacrilege with Piety. She went straight to the
Church, accompanied with the worst Churchmen of the Bishop of Zamorra,
clothed in their Priestly Habits, and carrying in their hands lighted Torches.
She fell upon her knees before the Relics; made a speech to them; prayed them
with joined hands, not to take it ill that they were stripped of their Ornaments
for a very short time; enlarged upon the reasons for so doing, and solemnly
swore, one day to restore the double of what she was about to take. Afterward
she caused the Relics to be taken out of their Shrines, wrapped up in clean
Linen, with Notes in writing, to show what Saints they belonged to, put up
again into the presses after they had been censed, and having carried away the
Shrines, turned them into money. It was no easy matter to reclaim a woman that
was come to that excess; and Padilla, to whom she had been a Megaera, if he had
dared to have listened to proposals of agreement without her, with her consent
demanded the great Mastery of S. James, without which he must not renounce the
confederacy. To this purpose he spoke to those who founded him in name of the
Governors; and it was to no purpose to represent to him, that the Dignity
which he desired was annexed to the Crown, not to be separated from it: That he
knew not what he demanded: That his King would be jealous of him, so soon as he
should be great Master; and that he would never quietly possess what he had
obtained by the Sword. He continued notwithstanding so firm, that they were
forced to try whether Pedro Giron might not be more tractable.

They offered him ready money, and the erection of his Lands of Ossuna into a
Duchy; but he made answer, that he was of too ancient a Family to be content
with a new Duchy: That that of Medina Sidonia, the ancientest of Spain,
belonged to him in right of his Mother: That he should not fail to be thankful
to those who would put him in possession of it, but so long as he lived he
would not lose his hopes of recovering it. They pressed him no more at that
time to declare for the Emperor, because he went to lead the Rebel Army to the
Siege of the Town of Medina de Riosecco, where the Army of the Governors, too
weak to keep the Field, was retired. They began there to be in want of
Provisions and Forage; and there needed no more, but to persist in
intercepting their Convoys, to oblige them to render upon discretion, which
would have occasioned the entire loss of Spain to the Emperor; but as he held
it of a woman, who was his Mother, so it was preserved to him by another woman,
the Countess of Medina.

She was the near Kinswoman of Pedro Giron, and upon that pretext desired a
Conference with him. Giron did not think he could civilly refuse the interview,
and having consulted those of his party, granted it. The Countess represented
to him, that all her Estate lay about Medina, and that the Army of the League
would utterly ruin it, if they stayed a few days longer in the place where
they were: That to prevent beggary, it had come into her mind to propose an
accommodation, which she judged to be too reasonable not to be accepted: That
the Town of Medina was no way considerable, but for the Army which defended it,
and that it would always receive the Law from him who should be Master of the
Field: That if the League had no other intention in seizing it, but to take
from the contrary party a place of so small importance, the Town offered to
submit to them, provided they would suffer those who had retreated thither to
march out: That in the mean time they could not force them out; and that there
was no instance of a Town defended by an Army of all old Soldiers, that ever
was taken by Storm.

Giron, who had not experience enough for the Generalship that he undertook,
suffered himself to be overreached by the ambiguity that lay in the
proposition of the Countess of Medina: For it is true, indeed, that Towns
defended by Armies were not exposed to the danger of being lost, when these
Armies found abundance of Provisions in them, or could have them from other
places: But they were not so when the Armies were in want, and so straightly
blocked up, that they could neither enlarge their Quarters, nor receive
Convoys, and nevertheless, that was exactly the case of the Imperial Forces in
Medina. They neither had nor could make Magazines there for want of money: They
were invested by the Army of the League, stronger by one half than they; they
expected no relief; and Provisions and Forage being equally wanting, they must
have been forced within a few days to render upon discretion.

Nevertheless Giron looked upon the proposition of the Countess as most
advantageous to his party. He spoke of it to the Bishop of Zamorra; who being
no greater Captain than himself, was no less taken with it. These two got it to
pass in the Council of War of the League, that the Confederate Army should draw
off to Villalpando, provided the Imperialists marched out of Medina, and left
it in its own possession, and that was the cause of their ruin; for the
Imperialists so easily delivered from the danger that their weakness in number
had put them into, made extraordinary good use of the neglect of their Enemy.
They marched straight to the Town of Tordesillas, being persuaded, that if they
could get the Queen out of the hands of the Rebels, they would deprive them of
the best thing they had, and they proceeded with this circumspection, that they
stopped and carried along with them all that they met upon the way. So they
hindered the Rebels from having any intelligence of their design, which they
might easily have disappointed if they had discovered it.

The Garrison of the Town and Castle of Tordesillas consisted chiefly in the
Bishop of Zamorra's Priests, and in some of the Trained bands of the City of
Vailladolid. They were in no preparation to maintain the assault that was made
about break of day, the fifth of October, one thousand five hundred and twenty:
Nevertheless it lasted from morning till night; and never was there before that
any place attacked with greater heat, nor defended with more obstinacy than
Tordesillas was, though it was one of the weakest places of Castille.

The Count of Haro, an expert General, who commanded the Imperialists,
perceiving his Infantry disheartened, because they had been thrice beaten back,
made his Cavalry alight, and led them himself to the Assault. The Rebels
startled not at all at it, and resisted with no less vigor nor order. A
Priest, one of the best marks-men amongst them, had placed himself behind a
Parapet, from whence he never missed any of the Assailants who clambered up on
his side, when he saw them within distance to fire at them. He made the sign of
the Cross upon them with the But of his Musket; and thereby pretended that he
gave them the Absolution of their sins, and lessened one half, at least, of the
crime he was about to commit: Then he took aim at them, and turned them down
dead into the Ditch. In this manner he had killed eleven of the boldest
Imperialists; but as he was performing his ridiculous ceremony toward the
Twelfth, he received an Arrow-shot in the right Eye, of which he died, begging
that the same favor might be done to him which he had done to others.

About noon the Count of Haro despairing to carry the place at that part which
he thought was the weakest, removed the Attack to the opposite side. His
Infantry disdaining that the Horse should perform their duty, behaved
themselves with greater eagerness, and in better order than before.
Nevertheless both were beaten off till night, when a Navarrese Soldier of
Cadaorra perceiving at the bottom of the Ditch a little door ill guarded, In
the relation of the second taking of Fordesillas.
showed it to his Comrades, who helped him to break it open with Bars and
Levers, and by it entered the Town.

The respect which the Victorious owed to the presence of the Queen, having
bragged that they were only come to deliver her out of the hands of Rebels,
hindered neither the plundering of Tordesillas, nor the other cruelties that
commonly attend it; and that Princess took no great exceptions at it, though on
all hands she heard most dreadful noise, because care was taken not to divert
her from her ordinary pastime, which was to pursue and run after Cats. In the
mean time there was never a more sensible proof than at this time, that it is
reputation which most frequently decides the quarrels in Civil Wars, as well as
in Foreign: For the Spaniards, who strove who should first declare for the
League, whilst they knew that their Queen was with the Confederates, no sooner
came to understand that she was taken from them, but that they fell off in all
places where they could safely do it.

The example went even from the small to the great; and Pedro Giron publicly
renounced the League upon a quarrel that he had with the Bishop of Zamorra, in
which he obtained not that fatisfaction which he expected from the Council of
the Party. His desertion quite broke the League, and there was hardly any doubt
made on it, but that he had raised the Siege of Medina, with a design to betray
those whom he forsook so soon afterward. They were confirmed in an opinion so
disadvantageous to him, by the manner how the Emperor used him thereafter; when
they perceived that his Majesty made rather a show of punishing him, than that
he really did so; notwithstanding the constant and uniform practice of the
Council of Spain, never to show favor to those who have been once engaged in a
Rebellion. The truth is, he was afterward suffered to live in his
Country-houses, as if he had been confined to them, without allowing him
liberty to come to Court, or enter into any Town, and that was all the severity
used toward him. Colonel Louis Bravo thought it not enough in imitation of
Giron solemnly to renounce the League; but he went farther, and listed himself
under the Emperors Banner, becoming the greatest Enemy of the Faction, which he
had had a hand in forming of.

The Governors being convinced that the League began to decline, wisely
concluded that an extraordinary effort, provided it were speedy, would be
sufficient to ruin it, and in that prospect sent for the Forces that guarded
Navarre. They got some also from the King of Portugal: And the high Nobility,
who had continued Loyal, lent what money they had; so that at length, by so
many different means, they set on foot an Army every way more considerable than
that of the Confederates. The Count of Haro was still General, and marched with
his Army straight against the Enemy, who refreshed themselves about Labaton.
John de Padilla knowing that the Imperialists approached; and being informed by
his Spies, that they were much stronger than he, thought it not fit to expect
them in the post that he possessed. On the twenty third of April, one thousand
five hundred and twenty one, he marched from thence in the morning, and with
extraordinary diligence advanced toward Toro, a Town strong by situation,
thinking that he might have refuge, and continue there until the considerable
recruits that were coming to him from Vailladolid and Toledo, had obliged the
Imperialists to divide their Forces, and send some to oppose them: But he was
overtaken by that time he was got half way, and forced to face about. The Light
Horsemen whom the Count of Haro sent after him, about noon came up with the
Rear of the Rebels at Villanar, and stopped them there until the main Body of the
Imperialists were arrived. Padilla, who stayed in the Rear the better to give
Orders in case of necessity, caused his Artillery quickly to be advanced: But
Maldonado, who commanded it, instead of obeying, mired it in a slough, out of
which it was not possible to draw it, and fled to the Imperialists. Such an
unexpected accident put Padilla, indeed, out of all hopes of victory, but it
dampt not his resolution to defend himself to the last breath. At the head of
his Rear he maintained the charge of the Imperialists, which was drawn up in
one entire Body; being assured that if they broke the Body, which Padilla
commanded in person, the other two would betake themselves to flight, as it
happened. The Cannon of the Imperialists made the more terrible havoc, that
the Enemies Guns made no answer; and if they had given them but time to charge
again, that alone would have been sufficient to defeat the Confederates. But
the Imperialists were so furious, that they neglected it, nay, and covered
their own Artillery; which made the Fight incomparably more bloody than it
would have been, had not their courage so transported them. Padilla was not
mistaken in his choice of those who fought about him. They fell in Rank and
File; and so had he in company, but that he was discovered by the marks which
he had taken to be distinguished by, when he gave his Orders to the Rebels. He
was so particularly taken notice of by the first of the Enemies that engaged
with him, that they took as much care to save his life, as he took to lose it:
They environed, dismounted him, and seized his person; and delivered him to a
Guard, who carried him to the next Castle, to the place where they Fought. The
main Body and Van of his Army being informed that he was taken, made no
defense: The Horse and Foot run for it by consent, and were pursued three
Leagues and a half beyond Villanar. This was so complete a victory, that it
utterly ruined the League: The leading men of it sell alive into the hands of
the Imperialists, and were next day put to death without any form of Process;
because the Council of Spain pretended that the crime was so evident, that
there was no need neither of Accusers, Proofs, Evidence, nor Judges: In the
relation of Nexia.
They were all beheaded, and Padilla, who had been their chief Commander, gave
them an example of dying courageously.

Seeing he knew the inexorable temper of his Countrymen, he neither demanded
nor expected favor. He delayed not to prepare himself for death, till it was
intimated to him; and he showed nothing that was singular in the last hours of
his life, but that as he was going to suffer, having espied amongst the crowd
of spectators the younger Brother of the Duke of Medina Sidonia, who made
afterward the stem of the Counts of Olivarez, he called him to him; and prayed
him to carry to Mary Pacheco of Mendosa his Wife, a Reliquary that he had as
the last pledge of his Love, though he was not ignorant how she had treated the
Relics of Toledo. That Lady abated nothing in her resolution of driving on
the Rebellion as far as it could go, even when she saw her Husband dead, and
her party ruined. She caused Padilla beheaded to be painted upon a pair of
Colors; had them carried before her the first time she went abroad after the
news of his Execution; carried in her arms a Son which she had by him in
Swath-bands; and in this pitiful posture running up and down the Streets of
Toledo, took the people off from the resolution of accepting, as Vailladolid
and the other neighboring Towns had done, the pardon that was offered them:
She confirmed them in the Seditious sentiments that she had inspired into them,
and kept them so almost a year; seeing it was not before the third of February,
one thousand five hundred and twenty two, when the Imperialists having formed a
more powerful Faction than hers, by the means of Melinar, whom they had gained
by the promise of a Cardinals Hat, the Archbishopric of Barry, and the
Bishopric of Songuetta, which he had afterward, that Toledo all of a sudden
returned to its duty. The widow of Padilla being abandoned of her party, for
her own safety invented a wile that succeeded with her. She went out of the
City mounted on an Ass, and so well disguised into a Country-woman, that those
who were set at the Gates with design to watch her, let her pass without
knowing her: She took her journey into Portugal, and upon the Rode escaped a
great many dangers. The Portuguese received her civilly enough; and the King
Don Emanuel, for all he was the Emperors Brother-in-law, showed more generosity
toward her, than she had ground to hope for. He thought the Sovereignty of
Portugal was concerned to give a refuge to that illustrious Fugitive; and the
instances of the Emperors Ministers to him, to persuade him to order Padilla's
Widow to look for a retreat elsewhere, were wholly ineffectual. He constantly
replied, That since she had chosen his Dominions for her abode, she should be
free to live there as long as she pleased.

The Bishop of Zamorra, her Cousin, could not be at the Battle, because the
Council of the League who expected not that they should have fought so soon,
had sent him to a place some Leagues from thence. Upon the news of the defeat
of his party he disguised himself, and fled to the Mountains of Castille, where
he absconded near Eighteen months, without finding the occasion which he looked
for, of going into Portugal. At the end of that time he was known in a Cottage
where he was; there he was Arrested, and carried to Simancas, where he was shut
up in the Castle of that Town, till a Brief might be obtained from the Pope to
bring him to a trial. He was in the custody of an Alcaide, who treated him with
all the respect that was due to his character: Nevertheless, as they were in
discourse together after Dinner, the Bishop, who had a Knife hid in the cover
of his Breviary, which was left him, drew it, closed with the Alcaide, threw
him down, cut his Throat; and would have made his escape, had not the Alcaide's
Son come running at the noise timely enough to stop him at the outer Gate: They
put him hand and foot in Irons; and so soon as the Brief came, he was put to
death in Prison.

The Memoires of the Spaniards of that time agree not about the kind of his
death, and make it apparent enough, by the diversity of their relations, that
there was an express order to conceal it: But there are some also who affirm,
that the Alcaide Ronchillo was sent to him, who caused him to be thrown down
headlong from the Battlements of the Castle of Simancas. They agree better in
relating the sad end of Don Pedro d' Ayala, Count of Salvatierra, President of
the Council of the League, who bragged to be descended from the Goths in a
straight Line, without any mixture of Mihometan blood, as there was in the
other Families of Castille. This is not a place to examine the truth of it; and
it is enough that after he had been a long time in the Mountains, where he
could find nothing to eat, but at a vast charge, because being proscribed, and
those that should in any way assist him, becoming accessory to his crime, it
was no small matter that would make people run the hazard of an Arrest, by
relieving the misery of the last of the Rebels. He was taken and dispatched in
a Dungeon, after he had long languished expecting the death that was intimated
unto him. The people knew it not till they saw him carried to the Grave
barefooted and barefaced. Athanasius Ayala his Son, was then actually the
Emperors Page, and had gone with his Majesty into Germany. There he was
informed of the Proscription, and afterward of the Vagabond life of his Father;
and seeing he was of an excellent sweet disposition, he was so moved at it,
that he considered not the danger of his fortune in assisting him, who had
given him being, in his extreme necessity. He had a Horse of considerable
value, which served him for the great Saddle; he sold him, got a Bill of
Exchange for the money; and directed it to a Spanish Gentleman, whom he knew to
be so much his Fathers friend, as to send him the money contained in it, in
what place soever he were. The Governor of the Pages seeing young Ayala
without a Horse, thought that he had sold him to get money to game with. From
that mistake he fell into another, which notwithstanding served to find out the
truth. He called together the Pages, of whom he had the conduct, who were five
and twenty, or thirty in number, and before them all asked Ayala what he had
done with his Horse. Ayala made no other answer, but that he had parted from
him, and that it was for no ill end. The severity which the Governor used
toward him to make him declare himself more clearly, could not draw one word
more from him; and such an obstinate silence, and so unsuitable to the humor
of Pages, increased the Governors curiosity to find out the cause of it. He
made so strict an enquiry into the matter, that he discovered all the
particulars which we have mentioned.

The Spaniards have subtilized more in the point of High Treason, than the
ancient Roman Lawyers did, and what follows will be able to convince the least
credulous of it. The Governor of the Pages thought it would blemish his
reputation, to know that Ayala had sent money to the Count of Salvatierra his
Father, if he acquainted not the Emperor instantly with it. He run and told it
his Majesty, who having praised him for his diligence, had a mind to search
into the bottom of the affair; but it was with another intent than the
Governor imagined. He sent for the Page, and commanded him in a manner not to
be disobeyed, that he should conceal nothing from him of his conduct in the
matter whereof he was accused. The Page for all he was so young spoke with a
most profound submission, and yet acknowledged not that he was guilty. He only
said, That having learnt by the public report to what dreadful straits his
unhappy Father was reduced, he was so afflicted at it, that having nothing else
but his Horse, he had sold him to give his Father assistance, being resolved to
sell himself also upon the same design, if he could find any body that would
buy him. The Governor thought that the Page had undone himself, by too
ingenuous a confession, and that the Emperor was about to condemn him. He was
confirmed in that opinion, when he perceived his Majesty extraordinary pensive:
But they were not thoughts of revenge that run in his mind. He admired the
dutifulness and constancy of the Page; and as he had learnt from Chievres, that
a Sovereign failed in the most indispensable of his duties, when he let an
Heroic action pass without a reward, he cast about how he might acknowledge
this as it deserved: But on the other hand, it had been done in a juncture
wherein all that the Emperor could do to testify the value he put upon it,
would turn to his own prejudice. The Count of Salvatierra was the guiltiest of
all the Rebels: The Laws of Castille in that case prohibit his own Children to
assist him: His Son nevertheless had done it; he confessed the same; and if a
fault were crowned instead of punished, the Emperor durst not promise to
himself the happiness of peace in Spain, though he stood in extreme need of it,
considering the new affairs that the Empire was about to create unto him. It
behoved then his Majesty to find out an expedient, which on the one hand might
hinder him from being unjust; and on the other, might so discreetly divert the
consequences of the Justice, which he should practice, as they might not be
prejudicial to the State, and in so nice a point he took this course. He
severely rebuked the Page before his Governor, yet pretended afterward to
pardon him in consideration only of his youth. He sent him back to his
exercises; and bidding the Governor stay, commanded him to buy another Horse
for Ayala, as good at least as that which he had sold, under pretext that it
would be an inhumane thing to turn him off at a time when his Fathers rebellion
had reduced him to beggary; and if he kept him still as a Page, it would be a
shame if he were not as well mounted as the rest of the Pages, seeing there was
none of them descended of a better Family than he. The Emperor did no more so
long as the Civil Wars of Spain lasted: But when they were over, he took
occasion of the first service that Ayala when he was past being a Page rendered
to Spain, to reward him both for it and for his affection toward his Father.

Ferdinand d' Avalos, though the most noted amongst the Rebels, was not so
strictly searched after as the Count of Salvatierra, whether because he was not
so guilty; or that the Council of Spain had respect to the great services which
the Marquess of Pescara, his near Kinsman, who carried the same name, Surname
and Arms, had already rendered, and might still render to the Crown. No notice
was taken of him in the places where he had fled to: Several attempts that he
made to get out of Spain were winked at, they let him go; and pretended not to
know him when he appeared in disguise, with a purpose to go into France. He
durst not stay there, however after the breach betwixt Francis the First and
the Emperor, for fear of rendering himself more guilty than he was; and retired
into Germany, where being reduced to misery, he was forced to try the friends
that he had at the Imperial Court, if any pardon could be obtained for him. He
wrote to them all severally, but most part refused to read his Letters; and the
rest who were not so scrupulous, did not think fit to answer them. So general
an indifferency did not wholly discourage him yet. He had been a Courtier; and
knew the humors of the men he had to do with; he was sensible that sometime
they bestirred themselves for disgraced Criminals, when they solicited them
personally; but that they never concerned themselves for the absent. He
thereupon formed a bold design of going to the Imperial Court, and used all
necessary circumspection to conceal himself from those to whom it was to no
purpose he should be known: But he had made too many friends to have none
amongst them unfaithful, in a place where friendship commonly is as unconstant
as favor.

D' Avalos discovered himself to a Spaniard, whom he took to be his friend, and
indeed was not. The Castillian relations name him not, nor agree about his
character. Some make him a Counselor of State, and others give him only the
title of a Courtier, which in the Spanish Tongue signifies no great matter when
it stands alone. However it be, that man who had just before promised d' Avalos
with execrable Oaths, that he would hazard all to get him a pardon, went
immediately after to the Emperors Palace to work his ruin. He told his Majesty
that he had news of great importance to acquaint him with; and drawing him
aside, insinuated that he was no less obliged to him than for his life. He
added, that d' Avalos had had the impudence to come to Court, and the
imprudence to run himself into a snare, that he could never get out of again:
He discovered the place where he lay hid, gave directions how to find him
without being mistaken, and to apprehend him without noise: He supposed that he
was not come so near his Imperial Majesty, but for putting in execution a
Conspiracy formed against him, whereof he was the Author or Accomplice; and
omitted nothing that might fortify his conjecture.

The Emperor heard him very attentively, and having thanked him for the care he
took for the preservation of his person, dismissed him. The news bearer
returned home extraordinarily well satisfied with what he had done, and
persuaded that he had gained much by undoing d' Avalos. He thought it not
strange that he was not rewarded upon the spot, because he supposed that the
Emperor thought it convenient first to apprehend the person who was discovered,
before he paid the Informer. In that thought he returned to Court at night,
expecting that the first Courtier he met would whisper him in the Ear that d'
Avalos was taken: But he was wonderfully surprised when he heard nothing of it
in the way, nor in the Emperors Antichamber. He cast about a long time with
himself what might be the reason of it, and could think of none other, but that
his Majesty had more urgent affairs. That satisfied him at first for the
neglect that was put upon his advice: But when he found that it continued the
second and third day after, and that he learnt that d' Avalos solicited as
before his pardon, from the place where he absconded, he changed his opinion,
and imagined that the Emperor had forgot what he had told him. He had the
impudence to put him in mind of it; and the Emperor not being able then to
endure the treachery of the man, replied to him, You ought rather to go and
tell d' Avalos that I am here, than to come and tell me again and again that he
is there; because in the present state of affairs he had more reason to be
afraid of me, than I of him. His Majesty having said so, made the Courtier a
sign with his hand to be gone, and d' Avalos was neither looked after, nor put
in prison: It is true, he was excepted out of the Oblivion that was granted for
the Rebellion of the Spaniards.

It was expeded in the manner of the Country which demanded it, that is to say,
with exceptions that made it useless to the persons of quality who stood in
need thereof. Two hundred were excepted in it by name and surname: But
Chievres, who thought it not his part to oppose that ostentation of severity,
rendered it almost wholly ineffectual by the way of execution, which he had
reserved to himself for cluding it. He could not doubt but that the storm which
now was calmed, had chiefly been raised against him: He had seen the public
writings and private Satyrs that reviled him in so horrible a manner, that it
is almost impossible to read them without conceiving indignation against the
Authors: He was informed that the Rebels had engaged themselves by Oath never
to make peace with the Emperor, if he delivered not up to them that Fleming who
had been his Governor, and suffered them not to practice upon him and upon the
Cardinal his Nephew, all that rage and malice could suggest to them: He
understood the Spanish humor perfectly well, and knew that that people never
part from a prejudice when once they have been possessed with it; and execute
in secret the sentences which they have pronounced, when there is no security
for them to do it otherwise. Nevertheless he chose rather to expose his person
to continual Plots, than to permit the punishments which were only inflicted
for his safety.

Of the two hundred that had been excepted out of the Oblivion, there were but
two punished, and Chievres obtained pardon for the rest. We shall see by and
by, that that Heroic clemency much like to that of Caesar, was as unhappy as
his; but the series of affairs requires, that we first treat of one of the most
important services that Chievres rendered to the Emperor, which was the
preservation of Navarre to him. It has been observed that the Clergy, Nobility
and People of that Country were become all equally sorry, that they had
assisted the Spaniards to conquer their Country, and that they impatiently
waited for an occasion to deliver themselves from the yoke which they had put
upon their own necks. That presented as of it self, and yet the most favorable
that could be desired. The Cardinal of Tortosa, the Constable and Admiral of
Castille, standing in need of Troops to quell the Seditious, thought it not
enough to draw out of Navarre the greatest part of those that were in Garrison
there. They had also ordered the Artillery to be transported from thence into
the Kingdoms of Arragon and Valentia, whether that it was absolutely necessary
for them to batter down the Rebellion; or that despairing to preserve Navarre
during the Civil War, they resolved at least to make the best of the Cannon
that were there. The thing was fully put in execution; and the Navarrese
wanting only an Army to second them in the defection which they were hatching,
demanded one of the Countess of Chateanbrian, who at that time could do any
thing in France. They represented to her that their Crown sprang from her
house, and must return to it again: That her three brothers, Lautrec, Asparaut,
and the Marshall de Foix, were the next Heirs to Henry d' Albert: That that
Prince not being as yet of Age to carry Arms, had need that his Cousin-german
should act for him: That the recovery then in agitation was neither doubtful
nor difficult, that all that was necessary to be done was only to take a
Frontier place, and then to appear in the heart of the Country, where they
would be favorably received: That on the one hand they would have the hearts
of the people, and on the other, no Enemy in the Field.

Two of the Brothers of the Countess were employed. Lautrec was Governor of
the Duchy of Milan, and the Marshall de Foix commanded the Cavalry there. In
the Letters of the Marshall de Foix to the King.
Asparaut only remained, who having no less courage nor ambition than they,
lived at home for want of an employment that he judged worthy of himself. The
recovery of Navarre was the most signal opportunity of getting reputation that
for some years had been offered. Glory there was enough to be acquired in case
it succeeded, and no great honor to be lost if it succeeded not. So that the
Countess employed her interest with Francis the First, to engage him in the War
of Navarre. She told him, that it was his interest to do it, and that he might
do so without breaking with the Emperor: That there was neither money nor
Forces demanded from him, but that he would only suffer under hand men to be
raised in the Provinces lying betwixt the Loire and the Pyrenees: That if the
enterprise proved unfortunate, it would suffice for his excuse to disown it;
and if successful, his Majesty might deliberate in Council, whether he should
recall Asparaut, or assist him to pursue his Conquests in Spain, to the end
France might in a Treaty of Peace exchange them with the Kingdom of Naples.

The King had no more measures to be observed with the Spaniards, since the
Emperor had refused to set on foot again the Negotiation of Montpellier. His
most Christian Majesty had too publicly declared, that he would by all means
have the house of Albert restored to the Throne of Navarre to neglect so
favorable an occasion that offered of it self; and now the time was come when
the two greatest Monarchs of Europe were to begin a quarrel that was to
out-last themselves, and expose Hungary to the invasion of the Turks.

The Court of France thought it not enough to suffer the Families of Albert and
Foix do as they thought best in Guyenne and Languedock, where both had vast
Estates; but favored them in secret as much as they could; and the young
Gentlemen of Gasconny being persuaded that they would please their King by
listing themselves under Asparaut, flocked to his Colors in great numbers. The
Army was on foot before the Emperor knew that it was a levying; and the
Historians, who agree that it was made up of choice men, do so vary about the
number of the Soldiers, that it is not possible to reconcile them. Some reckon
them only to have been Eight thousand; but others again swell them up to
thirty. It is also more difficult to be decided, whether or not there was any
intelligence betwixt Asparaut and the Rebels of Spain; for the Authors on the
other side of the Pyrenees positively assert it, and prove it by fragments of
several Letters, which they say were found in Asparaut's Cabinet. The French
writers formally maintain the contrary: And certainly there is nothing of it,
neither amongst the Records of the house of Foix, nor amongst the Papers of
Robertet, who at that time discharged alone the office of Secretary of State
under Francis the First.

However it be, the enterprise of Asparaut was well enough conducted in the
beginning. He made the best of the fault of the Marshall of Navarre, which was
mentioned in the foregoing Book, and thought it not fit to engage himself in
the mountains as he had done, leaving behind him the important place of S.
John-Pie-de Port. He besieged it in the usual form; and seeing nothing
withstands the first impetuosity of the French, the besieged at the end of five
or six days capitulated, though they had all things necessary for maintaining a
longer siege. Asparaut, who would lose no time, crossed over the Pyrenees by
the memorable passage of Roncevaux, and at his descent was joined by all that
remained in Navarre of the Faction of Grammont able to carry Arms. The Duke of
Najara, Viceroy for the Emperor, had none of those qualities that serve to help
men at a dead lift, when they are left in the lurch by other peoples fault. He
was superfluously cautious in all manner of affairs, and ventured nothing but
what he was forced to hazard, as he said, to the discretion of fortune. He
would not accept the Vice-royalty of Navarre, till they assured him that he
should want nothing that was necessary for making a good defense, in case he
were attacked: Nevertheless they had taken from him most part of his Artillery
and Troops to be employed against the Rebels. He was so concerned at that, that
at the same time he desired to be discharged of his Government; but it was not
in their thoughts to remove from Navarre a Grandee of Spain, who possessed so
fair an Estate upon the Frontiers of his Government, as might afford him means
of preserving it during the Civil War.

Chievres, by order of the Emperor, had written to him oftener than once, that
his Majesty entreated him to continue his care in the Vice-royalty that was
committed to him; assuring him that he should not be attacked: That the Spies
whom he entertained in France had sent him word, that the Levies which were
making there, were only to recruit the Army of Lautrec, that guarded the Duchy
of Milan; and if they might have contrary designs, the Troops of Biscay and
Guypuscoa should without fail be ordered to march into Navarre. The Duke obeyed
in the opinion that the Emperors Council was so well informed of what was in
agitation out of Spain, that they could not be mistaken in the measures that
they took for preserving it, In the last Letters of Chievres.
but he found himself to be mistaken, when he was informed of the siege of S.
John-Pie-de Port. He stayed nevertheless in Pampelona after that he knew the
place was surrendered, because he imagined that the Forces which he had sent to
guard the passage of Roncevaux being reinforced by the Mountaneers, would beat
back the French; or at least would stop them so long, till the Troops of Biscay
and Guypuscoa should have time to come into Navarre; but he was as far out in
his own supposition, as he was in the conjectures of others. The Mountaneers,
who bragged that they alone had defeated the Rear of Charlemagne, not only
refused to assist the Spaniards in the defense of Roncevaux, but also offered
to Asparaut to charge them in the Rear at the same time that he attacked them
in the Front. They sent him word of this by several hands, one of which being
surprised by the Viceroys Scouts, just as he was about to enter the French
Camp, confessed the truth.

The Spanish Soldiers, who presumed not so much upon their own strength, as to
be able alone to guard the passage, though they had had only to defend
themselves on the Front, abandoned it before they were beset; and retreated
with so much haste, that the Duke had the first news of their retreat from
themselves. Upon seeing of them, he lost all hopes of saving Navarre; yet
before he would imitate their example, he thought fit to try the Inhabitants of
Pampelona, whether they were more affectioned to the Spaniards than the
Mountaneers were. He employed Agents to speak to them, who brought him back
word, that they could not be worse affected than they were toward the Emperor,
and, indeed, they had reason for it too afflicting to be dissembled. All the
Forts that environed the Town, and might serve it for a Rampart, had by order
been demolished for the building of a Citadel, which was almost finished. If
the Inhabitants delayed longer to make an Insurrection, they would lose their
liberty; and if on the contrary they declared for Asparaut, they were assured
that the first favor that he would grant them, would be to raze the Citadel
that annoyed them.

So that the answer of those of Pampelona was very ambiguous; and the Duke not
finding it to be such as he desired, laid the blame upon the Emissaries. He had
a better opinion of his own sufficiency than of theirs; and imagined that if he
himself made a speech to the Burghers, he would persuade them to defend
themselves to the last: He assembled them in the Marketplace, and made a very
zealous discourse to them, to persuade them that Asparaut was a raw General,
and his whole Army made up of Volunteers: That there needed no more to overcome
them, but to baulk their first furious onset; and that as it was not possible
to do it in Navarre out of Pampelona, so there was nothing more easy than to
accomplish it within so vast a City: That the success depended absolutely on
the first assault; and that if the French were repulsed, they would return back
again as fast as they came: That the truth was, it required Force to guard the
breach that was made for the building of the Citadel; but that if the
Inhabitants would undertake to defend the rest of their walls, the Soldiers
that upon surrender marched out of S. John Pie-de Port, and those who returned
from Roncevaux, were more than enough to maintain the Avenues by which the City
had communication with the Citadel.

The Duke had no sooner made an end of his speech, but that the Magistrate
being already convinced that there was no more to be feared on the part of the
Spaniards, answered with a blunt ingenuity, that he agreed as to the way how
the first impetuosity of the French was to be baulked, but that he perceived no
means to do it; and that if the Duke knew any, he would do him a kindness to
tell him: That the question was not only how to beat off the attack of the
French; but also to withstand those of the Citizens whom they had gained, who
would infallibly declare for them in the heat of the Fight: That Pampelona so
divided, was not in a condition to hold out against an Army, which a place
regularly fortified at the foot of the Pyrenees, and the Pyrenees themselves
were not able to put a stop to; and that as the capital City of Navarre, though
there was no breach in the walls, had notwithstanding opened the Gates to the
Spaniards when they were strongest, upon no other motive, but to avoid being
plundered; so the Spaniards ought not to take it ill if it changed Master now
they had reduced it to an impossibility of making a defense, by laying it open
in the very place where before it was strongest.

The Duke heard that Language with indignation: But passion is always
ridiculous in those who are obliged to lay a constraint upon themselves, In the
relation of the second taking of Pampelona.
that they may not follow the transports which it suggests unto them. The Duke
was not the stronger in Pampelona, though he had Forces there; and if he had
replied briskly to the Magistrate, it would have occasioned a sedition of a
doubtful issue. If the Spaniards had been the stronger, they would have
continued irreconcilable with the Citizens, without whose assistance
nevertheless they could not have been able to defend themselves against
Asparaut; and if they had been the weaker, the Duke would have been made
prisoner by the Citizens, who would have delivered them up to the French, to
make their peace again with them. The course he took in this perplexity, was to
leave the Citizens of Pampelona to their fidelity; to draw out the Soldiers,
who were not absolutely necessary for the guard of the Citadel; to send them to
the Town of Esteille, which he thought more affectionate to the Spanish
Monarchy; and to take Post to Segovia, where the Cardinal of Tortosa was, to
give him an account of his conduct.

Asparaut in the mean time advanced toward Pampelona, where the Citizens being
forsaken by their Viceroy, sent Deputies to him, and offered to submit,
provided they had an Act of Oblivion granted them in good form. They excused
their former defection, in that John d' Albert when he left them, had allowed
them liberty, as they understood it, to dispose of their City, and joyfully
submitted to Henry d' Albert his Son. So Asparaut had no more to do but to
entrench himself before the Citadel, and having summoned the Garrison who
protested that they would bury themselves under its ruins, furiously to batter
it: But the obstinacy of the Garrison lasted not above three days; and it was
during that siege that S. Ignatius Loyala, the famous Founder of the Society of
the Jesuits, who served in the place as a Voluntier, received the wound which
put into his mind the first thoughts of forsaking the world. The Governor of
the Citadel perceiving a considerable breach made, and his best Soldiers
disabled from fighting, capitulated, and Asparaut left about two thousand men
to guard the place, and repair the breaches. He made haste with the rest of his
Army to march straight to the Town of Esteille, his good fortune attending him.
Those whom the Duke of Najara left there had not the courage to defend it; but
surrendered it upon the first summons.

Thus was Navarre recovered for the house of Albert, in the beginning of May,
one thousand five hundred and twenty one, with as much ease as it was lost nine
years before; and Asparaut had been the most fortunate subject of his time, if
he had known how to be content when he had executed his enterprise, and gone no
farther: But young men are not to be entrusted with the command of Armies, when
there is no more to be put to the hazard. The Army of Asparaut after the
conquest of Navarre was stronger than before; for besides that he had not lost
many Soldiers before the places which he had besieged, all the Navarrese of the
Faction of Beaumont had met to consult what conduct to follow as to him. They
resolved that part of them should go and join him, and that the rest should
stay till Asparaut sent for them. The inequality of his conduct, to speak
properly, was the cause of his ruin, and it is in vain for Historians to have
searched elsewhere the causes of the misfortunes that over whelmed him.

Asparaut knew that Navarre had nothing to fear from abroad, so long as it was
not divided at home; and that all the misunderstanding which had arisen there,
was betwixt the Factions of Grammont and Beaumont. In the mean time they had
been reconciled in his presence, and the agreement was made in such a manner,
that it seemed nothing could alter it for the future. Both the one and other
had learnt by their own experience, that it was their discord which had
subjected them to the Castillians; and seeing they hated the Castillians more
than they did mutually one another, there was no appearance, that their
quarrels would revive again; since they were convinced that they could not
decide them but to the prejudice of their Country. So that there being no more
cause of fear within Navarre, Asparaut turned his thoughts abroad; and was of
opinion, that for obtaining from the Emperor a Peace wherein he should
absolutely renounce his pretensions to Navarre, there was a necessity of taking
an important place in Castille, and of keeping it so long as the War lasted. He
proposed this to Arnauld de Grammont, who under him commanded the Cavalry of
Navarre, and whom he esteemed more than the other Officers of his Army.

Grammont, who was of a piercing wit, saw at first the fault that his General
was about to commit, and endeavored to divert him from it. He represented to
him, that the course he intended to take for obtaining an advantageous Peace;
would be good betwixt two Enemies, whose Forces were near equal; and who by
consequent might not only have their interest, but also their reputation to
manage: But that the case was not so betwixt the Emperor and Henry d' Albert,
seeing he the Son of a Father and Mother almost stripped of all, had no other
resource but the Army which he had then on foot: That an extraordinary occasion
had offered it self for the recovery of Navarre, which was the Civil War
amongst the Spaniards: That he had made use of it, and was therein more
successful than he expected to have been. But that however he had but performed
one half of what he intended: That it was not enough for him to be restored to
the Throne of his Predecessors; but that he must also maintain himself in it,
which could not be without much prudence and time, especially when he had to do
with an Enemy infinitely more powerful than himself: That the truth was, the
victorious Army was strong enough to maintain the new Conquest, provided it
continued in the condition it was in, and went not out of Navarre, where the
people refused not the Soldiers free quarters: But if it entered Castille, and
were weakened by a siege, it could no longer keep the Field; and the charges of
maintaining it being then double, the Navarrese would infallibly refuse to
contribute thereto: That in fine, to maintain himself in Navarre, he ought to
imitate the conduct of the Spaniards in conquering it, and that as the Duke of
Alva, when he took that Crown from John d' Albert, pursued not his victory into
the principality of Bearn, though it would not have been difficult for him to
have seized that dependence of Navarre; so Asparaut ought to content himself
with the Kingdom which now he had recovered, and to advance no farther.

Asparaut found not Grammont's reasons to his liking. The Spaniards in his
opinion had not made sufficient resistance in Navarre, to give him occasion of
acquiring so much glory as he desired; and he thought that stopping short in so
fair a cariere, he might deserve the character of a fortunate, but not of an
excellent Captain. Besides, he was the younger Brother of a Family where there
was not Estate enough for the younger: His birth and profession hindered him
from acquiring a fortune any other way, but by the Sword; an extraordinary
occasion presented; and if he lost it, seeing hitherto he had done nothing for
himself, he was in danger of doing nothing as long as he lived. He had indeed
taken a great deal of pains, but that was for Henry d' Albert his Cousin, who
could reward him but meanly, and out of the Estate which he possessed in
France; the Lands of Navarre not being of a nature to be held by strangers:
Whereas if he advanced his conquests into Castille, he would at least retain
them until the Peace; and in the mean time raise vast contributions from them,
which might render him the richest Subject in Christendom.

These selfish considerations of Asparaut were backed by the clamours of the
young Officers of his Army, who importuned him that he would be as good as his
word to them, when they were enrolled, which was to let them have a brush with
the Enemy. They added, that he had not so much as showed them the Castillians,
and that they were come into, and had recovered Navarre without a view of them.
That if they stopped there, they would leave no marks of their valor to
posterity: Whereas by entering into Castille, if they found the people still in
Rebellion there, they would subdue them without trouble; and if they found them
again reduced under obedience to the Emperor, they would still come to as good
a Market, since the two parties would be so weakened by fighting one against
another, that hardly could they make any resistance.

The most dangerous Counsels are most commonly followed in Armies, where young
men have the chief Authority, Asparaut's Army was subject to that
inconvenience, and it was resolved there that the French should march out of
Navarre: That they should pass the River Ebre, which separates that Kingdom
from Castille: That they should lay siege to the Town of Logrogno; and that
having taken it, they should extend their conquests farther. The design was
rash: Nevertheless the most expert in the Art confessed since, that it would
have succeeded, if it had been as hastily put in execution as it was formed.
The Town of Logrogno, though the Council of Spain looked upon it as a key of
Castille, had been ungarisoned as well as the Towns of Navarre, and not so much
as a Soldier left therein. They had also taken the Ammunition out of it, and
left there only the Provisions. For at least half an Age the Inhabitants had
had no necessity of carrying Arms; and that long rest joynedto the fertility of
their Country, entertained them in a softness that would have obliged them to
surrender upon the first summons, if it had been made when there was no body to
help them to defend the place. But Asparaut by a second fault less to be
repaired than the former, made a stop three whole days to refresh his Army in
the neighborhood of the little Town of Arcos; and thereby gave time to the
Nobility of Spain, who had continued loyal to the Emperor, to provide for the
security of Logrogno. They put into it Pedro Velez Guevera, a prudent and
expert Captain, with a strong Garrison, who at first made himself absolute
Master of the place: He turned out of it all useless mouths, and caused them to
be conducted farther in into Castille, to places where they might be maintained
at public cost. He received in the nick of time the Ammunition he stood in
need of, the Gentlemen of the Country having provided it at their own charges;
and the Governor thought it not enough to dispute every inch of ground with
the Besiegers, he besides drowned all the Fields about Logrogno by means of the
Banks of the Ebre, which he caused to be cut; and so much the more confounded
the French, that at that time they were not skilful enough in that part of
Mathematics which teaches Besiegers how to defend themselves against waters.
Asparaut, though he found upon his arrival matters in this state, yet for all
that undertook the siege, and vigorously prosecuted the same: But besides the
prodigious resistance he met with, there happened an impediment which he had
not foreseen. The Civil War ceased so suddenly in Castille and Arragon after
the Battle of Villalar, that the three Governors had time to send their own
and the Rebels Army, of which the Rear had only fought, to the relief of
Logrogno; and the Emperor was informed, that that important place was besieged,
at the same time when he had notice that an Army was marching to the relief of
it.

He communicated the news of both to Chievres, who was dissatisfied with
Francis the First, ever since his most Christian Majesty had refused to approve
the donation which Queen Germana had made to him of the Inheritance of Foix;
and probably in that heat of resentment, Chievres counseled the Emperor to
make use of the imprudence of Asperaut, in such a manner as would infallibly
gain Spain the advantage over France. The Letters which the Emperor had
received from the three Governors contained a particular, which they had
inserted without any design. And it was this that when Asparaut first
approached to Logrogno, a pair of Colors had been discovered in his Army with
this Inscription, To the glory of the King of France and the Lilies. If the
thing was true, and if the Spaniards invented it not, as the French pretended
since, the Colors must have been made by some capricious Captain of Foot,
without the knowledge of his General; since it is certain, and the writers of
both Nations agree, that Asparaut when he entered Navarre and Castille, declared
himself to be General of the Army of Henry d' Albert, and not of the Army of
Francis the First, and that he executed the orders of the former of those two
Kings, and not of the latter: Nevertheless Chievres took occasion from it to
represent to his Master, that that particular well managed, would be enough to
engage England in his interests.

He put his Imperial Majesty in mind, that in the last conference which he had
had with King Henry the Eight his Uncle, where he had the honor to be present,
his Majesty of England had let fall a word, that if the War broke out again,
betwixt France and Spain, he would declare for that Monarchy of the two, which
should be first attacked. That though the word perhaps dropped from him as in
course, and without deliberation, yet he ought to make his best of it, and send
an extraordinary Ambassador into England to demand the performance thereof, and
to exaggerate the ambition of Francis the First in the Court of England, whilst
the Imperial Agents should every where give it out, that the French had not
very long made use of the pretext of Henry d' Albert for entering hostilely into
Spain, and for favoring the Rebellion of the Emperors Subjects: That they had
taken off the Vizor when they passed the River of Ebre, and had retaken the
Flowers de Lice upon their entry into Castille: That under their own Colors
they besieged the Town of Logrogno; and that so the juncture was come, wherein
the King of England had promised to declare himself: That Spain was constantly
attacked, and that it challenged the promise of England.

The Emperor, who run no risk in following the counsel of Chievres, sent the
Count of Raeux to London, with instructions drawn according to the reasons
which we have now abridged. The Count, who was never before employed in any
Negotiation, succeeded in this, which was his first Essay; but not altogether,
because of his ability, though it was already very conspicuous.

The King of England made no such account of the word, which, as was signified
unto him, he had past, as to think himself obliged to keep it, but he set
before himself other considerations, which were not in the Counts instructions.
He examined which of the two, France or Spain, he had most reason to be afraid
of as affairs then stood; and he found it to be France; for though the Emperor
was raised to a prodigious power, and that there was none in the world
comparable to it in extent, yet it was not suspicious to England, seeing the
Emperor could not attack it by Land before he had conquered all France, which
could never be in the opinion of the English; and as to the Sea, England would
be always superior to Spain: Whereas if the French Monarchy having
re-established its Authority in Italy by the recovery of the Duchy of Milan,
should enlarge it self beyond the Pyrenees, by conquering there the Country of
the best Soldiers, which lay along the River of Ebre; it would not only not own
the King of England for Arbitrator of the differences, which it had with the
Emperor, but also might very well take the advantage of the first favorable
occasion that should present and confine the English to their own Island, by
taking from them what they still retained in France.

Henry the Eighth concluded from that principle, that it was his interest by
all means to hinder the Spaniards from taking footing upon the Banks of the
Ebre, and upon that sole consideration signed a League Defensive and Offensive
with the Emperor against the most Christian King; which he would not have done
as he many times declared afterward, if Asparaut had stopped in Navarre; or that
if he would have continued his Conquests, he had only carried them on along the
Pyrenees, without advancing at first into the very heart of Spain.

Before a fortnight was over, the King of England found that his fear was vain,
and repented that he had declared so soon, but the Count of Raeux having
obtained what he desired, was already gone from his Court, when the news was
brought to England that the French were driven out of Castille. The Spaniards
having joined the Rebellious Troops, as they called them, to those whom they
named Obedient, made an Army of forty thousand men; and marched in good order
to the relief of Logrogno at the time when the number of the Besiegers was so
diminished, that it was no longer sufficient for guarding all the Avenues to
the place. The Enemy perceived it, and took such good measures, that they put
into it four thousand Foot. Having done so, with the rest of their Forces they
cut off the Besiegers Provisions, and forced them to raise the siege, after
they had made many unsuccessful assaults. Asparaut repassed the Ebre, and
retreated in all haste to put himself under the cover of the Guns of Pampelona;
there being no Town nearer where he could lie safely; and the Spaniards had
almost suffered him to do it. There happened amongst them upon their coming
into Logrogno a debate which would have hindered them from recovering Navarre,
had it not been almost as soon ended as begun. Their chief Officers agreed
easily in a Council of War, that the French must be close pursued in the Rear;
but at first they could not agree about the choice of him, who should be their
head after that they had passed the Ebre. The Count of Haro, who till then had
commanded them, pretended still to the command; and alleged for his reason,
that he being declared General against the French, his Commission could not
expire till he had defeated them, or sent them beyond the Pyrenees: He added,
that that Commission was indeed no more but an Accessory of that which Chievres
had procured him to pursue the Rebels by Arms, and to resettle Spain in its
former tranquillity: He maintained that the French had first entered Navarre,
and then Castille through intelligence with the Rebels; and from thence
concluded, that his command could not be taken from him without injustice,
until Navarre should be recovered, or that the Emperor had given other orders.

The Duke of Najara, on the contrary, said that he was actually Viceroy of
Navarre, and that the Letters Patents which he had for it from the Emperor,
were not recalled: That it was expressly mentioned in them that he should be
General of all the Forces that acted in that Kingdom for his Imperial Majesty,
for what cause, and upon what occasion soever they should be brought together;
and that there was no limitation made in that particular: That the revolution
which had since happened in Navarre, could do no prejudice to his power; and
that in true policy it ought not to be considered, but in the sense that
Lawyers look upon Torrents, which though for some time they overflow the Lands
of private men, yet do not deprive them of their possession, nor so much as
interrupt it when once it has been lawfully established.

The Count of Haro had no ground to question the Letters Patents of the Duke of
Najara, but he alleged that the power thereby conferred had expired by the
Dukes fault: That he had abandoned his Vice-royalty upon the approach of the
Enemy; and that he had so absolutely lost it, that there was not so much as one
Village in all Navarre where his Authority was owned: That that Kingdom having
wholly changed its Master, the business was to conquer it of new; and by
consequence to take such measures as no more concerned the Duke, than as he had
never been Viceroy. The reason and inclination of those who gave their Votes,
seemed to give the cause to the Count: Nevertheless he lost it, and the Duke
was preferred before him by an effect of Spanish prudence, which has hardly
ever failed in the signal occasions of sacrificing justice to interest, when
the good of the Monarchy was thought to be concerned. The Army which had
relieved Logrogno, and earnestly desired to recover Navarre, was so wholly made
up of Volunteers, that there was not so much as one Company of Foot, or Troop
of Horse that had any pay from the Emperor. The Duke of Najara was the Grandee
of Spain, who had brought most Soldiers to the Camp; and it was to be feared
that these Soldiers, who only came upon his account, would return back with him
if he withdrew, as he must be obliged to do in honor, if he obtained not the
General command. His Son had gathered together five or six thousand men from
the Provinces bordering upon the Mountains, and Don Gaspar de Butron his
Son-in-law had raised almost as many more in the Provinces of Guypuscoa and
Biscay. These were the choice men of the Spanish Army; and so great a desertion
would have so weakened it, that it could not have been able to have pursued
Asparaut.

The Cardinal of Tortosa, the Constable and Admiral of Castille, foresaw that
inconvenient, and by consequence made no scruple to discontent Haro,
notwithstanding they were chiefly obliged to him for the taking of Tordesillas,
and the victory of Villavar. They gave their Vote openly in favor of the Duke;
and the Count, who was still very much displeased with them, though he would
have done the same as they did, had he been in their place, left the Army in
spite, and went home to his own house.

So soon as the Duke had taken upon him the Command, he omitted nothing that
might render him worthy of the favor they had done him. He pursued the French
with so great diligence, that he never failed to dine in the same places where
they had lain. He harassed them in their march by continual skirmishings; and
at length came up with them near the Forest of Roniego, when they were but two
Leagues from Pampelona. The relations which agree very well in what we have
said, do so vary about this subject, that it is not possible positively to
relate the matter of fact. The Spaniards maintain that their Camp was betwixt
the French and the City of Pampelona: That being so Encamped, they took from
them all communication with that capital City of Navarre, where nevertheless
all sorts of Provisions were: That so though they were most advantageously
posted, they wanted Bread, and that that was the only thing that made them
hazard a Battle. But there is an objection to be made against that which cannot
be answered. It is taken from the Letter that Asparaut immediately after his
defeat, which we are about to relate, wrote to Francis the First; and common
sense is sufficient to judge, that if he had been forced to fight, and the
matter of fact asserted by the Spaniards had been true, that General might have
had his excuse ready, by alleging that he was forced to give Battle, and his
most Christian Majesty could have had nothing else to impute to him, but his
misfortune. In the mean time he not only not mentions any constraint to have
been put upon him, but more, he writes positively the contrary. He agrees that
he had liberty either to fight or not to fight as he pleased: He affirms that
the only motive which inclined him to give Battle, was the disorder that he saw
in the Spanish Army, which he thought he ought to lay hold on: But he adds,
that the disorder was too quickly over; and that nevertheless he had not been
beaten, if his Foot had seconded the efforts of his Horse.

The French relations, then, more probably affirm, that Asparaut's
communication with the City of Pampelona was not intercepted: That the truth
was, he had not as yet got any Provisions out of it, but that nothing hindered
him from it: That he was Encamped in such a place as it was impossible to
starve, force, or oblige him to fight whether he would or not; and that the
Spaniards despaired of it when they had well considered his post: That they had
brought no provisions with them; and that the Low Country of Navarre, which the
French had purposely ravaged upon their retreat, having nothing to supply their
Enemies with, Asparaut needed to have done no more, but to have lain still at
Roniego, and seen the Spanish Army dispersed in a few days, being neither in a
condition to Assault nor Besiege the City of Pampelona; and that by that means
he had infallibly secured to Henry d' Albert the conquest of Navarre. But that
he committed a fault no more to be excused than repaired, seeing he hazarded a
Battle without taking three measures so easy for winning of it, that he had
them almost in his hands. The first was not to have drawn out the two thousand
Soldiers whom he had left in Pampelona; and who might have sallied out in time
of Battle with so much less danger; that the Citizens who were more concerned
than they that Asparant should have gained it, would have willingly consented
that they should have joined their General, and in the mean time taken upon
themselves the defense of the walls. The second, that Asparant recalled not the
Forces which he left to guard the Frontiers of Biscay, whilst he was to have
acted in Castille. The Lord of Olla who commanded them, wrote of it to his
General, and they could do no service where they were, since the Spaniards had
recalled theirs out of Biscay for reinforcing their Army. They had been in no
action, but at the Siege of S. John- Pie de Port, and had ever since been in
quarters of refreshment. Their number which is not exactly known, and their
experience which is not disputed, deserved very well that they should have been
expected for giving a decisive Battle; and both parties agreed, that if they
had been there, they would have infallibly inclined the advantage to the side
of the French. In fine, Asparaut's third fault was, that he staid not for six
thousand Navarrese, who were to join him that very day, or at farthest the day
following. The Country had raised them upon their own charges, and all their
Officers were expert Soldiers: There was not one of them but would have died
fighting, rather than have yielded a foot of ground; because all of them looked
upon it as the greatest of misfortunes, to fall again under the dominion of the
Castillians. If Asparaut had not trusted them so much as to have taken them
into his Army, they might at least have made a Body of reserve; and in that
manner supplied the defect, which according to all writers made the French lose
the Battle, their Infantry having been only worsted, because there were no
fresh Forces ready to assist them at a pinch: And the Spanish Body of reserve,
who took their time to fall upon them when they saw them tired, and without
support, having had a cheap bargain on it.

However it be, there was nothing to be found fault with in the drawing up of
the French Army, nor in the briskness of their first charge, though they were
in number inferior to the Enemy by one half. Nothing was able to resist the
furiousness of their right Wing; and the eldest Son of the Duke of Albuquerque,
who commanded the left Wing of the Spaniards, made head against them to no
purpose. His Squadrons were opened, and his Batallions broken: His Horse threw
him, and fell upon him; and if he had not been remounted by his Servants, he
must have been trodden to death by his Horses. But that disorder was presently
rectified; and the Admiral of Castille appointed with five thousand Horse to
second the left Wing, took his time to charge Grammont, when the Squadrons of
that Lieutenant General of Asparaut's were disordered by the great effort they
had made, and cut his way through them. Asparaut in the main Body seeing him in
such extremity, advanced to cover him, till he should put himself into order
again; and with much resolution resisted not only the Admiral of Castille, but
the Duke of Najara also, whom he had to deal with, and the whole main Body of
the Spaniards. The left Wing of the French led by Mauleon with no less courage,
charged the Spanish Right, commanded by the Count of Benevento, and put them
also to the rout. They did not offer to pursue them; but were marching straight
to Asparaut's main Body to complete their victory, by disingaging their General
from the danger he was in, when they were diverted by the Constable of Castille
at the head of the Spanish reserve, who charged them in the Flank and opened
them. Mauleon's Horse, who had neither been killed nor dismounted, wheeled
about to rally again behind the Foot, and to prepare for a second charge; but
the Spanish right Wing gave them not the time. They were almost as soon beaten
as charged; and the Constable having no more to be afraid of on that side,
endeavored to cut in pieces a Batallion of a thousand old Gascon Soldiers, who
guarded the French Artillery. He succeeded in it more easily than he had
expected; and turning the ten Fieldpieces which he had gained, against
Asparaut, made a dreadful havoc in the main Body of the French Army. He broke
into it by that means, and made himself sure of an entire victory.

One of his Cavaliers, called Perrea, engaged singly him who carried the white
Standard of the French; overthrew him, took the Standard, and carried it to his
General, who afterward obtained permission from the Emperor for him to change
his Escutcheon. Asparaut having lost all the brave men that were about him, was
environed by the Squadron of the Count of Alva de List, and having received a
wound by a Sword, which blinded him, he was dismounted. He rendered himself
prisoner to Francis of Beaumont, who had ten thousand Crowns for his Ransom.
The Victorious having left five or six thousand dead in the field of Battle,
pursued the Fugitives to Pampelona, and took them there; the Inhabitants of
that great City who had no more hopes of relief, having delivered them up, to
obtain pardon for their Rebellion, which was granted them, in that
consideration. The rest of Navarre was recovered by the Spaniards, with as
great facility as they had lost it, and their Conquest remained so sure, that
no attempt was made afterward to drive them out of it.

There is so little betwixt an indirect War, and direct, that Chievres foresaw
that the French and Spaniards would soon pass from the one to the other, if
they were not prevented by something of greater consequence than all that had
been till then Negotiated for making them friends: and as on the one hand he
saw the most Christian King resolved to cause the Treaty of Noyon to be put in
execution in its full extent, and on the other, he hoped to dispose the Emperor
to accomplish his part of it, because of the advantages that the Empire had
procured him over his most Christian Majesty; so he used all his Policy to take
off the French from declaring War directly, by convincing them, that if they
came to that, they would not only have all the Forces of Spain, and of two
thirds of Italy, but also all the Princes of Germany against them. The Union of
so many Powers, though of different Inclinations and Interests could not be
crossed, but by the changes which Martin Luther an Augustine Monk had some four
years before introduced into Religion; and these changes were already so great,
that they could not be remedied but by a General Diet. The Emperor, by the Laws
of Germany, was obliged to call one immediately after his Coronation; and the
City of Ratisbone had for many ages had that preference, that for the first
time it should be held there. Nevertheless in the Juncture of affairs at that
time it could not be, seeing the Plague was in that Imperial City. There
behoved then another to be chosen which was spacious enough for accommodating
the Princes and Deputies of the Empire; and the same Laws which appointed
Ratisbone, mentioning none other that might supply its defect, Chievres told
the Emperor, that by Law the choice was his, and that by consequence it was in
his power to name the place of Assembly. Besides, he represented to his Majesty
that he ought to pitch upon a City near the Low Countries; for if he were but
in the least distant from thence, if the French began the War again during his
absence, they would make great Conquests there before he could return to their
Assistance. Upon that ground Chievres added, that no City was more commodious
than that of Worms, which was wholly Imperial, that is to say, that held of no
Prince neither Secular nor Ecclesiastical: which was situated in a plentiful
Country; and which moreover was so near the Low Countries, that no accident
could happen but that his Majesty would have notice timely enough to remedy it.

The Emperor, according to his custom, complied with that advice, and the Diet
of the Empire was called at Worms against the beginning of May, 1521. Chievres
attended the Emperor thither, and there lost his life, after he had lost that
which was dearest to him in the world. It has been observed before, that the
Nephew whom he loved most, was the second Son of his Elder Brother, to whom he
had given his Name, and who for his sake had been made Bishop of Cambray,
Cardinal and Archbishop of Toledo. He had been bred with the Emperor; and the
Sympathy of his humor with that of his Majesty's, had contributed to his
promotion, almost as much as the merit of his Uncle. He was not as yet full
three and twenty years of age, and nevertheless he was already of all his
Masters Councils. It was not doubted, but that sometime or other he would have
held the place of Chievres; and that, according to the Memoires of the house of
Croy, was either the cause or the occasion of his death.

The Germans and Spaniards could not endure that these two Flemings should have
a greater share in the Friendship of the Emperor, than all the rest of the
Courtiers together; and the former of those two people who had taken no
exceptions at all, that Maximilian the first, during the whole course of his
life followed his own Whimsey, and changed his inclinations at every turn, took
it ill that Charles his Grandson should follow the Counsels of the Wisest of
men which had been so useful unto him; and that from his Infancy he had loved
amongst his Subjects, the young Lords of his own age, whom he esteemed the most
deserving. The other people imputed to Chievres and his Nephew, the Civil Wars
of Spain which we have mentioned. They were persuaded that they had divided
betwixt themselves, or given to their Creatures the Treasures of Cardinal
Ximenes, and the Revenues of the Monarchies of Castille and Arragon, during the
space of four years: they also supposed, that they had sold all the Offices and
Benefices of these Monarchies: and in that particular, their prejudice was so
much the more ridiculous, that it could neither specify the Fleets that had
transported such prodigious sums out of Spain, nor the places where they had
been kept, nor yet the purchaces that had been made with them: Nevertheless so
improbable a calumny, and so easy to be refuted, was received without
examination or contradiction. It was generally spread abroad; and made so deep
an impression on men's minds, that they were not undeceived in it, till upon the
death of the two persons whom they had accused of that imaginary robbing of the
public, it was found that they were no richer at their death, than they were
when Charles became King of Spain. But the false opinions that are entertained
of Favorites, are no less prejudicial to them, than true ones, when they are
insinuated through an excess of Credulity; and when they who are capable to
undeceive the people, think it their interest to let them continue in their
error. The enemies of Chievres, and of the Cardinal de Croy, who expected to
be enriched by their spoils, were so far from taking the pains to undeceive the
Spaniards in their behalf, that they increased the aversion which they had to
them; until both of them being gone out of Spain, and by consequence, having no
cause to suspect that the Poison which was prepared for them, came from the
Spaniards, they began with the Cardinal, and gave him a Dose that carried him
off within a few days after the Emperor came to Worms.

Chievres being thereby obliged contrary to the course of Nature to shut his
eyes, from whom he expected that last duty, was the more afflicted at it, that
he had a secret presentment that they would use him in the same manner as they
had treated the Cardinal whom he looked upon as his Son. He prepared to follow
him, and ordered both his Spiritual and Temporal affairs. He made his Wife the
Executrix of his last Will and Testament, and she acquitted her self of it
afterward with all imaginable care. Then he thought it his duty to employ the
remaining part of his life in Action; and conceiving none to be more
advantageous to the Catholic Religion, than the reclaiming of Luther, who was
engaged in his Errors, out of spite to see the Augustine Monks frustrated of
the profit that was to be made by the preaching up of Indulgences, he proposed
to himself to finish his Course by that. He encouraged the Pope's Nuncio, to
represent to the Emperor in full Diet, that the greatest evil wherewith
Germany was then afflicted, was Heresy; and that by consequence before all
things, a stop should be put to that: that the Emperor had the most formidable
enemies in the world to fight with, who were the Turks; and that to make
resistance against them, he had so much need of all his forces, that if they
were in the least divided, he must infallibly succumb: That nevertheless Luther
by his new Doctrine was about to divide them; and sow the seeds of a Civil War
amongst the different parts of the German body, which the Infidels would not
fail to make their advantage of. That the Holy See declared against that
Heresiarch; and offered to prove that he was Scandalous, a disturber of public
peace, disobedient to God and his Superiors, a Blasphemer, impious wretch, and
a Calumniator: That the Pastoral charity of Pope Leo the tenth, obliged him to
hunt the Wolf, hid under the Sheeps skin, out of the Sheepfold of Jesus Christ;
and that if the Emperor, and other German Princes assisted not his Holiness in
so laudable a design, he beforehand protested that they would be guilty before
the Tribunal of God of all the evils that might happen.

But there are no inconveniences that ought more speedily to be remedied than
those which threaten a great State with an imminent Revolution, because their
operation is quicker, and their effects of greater extent. It was already four
years since Luther began to Preach against the Catholic Church; and his
Declamations, which in the year 1517. served only to make sport for the
curious, whilst they exaggerated the venality of Indulgences, had in the
following years persuaded a vast number of people, when they passed from the
abuse of the same Indulgences, to the power of the Church in granting them, and
when they endeavored to ruin all the foundation of that power. The great men
had listened to that new doctrine as greedily, as the inferior people; and God
who looked upon it as a scourge wherewith he intended to punish Germany, had
suffered two Princes, whereof the one was the most Powerful, and the other the
most Valiant Prince of the Empire, to be convinced of the truth of it. The most
Powerful was Frederick Elector of Saxony, and the most Valiant Philip Landgrave
of Hesse. Both had so great credit in the Diet of Worms, that they hindered
any deliberation to be made about the Answer that was to be given to the
Nuncio; and they made such strong parties the days following, that no positive
Answer was given him. To divert the Deputies from that, they represented to
them, that the Court of Rome had raised an imaginary Monster to fight with; and
that the Nuncio had only made a speech to show his Eloquence in the most August
Auditory of Europe; and to deserve a Cardinals hat: That Luther, indeed, struck
at the abuses that were crept into the Church, but that he neither meddled with
the Faith, nor the Ancient Discipline: That it was no wonder to see the Pope
his enemy, seeing he disputed his power; and the Ministers of the Court of Rome
rise up against him, since he had disappointed them of two thirds of the profit
which they proposed to make by the publication of the Indulgences: that it
concerned Germany to let him preach after his own way, so long as he spoke of
nothing but of exempting it from the pillage of the Italians; and that it would
always be in a condition of imposing silence on him, if he went farther, and
meddled with points of Faith.

The Nuncio being discouraged at the bad success of his first attempt; and not
knowing what part to act in the Diet, where he found by experience that the
greatest part of the deputies were not for him, applied himself to Chievres,
and asked his advice. Chievres made him answer, that in all appearance, that
which had hindered the effect of his harangue, was, that he thought it enough
to discourse; and that there behoved something more than words to move the
Germans: That that Nation was too diffident to believe him upon his word, and
too much prepossest in favors of Luther to condemn him upon the bare
deposition of a stranger: That in speaking to them, he ought to have convincing
proofs in his hands, and that then they would hear with more Attention, and
judge with greater Equity. The Nuncio to whom Chievres had suggested a thought
which had not till then come into his mind, replied that it would not be
difficult to put in execution what he had proposed, and that Luther had just
published a book called The Captivity of Babylon, wherein he had declared
himself openly against the Catholic Church, resumed all his ancient errors,
and added a great many new: That the divines whom the Pope had given him to
attend on him in his Nunciature, had examined the book; and that they had
extracted out of it, forty such terrible propositions, that to hear them was
sufficient to make them be abhorred: That he should cause them to be
Transcribed in the very terms they were expressed in, and the pages where they
were to be found quoted: That he should read them to the Diet; and press them
to employ their authority for stopping the impudence of a Monk, which they had
already suffered but too long.

Chievres approved the Expedient, and the Legate put it in practice in the next
Assembly of the Diet. He said, that it seemed to him, that the Diet had not
reflected enough upon what he had represented to them, upon occasion of Luther;
and drawing out of his pocket the forty Propositions we mentioned, he read them
with an audible voice, and without either exaggeration or commentary. The
effect proved to be as Chievres had foreseen, and immediately it appeared by
the murmur which it raised amongst the Electors, Princes and Deputies of the
Empire: There were already a great many Lutherans amongst them, but there were
but a few that were so upon sufficient information. All of them for most part
believed that Luther had neither preached nor written, but against the abuses
which time and humane inconstancy had brought into the Catholic Church; and
those who examined his doctrine more narrowly, thought that he had only
undertaken to re-establish the ancient discipline in the important points
wherein there was some relaxation. But when they understood that he had passed
from the use of Indulgences to the very source of them, and that he questioned
the power of the Holy See in granting them, and the Article of Purgatory which
served for their groundwork: That he had denied Free Will, the merit of good
Works, the perfection of the state of Virginity, and of a Single Life, five of
the seven Sacraments, and the Transubstantiation in the Eucharist; their
amazement was soon followed with indignation that they had been deceived, and
the order that they were about to make for apprehending Luther, had been the
sign of it, if the Elector of Saxony, who foresaw the blow had not prevented
it, by rising and demanding to be heard.

It could not be denied to a person of his degree, and he spoke, applying
himself to the Legate. He maintained in formal terms, that the propositions
which the Diet had heard, were none of Luther's; and that it came never into
the thoughts of that Doctor, either to teach, or write them: That the Legate
himself, or some others devoted as he was, to the Court of Rome, had invented
them: That there was no other cause of the implacable hatred and revenge which
his eloquent Sermons wrought in them, but the shameful and public commerce of
Indulgences, against which, he had inveighed: That the Book of the Captivity of
Babylon, out of which so many blasphemies were said to be taken, was none of
Luther's; or if it was, he questioned whether any of the propositions that had
offended the ears of the Assembly, were found in it.

The Legate, who with his own eyes, had read the Propositions in the book of the
Captivity of Babylon, and knew that Luther had not only written it, but also
Corrected the Proofs from the Press, protested that there was nothing truer
than what he had asserted, and demanded that he might be admitted to prove it
Judicially. The Elector replied that he could not; and the dispute grew so hot,
that the Emperor was forced to interpose his Authority to put a stop to it, and
impose silence, both upon the Elector and the Nuncio, by offering to speak.

He said in a few words, that the decision of the affair in hand, required that
Luther should appear personally in the Diet, out of his own mouth to give an
account of what he had done, because if he confessed that he had written the
book of the Captivity of Babylon, the debate betwixt the Elector and the Nuncio
would be at an end; and if he disowned it, then the Nuncio might be allowed to
make it out. The opinion of his Imperial Majesty was so universally followed,
that the Elector of Saxony with all his credit could not hinder but that Luther
was sent for: but he soon started strange difficulties about the Security that
should be given him. The Emperor offered a safe conduct, but the Lutherans were
not satisfied with that. The instances of John Huss, and Jerome of Prague, who
were burnt notwithstanding the like assurance given, increased their distrust,
when they called to mind, that both of them had repaired to the Council of
Constance, upon the Security of a safe conduct in good form, from the Emperor
Sigismund; and yet for all that had been punished with the most dreadful of
punishments. They knew besides, that the Council had not wanted Divines, who to
excuse what it had done, had then, and since, maintained that Faith was not to
be kept to Heretics; and that there were still Catholic Schools which
actually taught, That the attempts of Luther, against Religion, and the Holy
See, being of public Notoriety, it was not reasonable to suffer them; and that
one might with a safe Conscience dispense with the breach of promise that might
be given him, since he himself had neither kept his word to God nor man. From
thence they concluded, that it would be the way to undo Luther, to consent that
he should come into a place where his enemies would be the stronger, and that
the Emperor should be Petitioned to be satisfied that Luther should answer in
writing to the Accusations of the Nuncio: but the Catholic Deputies could not
endure that any more should be required than a safe conduct for a simple Monk
such as Luther. They maintained that it was injurious to the Emperor, to
suspect him of unfaithfulness on that occasion; and that they who sought
extraordinary security for Luther, did him incomparably more hurt than good,
because they turned against him, the prejudice of all disinterested persons, by
giving them occasion to believe that they must needs think him not altogether
innocent, seeing they were so fearful that the Law of Nations might be violated
in respect of him in the securest place of the Empire.

The Reasons of the Catholic Deputies had infallibly carried it from the
Arguments of Luther's friends, if the Votes of these had not been fortified
when it was least thought on by the Deputies of the Imperial Cities. One part
of them had openly declared for Luther, and the other part had given secret
instructions to their Deputies to favor him underhand as much as they could.
They failed not to do it upon occasion of the safe conduct, and represented so
strongly that it was not enough now, to have one expeded in the ancient form,
since the Fathers of the Council of Constance had discovered a way how it might
be safely violated, that the Emperor was forced to consent that a new one might
be found out that should content the friends of Luther, and the Deputies of the
Imperial Towns, without absolutely displeasing the rest of the Diet. Chievres
had the Commission to do it, and acquitted himself in it with universal
approbation, having used such strains of wit, as cannot be better expressed,
than by the great blazes of a light when it is upon the point of going out.

He had in the last Assemblies of the Diet wherein Luther was mentioned,
observed those who were most favorable unto him; and seeing he made no doubt
but that they would defend him in the Diet, at the peril of their lives, in
case they offered to Arrest him, he thought there would be no danger in it to
suffer them to be his Security; seeing as they were then disposed they would
not fail to perform that duty, though it were not desired they should. He
thereupon sounded the Elector of Saxony and Landgrave of Hesse, whilst the
Emperors ablest Agents sounded some of the Princes of Brunswick and
Brandenbourg, whether they were in the humor to join their Guarranty with that
of his Majesty, to assure Luther that he might come to the Diet, and return
back again with all safety. These Princes, who expected not that such a thing
should be demanded of them, granted it with the more joy, that it eased them of
a great trouble: For so soon as they heard it moved, that Luther should be
obliged to appear, they made no doubt but that the Diet would agree to it; and
seeing they foresaw that the Emperor, to engage the Court of Rome in his
interests against France, would Sacrifice unto them Luther, they supposed that
his Majesty would seize the person of that Monk, whether he retracted or
persisted in his new Doctrines; and send him into Italy under a sure Guard,
where he would be tried as a broacher of Heresies. They had resolved by all
means, to withstand that pretended violence with the assistance of Sequinguen a
Lutheran Gentleman, who commanded a pretty considerable number of Soldiers in
the neighborhood of Worms, and had promised to stand by them if it were
necessary. The only inconvenience which seemed to them inevitable, was the
Judicial procedures, whereby the Emperor and Court of Rome would prosecute them
with all vigor, so soon as they should have saved Luther. The Court of Rome
would put their Territories under an Interdict, and the Emperor punish them
with the Outlawry of the Empire. They were not very apprehensive of the
Thunders of the Holy See; because there was no Army in readiness to Second
them; but they feared so much the more to be proscribed by their Secular
Magistrate, who was the Emperor, as that they knew that the Laws of Germany
authorized the punishing of the attempt, which they had a design to commit.
They could not be secured against those Laws, but by the Guarranty that was
demanded; because if they granted it, and maintained the liberty of Luther,
though by force of Arms, they would always be excused for having kept, even
contrary to the Emperors will, a promise which they made not only with his
consent, but more, at his solicitation; and if these two Pretexts were
wanting, they could not avoid the Confiscation of their Lands, what other
color soever they might take for having rescued Luther from his Imperial
Majesty.

They made answer then to Chievres, that the Emperor did them too great an
honor, to admit of them to join with him in promise, and that they consented
to it with all their hearts. But Chievres not resting there, asked them, if
they thought after that, that Luther would make any more difficulty to come;
and the Elector of Saxony, bolder than the rest, because he had him in his
Country, replied, that if he came not, he would fetch him himself, rather than
that his Imperial Majesty should want the satisfaction of seeing and hearing
him, seeing he seemed to desire it. Chievres having in this manner negotiated
with the Lutherans, conferred with the Catholic Deputies; and represented to
them, that the Nuncio and Elector of Saxony had brought the business of Luther
to that pass, that it was absolutely necessary the Monk should come himself,
and give the Diet an account of his Doctrine: That it signified nothing in what
manner the safe conduct were framed to be sent unto him, seeing it was the
Emperors intention to be punctual to him in his word, and could not violate it
without kindling a Civil War in Germany; but he judged it convenient that there
should be inserted in the safe conduct, a condition which might be sufficient
to secure the Catholic Religion from all prejudice: That the condition was to
stipulate that Luther, neither upon his way from Wittemberg to Worms, nor
during his stay there, should not preach, write, or speak, in any manner, of
the opinions which he had, contrary to the Sentiments of the Ancient Church.
The Catholic Deputies approved the safe conduct with the qualification
proposed, and Chievres caused it immediately to be expeded: But humane frailty
never moves those who seriously reflect upon it to greater compassion, than
when they consider that the greatest men are so subject to failing, that though
they be so happy as not to commit faults in projecting difficult affairs, yet
they are not so in the execution of them. Prudence could do no more, as to the
manner how Chievres had adjusted the safe conduct; and it is acknowledged that
no inconvenience would have ensued upon it, if it had been entrusted to
faithful hands: But it was Chievres his misfortune, to make a bad choice of him
who was employed to carry it to Luther. The Emperor had brought up a young
German Gentleman called John Sturmie, who promised much. There were none at the
Court of Bruxelles that applied themselves so much to study as he, and yet none
had less than he contracted the imperfections of Students: it had rendered him
neither more sullen, nor less gay, more vain, nor less charming in
Conversation: He succeeded the best in all sorts of Exercise, and the
politeness of his manners equalled that of his mind. Chievres, who esteemed him
according to the merit that he observed in him, proposed him often to the
Emperor for little Negotiations, till more maturity of age might make him
capable of greater. He procured him the Commission of bringing Luther from
Wittemberg, and conducting him to Worms, of defraying his charges upon the
road, and of observing him so strictly, that he might not be able to contravene
the condition of the safe conduct, though he might have a mind to do it: But
Chievres knew not that Sturmie was the unsittest person of the Emperor's Court
for the employment he designed him for, and that he was in Judgment and
Inclination a Lutheran, though he had till then dissembled his change of
Religion. The Emperor's and Duke of Saxony's Letters to Luther were no sooner
expeded, but Sturmie parted from Worms with a very Magnificent Train, having
for that end added money of his own to that which was given him for the
discharge of his Commission. Luther, who would not have budged, if they had
sent one less affectionate to conduct him, or who at least would not have
undertaken the journey, but with fear and trembling, and as a Criminal led to
execution; joyfully set out upon the word of Sturmie, and traveled as in
Triumph; his Conductor having intimated to him privately that a more favorable
occasion could not be offered of spreading his doctrine in a trice all over
Germany, by publishing it himself, with that extraordinary eloquence which was
natural to him in the most August Theater in Europe: That he had so little
cause of fear to appear there, that his enemies dreaded nothing so much as to
see him there: That they had used all manner of artifices to divert the Emperor
from sending for him; but that at length the Solicitations of the Elector of
Saxony, and the obligation which the Emperor had to that Prince, had carried it
over the Officers of the Court of Rome: That the safe conduct was such as it
ought to be, and that Luther should not boggle at the condition therein
inserted: That it was, indeed, granted to the importunity of the Papists, but
that it bound no more than as he thought convenient; and that he assured him
before hand, that he himself would not be called to an account for not having
observed him.

In this confidence Luther parted from Wittemberg with Sturmie, and took along
with him three of the most famous Divines of that City, whom he had engaged in
his party. He boldly traveled over the greatest part of Germany; and in all
places found the road full of curious people who came out to see a Monk, who
was so variously talked of in the world, and with so much heat. The crowd
consisted of persons of quality as well as of those of inferior rank; and both
sorts took notice that he loved Music and good Cheer. He never eat in public
without one of the two, and most frequently without both together. After dinner
sometimes he took his Lute, on which he played exquisitely well: He sailed not
to Preach in the Towns where he made any stay; and by one Sermon he turned the
Town of Ausdors wholly Lutheran. His Preaching in Erford was a continued Satyr
against the Court of Rome upon occasion of Merit and the satisfaction of Good
Works; and that it might produce the greater effect, it was no sooner preached,
but that with Sturmie's consent it was Printed, which was a manifest
contravention of the Orders he had received.

Next day after Luther arrived at Worms he had Audience of the Emperor, who
received him well: but his Majesty sent him word afterward, that he should
precisely Answer the Interrogatories that were to be put to him in full Diet,
and not to enlarge, as his usual way was, in superfluous discourses. Luther
obeyed that order no more than he had complied with the condition of the
safeconduct. He came into the Diet the Sixteenth of April, 1521, and the
Adversary that was to encounter him was Ekius Provisor of the Archbishopric of
Treves. Ekius told him, that he was sent for, for two things; the one to know
from his own mouth, if he had written, and if he owned for his, the Books that
were Printed in his name; and the other if he was ready to maintain all the
Propositions contained in them, and if he intended not to retract any of them.
The Demand seemed too wide to one of the three Divines whom Luther had brought
with him from Worms, and he said, that the Books out of which the Propositions
were taken ought to be specified, to the end that Luther might make a more
Categorical Answer. Ekius thought the Objection reasonable; and seeing he
foresaw that it would be made to him, he took out of his Pocket a Catalogue of
Luther's works, with the date of the Edition, the name of the Towns and
Printers. He read it distinctly and with a loud voice; and then turning to
Luther, pressed him to explain himself without ambiguity.

Luther then made Answer, that he could not but own for his, all the books that
had been reckoned up to him. That the truth was, he had composed them: that he
would never deny it; and that that was all that he had to say to the first
interrogatory of Ekius: but that, as to the second, which concerned the
Revocation of what he had written, he adjured all his Auditors to consider,
that his rashness would be insupportable, if he complied with it upon the spot,
and without convenient reflection upon the Subjects which he had handled,
seeing the Salvation of Souls, and the Power of the Word of God was concerned.
From thence he concluded, that he ought to be allowed time to Revise, what had
dropped from his Pen during the space of four years; and that then he promised to
answer with all necessary sincerity, for the discharge of his own Conscience,
and giving the glory which belonged to God.

Luther's answer perplexed the Diet; and the general murmur that followed upon
it, was a proof of the same. The Emperor was but too sensible of it when the
matter was put to the Vote; and he found the Voices so divided, that he had
much a do to bring them to his own opinion, which nevertheless at length
carried it. The zealous Catholics would have had Luther explain himself at the
very instant, because they understood that he should be condemned and punished
immediately after he had spokn. The Lutherans, on the contrary, being persuaded
that the best of Luther's talents was his Eloquence, were for having him
display it to the Diet in its full extent; and would by consequence have his
answer delayed, until the conclusion of the Diet; to the end he might have time
to prepare his harangue, and to render it more efficacious. The Emperor's
opinion held a mean betwixt the two that we have mentioned; and contained all
that was good in either of them, without running to extremes, in the point
which was thought dangerous. His Majesty thought that Luther might have ground
to complain that he was too rigorously dealt with, if he were forced to explain
himself instantly, concerning so many novelties of which he was accused; but it
seemed to him also, that a day might suffice him to come to a final resolution
about matters which he could not but many times have thought on, and that if a
longer time were granted him, he would but abuse it.

The Emperor was so successful as to bring both parties to this; and then
commanded Ekius to tell Luther that the Diet knew very well, that he was not
come without being informed of the ground for which he was sent for, nor
without having taken his measures, as to what he was to Answer, and that so his
Majesty did him no injustice, though he granted him not the time which he
demanded: That nevertheless, to take from him even the Pretexts of complaining,
and to use him with all clemency, the Emperor allowed him four and twenty hours
for the longest delay: That he should return then next day at the same hour;
and that he should have Audience, provided he brought with him nothing in
writing, and that he did only speak. Luther obeyed, and next day returned to
the Diet at the time prefixed. He spoke two full hours, and made an harangue,
which was the abridgement of his book of the Captivity of Babylon. Ekius being
impatient to hear him out, and perceiving that he spoke nothing of retracting,
interrupted him, and asked whether or no he persisted in maintaining the
Propositions which he had owned for his own. Luther answered that he could not,
nor would not revoke any thing of what he had written, until he were convinced
of his error, by evident Texts of Scripture, and invincible Arguments: That
these were the only Weapons that he pretended should be used against him,
seeing he had no other to attack his Adversaries with. That he submitted not to
the Authority of Councils and Popes, because he had observed an infinite number
of cases, wherein both had been mistaken; and that it was no more in his power
to retract what he had written, than not to believe it.

It is probable that the blunder of Ekius discomposed the affair, which till
then Chievres had successfully carried on; and that if that Divine had not
interrupted Luther in the beginning of his speech, and before the Orator had
observed in the countenance of his hearers the effect that it wrought upon
them; Luther being doubtful of the success, and in the cool that men are
commonly in upon such occasions, would not at all have declared, or at least
not so plainly in Justification of his Writings. But after that a continued
discourse of two hours long, had exceedingly warmed him, and that he observed
that what he said pleased one half of the Assembly; his boldness increased, and
drew from him what never would have come out of his mouth upon any other
occasion. That which raised highest indignation in the Catholics was, that
Luther added to what we have related, these words, which are the conclusion of
all Oaths that are taken, So help me God, Amen; and that the Deputies of the
Diet broke up upon it immediately without going to a Vote.

Luther, as he went out, received such Applauses from those who favored him,
as he had not expected: many to do him honor waited upon him to his Lodgings,
and Chievres who visited him the day following, labored in vain to draw a
Recantation from him. He excused himself under pretext of the Oath which he had
taken; but the true cause of his Obstinacy was, that he thought himself engaged
in honor to maintain as long as he lived, what once he had declared in full
Diet. What we have now related happened about the end of April, 1521, and some
days after Chievres was poisoned; or the poison that was long before given him
began to work, if the relations of his death be more certain in the latter part
of this alternative than in the former. He supported his evil with
extraordinary patience: and died the Eighteenth of May, 1521. in the City of
Worms, at the age of 63 years. The Duke of Ascot his Nephew and Heir succeeded
him in his Places, and in the Emperors favor, who by that evidenced more
effectually than by the Tears which he shed, the regret that he had for his
loss. The Judgment that was made of Chievres was, that he infinitely surpassed
all the Governors of great Princes that went before him; and that if he had
lived longer, the War that was not as yet directly broken out betwixt France
and Spain, would have been by his care prevented, and would not have occasioned
either the Conquest of the Duchy of Milan, or the Battle of Pavia.

FINIS.

