Unto His Grace, His MAJESTY'S High Commissioner, and the Right Honorable
Estates of Parliament, The PETITION of the Tacks-men of the Pole Money
Humbly shows,
THat whereas the late Officers of His Majesty's Forces, having given in a
Petition to the Parliament, making mention, that the Pole Money by the Act of
Parliament being destinat for payment of the Arrears due to the Country in the
first Place, and for the Arrears due to the Officers in the next place, and the
Superplus to be applied to the Kings use, and discharging the samen to be
applied to any other use; The said Pole Money being set in Tack for 44100 lib.
sterling, and that the Officers had received no payment of their Arrears,
albeit the Terms of payment of the Pole Money be elapsed, and that they were
informed that the Tax-men were to apply to the Parliament for an Abatement of
the Sum for which it was Rouped, or that it may be turned into a Collection,
and alleging that the Pole Money being destinat for re-payment of the Arrears
due to the Country, and to them there was thereby jus quesitum so that it
could not be inverted to any other use, altered or diminished without their
Consents, and that so soon as the Polemoney was Rouped, they had Right to the
Sum and Bonds granted to the Thesaury and Exchequer for the samen, and that the
Tacksmen having taken the Tack with the hazard of Gain or Loss, they are liable
for the Tack-duty to the Country and the Officers, and so there could be no
Abatement given to their prejudice; And therefore craves that the Tacksmen may
be ordained to make payment of the Tack-duty to the Exchequer, or that
Diligence may be used against them for the samen; As to which we humbly
represent.

1. That the Pole Money not being formerly in use in this Nation, there could
be no certain Estimat taken of it what it would amount to, so that we could not
well know what to offer for it; but such was our Zeal for the Kings Service,
that we frankly offered a great Sum for it, but now when we have taken a Trial,
we find it comes vastly short of what was expected: And we having given in a
Representation of the case to the King, humbly craving, that the Tack might be
turned into a Collection: His Majesty was graciously pleased to signify his
Royal Pleasure to the Thesaury, that he had entrusted his Grace the Lord
Commissioner, in relation to what he would have done in the Affair of the Ferm
of the Pole Act, and that an Inquiry of the whole matter must be made, it was
therefore his pleasure not to press at present the Fermers of the said Pole
upon their Contract for payment above their Collections, providing they delay
to press the Country upon the head of the Quadruples: By which it is evident,
that the Kings plain Meaning is, that after Inquiry made of the matter, if the
Pole Money which is the subject, should fall short, then the Tack should be
turned into a Collection, and that the Country should be free of the Penalty
of the Quadruples appointed by the Act.

2. Albeit the Officers had stated their Arrears, and that thereby they had an
Interest in the Pole Money, that Interest can extend no farther than the true
Sums uplifted from the Country, by virtue of the Pole Act, and the King has
still the Administration of it: And if the Exchequer has set it in Tack, and
gotten more than the true Sums uplifted from the Country, whatever the Tacksmen
are obliged to pay more than what is uplifted from the Country, the Officers
have no Interest in it, but that properly belongs to the King: and his Majesty
upon just Reasons, may quite it and give it down, or otherwise disposs of it at
his pleasure, as has been usual to be done in the like cases, and there was a
particular Instance of it, in the case of the Town of Edinburgh, as to their
Gift of two pennies on the Pint before the Revolution, which being set by the
Town, for thirty two thousand Merks, or thereby: And the Exchequer finding that
it was much more worth, the Lords of Theasurie did set it for ten thousand
pounds of Advantage, and did take the superplus to the King. And the Town of
Edinburgh by their Git, had as good a pretense of Right to the superplus that
the Tacksmen were obliged to pay for that Imposition, as the Officers can have
to the superplus of the Pole Money due by the Tack, more than what truly the
Pole Money uplifted from the Country arises to; yet the Town of Edinburgh never
so much as offered to pretend a Right to the said superplus, more than what was
in use to be paid to them of Imposition, but the same was paid into the
Exchequer, as properly belonging to the King: and it is clear by the Pole Act,
that the Officers have no farther Interest in the Pole-mony for payment of their
Arrears, but only in so far as shall truly be uplifted from the Country, by
virtue of that Act, so that if the Tacksmen hold, count for all the Pole Money
that has been uplifted from the Country, the Officers have no farther Interest,
nor are they anyways prejudged:

The Tacksmen can never be liable for payment of the Tack-duty, but only as
Collectors, because the method prescrived by the Act of Parliament, for the
effectual uplifting the Pole Money, was not observed, in so far as, by the Act,
the Commissioners of Assessment, and the Magistrates of Burghs are appointed to
take up Rolls and Lists of all the Poleable persons within their Bounds, which
were to be Recorded in the Register of the Shire, or Burgh, and Abstracts
thereof sent to the Lords of the Theasurie, betwixt and the first of October
1694, which was not done: and the Tacksmen having entered into the Tack, upon
the Faith of the said Act, and the methods appointed for making up of the
Lists, not being observed by the Commissioners and Magistrates, and their Rolls
not being returned to the Thesaurie, which was to be the Rule conform to which
the Tacksmen were to uplift the Pole, they cannot be liable for the Tack-duty:
and albeit the Privy Council did emit several Proclamations for Stating and
In-bringing of the Pole Money, yet they were not observed by the Commissioners
of Supply, and Magistrates of Burrows, to whom the Trust of that matter was
committed, so that still it proved uneffectual. And no List being sent to the
Lords of the Thesaurie, as was appointed by the Act of Parliament, and but very
few sent to the Pole-Office at Edinburgh, as was appointed by the Act of Privy
Council, we did take Instruments thereupon, both at the Thesaurie Chamber, and
Pole-Office at Edinburgh, as appears by the Instruments herewith produced.

Any Lists that were made or sent in, which were but very few, as said is, the
same were so imperfect and defective, as to the numbers, and so erroneous as to
the stating of men's Degrees and Qualities, that in effect they are little
better than no Lists at all, and though these Difficulties be such, (...) might
have put an absolute Stop to our Procedure, it being absolutely impossible for
us to raise the said Pole Money, when the Act of Parliament, and Proclamations
of Council were not observed, nor the Conditions of our Tack performed; Yet
such was our Care, to do all things possible on our part that might advance the
Kings Interest, that we did before the Term of Payment, divide our selves to
several districks, and went to the Country to have appointed Collectors for the
several Parochins; But the Lists not having been made in most parts, and where
they were made, they being so confused and erroneous, that what either was, or
could be collected by these Lists, do fall infinitely short of the Tack-duty.

The short-coming of the Pole was not only occasioned by the neglect of the
Commissioners of Assessment, and the Magistrates of Burghs, in putting the Law
and Proclamations of Council in Execution; But likewise it was occasioned by
the many Mistakes that did arise in relation to the meaning of the Act of
Parliament: For the way and method of Pole never having been essayed in this
Kingdom, and it being in effect a matter that could not possibly be exactly
ordered and digested at first, till after trial, as it happened in the case of
the Pole in England, where albeit Poles had been formerly in use in that
Kingdom, yet the late Pole there imposed, after all the care that the Wisdom of
that Nation had taken, to digest and settle it in a right method, yet it came
near the half short of what it was reckoned to have amounted to, and for
clearing of this Point we shall give some Instances, amongst many more that
might be given of the Mistakes and Difficulties that did arise upon the Pole
Act, such as 1. Servants having more than six Pounds Scots of Fee, are
appointed to pay the twentieth part, but the Act of Parliament not being
express, as to the Bounties and other Pennyworths they receive, most of Heynds,
Gardeners, and others, have only paid six pence per Head, when one with
another of them might have paid much more: And further, Chamberlanes, Factors,
Grieves, Coal-hewers, and Salters, and the like, have refused the twentieth
part of their Fees, making themselves either simple six Pound Servants, or
ranking themselves in some easier Class. 2. Tennents are appointed to pay a
merk of the hundred merks of valued Rent which they possess, but in many
places, the valued Rent is cast with such inequality amongst the Tennents, that
many of them, who should pay above thirty shill. of Pole, do evite paying for
their Children, conform to the Act, and this casting of the valued Rent does
also protect others, and make a considerable Dimunition. 3. By the said Act,
Tradsmen inhabiting within any Burgh, whether of Royality, Regality, or Barony,
whose Free Stock and Means is above a 100 merks and does not extend to 500
merks, are made liable to a merk Scots, including the 6 pence of general Pole,
and these whose Stock does extend to 500 merks, shall be liable to one lib. 10
sh. and those whose Stocks is above 5000 merks, and does not extend to a 10000
merks, shall be liable in 4 lib. and those whose Stocks above 10000 merks,
should be liable in 10 lib. yet there are several Merchants and Tradsmen who
live in the Country, but not within a Royal Burgh, Regalitie nor Baronie, whose
Stock are above an hundred Merks, and so should be liable for a Merk of Pole,
and these that have above five hundred Merks to one pound ten shilling, and yet
they pretend to be free for the general Six pence Pole, because they do not
live within any of the foresaids Burghs, which ought to be cleared. 4. Many
Heretors, and repute Gentlemen, yet have not paid their five shill. Pole; but
only the general six pence Pole: Nor have they offered to renounce their being
Gentlemen, as the Act prescribes, so that the said condition of Renunciation
has proven quite ineffectual. 5. When Gentlemen were appointed to pay by their
valued Rent, yet what by deducing parts life rented, or dividing of the Estate
betwixt Father and Son, or other near Relations, they make themselves of a
lower Class, and that evades the Pole: and no Heretor of fifty pounds Scots of
valued Rent, and under has paid more than his general six pence Pole. 6. The
Sons of Gentlemen generally refused to pay as Gentlemen, on pretense that they
are still in familia, which the Act of Parliament has not explained, 7. There
is very few Gentlewomen unmarried, though foris familiat, and possessing their
provisions, have paid more than six pence. 8. By the Act, Writers, not Writers
to the Signet should pay their six pounds and generally, upon several pretenses
not obviat in the Act, they pay only six pence. 9. Doctors of Medicine are
appointed to pay twenty four pounds Scots, and yet the far greater number of
these who truly practice, do not own themselves to be either Doctors or
Physicians, and so escape for six pence. By which few instances, for making out
the defects and mistakes that were un-fore-seen at the making of the Act, it
plainly appears, how much the Tax-men has been disappointed on this account,


As to that pretense, That we did take the said Tack with the hazard of gain or
loss. It is Answered, That it has been always the ordinary practice, not only
in the case of the King's Revenues, but likewise in the case of any part of a
Burghs Common-good Set in Tack, that when the Tacks-men makes it appear by
clear evidences, that they are considerable losers, the Tack has been turned
into a Collection; whereof many instance might be given. And if it were
otherways, no man hereafter would ever make any offer at such Roups, which
would be an infinite loss to the Public: And we do not doubt, but that upon
trial, it being clearly made appear, that we are such vast losers, but that the
King out of His Royal Goodness and Clemency, would allow the Tack to be turned
into a Collection. And it were hard that the Officers would make any opposition
to it; we extremely wish that these Officers who did raise Forces upon their
own Charges, for security of the Government at the Revolution, should be
re-imbursed of their Charges; But we hope they will be so generous and just, as
not to desire their Charges should be re-imbursed out of our private Fortunes.
And to evidence that they are not sham pretenses that we make use of for
turning the Tack into a Collection; we are content the strictest Trial
imaginable be taken for finding out of all the Pole Money that was truly
uplifted from the Country; and for that effect shall produce our Books, and
are content, that we, our Collectors and Servants, and all persons that have
been employed about the uplifting of the Pole Money, be examined upon Oath,
what has been truly received of the famine; and we are content to hold Count
accordingly; our necessar Charges and Expenses in Collecting and In-gathering
of the Pole being always allowed; so that we being in damno vitando, and the
Officers in lucro captando (at least as to us) it is most agreeable to Law,
Justice, and Equity, that the Tack should be turned into a Collection, and that
we should be Comptable for no more than what was truly received.

It is evident from what is above-represented, in relation to the not observing
of the Act of Parliament, and Proclamations of Council, that the most part of
the Kingdom have incurred the Penalty of the Quadr^uple: And if we should be
holden at the Tack, and be obliged to pay the Tack-duty, it would necessitat us
to exact the Quadroulpes off the Country: And how prejudicial that might be to
the common Interest of the Nation, the Parliament may easily judge: And His
Majesty has so far taken notice of that consideration, that by His gracious
Letter to the Thesaury, He has made it a condition of forbearing Diligence
against us upon the Tack, that we delay the exacting the Quadrouples from the
Country, which clearly intimats, that rather then the Quadrouples be exacted
off the Country, the Tack should be turned into a Collection.

It is therefore humbly craved, that your Grace, and the Honorable Estates,
would be pleased to take the Premises to your Consideration, and exoner your
Petitioners from the said Tack, and to declare that we shall be only Comptable
as Collectors; and we are content to have no benefit, but only that we may
have allowance of our necessary Charges and Expenses we have been at, in
Collecting and In-gathering of what is received of the said Pole Money. And
your Petitioners shall ever pray.


