THE ART of Pruning Fruit Trees, WITH AN EXPLANATION Of some Words which
Gardiners make use of in speaking of Trees. AND A TRACT Of the Use of the
FRUITS of TREES, For preserving us in Health, or for Curing us when we are Sick.

Translated from the French Original, set forth the last Year by a Physician of
Rochelle.

London, Printed for Tho. Basset, at the George near St. Dunstans Church in
Fleet Street, 1685.

THE APPROBATION OF THE Colledge-Royal Of Physicians at ROCHELLE.
WE subsign'd, Doctors of Physic of the Colledge-Royal of this Town, and
deputed by our Company to Read and Examine a Book Composed by one of our
Fellows, which has for Title, Of the use of the Fruits of Trees, do certify
that there is nothing in it which is not conformable to good Physic. In
Testimony of which we have subsign'd this Approbation, at Rochelle the 8th of
March. 1683.

Chauvet, Arault, Censors of the said College.

THE PREFACE.
THere are Persons who persuade themselves that its a crime to add any thing to
Antiquity, and who say, That nothing can be invented of new more than what the
Ancients have said; and that it is a vain Glory and Presumption to imagine we
can say any thing which has not been written. But if it were free for me to
Answer this Opinion, I would say, That Arts are not of those things to which
nothing can be added, and that the Older the World grows, the more they are
carried on to perfection. Anatomy did not appear in so great a Luster in the
Time of Galen, as in our Days: and the Art of Pruning Fruit Trees was not so
perfect in the Time of the Curate of Henonville, as at present. We are like a
Dwarf on a Giants shoulders. We see much farther than our Fathers, and we daily
discover things which they knew not. I will not say for this, that there are
not any precepts or Rules found for Fruning Trees in the Books of Agriculture
and Gardening which have been Printed within Twenty or Five and Twenty Years, I
heartily own that there are some; but in truth they are so few in Number, and
the greatest part so obscure, and so little to be relied on, that I very much
doubt whether they may be followed without committing faults. If on the
contrary you stick to those which I give in this Tract; many Years experience
has assured me, that Trees Pruned according to the Rules which I Establish,
will produce great Fruits in abundance. I have therefore reduced The Art of
Pruning Fruit Trees into four Chapters; and I have caused seven Figures to be
Engraved which I Judged necessary for the understanding of what I say: The first
Chapter Treats of Pruning Trees in the Month of February. The second explains
that of the beginning of May. The third teaches the Pruning at the end of May
and the beginning of June. Lastly the Fourth comprises the Pruning of July. I
thought fit to reduce this Book into a form of precepts, without forming a
continued Discourse; because often we have need of one precept, without having
need of another: and I have writ it after so popular a manner that the most
Illiterate Gardiners might comprehend what I would say.

Opus arduum nova Conscribere, Inaudita edocere, Insolentia praeceptis firmare,
magis arduum aliquid Antiquitati addere.

THE Art of Pruning, OR Lopping Fruit Trees.
I Suppose that a Tree has been well Planted, and set in a fertile Soil, that
the Root of it has been well cut, that good choice has been made of the Plant
and of its kind; and that it has some years Growth, to be able to endure the
Pruning-knife.

CHAP. I. The Pruning or Lopping of Fruit Trees, for the Month of February.
ALmost all Trees begin to sprout forth in France toward the end of February,
or the beginning of March; and this is the motion which we call the rise of the
Sap, or the shooting of Trees. This nevertheless happens variously, the
disposition of the Air, the goodness of the Soil, the vigor or the kind of the
Tree, make the Saps or shootings to come earlier or later: They come early in a
dry year, and are backward in a moist.

This rise of the Sap invites then Gardiners to Prune or Lop Trees in the Month
of February, which is the most proper time for this work; and though it may be
done all the Winter, however the Moon be disposed, Trees being then at rest as
to their Branches; nevertheless it is much better to stay for this till the
Colds are past, and that the Rains no longer infest the wounds which are made
on Trees; by this means they seal themselves in a little time, and soonner
cover the wound which has been made on them.

Before you Prune or Lop a Tree, you ought to consider the strength and kind of
it for rendering it beautiful and fertile; for all Trees are not to be Lopt
after the same fashion: We Lop diverly (for instance) a Peach-Tree and a Winter
Pear Tree; and its by Lopping of this last, that the skill of the Gardener
shows it self the most conspicuously, and that we judge best of his ability.

There are Trees which we dare not Lop, by reasonof the abundance of their Sap;
for the more we Lop them, the more Wood they shoot forth, and the less Fruit;
even the Flower-buds yield Wood, which happens often to the Tree, which yields
the delicate Pear called the little Rousselet; to the lateward Bergamot, to the
Virgoleuse, to the St. Lezan, etc. But when these sorts of Trees have shot
forth their full, after this they bear but too much. In this occasion Lop
sometimes short, and sometimes long, or not at all: take away sometimes the
young Wood, and preserve the old; another while cut away the old, for the Tree
to grow young again; at another time cut away the Branches, and all the false
Sprouts, but remember never to disgarnish the Stock, by Lopping away all the
little Branches of the sides of the Tree, and making the Trunk bare.

Gardiners have a very true Maxim, Lop in fair Weather, in the decrease of the
Moon, and in the end of the Saps, or rather when Trees are at rest.

The decrease of the Moon of January, which happens in February, is the true
time for Lopping Trees, and for preserving Grafts; not but this Rule has some
exception; for weak Trees, and those that are Planted but of that year, ought
to be Lopt at the new Moon, to make them sprout vigorously: And we must
remember that Trees ought not to be cut when we Plant them, but we ought to
stay till the Month of February following.

When you Plant a Graft of three years, which has Flower-buds, preserve some to
see the Fruit in the first year: It is of these sorts of Trees that you must
always make choice, they show from their beginning an assured fruitfulness, and
bear afterward a great deal of Fruit as long as they live.

Because it is known that an abundance of Sap makes but Branches, and that a
little or mean Sap makes Fruit: and moreover that the Moon has less influence
on sublunary things, when she begins to be in the Wain, than when she
Increases; experience has taught us that the decrease of the Moon is the most
kindly time for Lopping Trees, which have then less of motion. The decrease is
from the time of the Full to the New, nevertheless some will have it that we
may Lop Trees during the time that the Moon is not horned, that is to say, from
her eighth day to her one and Twentieth. They say that it is not only the Moon
which causes Fruit on Trees, but the disposition of the Branches; and that it
suffices that the Moon has strength, provided that on the other side she finds
in a Branch, Fibers transverse and disposed to cause Fruit-buds to be there
formed. True it is, experience has taught me that the Seeds of Flowers cast
into the Earth during all this time, turn double sooner than those that are
Sown in another time.

We ought first to Lop Apricock, Nectarin, and Peach-trees, etc. because they
shoot forth the first; the Winter Pear Trees follow next, after these those of
Autumn and of Summer, and the Portugal Quince-trees: We ought shortly after to
Lop and Prune Plum-trees, and Apple Trees, and lastly Spanish Pomegranet-trees,
because all these Trees shoot forth the one after the other; but above all, we
ought not to Lop this last till it has shot forth a little, that we may the
better distinguish the weak or dead Branches.

After the Observations which we even now made, we ought to begin to Lop and
Trim up a Tree by one of its sides from the lower part to the top, and we ought
afterward to carry on our Work without confusion, and to take one Branch after
the other. This side being thus Lopt and paled, we descend on the other side
from the top to the bottom in the same Order.

We must here remember always to cut the Branches in the form of a Hinds foot,
so that the Sun may not dry the wound, which ought to be as far as we may on
the North side; but after such a manner that the sloping side of the wound be
not too straight downward, to the end that the knot be not endammag'd;
otherwise the eye which ought to push forth wood, being cut too much by the
slope of a too straight descent (chiefly in tender Trees) will not push forth
at all or weakly, and will communicate even to five or six eyes the evil of a
wound ill made.

We must further remember to cut always a Branch near a Wood-bud, and never
near a Flower-bud; because in this last Lopping, the Fruit which would come
there, would not be secured by the Leaves against the injury of the Air.
Moreover the Branch would be exposed to the Air, and finally the wound would
not close it self, nor ever come to an Eschar the Pears carrying away all the
Sap, that ought to make it:

We ought not moreover to leave a Stub to a Branch which we cut at a Wood-bud,
that we may give way to the Branch to close it self in a short time by the
sprout that ought to grow there; I say not the same of a Branch which we cut an
Eye or two from the Trunk; this may put forth near the Stub, which we leave
there, some Fruit. buds, or some Branches which will have dispositions to
produce them, at least if the Branch be little or of a mean size; for if it be
great, it ought to be cut near the Tree. If in Lopping where we leave a Stub,
nothing shoots forth there, the year following the Stub must be cut smooth to
the Tree.

I speak not here only of Fruit with Kernels, we ought even to leave a Stub to
Fruits with Stones, not to make them push forth Wood there, for this is not
their Genius, but to keep them from being corrupted by the Weather, and not to
cause them to push forth Gum there, which is their Sap, and in this occasion
their Capital Enemy.

When the little Branches are too confused, care must be taken to cut them off
an Eye or two from the main Branch, or near the Trunk as I have said, both to
disburthen the Tree, and to make it push forth some Branches anew, but after
such a manner, that there be always room for placing the Sprig which will come.

We ought also to Observe that to fill out a Tree well, its Branches ought not
to be distant from each other above a Fingers breadth.

You must never cut Fruit-buds whatever reasons are alleged thereon; Trees at
that time do what they are ordained for, by displaying their Riches, and Nature
gives us what we demand of her for recompense of our cares and Labors.

We know a Fruit-bud by its Figure, by the small bearer where it comes, by the
motion it makes in the shoot of the Tree or finally by the abundance of Leaves
that accompany it.

If a little and long Branch be well stored with Flower-buds, do not cut any of
them (I say it once again) and do not so much as touch the Branch, wait rather
till the Flowers are come forth of the Bud to destroy them, or till the Fruit
are kern'd to cut with Scissars the Stems of the least and worst formed; by
this means you will not cut away the Bud which will produce other Fruit the
following years when the Branch has fortified it self.

Nevertheless, if for some great reason, we are Obliged to cut Flower-buds in a
Branch bared of shoots, for drawing thither the Sap, and to cause some void
space to be filled, and that there are no other Branches found for supplying
this Default, we must cut the Branch at a Wood-knot to fill out the Tree, and
we must take good heed not to cut it near the Flower or Fruit-buds, for the
reasons which we have mentioned, and after this we must take away the
Fruit-buds to give it more strength to push forth.

The old Buds which have yielded Fruit for many years together, and which give
us no longer hope of producing more, must be cut away to embellish the Tree,
and to disburthen it of somewhat which is useless and superfluous.

The bearers which are two, three, or four Inches long are the best, especially
when they Issue from the great Branches near the top of the Tree; they bring
forth many years one after the other, and bear very great Fruit. Those which
are bared of Branches last indeed a long time; but they do not bear so
Beautiful Fruit, and often they are drained, unless you cut the Stems of the
Pears with Scissars; and those which are not above a nail in length, and which
come from the Trunk, bring forth very great Fruit; but ordinarily they last but
a year

A Shoot of August never yields Fruit, the Wood is not then well filled with
Sap, it ought always to be cut away, unless it be extremely necessary for
filling a void space.

If a useless or irregular Branch grows behind, it is always cut away, even
though it has on it a Flower-bud; for the Fruit which would come of it, would be
spoiled by the shadow of the Tree, and would be good for nothing: if it be
before, we cut it an Eye or two from the Mother Branch, to try to make some
Flower-buds spring forth there.

A Branch bent by force bears much Fruit, but it is small, unless it were plied
so the first year; the reason is evident, its Fibers are bent, and the Sap does
not carry it self briskly to it.

Sometimes forked sprouts, or knots of Scions shoot forth from certain places
of Trees, when they are Old and at a stand that they need to be cut to renew
them. In this occasion we ought to cut at a good length a Master Sprig in
Pear Trees and Apple Trees, and to cut some an Eye or two from the Mother
Branch, and cut others near the Trunk, but in Nectarin and Peach-trees, we
ought to cut all the lesser Branches an Eye or two from the Mother Branch, and
let the longest and streightest run on, though it would be the shortest way in
these last Trees, to cut a great Branch near the Trunk, or to cut the Trees two
or three Fingers breadth from the Earth to renew them.

You must cut one Branch short betwixt two long to fill out the Tree. The year
following the short Branch must be cut long, and the long short: It is the
secret to have much Fruit, and to preserve Trees; there are some who say that a
Tree Lopt after that manner is not agreeable to behold: but I desire them to
stay to consider them till the Month of May; and I am well assured they will
change their sentiment.

A Tree is ordinarily composed of three sorts of Branches, we find on it
Ravenous or Prodigal, Indifferent, and Fertile.

1. The Ravenous grow most commonly at the top of the Tree, and sometimes they
spring from an Old Branch; they are finely even and without Moss, greater and
more smooth than the others.

2. The Indifferent are of a mean sort, among which there are sometimes some
well supplied with Juice, they bearing sometimes Fruit within three or four
years.

3. The Fertile are ordinarily small, and growing athwart; sometimes there are
found of them great and long; they always bear Fruit; there are counted five
sorts of them.

1. The first have in their source, and in the place whence they spring, little
Wrinkles like Rings; which show that in this place there are transverse Fibers
in the Wood. Its in these Fibers where is made a slow circulation of the Sap of
the Tree, which produces the Flower-bud, whereas when the Fibers are all
straight, the Sap is carried upward vigorously and without resistance, and not
staying it self in any place, it produces naught but Wood: We may Observe these
transverse Fibers in cutting the Wood where there are of these Rings, the cut
will not be close and even as elsewhere.

The Figure following will Represent to you the Fertile Branch.

Fig. 1



A. The Wrinkles and Rings of a Branch of a Bon-Chretien Pear Tree.

2. The Second Fertile sprouts have no Rings in their Origin, where they Issue
from their Mother Branch; but they have in the middle, that is to say, when an
Indifferent Branch, having not been cut in February, shoots forth Wood in May,
and forms Wrinkles at the beginning of its shoot; or when a Branch in its
middle forms Rings betwixt the end of its shoot of May, and the beginning of
that of June, which may be known easily, if a Man will make the experiment; for
in cutting the wood in this place, as I even now mentioned, the cut will not
appear pear smooth as elsewhere, but uneven by the transverse Fibers that are
there.

The following Figure Represents the Second Fertile Branch in a Bon-Chretien.

Fig. 2



A. Rings, and Wrinkles at the beginning of the Shoot of May, or betwixt the
end of the Shoot of May, and the beginning of that of June.

3. The third kind of Fertile Branches Issues from a Flower-Bud, which has
failed to blow sometimes for outward causes, and often through the abundance of
the Sap of the Tree: They Issue also from a Bud which has yielded Pears; they
are called Fertile, because they come of a Flower or Fruit-bud which experience
discovers to us to have transverse Fibers.

The third Figure shows it us in a little Branch with Flower and Fruit-buds of
a Bon-Chretien.

Fig. 3



A. The Bud which has yielded Pears, or has failed to blow.

B. The Fertile Branch which we must let grow on.

C. The lesser Branch which we must cut away.

D. Where it ought to be cut at two knots.

E. The Bearer.

4. The Fourth kind of Fertile Branches are those which the year before were
Indifferent, and which are become Fertile through the little Sap that is come
to them, and by the Buds which are grown to a fullness.

5. Finally, the Fifth are those which have a Flower-bud at the end of the
Branch.

1. Of these three sorts of Branches, that is to say, of the Prodigal,
Indifferent, and Fertile, the Prodigal are always cut very short at the first
or second knot, to make the Sap pass to another side of the Tree, and produce
there Branches Indifferent or Fertile. This Lopping reiterated many times,
makes the Prodigal Dye, or at leastwise hinders the Tree from pushing them so
vigorously. Its by reason of this experiment that we ought not to cut Trees
much, because by cutting them in all their Branches, they are made to Languish
and afterward to Dye. The Prodigals which have been cut many times the
precedent year, ought to be Lopt at the first knot near the Mother Branch
whence it grows, as the Fourth Figure shows.

Fig. 4



A. A Prodigal cut in February at the Second knot.

B. A Prodigal cut in June at the Second knot.

C. A Shoot of the Prodigal in July which has not been cut, because it has shot
very little.

D. Where we must cut a Prodigal in February, of the following year at the
first knot.

Lop therefore the top of the Tree, where the Prodigal Branches are Ordinarily
found, and spread it at the bottom and at the sides; this Lopping gracefully
fills a Tree, and hinders it from Growing to too great a height and from
destroying it self in a short time.

2. As for the Indifferent Branches, some of them ought to be Lopt, others not;
that is to say, we ought in the Month of February to let those grow on which
have Buds for Wood very near each other, and which issue from a good place, as
also those which have two great Leaf-buds which touch each other at the end of
the Branch; to the end we may know their Genius at the Lopping of June. The
greatest and best supplied with Juice will be the best for keeping. The
Indifferent which we ought to cut at the third or fourth knot, are those which
are least disposed to bear Fruit, and which have the Leaf-buds far from one
another.

3. The Fertile ought never to be Lopt, though they are as long as the Arm; Trees
left to run up from which we Lop no Branches and which bear so much Fruit, show
us well that we ought never to Lop the Fertile: nevertheless, if there be need
of them for filling up a void space where it happens, and that no other Branch
can be found for this purpose, I permit them to be cut for embellishing the
Tree.

And to explain my self farther in speaking concerning a Fertile Branch, I say
that that which has Rings in its source, Wrinkles at the beginning of its shoot
of May or of June, or finally knots near each other, ought not to be cut
without a great necessity; for experience has taught me that all these Branches
bear Infallibly their Fruit toward the end of their Branches, which our ill
Gardiners always cut away. So at the beginning of February Observe exactly the
end of the shoots of the precedent year, that you may always cut the Branch
when the Saps are at a stand at the first or second knot in the Wood which
comes after, and to leave all the knots which will be as many Flower-buds, that
will not fail to form themselves there in two or three years. Its an
Observation which will embellish your Trees by the abundance of Fruits which
they will produce. That which I say being somewhat difficult to comprehend
without seeing it, the fifth Figure will make you understand it.

Fig. 5



A. The Lop of February in an Indifferent Branch.

From B. to C. three Branches of the shoot of May.

D. The Lop of June in Indifferents.

From D. to E. The shoot of June.

From E. to F. The shoot of August, the Wood of which is very full of Sap.

G. Where we must Lop in February, of the following year when the Saps are at
rest.

H. Where in two years Fruit-buds will be formed in a Branch which from
indifferent is become Fertile.

The Fertile Branches which Issue from a Bud which has yielded Fruit, and which
have not been cut at the beginning of May, ought not to be cut in February,
unless they are double. In this occasion we must let run the better, and Lop
the other at the first or second knot. Experience has taught me that these
Branches never fail of bearing Fruit the second or third year. See the third
Figure.

Finally, the same Experience has taught me that the Fruit-buds which come at
the end of the Branches in Trees whose Genius is often to bear their Fruit in
this place, ought not to be cut, especially if they produce little, and we
should have but few Gracioli, Coins Francs, nor Grenades d'Espagne, if we
should cut these sorts of Trees at the end of their Branches.

It is said that the Fruits which come at ends of Branches are small, and that
the Wind blows them down. I own that the first default is without remedy, but
the Second is not so, for we may bind up the Branch laden with Fruit against
the Wind. Nature doing well what she does, when she places a Fruit-bud at the
end of a Branch of a Pear Tree, has an intent to render this Branch Fertile;
for the Fruit which she produces there, seals that Branch, and hinders it from
pushing forth afterward; this Branch receiving not then much Sap, forms in all
its length an Infinite number of Fruit-buds, and two or three years after it is
all decked with them; which it continues to do for five or six years following,
till the Branch is worn out; if this Flower-bud be cut away the Sap will come
freely and vigorously into the Branch cut, and instead of the Fruit which
Nature had there designed, we shall have naught but Wood through the Gardiners
Ignorance.

When we will have larg Fruit, especially in the Bon-Chretien and in other
Trees, which bear great, we ought to Lop short, the nearer the Fruit-buds are
to the Trunk, the greater the Fruit is, for it receives more of the Juice.

There are Gardiners who make the Bush of a Tree too thin by cutting away the
little Branches, and leaving the Trunk almost bare: we might leave in it some
clear space in the middle and the sides, to give entrance to the Sun which must
color the Pears, but we ought not to cut it too much: the shadow of the Leaves
ought to secure the Trunk of the Tree against the parching heat of the Sun
which makes it chop, and which breeds the Scab and the Canker by the dryness of
its Bark. True it is that we ought to cut shorter Trees with a round Bush head
than Espaliers, and that we ought not to let them run up too much: In a strong
and moist Soil we must keep a Bush head thinner of Branches than in another
Soil, which is poor and dry; but in all places we ought to keep it well filled,
and not cut away the Branches in the midst of it as much as is done at this day.

The nicest Trees do not delight in this Figure, Pear Trees do not much take to
it, and Apricock-trees less. Trees Grafted on the great Quince-tree, are more
proper for it than those which are Grafted on a Pear Tree, these later cannot
be reduced, the more you cut them the more they shoot of Wood; and besides with
this, they do not bring forth much Fruit, their nature being to be always high.

Cherry-trees which bear sharp Cherries, grow very well with a Bush head,
provided that they are Grafted on the small bitter Cherry-tree; and they take
to it better yet if they are permitted to grow up, for they do not much delight
in the Pruning-knife, and less when they are old.

The Plum-tree is of the same nature with the Cherry-tree; it is ordered also
after the same manner.

We ought rather to cut a Branch away, than to cut it in many places; the
diverse wounds which we give Trees, decay them, and make them dye languishing,
witness the Prodigal, which we kill by often cutting.

Experience has taught me for many years following, that Fruit with stones
(that is to say the Apricock-tree, the Nectarin, and the Peach-tree) ought not
to be Lop't as Pear Trees.

We ought only to cut away Branches, and sometimes the greatest to make them
renew themselves: and contrary to the custom of other Trees, they bear in
young shoots which lade themselves with Fruit the first year. Its after this
manner that they last Twenty or Thirty years; the more therefore that a
Peach-tree shoots forth, the more Fruit it bears.

We never ought in these Sorts of Trees to cut a Branch in the middle, though the
Apricock-tree is not so much damnified by it as the others; because they have a
larg Pith very susceptible of the injuries of the Air. The wound often causes
five or six knots to dye in a Branch, which has been cut after that manner, and
by taking off with the Pruning-knife the end of the Branch, as is ordinarily
done, we carry away at the same time the Fruit that ought to form it self
there, and we leave but an end of a Branch which brings naught but Wood.

I say it once again; the Fruit comes but at the end of the shoot of the two
first Saps; if we Lop away this end, we carry away the Fruit, and we blockishly
deprive our selves of that which we seek with so much passion. Its a remark
which we ought well to Observe, for the Sap having spent and as it were wearied
it self after having past all along a Branch, does not exert it self with so
much vigor, and its motion is not so impetuous, nor so nimble at the end of a
Branch as in the beginning of it; also it employs it self rather to form Buds
for Flowers when it acts mildly, than when it agitates it self with so much
praecipitation.

Because Fruit with Stones shoot more briskly and more in confusion than
Pear Trees, we must also take good heed to Lop them with discretion. These
Trees having shot forth vigorously a Branch during one year, and having
produced Fruit there, lose their force in this same Branch the year following,
and shoot forth naught but Scions here and there, but which are laden with an
infinite number of Fruit; and the greatest part of these same Scions dye the
year following as well as all the annual buds of the Tree. When a great Branch
is old we ought to cut it in its Source, as you may see in the Figure following.

Fig: 6



A. Wood worn out of three or four years.

B. The place where it ought to be cut.

C. Young Wood of the year which ought not to be cut in the middle.

D. Flower or Fruit-buds of the precedent year, which are dry.

The Nectarine and the Peach-tree, being of the nature of those Trees which
shoot much in their tops, we must not hope to be able to subdue them as
Peartrees, and force them to fill themselves well in the lower part: if we Lop
them as these Trees, that is to say, if we Lop their Branches in the middle we
hinder them indeed from shooting in their tops, but they do not fill themselves
for this in their lower part; they mount always, and by cutting them after that
manner, no Fruit comes of it, and we kill them in a short time.

In general, the Plum-tree and the Cherry-tree delight more in Lopping than the
Apple Tree: but all three of them do not delight in it as much as the
Pear Tree, which is the only Tree that endures it best. We must take naught
from these three first Trees but the dead Wood, unless we will form them at
first for Bush-trees or Espaliers.

Because the Corand-tree has much Pith, and that it comes easily of a slip, its
nature does not endure it to be Lopt in the middle of its Branches, no more
than the Peach-tree; above all we must take good care of cutting it, when we
set it. We ought in an old Corand-tree to cut near the Root a Branch past
bearing, in order to renew it, and to cut also from the lower part some young
shoots of the year to hinder it from being too much confused. The young shoots
which we preserve, serve to renew it when we cut it in its old Wood.
Nevertheless, though it does not delight in being Lopt, we make Bushes of it, and
form it in an Espalier, which is beautiful to behold, at the time that it is
laden with Fruit.

I say the same of the Mulberry-tree, and of the Fig Tree, which cannot endure
the knife by reason of the abundance of their Pith; the last especially is
visibly damnified by it, unless we Lop from them great useless Branches, for
rendering them regular: and neither of them can be made to grow low, they love
too much the free and open Air.

Medlar-trees and Service-trees naturally grow high, the former endure the
knife much more than the latter.

The Portugal Quince-trees, and the Pomegranate-trees of Spain will not be
Lopt, because they bear their Fruit at the end of their Branches. Nevertheless
we may take from them entire Branches, which cause a confusion, and which are
old; and cut near the Trunk the useless Prodigals, which are usual enough in
these sorts of Trees. As for the other Prodigals which embellish the Tree, and
which in four or five years will yield Fruit, we ought not to Lop them.

Care must be taken to cover the great Wounds of Trees with a Plaster made of
a pound of Drogue a flambeau, four Ounces of Rosine, and two Ounces of Sheeps
Sewet. When we walk in our Garden in a fine day of the Month of April, we must
have in our hand a Magdaleon of the Plaster even now mentioned, we must cut a
little of it with a knife, and after having wrought it betwixt the moistn'd
Fingers, for rendering it a little soft, we must apply it on the great Wounds,
which we had forgot to seal in the Month of March. And to the end that this
Plaster may keep the longer on the Wounds, we must put on it a bit of paper as
a binder, which we must press on softly with the Finger, to the end that the
heat of the Summer making the Plaster melt, the paper may press it, stay it,
and glue it more to the Wood: it is what we ought to do in the two other
Loppings following.

CHAP. II. The Lopping of Fruit Trees, at the beginning of the Month of May.
PRoperly speaking, it is not a Lopping that is done to Trees at this time;
they are as yet in the motion of their Sap. We cut but Scions; which though
Fertile of themselves, bring in the mean time a great prejudice to the Fruit;
at the beginning of May we must therefore take a particular care to cut away
the useless Branches which grow by the Buds for Fruit, and especially in
Pear Trees; that is to say, to cut away at the second knot a little Scion which
comes among the clusters of Pears: to delay this is not good, the Sap which
ought to Communicate it self to the Fruit, is carried into the shoot, which
draws a part of the humor of the Fruit-bud, where the Pears are fastn'd, which
causes either that their Stem drys for want of Sap, or that they come very
small.

You may see what I mean in the following Figure.

Fig. 7



A. A shoot which comes on the Fruitbud through the abundance of the Sap.

B. The place where you must cut it.

CHAP. III. The Lopping of Fruit Trees at the beginning of June.
IN the Decrease of the Moon of May, which happens often in June, you must Lop
Trees for the second time; but with more moderation than in February: for we
ought never in June to cut great Branches, and properly speaking, it is but a
relopping of Trees.

We must wait above all till the Sap be ended, according to the Maxim which we
have alleag'd before, and it will be good to repeat it here: Lop in Fair
weather, in the Decrease of the Moon, at the end of the Saps; or rather when
Trees are at rest.

The rest of a Tree is known by a bud Garnish't ordinarily with two Leaves,
which forms it self at the end of the Branches, and we observe chiefly this bud
at the end of May, or at the beginning of June, that is to say, after the first
Sap or shooting.

The second Sap or shooting of Trees begins ordinarily in the middle of June,
and ends a Month after, toward Magdalen-tide, so that betwixt the end of the
first Sap, and the beginning of the second there is about a Month: and its at
this time that we must cut Trees again.

The effect of this re-cutting is to make the Buds of the first Sap to fill up,
to force Trees to make Fertile Branches, or to form Flower-buds for the
following year; whereas the Lop of February, furnishes but Wood to yield Fruit
three years after, if we except the Orange, the Bergamot, the Double-flower,
the Summer Bon-Chretien, and some others.

You ought here to call to mind that we have distinguished the Branches of Trees
Into Prodigals, Indifferent and Fertile.

There are few Trees Grafted on cultivated Trees, and on Trees come of Kernels,
which do not yield some Prodigal in the first Sap, and which do not continue
even to yield of them in the others. Care must be taken therefore to cut them
at the second Leaf-bud, and thus to correct the shoot which transports it self,
and which draws a great part of the Sap of the Tree. On this matter you may see
the fourth Figure.

As for Trees Grafted on the great Quincetrees, they have not often of these
sorts of Prodigal shoots: and some Gardiners are even of the mind that they
ought not to be Lopt at this time, and that the tops of them ought only to be
pincht off with the Nails.

We must not deal with the Indifferent Branches as with the Prodigal: for we
ought to keep the best without touching them, and observe exactly those which
we permitted to run on in the Month of February. If these have good marks for
proving Fertile, we must cut nothing there; but if they have not, they must be
cut short enough to make them yield some; that is to say, they must be cut at
the fifth or sixth knot for Leaves: As for the other Indifferents, we ought to
cut them at half a foot, or even a foots length, for rendering them Fertile the
year following. The Indifferents which we must not cut, have particular marks
which we have observed in the first Chapter.

We ought not to touch the Fertile Branches for the reasons mentioned
elsewhere, unless it be sometimes those which Issue from a Flower-bud which has
failed.

Before I pass farther, it will be proper for me to explain my self on what I
pretend to say by a Flower-bud which has failed; and you must give me leave to
make two sorts of Flower-buds. One sort is certain and never shoots forth Wood:
they are these which will yield Fruit in a short time. The others shoot forth
Wood when the Sap abounds too much, or when we cut a Tree too short, and that
by this means we draw the Sap too much toward these sorts of Buds. They are
these Buds which will not blow under two or three years. Their Origin, their
situation, and their Figure make them easily distinguishable to a Gardener
which has experience and a good sense. This being thus established, I may say
that a Scion which shoots in a Fruit-bud which has failed, is situated in a
good place for being called Fertile as I have said it elsewhere; and that if
the Sap of the Tree had not been so abundant, to make this Bud shoot which
yielded the Scion, doubtless this Bud would have become the year following a
Flower-bud; besides the Fibers of the Bud being transverse, cause the Sap to
circulate more slowly, and during all this time the Sun concocts and digests
the humor to form there Fruit-buds for Fruit.

I though good to allege all this, to show the error wherein some are, who
will have us always to cut this Scion, even when the Fruit has failed, and for
this they call it a false and an ill shoot. But experience has taught me that
it has marks of Fertileness, and that two years, or at farthest three years
afterward, if it were not cut away, it would furnish it self with Flower-buds;
and would bear during six or seven years an infinite number of Fruit.

If therefore the Flower-bud which is on a little bearer, that has failed,
which would yield Fruit the next year or two years after, shoots Wood; it ought
to be cut short in June, to make it form there Fruit-buds, which happens
sometimes otherwise through the abundance of the Sap; for a Scion or two form
themselves there as may be seen in the third Figure.

Nevertheless, there are some who will not have us to cut this Scion in June;
they preserve it for the Fruit, and cut it long in the Month of February
following, or do not Lop them at all; and if there are two, they let the best
grow, and cut the other an Eye or two from the MotherBranch.

But however, I think we must here distinguish two sorts of Scions which come
in a Flower-bud which has failed. There are bearers and vigorous Buds, which
shoot forth two or three Scions, whereof some are long and slender, others
short and slender, and others again short and thick: We must not touch these
last; because most commonly a Flower-bud forms it self there, and we must not
always cut the others an Eye or two from the Mother-Branch: If some disposition
for a Flower-bud forms it self near the Scion, cut within an Eye or two of the
Mother-Branch, we must accept of it from the liberal hand of Nature; if none be
formed there, and that another Scion grows there, they must be lest for the
Months of July or February following. If the Bud which produces the Scion, be
weak, we must not touch it, but we must preserve the Scion for the Fruit, at
least if it appears well furnished with Sap in August; for if we cut it, it will
be at a stand and will not shoot.

We must cut larger in June than in February; because it is at that time that
we give the Figure to the Tree for the year following, and that we cause
Fruit-buds to be formed for two years after.

If Grafts within a cleft made in the top of a Stock; are vigorous the year
that they are grafted, it is better (as some think) to pinch the ends of them
away with the Nails at the beginning of June, than to cut them. But experience
has taught me that if we design a Graft which shoots vigorously either for a
Bush head or for an Espalier, we ought to cut it at the New of the Moon, three
or four Months after it is Grafted, to make it spread below, and to secure it
from the Wind: We gain a year by so doing.

As for Trees which we design to let run up to a height it will be good not to
cut them at all till the second year.

We must not touch the first year a Bud Crafted, be it never so vigorous; we
must wait the year following to cut the Stump of the Tree come of Seed, mean,
while care must be taken to stay it up against the Wind.

I repeat it once again here, that we ought never to cut Flower-buds, because
we take away the Buds which bring a great deal of Fruit during six or seven
years following. When the little Branches, where the Buds are fixed, are
fortified by the hardness of the Tree, it is then that we must no longer cut
off with Sheers, neither Flowers nor Pears.

there are some who say, that we ought to cut Apricock, Nectarin and
Peach-trees, four or five times a year, to wit, in February, in May, in June,
and in July: but Experience has taught me, as well as Father Feuillant, who has
writ of Fruit Trees, that these sorts of Trees do not much love the knife;
otherwise, they do not last long, and we destroy them in the end, by much
cutting them: We are obliged in this Month to nale them up, and to cut at the
same time the Branches which cannot be applied to the Espalier. Some preserve
them to be eut in the Month of February, according to the Maxim that these
sorts of Trees, being very nice, do not love to be cut, or rather, they pull
away with the Finger the Branches, as fast as they come against order, and in
an Irregular place.

After the first Lopping of February, I am not of opinion that we ought to cut
any thing from Apple Trees, or Plum-trees, or Chefry-trees, or Goosberry-trees,
or Portugal Quince-trees, or Spanish Pomegranatetrees, unless we take from
these two last Trees some Prodigals, which ordinaly grow there, and which do
not fill, nor embellish the Tree.

Tho I resolved to speak here but of Lopping Trees, nevertheless it may be
allowed me to say somewhat curious concerning their watering, which contributes
much to the abundance and greatenss of their Fruit.

It will be proper in the Evening at Sun set, during the great heats of the
Summer to sprinkle with Water sometimes the Branches and the Fruit of Trees
with a Dutch Pump. The Tree will be greener, and the Fruit better supplied with
nourishment: it is far better to do so than to Water them at the Root; for this
last watering renders Peats unsavory, and of any ill taste, whereas the first,
answering to an Evening Rain, or the due of the Night, keeps the Tree supplied
with nourishment, which afterward gives its Fruit the Juice, which is meat for
them, for rendering them good and delicious.

For this we ought to observe that the Water which we will make use of, ought
to be drawn in the Morning, and to have been a little exposed to the Sun, so
that it should not be cold in the Evening when we would use it: Moreover that
the Pump has three or four little holes, that it may make the Water which
issues from it to divide it self into a Thousand little drops. Finally, that we
ought to place our selves at fifteen or twenty Foot from the Tree which we will
Water.

CHAP. IV. The Lopping of Fruit Trees at the end of July.
WE said in the foregoing Chapter, that the second Sap or shoot began in the
middle of June, and ended at the end of July; and we say at present, that the
third manifests it self in the Month of August, and sometimes in the Month of
September according to the disposition of the Air, and the difference of the
seasons: so that it is at the end of the second Sap that we ought to meddle
with Trees; for in the Month of August we must take good heed not to cut any
thing there, and if we cut then any Branch, the Wound does not cicatrize it
self all the year, the heat drys it, and the approaching Winter incommodes it
with the excess of its Rains and colds.

This Lopping is not performed but to cause the Branches to be fortified, to
make the Flower-buds to fill themselves, and to cause the Fruit to be nourisht
the more.

If we ought to be scrupulous in the Month of June to Lop Trees, we ought to be
so for a much greater reason this Month, for at present we must but pinch away
with the nails the ends of, or cut a little some Branches.

We must choose then in July a fine day and the decrease of the Moon to visit
the Trees: and we must call to mind the division which we have made of the
Branches of Trees.

We must Lop again at the second knot the Prodigals a third time, if they have
shot vigorously, that we may wound so often the Branch which receives much of
Sap, that its diverse Wounds may weaken it, and divert by this means the Sap to
other places, that it may be divided into many Branches. These Prodigals come
not much but in Trees Grafted on the Peartree; and Planted in a good Soil, as I
have said: and so we must not seek for them elsewhere, for those which are
Grafted on the great Quince-tree do not shoot much: and in this Month we ought
to cut nothing in these last sorts of Trees.

In this Month we must not touch the Indifferent Branches, which we judged to
be so in the Months of February and of June, we must stay till the Month of
February following to Lop them, if they ought to be Lopt.

Neither must we touch of those which are Fertile: but concerning those which
issue from a Flower-bud which has faild, there are differing sentiments. The
shoot which issues from this Bud having been cut at the second knot in the
Month of June, shoots sometimes at the second Sap, and yields one or two
Scions. Some will have it that we should cut these also at the second knot:
because they pretend that Nature ought to form there some disposition to make
Buds. Others Lop at the second Eye the least, and preserve the fairest and best
fed and knotted, to see in February following if it will show its Genius, and
at that time they leave it all entire, because it comes from a Fertile place,
or cut it very long. They have observed by experience that three years
afterward it brings a great many Buds, whence issue an infinite number of
Fruit.

If in this Month there are found some useless Branches besides, they must be
cut an Eye or two from the Mother-Branch, to make them shoot forth somewhat
that is good.

There come often on Peach and Nectarin-trees, and sometimes on Pear Trees a
cluster of Branches, which happens often to Trees grown old, and fit to be cut
for renewing themselves. We must do at this time as we did in the February
before: that is to say, we must make choice of the Master Sprig to preserve it,
and cut away the others. Nevertheless there are some who stay till the Month of
February ensuing to do this, because that in July the heat penetrates to the
quick into the Wounds of nice Trees; and besides that which Trees shoot after
this season ought not to be preserved. They cut therefore Trees at this time
the least they can, relying doubtless on experience which has obliged them so
to do.

Toward Magdelan-tide, in the Decrease of the Moon, which happens in the Month
of July, we must nail up again Peach-trees, Nectarin-trees, etc. and we must
cut all the Branches which are not flexible, and which are grown contrary to
Order, though with this diligence, that we must cover as soon as may be with a
Plaster, and paper the Wounds which have been there made.

Those who are for the lasting of these Trees, pale them up at this time, but
they stay to cut them till the Month of February; these sorts of Trees
(according to their sentiment) being so nice, that they cannot endure the
Summer, the great heat penetrating into their Wounds, causes five orsix Eyes to
dye. Which we perceive dried the year following: this is the way (say they) to
make them last forty years, as experience shows it. They chose much rather (as
I have said) to pull away with the Finger, as they walk, the Branches which
come contrary to order, than to cut them, and if there are found some which
ought to be cut, they keep them for the Month of February following.
Nevertheless, if they are too much confused, and that their shadow hinders the
Sun from heating the Fruit, we shall be obliged to cut them away.

The abundance of Pears being ordinarily the Enemy of Espaliers, and making the
Trees often dye, we must cut with Sheers the middle of the stalk of the Pears,
to disburthen the Trees. This ought to be done when the Fruit is a quarter or a
third part as big as it ought. This Rule is only for great Winter-Fruit, and
chiefly for the Bon-Chretien: we must observe also not to leave above one or
two Pears on a weak Branch, a strong one being able to bear more.

Its also in this Month that Fruit enter into Juice, and begin to take a color
through the light of the Sun: but because often there are Leaves, which hinder
the rays from touching the Fruit, care must be taken in July to take away some
from before them, and in the Month of August following we must cut away the
rest with Sheers, so managing the Light by reason of the burning heat of the
Sun.

End of the First Tract.
An Explanation of some words which Gardiners make use of to express themselves
in speaking of Fruit Trees.
CAnker, or Scab is often caused by the heat of the Sun, or through the taint
of the Tree which is in an ill Soil,

Espalier, is an edge row of Fruit Trees set close together, their Boughs
interlac'd one within another, and held with Stakes, Railes, or Pales.

False Shoots, are little useless Branches, or Sprouts of the shoot of August,
turning yellowish, and ill supplied with Juice.

Franc, is said of Fruit, when they are cultivated and domestic, or of a Tree
Grafted, or lastly of a young Tree come of a Kernel, Sown, which has no thorns,
and which has large Leaves, for there are excellent Fruit which come of Seed so
Sown. We say to Graft a Franc on a Franc, Coin Franc.

Fertile, Fertile shoots are the Branches which always bear Fruit.

Indifferents, are Sprouts which sometimes yield Fruit within three or four
years. A knot is the place where a Tree shoots forth Wood.

Prodigal or Ravenous, are great and smooth shoots, which draw the Sap of the
Tree, and which bring not Fruit in a long time; they dissipate all the
substance of their Mother.

Sap, is taken for the humor which rises betwixt the Wood and the great Bark,
by the little Bark which is betwixt both, it answers to the Blood of Animals:
It is Rosin in the Pine Tree, Turpentine in the Larchtree, Gum in the Apricock
and Cherrytrees, Milk in the Fig Tree, Water in the Vine and in the Pear Tree.

Scion, is a little Fertile Branch.

Void spaces, when there are no Branches to fill out the Espalier.

Worms called Tygres, Lutins, Diablotins, are those Worms which come in the
Month of August and gnaw the Leaves of Trees; they have the Head great and
black; the vapor of Quick Lime, or the decoction of Wormwood kills them.

The Second PART. Of the use of the Fruits of Trees, for preserving us in
Health, or for Curing us when we are Sick.
IT is not enough for us to have Writ concerning the Lopping of Trees, to have
Fruit in abundance, we must also teach the way and the time of eating them
without being offended thereby.

If our Stomach were as good as that of our Forefathers, it would be useless
for us to Write on this matter; but because it is weakn'd by the pleasures
which men of late have taken in their way of living, there seems an Obligation
upon us to give precepts concerning the use of Fruits, either for preserving us
in Health, or for destroying our Diseases when we are afflicted with them.

There is nothing so useful in Physic, as to know the qualities of things
which we make use of in Life, either for avoiding those which offend us, or for
taking those which do us good: it is what has obliged Learned men to deliver
their sentiments concerning all that we eat, they making use always of Reason
and experience, which we shall also follow in this Tract of The use of Fruits
of Trees: for it is only of those whereof we design to speak.

We shall make therefore three different Chapters: We shall show in the First
the time and the way of using those Fruits which are easily corrupted, as
Figgs, Nectarins, Peaches, Plums, Apricocks, Mulberries, and Cherries, which we
ought always to eat fasting, on an empty Stomach, and before Meals.

The second shall Treat of those which are not easily corrupted, and which we
ought to eat the last thing after Meals, as Pears, Apples, Portugal Quinces,
Medlars, and Services.

Lastly, the third shall explain how we may eat before or after Meals Raisins,
Portugal and China Oranges, Spanish Pomegranates, and Corands. But before I
enter upon this matter, I think fit to lay down some general Maxims, without
which we cannot know the good use which we ought to make of Fruits.

We ought then in the first place to observe all the qualities of the Fruits
before mentioned, that we may use the one and the others at diverse times,
according to the precepts which we shall give in the Sequel.

We find of Sweet, of Sugared, of Amber'd, of Musked, of Vinous, of Aqueous or
Insipid, of Sharp, of Acerb, and of Austere, and to speak in a few words, there
are of sweet, sharp, and austere.

There are found moreover of Red, of Yellow, of Green, of Tawny, of Violet, of
White and of Black.

Again there are of Cassans or harsh, of Burez, of Fondans or melting and
tender; finally we find such as pass quickly through the Bowels of those that
eat them, and these are the Fruits which are easily corrupted: there are others
which stay a long time in the Stomach, and they are those which are corrupted
with difficulty.

All the Fruits whereof we design to speak in particular, cool and moisten
much, because they are but Water gathered together, and passed through the
Trunk of the Tree, which produces them; but nevertheless with this difference,
that there are some colder and moister than others.

Fruit that have a quality which is sweet, and pleasant to the taste, are less
cold than others: thus, though Figgs, Raisins, the Bon-Chretien, the Spanish
Renet, and other Fruit of the like nature, moisten much, they have nevertheless
but a coldness, which does not pass the bounds of the first degree, its for
this reason that they dulcifie much, and that they nourish a little more than
the others, their matter having more affinity with our parts. But if with their
natural sweetness they have an odor of Amber or of Musk, then they have I know
not what subtle and penetrating parts, which exhilerate our Heart and Brain,
and which make us digest them better than others.

Sharp Fruit cool more than sweet: but they do not moisten so much, they
powerfully penetrate and attenuate the thick and earthy matters, so that
afterward they are no longer capable of doing us hurt. They qualify our heated
Bowels; they destroy the Flame there, which often all the remedies of Physic
have not been able to quench during many Months: they cool our Liver, remove
all the Obstructions of our Bowels, and give our Blood a more free motion:
finally they appease fluxions, if we apply them outwardly, and they stay a Flux
of Blood from whatever part it comes.

Fruits which are austere and acerb, and which differ but in more or less,
restringe the Tongue and the Palate when we eat them: it seems that they stop
the Orifices of the threads that terminate there, by the blunted and obtuse
particles of their matter.

I do not pretend to speak here of Fruit which are not Ripe, that have all
these qualities. I banish them entirely from this Book as very pernicious to
the Life of Man; but I speak only of those, which being in a perfect maturity,
retain somewhat of austere, acerb, or astringent, as the Rake Pear, the great
Degue, the Quince, and other Fruits of the like Nature. All these Fruits are
also more cold than the sweet and the Amb'red, but they do not moisten so much:
and because their savor is in a more Earthy matter, even in this respect they
do not penetrate so much as the Sharp. They restring however the Stomach and
the Bowels, and withstand a Looseness and a Dissentery, and being applied
outwardly they hinder Vomiting, retard growing Inflammations, and easily
cicatrize the Skin, which has been opened by a considerable Wound.

After all, a Fruit which has been brought to perfection by the heat of the
Sun, and which has not been shadowed by the Leaves of its Tree, will be always
of better taste than another. A red Apple or Pear, and a yellow Raisin will
always be better than others; because their Juice will be better digested, and
their useless moisture will be easily evaporated by the heat of the Sun.

You must observe in the second place, that I give not here precepts concerning
the use of Fruits, for sound and robust Persons, on whom Fruits make no
Impression; Let such eat of them at all times, and as much as they please,
without distinguishing their Nature and Temperament, they will not find any
inconvenience: but because these sorts of Persons are very rare, and that in
the Age we Live, there are more Valetudinarians than others, I may be allowed
to Write only for those who have their Entrals tender, and who are often
incommoded by eating Fruits.

The greatest part of men at present are of a hot and dry Complexion; we have
all of us the inward parts very hot, through the excess of a burnt Choler, and
through the redundancy of a troubled Melancholy. With difficulty are we able
during the Summer to support the heat of the Season, without being exhausted of
our strength: We have the Stomach so weak and so tender through our natural
distemperature, that we have need of much precaution for the good use of Fruits.

In the third place, we must remember, that in walking in a Garden full of
excellent Fruit, which are perfectly Ripe; we must not eat one which has not
first been washed with fresh Water, and especially if the heat of the Sun, or of
the day be excessive.

It is not of to day that experience has taught me, that Fruit newly gathered,
and eaten without precaution, cause the Fevers which we call putrid, which
always begin with shiverings and tremblings, because all the Juices of Fruits
being then through the heat of the day, and of the Season in a considerable
motion, they cause in our Stomach so great a disorder at the time that the
fermentation is there made, that the Chyle becoming crude and undigested, often
gives Birth to great Diseases, whereas the motion of the Juice of Fruits being
calmed by the cold of the Water, of the Night or of the season, the Fruits make
no disorder in our Stomach, which then digests them better, and which performs
its Office much better, when it is not interrupted by unusual causes.

After all, we ought to know that our sood being in some sort like our
substance, changes it self easily within our parts imperceptibly to us: Its
thus that Bread, Flesh, an Egg, have no Predominant quality when we put them
into our Mouth, and we do not sensibly feel the Virtues when we have them in
the Stomach. We must not say so of Aliments which we call medicamental; they
nourish little, and on the other side they have sensible qualities, which
affect our Tongue and our Palate. We may perceive that a Vertelongue, or a Pear
Portail will cool and moisten our heated Stomach, that it will qualify the
Gall of our Liver, and the heat of our Reins, and that by cooling this last
part, it will hinder Stones from being formed there.

Finally, its a grand secret for our good Health, to keep what we eat, from
corrupting in the Stomach. The things of a different Nature which we put into
it, daily cause disorders, whereof our selves are too often Witnesses; if
experience did not convince us of this truth, there would doubtless be a great
deal of pleasure in eating many things one after the other; but it shows us
that eating before or after Meals Fruits of a different Nature, that is to say,
such as are easily corrupted, as Peaches, etc. and such as have a more firm
substance, as Pears, etc. The Coction which is made in the Stomach is not
laudable, and that it is thence that often proceeds the little Health of those
who over loosly indulge themselves to the pleasure of the taste.

If therefore we eat at the end of Meals Peaches and Pears, as it often
happens, the Peaches being of a substance to be soon digested, and to pass off
quickly, and the Pears of a pretty firm matter, requiring more time to Concoct,
two great inconveniences follow; the first, that the Peaches trouble the
Belly, and make the Food taken at the Meal to descend, without being fully
digested: the second, that they hastily drag along with them the Pears, which
require a longer time for digestion, and thus there comes of it but crudities,
and afterward obstructions, which are the cause of some troublesome Disease.

It is not the same when we eat before Meals Mulberries and Peaches, or after
Meals Pears and Quinces; the two first Fruits and the two last have a matter
and qualities near alike: the former pass quickly through the Belly by reason
of their great humidity: and the later digest themselves afterward at leisure,
by constringing after the Meal the superior Orifice of the Stomach, which by
this means acquits it self much better of its office.

CHAP. I. Of Fruits which ought to be eaten before Meals.
I Say in the first place that good Fruit which are Ripe, never do hurt, unless
we misuse them, or commit faults in eating them; there are none but ill and
unripe Fruit which cause Crudities, Indigestions, Colicks, and Fevers. I say
much more; experience daily teaches us, that by the moderate use of them we
prevent an infinite number of Diseases, and that we Cure as many. Our Gardens
fail not of Remedies to relieve us, and I wonder we go so far into Foreign
Countries to seek for Drogues, which are musty or rotten, when they are brought
to us, since we have so excellent at home. Our Fruits have many more Virtues
and Charms than all those Drogues, and there are seen few Persons who refuse
Peaches, Mulberrys, or Pears, to appease the burning of the Bowels; Whereas we
daily see Persons have in horror Tamarinds, Cassia, Rhubarb, and the other
Drogues which are brought us from so far.

Because I am obliged to follow the Order which I have prescribed to my self, I
shall treat in this Chapter of the good use of those Fruits which ought to be
eaten at Breakfast, or before Meals: and I shall begin with Figgs, which among
all Fruits have always been the most esteemed.

ART. I. Of Figgs.
AMong all the Food wherewith Men nourished themselves at the beginning of the
World, there is not one which deserves a greater praise than Figgs. The
Ancients have made Encomiums on them in many of their Books; and the
Lacedaemonians so far esteemed them, that they would never go to any Feast where
they were not provided in a great plenty. Also some have compared them to Gold,
nay have esteemed them far better than this Metal. Its doubtless by reason of
their sugary sweetess, which is the Symbol of peace, that men formerly wished
their Friends a happy year, by sending them at the beginning of it Figgs and
Honey.

In truth, they have admirable Virtues in Case they are eaten with Bread, for
Breakfast, or before Meals. For it is thus that they qualify the Bowels, and
that they appease the excess of a troublesome heat. They do not fail of
producing other good effects, they quench drought, lenify the Breast, and give
a more easy respiration. They clear the Liver and the Spleen of the
Obstructious wherewith they are afflicted. They discharge the Reins and the
Bladder of their slime and Gravel: They loosen the Belly, be it never so tardy:
finally they nourish and fatten both together, witness the famous Wrastlers,
who performed most courageously, when they lived but of Bread and Figgs.
Witness also the Keepers of Figg-Gardens, who (according to the Relation of
Galen) ate in a manner naught but Figgs, and who in the mean while were so fat,
that a man would have said that nothing was wanting to them in their way of
living.

Figgs also have this peculiar to them, that they contribute to the vigor of
young People, and to the Health of such as are Old, so that those who use of
them often, have no Wrinkles in their Face. A better Reason cannot be given
than that Figgs, by their fat substance engender a Blood which dulcifies much,
and this same matter being carried to the superficies of the Body is there
cleared as well as the Blood of all its serous and superfluous excrements, so
that what remains serves as a natural Paint, and renders the Face smooth, and
free from all sorts of Wrinkles.

After all, they have the property of Penetrating, Cleansing and Digesting; for
no man doubts but they are hot in the first degree, and moist in the second;
the great humidity they have make them soon corrupt, and obliges us to eat them
with Bread before Meals; for its the Leaven of the Bread which corrects all the
ill qualities.

Its a Maxim among Physicians, That we ought always to begin with the things
that are moistest and easiest of digestion, when we Dine, or when we Sup. And
this is also another, That after Fruits that are Sweet and Luscious, and which
withal pass quickly through the Belly, we ought rather to Drink pure Water, or
Water mixed with a little Wine, than Wine alone. Pure Wine carrys hastily into
the Lacteal Veins the matter of the Figgs before it be digested, and so causes
winds; and Indigestions in those who so do: Whereas Water is the cause of a
slower fermentation, by the means of which the Figgs are perfectly digested and
make afterward a very laudable Blood, which easily becomes our substance.

They are not proper only for such as are in Health, but likewise for those who
have a Fever and are costive, and I cannot imagine to my self that a Learned
Physician can refuse his Patient a Figg half dried on the Tree by the heat of
the Sun.

Dry Figgs have much more Virtue than those which we gather; we may eat of them
even after Meals, without offense; also they are more penetrating and hotter
than the others through the subtilty of their parts, but they are not so moist.
If they are applied in the form of a Cataplasm with Bread and a little Vinegar,
happily they are the quickest and most certain remedy for opening an abscess, for
killing a Carbuncle, or the swelling of the King's Evil, or lastly to withstand
the progress of a Latent Cancer.

They do much more, if we will believe Dioscorides, for they tear from the
Flesh (as we may say) a piece of a Bone broken, if we mix them with wild Popy
Flowers.

The German Physicians have not found a better remedy in the Smallpox, or
Measles than the decoction of these Fruits dry; experience has shown them that
this decoction, by Purging by Urine, carrys away all the Malignant serosity
which is the cause of those troublesome Diseases.

But among all the good qualities which these Fruits enjoy, there are observed
some ill: they cause Winds which swell the Stomach; they breed Lice, and makes
us fond in caressing Women.

The Spirits irritated and set in motion by the Winds which they engender, and
a viscours humidity which they cause, are two things which dispose us to be
fond of a Woman, as we have proved at larg in a Dissertation we caused to be
Printed the last year; which has for Title, Whether those who Drink Water alone
are more amocous than others?

The Lice which they say Figgs breed in those who use them in excess, proceed
but from the filth of the Skin, and from our excrements which they evacuate by
the pores: and the evils they cause in us by the Winds they engender, proceed
but from the ill use we make of them; if we eat them with Nuts or Almonds, we
shall correct all the disorders they can bring us; and I can assure you that
being so eaten, they will be without fault, and will do us no hurt, still
provided that we use them with moderation.

ART. II. Of Nectarins and Peaches.
I Cannot bear the contempt some Persons have for Nectarins, Alberges,
Brugnons, Melicotonys, Perses and Peaches, nor be satisfied with the reason
they bring for blaming them. They say among other things that these Fruits are
corrupted so easily in the Stomach, that it is almost impossible to secure them
from it; that they produce ill Blood, that they cause Fevers; that they injure
the inward parts; that the Persians, from whose Country they were brought, dare
not eat of them by reason of their Malignity, and finally that Galen, the most
knowing of the Greek Physicians, always condemned them.

But if it were free for me to explain my self at large thereon, and to break
off the design which I proposed to my self; I would show that the ill use which
is made of the most excellent things, is often the cause that they are despised
and blamed. Peaches, not to speak of the other kinds, are a Fruit so excellent
and so delicious to the taste, that I could freely prefer them before Figgs and
Raisins, which (according to the sentiment of some) ought to hold the first
rank among Fruits.

Very far from causing all the evils whereof they are accused, they cool the
Stomach when heated, quench the heat of the Liver, allay the burning of the
Blood during the extremity of the Summer heats, and moisten the matter which is
then very thick through the drought of the Season.

If we observe well their praecautions, they do not corrupt in the Stomach,
provided that they are eaten before Meals, and that after having eaten them we
drink only Water, if we find a burning in the Bowels; or excellent Wine, if we
find our selves to have a very moderate heat; It is then that they will
engender a better Blood than the Herbs we use every day.

I own that in Persia these sorts of Fruits have Malignant and purgative
qualities, but since the Trees were transported into Egypt, and have been
re-planted in Italy, and since cultivated in France, they have lost all the
Malignity which they had, and have retained but the purgative Virtue, which
they have still, and which they Communicate to their Fruit.

Its this purgative Virtue which causes them to be so much esteemed of by the
Healthy and Valetudinarians, who had much rather eat fasting four or five
excellent Peaches, and drink after them Water or Wine, to loosen the Belly;
than to take a dose of Physic, the very name of which raises a horror in
those that take it the most courageously.

Its this same property which resides in the Leaves, the Flowers and the Fruit
of the Peach-tree, which kills the Worms in the Bowels, which Purges Choler and
the Serosities of the Body, and stops even Vomitings at Sea, as we see written
in the Works of Julius of Alexandria.

If Galen had Lived in our days, and had tasted Peaches, which the Art and
Industry of our Gardiners have rendered so recommendable, I am certain he would
have had quite another opinion of these sorts of Fruit: the Peaches which were
carried to Rome in the Time of this Physician, coming by Sea from Sicily or
from about Naples, were partly rotted before they came thither, which made
Galen at that time to despise them, and to condemn them even as a Food very
pernicious for Man.

Some Persons will correct the ill quality, and the great humidity of the
Peach, by eating it with Bread, by exposing it two or three days to the
scorching heat of the Sun, by eating its Kernel, or finally by drinking pure
Wine with it.

True it is, experience has taught me, that Bread eaten with Fruits which we
ought to use before Meals, corrects their ill qualities, and that by exposing
Peaches to the Sun, they lose a superfluous humidity which often incommodes us.
But the same experience has also given me to understand, that Peach and
Apricock Kernels much charge the Stomach, and that besides their great
bitterness they are also very difficult to digest: that moreover, though pure
Wine be the sole thing which opposes it self to the coldness, and humidity of
this Fruit; nevertheless if we drink much of such as is small or of a mean
strength, we fall into Vomitings and Loosnesses, which sometimes degenerate
into a Bloody Flux. Whereas a little of excellent pure Wine corrects by its
noble heat the ill qualities of the Peach: Its happily this experiment which gave
occasion for this Latin Verse.

Petre, quid est Pescha? Cum vino nobilis Esca.

ART. III. Of Plums and Apricocks.
THere are some who prefer the Plum before all other Fruits with Stones, and
say that there is nothing more delicious to eat than a Black Damson, a Great
Date, or a Perdrigon. The Apricock does not come near them, it has I know not
what of unsavory when it is ripe, and of sharpish when it is not so; mean
while, both have very near the same qualities; they are both hot in the mean,
and moist in the second Degree.

The sweet Plum rejoices a hot Stomach, lenines the Breast, Loosen's the Belly,
and nourishes much more than the Peach, provided however that it be eaten
before Meals, otherwise it corrupts, and by moistning too much the superior
Orifice of the Stomach after Meals, it makes the Food descend too soon, and so
causes Crudities, which it is difficult afterward to deal with.

I shall not repeat here the different Maxims which I have laid down in the
precedent Discourses concerning the Use of Fruits, which ought to be eaten
fasting, and before Meals. I shall only say that its good to cast Plums into
fresh Water before they are eaten, to the end they may cool and moisten more;
but provided that they are very ripe, and that all have their Stems, lest the
Water enter there, and render them Insipid. Its doubtless in order to be more
cooled, and more moistn'd, and to keep the Belly more soluble that some Men eat
often Prunes with their Meat, and that there are even some who dislike their
Pottage if it has not of them.

If dried Plums may be given to sick Persons, I do not doubt also but I may be
permitted to give of them to mine, after having gathered them very ripe in a
clear day; the Choler which is often the cause of all Fevers, looses its edg by
the cumbrance which it receives from the substance of Plums: and because these
Fruits oppose the heat and drought of these Diseases, they are esteemed
excellent for encountering Bilous Fevers, provided that the use be regular, and
that we take a seasonable time to give them.

ART. IV. Of Mulberries.
OF all the Fruits that are eaten there are none but Mulberries which are fit
for Men when unripe: these ought only to be Red, drawing toward the Black, to
be eaten. If they are thoroughly ripe, they corrupt so hastily in the Stomach,
that shortly after they cause in those who eat freely of them, Distempers of
the Stomach, Loosnesses, Carbuncles, Malignant Swellings, and often pernicious
and Epidemick Diseases, especially if Rains have been rise during the Summer.

There is nothing which changes it self sooner into Choler, and which becomes
sooner poison within our Body than a Black Mulberry. Those who have the Stomach
foul ought to take good heed of eating them, unless they have a mind to be sick
in a short time. The Red-blacks withstand Corruption more, and though they are
very moist, they have nevertheless I know not what of drought through their
sharpness and astriction, which hinders them from corrupting so soon.

To use them well, we ought nevertheless to mind the praecautions belonging to
them, and never to eat of them but when the Stomach is empty, clean, and hot;
for if a heat be not felt in the Bowels, how young and Choleric soever a
Person be, I do not advise him to eat of them, unless he has a mind to fall
into some one of the Diseases which we have spoken of before.

Mulberries carry their Liquor with them, and nothing ought to be Drank after
they are eaten; they excite the appetite, cool the Stomach, appease drought,
allay the heat of the Liver, Purge the Blood of its superfluous serosities,
carrying them off by Urine. They blunt the edg of the Choler, moisten those
that are troubled with Melancholy and Choler: finally they make the Belly
soluble in those who are naturally Costive. I will say much more, if Mulberries
gathered from the Tree and eaten in a good plenty can cause the Bloody Flux; as
we see it every year, nature which most commonly has placed the remedy in the
cause of our evils, has not forgotten to teach us by experience, that these
Fruits serve for an assured remedy against the inveterate Bloody Flux, if they
are given dry to the weight of a Crown in Gold in Red-Wine.

Since the chief Virtue of Mulberryes is to cool and to keep the Mass of Blood
from fermenting, by qualifying the parts which serve for sanguification, there
may be cause to believe that they may be a Remedy appropriated to the Gout as
well as all other Fruits. For the pain which Gouty Persons feel in the
ligaments of their Joints, is caused but by a Blood and a serosity too sharp,
which sharpness is blunted by the great humidity of Mulberries, they insensibly
evacuating it by Urine. We need not seek for other proofs than daily
experience, and that which Hegesander has left us in Writing. He relates that
the Mulberry-trees did not bear Fruit for Twenty years together, and that
during all that time Men, Women, and Children, were so troubled with the Gout,
that other causes could not be then discovered, than the scarcity of these
Fruit.

ART. V. Of sharp Cherries.
SHarp Fruits in general are enemies to Old and Melancholic Persons, when they
do not find within themselves an excessive heat; they are not edulcorated in
their Stomach (if I may so call it) and are distributed into their Veins
without being Concocted and blunted. Which is not done without causing in the
Mouth little sharp belchings, and in the Stomach troublesome prickings, and in
the whole Body an insupportable heavyness.

It does not happen so to young People that are Sanguine and Choleric who have
the Entrals heated: but if casually the sharpness of Cherries with short Stems
eaten fasting, causes sometimes in these prickings in the Stomach, they need
then but to mix Powder Sugar with them, to blunt the point of it.

The most refined Sugar and the whitest, which we call Royal, is the least
proper for the use of Man; it heats and drys us too much, and through the
abundance of its Sulphur and Salt, it is entirely opposite to the principles of
our Life: The finer Sugar is the less sweet it is, and the less also it
quenches thirst. Lime which is a capital Enemy of Man, if it be taken inwardly,
or outwardly applied, is the chief matter which Refiners make use of, for
rendering Sugar whiter and more solid; and though Powder Sugar be made by many
repeated Lixivium's, nevertheless it ought always to be preferred before Loaf
Sugar, and if we will choose the best of all, we must always take that which is
the whitest among the browns. It is that which is extremely sweet, which
quenches thirst, which moistens, and which lenifies the Breast: I thought it
proper to make this digression for Persons who lovesweet things, because Sugar
is often set at our Tables, for rendering our Fruits more agreeable to the taste.

Sharp Cherryes exhilerate the Stomach, they excite there the Appetite, and
appease the drought. They dissipate the thick humors, and by their sharp
quality, they cut them (as I may say) and divide them, either that they may
serve afterward for Food, or be evacuated with more ease.

By all these Virtues they are very proper as well as Mulberries, to oppose the
cause and the progress of the Gout, and experience shows us that Gouty Persons
receive a sensible relief by the use of Fruits, which qualify the Liver, and
which correct the Acrimony of the Blood.

Moreover they powerfully loosen the Belly, if they are freely eaten fasting
while the Dew is yet on the Fruit; and experience teaches us every year that
they carry off by a Looseness long Diseases, which all the other Remedies of
Physic have not been able to Cure.

The most proper time to eat them is in the Morning fasting, either with or
without Bread. They have moisture enough to oblige us not to drink any Liquor
after them. As for the lateward Cherries which we call at Rochelle des Guignes
with long Stems, though they may be eaten before Meals; nevertheless I allow them
to be eaten after Meals: they have an agreeable Astriction, which contributes
to Concoction, and which closes the superior Orifice of the Stomach, that it
performs its Office afterward much better.

The sweet Cherries, especially those which we call in this Town Guindoux and
Guigneaux, are much better than the sharp for old Persons and for those who
have a nice Stomach; they do not prick so much the inward parts, and they
nourish more.

Happily there is not any Remedy more agreeable and more excellent for qualifying
the Reins, and for clearing thence the Gravel, Slime, and little Stones, than
the Wine of sharp Cherries: We must take off them therefore in the Months of
June or July, twelve or fifteen Pounds, we must cleanse them of their Stems and
Stones, and cast them and their Stones broken through the Bung-hole of a
Barrel, ( a Vessel containing somewhat more than our Barrel) of good
White Wind. After that they have been there for a Month, and have Communicated
to the Wine their cooling and opening quality, you may pierce the Vessel and
drink the Wine with pleasure. The color will be agreeable to the Eye, the
taste delicious, and the effects admirable.

CHAP. II. Of Fruits which ought to be eaten after Meals.
THo the Fruits which ought to be eaten after Meals are of a matter more firm,
which nourishes more, and which does not corrupt so easily as that of the
others, nevertheless we must remember to use them with the same precautions
which we gave in the Preface to this Tract: these precautions ought to be stood
too as Religiously in using these Fruits, as in eating the others. The faults
which are committed in their use are very considerable, and that Person whom I
Cured not long since of Vertigo's which threatened her with some severe
Distemper, has been thankful to me since, for having forbidden her the use of
Apples, which she ate irregularly after Meals.

ART. I. Of Pears.
NEver has the Industry of our Gardiners appeared more admirable than in the
diverse kinds of Pears which we have in France. They have taken a particular
care to Sow Seeds, and to preserve such Trees, as in their Wood and Leaves gave
them marks of a good hope: For as by Sowing a great many Flower Seeds, there
come of all kinds, and even some that are beautiful and double, so by Sowing a
great store of Pear Kernels, it seems that Nature pleases her self in giving us
a grand variety of Pear Trees, which produce all new Fruits, and some of them
delicious to the taste: happily it is because the Pear is the most excellent
Fruit of all, that she delights in multiplying its kinds even to an infinite
number: It is thus that the Messire Jean, the Dame Houdote, or the Amadote, the
Gabriel Egaud, the Micet, the Martinsire, and a great many other excellent
Pears are come of Kernels, and that they have had the honor to bear the Names
of those who raised them.

But not to stop at this Discourse, which seems to contribute nothing to my
design, I may say that the artifice of our Gardiners has multiplied for us
Pears of Summer, of Autumn and of Winter; that it has given us more of
Cassantes and of Burez, that it has shown us more of Sweet, of sharp and of
Acerb, and that finally it has procured for us more of Vinous, of Ambred and of
Musked, than we had before.

Among all these Pears the sweet and melting are esteemed the best, they
nourish more than the others which are a little sharp or Acerb, and they are
much more friendly to the nature of Man. Nevertheless there are some who prefer
before these first Pears the Sweet and Cassantes, because these for the most
part are odoriferous, and the others are not. They prise therefore much more
the Bonchretien-Pioulier, or the great Winter Musk Pear, than the Vergoulette,
or the Bergamot of Autumn.

Be it how it will, the Pear in general cools and moistens the heated Entrals,
and by its gentle Astriction contributes much to the Concoction of the Stomach,
by gently closing its superior Orifice, and by Loosning a little the Belly;
its the reason for which it ought always to be eaten after Meals, for if it be
eaten the Stomach being empty, it cumbers us, and loads us much, and moreover
it binds the Belly; but however we eat of it after Meals, it always has very
good effects, provided that we have the Stomach disposed to receive it: for be
it that we eat it Crud, or Baked, or Roasted, or Boiled, with Powder Sugar and
Cinnamon, as old People ought to eat it, after all these manners it always
solaces the Stomach drained of its strength and weakened by the excess of heat.

That which is to be Observed in the use of Pears, is, that after Meals we
ought to eat fewer Beurees than Cassantes, the former being more digested, and
more ready to corrupt through the least fault that we commit in our way of
living. Moreover we ought always to make choice of the most colored, and
reject those which we find Worm eaten. Finally we ought after Pears to drink a
good Cup of pure Wine, letting this Latin Maxim have its force, Post Crudum,
merum. But above all we ought to remember not to drink much Wine, nor to drink
such as is small; small Wine through its defect of heat not causing the Pear to
be Concocted, and the other causing crudities by its redundancy, make both of
them disorders in a Stomach the most even tempered and the most strong. It is
what experience showed us not long since in a Person, who fell into
insupportable pains, having drank much Wine; and Rodolphus Goclenius assures
us, that another dyed having drank much Beer, both, after having eaten Pears to
an excess.

Because our Stomach is much hotter in Winter than in Summer, our heat not
dissipating it self during that first season through the pores of our Body,
there are Persons who rather eat Pears in Winter than in Summer, and who do not
find themselves so much incommoded by them. Happily these Pears have sweated in
the heap, and have there seasoned themselves; whereas the Pears of the Summer,
having their Sap still in motion, and having not lost their superfluous
humidity, trouble rather the Coction of the Stomach than the Pears of Winter.

ART. II. Of Apples.
SInce Apple Trees have been cultivated in the Pais des Basques, and in the
Province of Normandy, Men have had a greater esteem for their Fruits. Trees
have been Sown, and afterward Grafted; they have been after that planted and
re-planted: Finally they have been so often changed in their Soil, Countries,
and Climats, that the Fruit are become sweet and pleasant.

I own that Apples were a long time despised, and that in Arabia they have even
been accused of Contributing to the Prizick, and to the drying of the whole
Body. It has been said also that they caused weakness in the Joints, and that
consequently they increast the Gout and other Fluxions, that they engendered
Worms in the Bowels, and that finally they caused Vertigo's, as experience
shows it us, and as it happened formerly to Scipio Gentilis a famous Civilian,
who after Meals abused these sorts of Fruits.

But if Men have talked after this manner, either it has been because they knew
not Apples well, and that they have been taken for other Fruit, or they judged
of them, as Men do of all other things, by the ill success of those who have
abused them: for if we will examine the thing very narrowly, we shall find that
the Arabians had none but Apples that were wild, acerb and very unpleasant to
the taste; that the weakness of the Joints, the Worms of the Bowels, and the
Vertigo's are caused but by the excesses which are committed with them, or by
the ill praecautions that are taken in their use.

On the contrary, Apples which are sweet and Luscious, Odoriferous and firm,
exhilerate the Heart, and allay the excess of its heat; they correct the Gall
of the Liver, they dilute the Blood, which is too thick and gross: in a word
they cool and moisten the heated Viscera: Moreover, whatsoever is said, they
oppose the drying of the Body and the Ptisick, and we see but very few of these
sorts of evils where Cider is common: For this drink is friendly to the
Stomach, which it heats in a moderate way; it revives the Heart, and opens the
Obstructions of the Entrals: In a word it is of wonderful use to Melancholic
and atrabilarious Persons; that which issues the first from Apples squees'd in
a Press is not so excellent as the second: and the third resembles the
Demy-wine of our Peasants.

If we mix among Apples a little Powder Sugar, they make us spit, and cool our
Breast.

But they must be used with precaution, that is to say, that they must be eaten
after Meals, because they are heavy and difficult to digest, that they ought to
be forbidden Old People, unless they find themselves heated, or that they are
prepared as Pears with Powder Sugar, Cinnamon and Water, and that finally we
ought to drink a little of good Pure Wine after having eaten them.

In the Distempers which are accompanied with a considerable heat and drought,
they give a great relief, if we eat a little of them Crud, or Boiled, or that
we put of them in Water: and I wonder that in France we give our selves so much
trouble in seeking Oranges and Citrons for our Diseases, when we have a
short-start Apple, or a Spanish Rennet: Happily things which cost much, and are
often difficult to be had, are much better than the common, and that they much
more satisfy the mind of the Diseased; for it is this part which we ought often
to Cure in those who find themselves ill.

Finally, Apples do not profit us only by taking them at the Mouth, they are a
sovereign Remedy for Heart-burnings and for the heats of the Stomach if they
are outwardly applied: for if a Cataplasm be made of Boiled Apples, and applied
hot on the Region of the Heart, or on the pit of the Stomach, happily we may not
find an Epithem more Sovereign in those Cases. Also experience has shown us
that the pulp of a boiled Apple put hot on Bloodshed and inflamed Eyes, is
almost the only Remedy for this evil.

ART III. Of Grafted Quinces.
ITs a pleasant Medicine to Purge ones self by eating after Meals Portugal
Quinces: The Fruit which I so call, are the Quinces whose Grafts were brought
from that Kingdom, and which are almost as pleasant to eat and to behold as a
Bon-Cretien Pear, at least they have an odor more sweet and Luscious; they are
yellow as Gold, and yield in nothing to those Pears in greatness, Figure and
Beauty.

Quinces are cold and dry, they restringe also manifestly the parts of the Body
where they are applied; and it is by this astringent quality, that constringing
the Stomach in the upper part, and afterward the Intestines, after that they
are eaten, they squeese, and force out all they meet within their cavity, be it
Excrement, Choler or Phlegm. Its what happened to an Advocate of Pergamus, of
whom Galen speaks, who was pleasantly Purged after having eaten Quinces after a
Meal, and having walked a little upon it: so that after all the experiments that
we have had of them, we ought no longer to doubt of their Virtues.

Mean while the stirring of the Belly which they cause, does not happen but to
Persons who have the Stomach weak and nice, and who have need by reason of this
to fortify it; for these Fruits do not work the same effects in a young robust
Man; and on the other side, if they are eaten before Meals, being very far from
moving the Belly, they make it tardy; and it is so that those do who have it
ordinarily too moist.

Quinces have also other excellent Virtues; if they are eaten Crud, Boiled, or
preserved with Sugar, they give an appetite, they stop a Looseness, appease
Vomiting, withstand an old Dysentery and a Bloody Flux; and if wescrape off
them Crud, and put the pulp of them hot on the Region of the Heart in the form
of an Epitheme, when a Malignant Fever attacks us, they contribute not a little
toward the subduing it: Their penertrating and sweet odor revives the Heart
and the Brain, and it has not been heard said hitherto, that Quinces corrupt in
the Stomach.

I very much approve the method which some have of making Wine and Water of
Quinces. These two Drinks have near the same Virtues, unless it be that the
Water is most proper for those who find themselves much heated, and the Wine
more meet for those who do not find any praedominant quality, and who are old
or Phlegmatic.

The Water of Quinces which the Greeks call (...), is made after this manner.
We take in the Month of October fifty or sixty pints of Fountain Water, of
Paris Measure [which comes near to our Quart] we put into it ten or twelve
Pounds of Portugal Quinces, pared, cleans'd, and cut in slices; they steep
there till the Water has a yellow color like that of Spanish Wine; after which
we strain this Water, and then let it sees ore a gentle Fire till the fourth
part be consumed, scumming it often, and after having put it in a Vessel well
filled and well stopped, we preserve it for the Month of March following.

The Wine is made after this manner; we take at Vintage time Ten or Twelve
Pounds of Portugal Quinces, prepared after the same manner as I have said, we
throw them into fifty or sixty pints of good Claret Must, and after that they
have wrought for thirty days, we strain the Liquor, we put it into another
Vessel which we stop up close, and we preserve it for use.

These two Drinks produce good effects in Persons who use of them; they fortify
the inward parts, oppose a Looseness and a Dysentery, cleanse the Reins of their
filth, hinder the Vapor of Wine from offending the Head, and secure us from
Pestilential Vapors: Finally, they cause so many good effects, that I must
pass the bounds of an abstract if I would name them all

ART. IV. Of Medlars and Services.
THese Fruits are seldom at our Tables, and they are eaten most commonly but in
a fancy; they are not very agreeable, and there is but little pleasure taken in
eating them. Mean while they are not without their use, and contribute
something to our Health. They are both so near allied in qualities that a
Person will not deceive himself if he takes the one for the other. They are
cold and dry when they are hard, but when they are softish they acquire a
better heat, by a sort of Corruption, that is to say, that they are not so
cold; after the first way they restringe more and nourish less: and they ought
to be used as Quinces, and to be eaten after Meals soft, Crud, Roasted, Boiled
in Wine with Powder Sugar and Cinnamon, or finally Fried in fresh Butter, which
does not render them disagreeable to the taste through the Skill of the Cook.

But because after all these manners they produce the like effects as Quinces,
this will oblige me to pass in silence what I have said in the precedent
Article: I shall only add here, that the Stones of Medlars being powdered, and
then taken by the Mouth to the weight of a Gold Crown in White Wind, cleanse
the Reins of their Impurities, and even drive forth Stones which are small
enough to pass through the Vreters, and afterward through the Passage of the
Urine.

In reality these Stones are extremely dry, and they have in their matter
particles which powerfully penetrate; for experience has taught me that the
Stones of Fruits, and the hardest bones of Beasts and Fishes provoke Urine as
specific Remedies. I do not doubt but that which Brassavolus has left us in
Writing concerning the Virtues of the Stones of Medlars, is true, since he
proves it by two sick Persons who were Cured thereby.

But we ought not to suffer our selves to be abused on this account by the
promises of Quacks and Mountebanks, who boast to have certain Remedies for
breaking the Stone in the Reins or in the Bladder: I know not whether the
Stones of Medlars have more Virtue in Italy than in France, but at least I know
by experience and reason, that neither the Stones of Medlars, nor all other
Remedies have the force to break the Stone, nor to drive it forth of the
Bladder, when it is to big too pass forth.

The chief Virtue of Services is to cool and to restringe, as we have said: its
through these qualities that they serve for powerful Remedies against moist
Diseases, against inveterate Loosnesses, and against long Dysenteries. Perhaps
the Learned Bruyerius had not been Cured of a Malignant Dysentery which lasted
him above a Month, if he had not eaten a great many Services; so true it is
that the presumptuous boldness which we have in trying Remedies in our long
Distempers, often succeeds much better with us than prudence it self.

CHAP. III. Of Fruits, which may be eaten before, or after Meals.
THere are Fruits which may be eaten at all times, because they do not corrupt
in our Stomach, but through our fault: Wherefore we ought to have a peculiar
design, and different praecautions in using them. One Person would only cool
and moisten himself. And besides this, another will have a farther design of
rendering the Belly soluble: thus there may be need of these Fruits in different
occasions.

ART. I. Of Raisins.
THe most excellent Raisins which our Province furnishes us with, and which are
ordinarily served at our Table, are those which are sweet, tasting of Sugar and
Amber: many prefer them to all other Fruits; and they yield us a Liquor, which
is the most agreeable and richest present that ever God gave to Man. If I would
extend my self here on the Encomium of Raisins, I persuade my self that I
should find but too much matter to say fine things of them; but, because I
proposed to my self to Write only concerning the use of the Fruits of Trees as
briefly as possible; I must be allowed to deliver my thoughts in a few words
concerning the use of Raisins eaten before or after Meals.

But before I explain my self thereon, I fancy that I ought to establish some
general Maxims, for well using them, without being damnified thereby.

A Woman who has the Stomach nice and weak must never eat Raisins newly
gathered; they puff up the Belly, they cause a rumbling and winds, and trouble
the Concoction of the Stomach: moreover she must not eat but of such as are
excellent and very ripe, and again she must not so much as look on those which
have grown in the shade, and which the Sun has not heated with its rays.

To correct the ill quality of Raisins, they must be gathered some days before
you will eat them, or else you may take such as have been hung up in a Chamber,
or if at time of Vintage you have an inclination for eating such as are fresh,
they must be dipped into boiling Water, and then into fresh Water, and so they
must be served to Table.

Raisins are moist and moderately hot, and by these two qualities they are
proportionate to the Principles of our Life; they nourish much more than other
Fruits, if we except Figgs: they revive the Spirits by their sweet and
odoriferous savor, they cheer up a Stomach which is languishing and heated
through Labor, and moisten the Viscera, and so correct by their pleasant
moisture the drought and which the heat of Autumn has there caused.

Nay there are Physicians who do not deny them to their sick Patients when they
begin to amend, though on condition that they eat them with Bread, and throw away
the Stones and the Skin, as two parts which cannot be digested by a Stomach how
robust soever.

If they are eaten fasting, without Bread, as they come from the Tree moistened
with the Dew of the Night, they purge the Belly even of those who have it
naturally tardy; there is neither Water of Cassia nor Manna which ought to be
preferred to Raisins so eaten.

We ought here to remember not to drink Wine unless it be well diluted, after
having eaten Raisins fasting: Nay it would be better not to drink at all, or to
drink only pure Water; pure Wine mixed in the Stomach with the new Juice of the
Raisins makes so extraordinary a fermentation, that the accidents which arise
from it are much greater than you may imagine: For the Wine carrys the Chyle and
the Juices into the Bowels and into the Reins, before they are digested, and so
causes impurities and indigestions in the Blood; whereas Water hindering the
great ebullition of the Stomach, contributes to a good Concoction; it causes
the Chyle to become more pure, and that we are more refresht and moistn'd by
the use of the Raisins.

We ought not so to do when we eat them after Meals, for we may drink a good
Glass of pure Wine, and not consider so much the Raisins prepared as we have
said before, as the food which we have taken at our Meal.

Tho the Stones cannot be digested, yet we ought not to throw them away when we
eat Raisins after Meals: For since they are astringent, they correct the great
humidity, which is the cause of the evils which they bring upon us. We must
chew them therefore very small, and reduce them to minute parts betwixt the
Teeth, that they may contribute to the Coction of our Stomach, and correct the
ill qualities of the Raisins: It is thus we ought to eat after Meals the dry
Raisins which are brought from Spain; for by nourishing and lenifying our
inward parts they solace them by their sweetness, and fortify them by the
astriction of their Stones.

I shall not pass by here the excellent drink which is made with dry Raisins,
and is called de Cabat. The Stones must be taken away from fifteen or twenty
Pounds, and then the Raisins must be bruised a little: and in the Month of
January or of February, which is the time that they are brought to us from
Spain, they must be put in an excellent Barique (a Vessel somewhat more than
our Barrel) of White Wind to drink at Easter. This Wine will have the color of
a Spanish Wine, it will be pleasing to the Palate, and will have qualities not
to be contemned; for it lenifies the Breast, appeases the Cough, helps
respiration, and fortifies the Stomach and the Liver, creates an Appetite,
opposes inclinations to Vomit, stops a Looseness; in a word, it is an excellent
Remedy against the Dropsy, it agrees admirably with Old men, with
Valetudinarians, with Phlegmatic or Melancholic Persons, and finally with
Women of a tender Constitution.

ART. II. Of China and Portugal Oranges.
THe Grafted Orange Trees which were brought from China into Portugal, and
which have been multiplied in the later Kingdom, produce Oranges which have a
fine Rind, a vinous Juice, and which are very pleasant to eat; they may be used
before or after Meals, for being more moist than cold, they qualify also after
Meals a Stomach too hot and too dry, and so help Concoction.

Those which are brought us ordinarily from Portugal are sharp or
aigres-douces, they are colder than the former, and they refresh more, and more
oppose the Corruption of our humors.

Sharp Oranges ought never to be used after Meals, they hinder the digestion of
the Stomach by their coldness, but they are very proper for quenching the heat
of our Liver, and to give us an appetite, if we take the Juice before Meals
with Water and a little Powder Sugar, but especially when the great heats of
the Summer or of Autumn exhaust our strength.

I say no more here, for that I will not repeat what I have said in the Article
of Cherries, where you may see what sharp Fruits are capable of doing within
us, and the precautions we must take to use of them. I shall only say that the
Rinds of sharp Oranges being squees'd a little into Wine, renders it more
agreeable to the taste of many Persons, and makes it pass more readily by Urine.

Our sick Persons use both the one and the other, and if you will believe them
on their own experience, they will tell you that there is not a better Remedy
than these Fruits for quenching Thirst, cooling the Stomach, qualifying the
Liver, provoking Urine, taking away the Heart burning, opposing inward Poisons;
in a word, for Curing the Diseases which are accompanied with an insupportable
heat and drought and indeed, if we cut a China or Portugal, vinous Orange into
four parts, and throw it into a pot of Water with the Rin'd, this drink will
have all the Virtues even now mentioned.

ART. III. Of Spanish Pomegranates.
WE cultivate in our Gardens sweet, Aigres-doux, and sharp Pomegranate-trees
which came to us from Spain; for as for those of France which are wild, we
cannot eat the Fruits: The Flowers and Rinds of Pomegranates are astringent,
and both serve to Cure our Diseases which are caused through a too great
humidity. They have the Virtue of constringing the parts of our Body together,
and of giving them the Situation which they had lost: The inside of the Kernels
of a Pomegranate is useless and undigested, our Stomach cannot dissolve it, and
there is no Body who eats it. There is but the pulp which is about the Kernels
that yields an agreeable Juice, wherewith we are often solac'd in our
sicknesses.

Sharp Pomegranates ought to be used before Meals, when the Stomach is empty;
and if the point of their sharpness does us hurt, as it happens in those who
have this part weak and tender, we need but blunt it with Water and Sugar to
make a delicious Drink: Then this agreeable Liquor cools the Stomach, quenches
thirst, qualifies the Liver, weakens the sharpness of the Choler, revives the
Heart, resists putrefaction, provokes Urine; in a word, its a Drink proper for
the Sick and sound. It is much better than the Bouillons of Veal, and of
cooling Herbs, which are taken too often in the Summer, and in Autumn to
qualify the Entrals, and to resist the heat and drought of the Season: for the
continual use which is made of Bouillons, is wholly an enemy to the Stomach,
their substance relaxes too much the membranes, and to perform well its Office
it must have a certain temperament which is not too moist; whereas the Drink of
sharp Pomegranates, by restringing it gently, tempers this part, and at the
same time all the others.

Sweet and vinous Pomegranates do not cool so much as the sharp, but they
dulcify more, and are more proper for Old and atribilarious Persons.

Those who find a heat in their Bowels, are very much solac'd after having
swallowed some Spoonfulls of the Juice of these Fruits: It is so that the
Carthaginians used of them, from whose Country Pomegranates were brought: and
it were those also who taught us by their own experience the greatest part of
the good effects which they cause in us, when we use of them. It cannot be said
what goods the Juice of sweet and vinous Pomegranates, pressed forth, scumm'd,
and fermented may produce: it strongly opposes all inward Fluxions, it resists
all Fevers which are accompanied with a Looseness and an exhausting of our
strength, and it has this proper to it, that it fortifies all our languishing
parts. If we will make some Bottles of it, we must squeeze forth in a Press a
sufficient quantity of Pomegranates, we must sees the Juice over a gentle
Charcoal Fire to the diminution of the third part, after having well scumm'd
it, and afterward it must be kept for use.

If we put in White Wind the Kernels of sweet or vinous Pomegranates, or after
the same manner as we have prescribed for sharp Cherries, we shall have a Wine
which will yield in nothing to all the Remedies which Physic has invented
hitherto for allaying the burning of the Reins, for cleansing forth all the
filth, and for hindering Stones from being there formed.

ART IV. Of Corands.
THe Red Corands and the White, which we call Gadelles, have very near the same
qualities, though the Gadelles are more sharp, and the Red more pleasant to eat.
Both of them cool and restring the parts of the Body through which they pass;
they hinder Vomiting, quench drought, blunt the Choler, remove Obstructions,
fortify the parts, and they solace both the healthy and Sick that are heated,
if they are used before or after Meals.

Their pungent sharpness ought to be corrected, as that of Cherries and
Pomegranates, or we may make them into a Sugar Paste or Gelly, which is very
proper for those who have the Stomach weakend by long Sicknesses; and I have
Cured many Persons of considerable quality, who had this part very much
afflicted by continual Vomitings, and had a troublesome Looseness of the Belly,
by giving only a Paste or Gelly of Corands, and of the moist conserve of
Provins Roses.

In Imitation of the Turks, during the great heats of the Summer, we may make
of the greatest part of the Fruits before spoken of, a sort of Sherbet to be
drank with Ice: and I allow young Sanguine and bilous People, who have known by
experience that drinking with Ice does not incommode them, I allow them, I say,
to drink of it, with prudence for allaying the excess of their heat: This will
be a sure means to hinder them from being set upon by continual and Malignant
Fevers, and to keep them in good Health during all the Summer and Autumn. As
for others who are of another temperament, and of another Age, they must not
touch of it, and they must remember that heat, which we must not destroy, is
one of the Principles of our Life.

THE TABLE OF THE Chapters of the First PART.
THe Art of Pruning Fruit Trees. Page 1 Chap. 1. The Pruning of Fruit Trees for
the Month of February. p. 2 Chap. 2. The Pruning of Fruit Trees at the
beginning of May. p. 31 Chap. 3. The Pruning of Fruit Trees at the beginning of
June. p. 33 Chap. 4. The Pruning of Fruit Trees at the end of July. p 42 An
Explanation of some words used by Gardiners to express themselves speaking of
Fruit Trees. p. 48
The end of the First Table.
THE TABLE OF THE SECOND PART.
OF the Use of the Fruits of Trees for keeping us in Health, or for Curing us
when we are Sick. Page 50 Chap. 1. Of the Fruits which ought to be eaten before
Meals. p. 59 Art. 1. Of Figgs. p. 60 Art. 2. Of Nectarins and Peaches. p. 65
Art. 3. Of Plums and Apricocks. p. 69 Art. 4. Of Mulberries. p. 71 Art. 5. Of
sharp Cherries. p. 74 Chap. 2. Of the Fruits which ought to be eaten after
Meals. p. 78 Art. 1. Of Pears. p. 79 Art. 2. Of Apples. p. 83 Art. 3. Of
Quinces. p. 87 Art. 4. Of Medlars and Services. p. 90 Chap. 3. Of the Fruits
which may be eaten before and after Meals. p. 93 Art. 1. Of Raisins. p. 94 Art.
2. Of China and Portugal Oranges. p. 98 Art. 3. Of Spanish Pomegranates. p. 100
Art. 4. Of Corands. p. 103
The end of Second Table.
A CATALOGUE of some Books Printed for and to be sold by Thomas Basset at the
George in Fleet Street.
Folio.
DR. Lightsoots Works in two Volumes. Speeds Mapps, and Geography of Great
Britain and Ireland, and of Foreign Parts. Wanleys History of Man. Bishop
Wilkins Real Character. Pharmacopeia Londinensis. Hooker's Ecclesiastical
Polity. Judge Jones Reports. Judge Winches Book of Entries. Guillims Heraldry.
Bishop Saudersons Sermons. Foulis History of Romish Treasons. Crokes Reports in
three Volumes. Daltons Offices of Sheriffs. -- Justice of Peace. Cokes Reports
in 13 Parts. Selden's Jani Anglorum in English. Lex Mercatoria. Mezerays
History of France. Cowels Interpreter, Enlarged by Manley. Littleton's Reports.
Dr. Howels History of the World. Grotius of War and Peace, English. Townsends
Historical Collections. Pharamond. Heaths Chronicle. Pettus of Mines and
Minerals. History of the Cariby Islands. Brents History of France. Browns
Entries in two Parts. Sir Roger Manly's History of the Wars of Denmark. Lord
Bridgmans Conveyances. Lord Cokes 2d. 3d. and 4th Institutes. Huttons Reports
with New References. Modern Reports. Leys Reports. Hetleys Reports. The Ten
Volumes of Year Books with New References. Edward the Second Published by
Sergeant Maynard. Officina Brevium. A Catalogue of all the Common and Statute
Law Books of this Realm, to this present Year, 1684.
Quarto.
Dr. Littletons Dictionary, the Second Edition. Gouldmans Dictionary. Coals
Dictionary. Mieges French Dictionary. The Travels of the Patriarchs. A
Discourse of the Laws Civil and Ecclesiastical. Doctrina Placitandi. Moyles
Entries. Complete Clerk. Dr. Parker of the Law of Nature. Sheppards Grand
Abridgment. Dr. Haywards two Sermons before the King. A Collection of the Cases
relating to Church Communion, Written by several Ministers in and about London.
Counter-Scuffle. Mandevils Travels. History of the Seven Champions. Dr.
Sherlocks Sermon on the Discovery of the Plot. The Difference of the Case
between the separation of the Protestants from the Church of Rome, and the
separation of Dissenters from the Church of England. Medicina Curiosa.
Octavo.
Mieges French Dictionary. The London Practice of Physic, being the whole
Practick Part of Dr Willis's Works. Dr. Salmons Dispensatory. -- his Doron
Medicum. Several Tracts of Mr. Hales of Eaton. Bishop Sandersons Life. Coals
Dictionary Latin and English. Bishop Wilkins Sermons, never before Extant. --
Principles and Duty of Natural Religion. Filmers Patriarcha. Mieges French
Grammar with a Vo cabu lary and Dialogues. -- short French Grammar. Mieges
Present State of Denmark. -- Cosmography. Berniers Travels. Art how to know
Men. Pools English Parnassus. Dr. Whitby of Idolatry. Dr. Hinckley and Mr.
Baxters Letters. Sheppards Actions for Slander. -- Action on the Case for
Deeds. Blounts Ancient Tenures. Complete Solicitor, entering Clerk and Attorney.
Touchstone for Gold and Silver. Pettyt's Rights of the Commons. --
Miscellanies. The Egyptian History. Atwoods Jani Anglorum facies Nova. Sir John
Pettus of the Constitutions of Parliaments. Russian Impostor. Ogilbys Aesops
Fables with Cuts. Lawrence's Interest of Ireland. A New Book of Instruments.
French Monarchy. Anglers vade Meum. Scarons Novels. Meriton of Dreams. Clerks
Tutor. Brown of Fines and Recoveries. Kitchen Physic. Posing of the Parts.
Duodecimo.
Heylins help to History. Lukins Chief Interest of Man. Help to Discourse.
Mothers Blessing. Grotius de veritate Relig. Christ. Bishop Lauds Devotions.
Ladys Calling. Vaughan of Coins and Coynage. Meritons Guide for Constables. --
Landlords Law. Phillips Principles of the Law. Manwaring of Consumptions.
Catalogue of Law Books. Pharniacopeia Londoniensis. Butlers Rhetoric. Lucians
Dialogues Greek and Latin. Tullies Select Epistles.
FINIS.

