The Grand SCIPIO, An Excellent new ROMANCE.

Written in French By Monsieur De VAVMORIERE.

And Rendered into English by G. H.

LONDON, Printed for H. Mosely, Tho. Dring, and Hen. Herringman, and are to be
Sold at the Princes Arms in St Paul's Churchyard, at the George in Fleetstreet
near St Dunstans Church, and at the Anchor in the lower Walk in the
New-Exchange, 1660.

To the RIGHT HONORABLE, The Lady Martha Carry.
Madam,
THe Interest I have in the Book offered to your Honor, by transcribing it
into English Language, has made me not less careful of its prosperous coming
into the World, then the Author that gave it being. In order whereunto, I think
I have addressed it to a Lady, so perfect a Parallel to his Princess, that if
your Honor favor it, I shall not much apprehend the disadvantage it has
received in the aversion, and consequently the more need it stands in of a
great protection; I am not ignorant how severe a censure this sort of Writings
undergoes from the rigid judgments of some seeming Sages, who look upon them
no otherwise then as the Productions and Entertainments of Idleness. But, I
confess with submission, I cannot understand with what equity Recreations are
allowed to the Body, if those accommodated to the mind be condemned; nor why
Music, Peniture, Statuary, Ornament, and Magnificence in Architecture,
Gardening, and the like, which certainly in a great measure conduce only to
Delight and gratify our Senses, should be plausibly judged of, if the innocent
representations of noble Actions, and handsome Conversations, which afford
infinite pleasure to the fancy, and extremely recreate the mind, be decry'd as
noxious, or, at best, superfluous. Such Cynicks may be pleased to remember that
Socrates and Cato have been seen upon the Theater. But it would be no difficult
matter to evince against those morose persons, that Delight is the least
advantage redounding from such compositions. For, not to say any thing
concerning the Groundwork, which is generally some excellent piece of Ancient
History, accurately collected out of the Records of the most eminent Writers of
old, the knowledge of which is not to be mispris'd; the addition of fictitious
adventures is so ingenious, the incident discourses so handsome, free, and
fitted for the improvement of conversation (which is not undeservedly accounted
of greatest importance to the contentment of humane life) the descriptions of
the passions so lively and naturally set forth; yea, the Idea of virtue,
generosity, and all the qualifications requisite to accomplish great persons,
so exqui^itely delineated, that I cannot content my self with giving the French
that ordinary commendation of having freed this kind of Writings from the
incongruous Chimaerical mixture of extravagancies and imposibilities; but I
must also speak it, (though I believe with the envy or regret of many) that
they have approved themselves the best Teachers of a noble and generous
Morality that are to be met with; not presenting us with a Carcass or Skel^ton,
but with a living, active, and (as I may so speak) imbodied virtue, as far
transcending that which is held forth in the gravity and formality of Precepts
and Definitions, as a living person does his own Picture, which is destitute of
Motion, of which (as a great person observes) the better half of beauty
consists, not to be expressed by the Art of the Pensil.

Now whether the Piece I present to your Honor, deserves to be ranked in the
number of those I have Characteris'd, whether the Author has done justice to
SCIPIO, and whether I have been very much injurious to both, is humbly left to
your Ladyships Judgment, which is so authentic, that as all Books which come
into your fair hands, find you an exact esteemer of their value; So this must
receive its fate from your sentence, and accordingly be to other Readers
acceptable, or otherwise. If the Dedication of it seem too presumptuous, I must
acknowledge I was induced to it by a natural, and so not easily resistable,
inclination; being as well led by an ardour to testify in some manner the
generation and esteem I have for things that are excellent by testifying it for
a person that is so, as by an Ambition to do the Book the greatest Honor I
could by placing your Ladyships Name before it, and my self by putting before
my own, the Title of,

Madam, Your Honor's most humble and most obedient Servant. G. H.

The Grand SCIPIO.
The First Part.
BOOK I.
THe emulous contest of Rome and Carthage had now brought the expectations of
all the world to an equal balance. These two proud Republics were fighting
for the Empire of the Universe, whilst all the Nations of the same awaiting
the decision of the important war, suspended their homages in the mean time, to
render them afterward to that of these two powers, with whom Victory should
side. During this stand of affairs, the event hanging in the hands of Fortune,
it happened that the Courts of Africa about Lephi were heard to Echo with
Exclamations of joy, and there appeared between 10 and 12000 men approaching in
haste and disorder toward the Seashore, and expressing the greatness of
their jollity and impatience by such gestures as seemed at the same time very
rude, and yet sufficiently becoming. They stretched forth their arms toward
the Sea, and being driven by the impetuousnesse of their precipitant passions
in this posture, seemed as if they endeavored to embrace a Fleet of Ships,
which nevertheless was at that time near four Leagues distant from them. But
the wind and their Oars in a few moments overcame that way, and rendered them
into the Rode, where they presently cast anchor; which while they were doing, a
person of a very high and martial aspect showed himself upon the prow of a
stately Vessel, and this sight did not more quiet the impatience of the
Africans, then it augmented their rejoycings. For they lift up their eyes and
hands to heaven, and beholding that source of their happiness, they shouted
out with one voice (rather by instinct then knowledge) That the Romans were no
longer to be dreaded, nor their Scipio esteemed invincible. After which words
they resounded forth the famous name of Hannibal, every one pressing forward to
do reverence to this grand Personage as soon as ever he was disbark'd, (for he
it was that occasioned this agreeable confusion;) The eagerness of their great
passions, which is always an enemy to order, confounded all such as was
requisite to be observed in the reception of this Prince Bomilcar, who
commanded the Africans, at length spoke to him; and after the first civilities
which he could not perform but in tumult, endeavored to express such respect
to Prince Hannibal, as is patible to so considerable a person in the like
occasions. The great Hannibal showed many tokens of friendship to Bomilcar, and
having embraced him with a tenderness, whereof his ferocity was not oftentimes
very capable, he advised with him concerning what was necessary to be done in
order to the peace and glory of Carthage. My Lord (answered Bomilcar) I beseech
you to afford me a more private audience, and it is possible (continued he with
a lower tone) you will understand that we have been more unhappy then Fame has
given out of us, as accustomed as she is to amplify the things she reports.
Upon this unpleasing Preface, Hannibal signified that his pleasure was to
confer apart, and every one retired out of respect: When the Prince turning to
Bomilcar, proceed (says he) I beseech you, and being out of the reach of any
other ears, unfold to me without any reservation the present estate of our
Republics affairs. These words enforced a sigh from Bomilcar, who after a
beginning which seemed to promise a sad Discourse, told him, that he was too
good a Carthaginian to be able to describe the great Conquests of Scipio. I
shall content my self (continued he) with informing you into how deplorable a
condition they have reduced us, and struck such an astonishment into the
spirits of the Africans, that all our Neighbors fled for Sanctuary to Carthage
in such multitudes as represented that City rather a Rendezvous of all the
whole affrighted world, then a secure refuge to distressed persons. Their
multitude from which we might have expected some advantage by the increase of
our Forces, in this occasion afforded us nothing but more trouble and
perplexity, insomuch that even the presence of those, which was at other times
wont to contribute to the public joy, had in the present conjunction somewhat
of so doleful semblance, as served rather to redouble our consternation and
fears. You may judge, My Lord, if these passions, which are but too contagious
of themselves, did not receive new vigours by the concourse of persons already
in^ected therewith. In a few words, I can averr, that they caused so profound a
silence to reign in Carthage, that the poor City did in a manner appear as
solitary and desert, as it was really populous. Moreover, these fatal passions
had so strange and confused influences, that they caused us even to fear that
which ought to have calmed our disquiets, and represented unto us the clemency
of Scipio more dangerous, ^hen his valor formidable. For the general voice
was, that this Roman had indeed approved him a most valiant man in the defeat
of Hanno, Siphax, and Asdrubal; but they added, that his gentleness,
moderation, and other virtues were such as raised him above the rank of men,
and made the gods our Adversaries so long as Scipio was our Enemy* This is not
all, My Lord (continued Bomilcar) the Ghost of King Siphax added new terrors
to our forlorn estate, and that doleful spectre caused such fright and
astonishment in the spirits of the Carthaginians, that we at length apprehended
his design was to destroy us, either by the decree of the Gods, or to have
associats in his misery. But My Lord (added he, beholding Prince Hannibal with
a somewhat less sad countenance) I have not without reason presented you this
ample description; and although it may seem I ought rather to have concealed
our weaknesses and defects, yet I have been induced to use this opportunity to
unfold them, and discover the greatness of our evils, to the end I might
afterward manifest the proportion of the remedy we have provided for them.
This remedy is no other then the news of your return, which has been published
in our City, during the general dejectedness, as a means to reduce it to some
order; and all our people terming your arrival the return of their happiness
and glory, have enforced themselves to solemnise the day with sports and
feastings. Yes, my Lord, your only reputation has wrought this change; nothing
has been heard since some days, in the mouth of the whole world but your
name; and by a kind of transport, suitable to such conjectures, our women cried
about the City, That now the whole Universe should be resolved whether the
Romans were able to resist the renowned Hannibal of Tresbia, Thrasymene and
Cannae. Behold, My Lord, the power of our reputation (added Bomilcar) and
observe so great a change proceeding less from the ordinary levity of popular
minds, then from the great assurance which our Citizens have in the valor of
their illustrious Prince. Whereupon I am come hither by order of the Senate,
who receiving certain intelligence of your affairs, and being informed that you
would shortly arrive at Leptis, commanded me to take these Troops to augment
yours, and assist you in landing, in case the Romans should take the
opportunity to oppose it. But now as if Fortune were weary of persecuting us,
we shall without obstacle recover the great prop of Africa, and with justice
hope that Scipio as valiant as he is, will appear no more invincible before the
illustrious Hannibal, then those known Captains his Predecessors, Flaminius,
Aemilius and Marcellus have already done. Your Language is too obliging
(answered Prince Hannibal) and the people attribute too much to my arm,
Nevertheless, since pre-conception acts so strongly in their spirits: I shall
leave them to their opinion; and I will either perish (added he with a tone
somewhat more strong and savouring of his noble fierceness) but I will make
good some part of their hopes by my actions. I am determined therefore to march
against Scipio (continued he with the same air) as I have formerly marched
against the gallantest Chiefs of his Nation, and it is possible it may appear
that this Roman, whose name carries so much terror with it to the hearts of
our people and Armies, will not always fight with favorable success, nor
harrasse Africa so furiously, since the Sea is no longer between us. Scarce had
Hannibal uttered these few words, but he dispatched Magar to Carthage, both to
confirm the peoples joy there, and to provide such things as were necessary to
the accomplishment of the designs he had resolved on; And turning himself
again toward Bomilcar, in the mean time that his Army unshipt, he continued
conferring with Bomilcar to inform himself more exactly of the forces of
Carthage, and those of the Enemy, and having learnt from him all that could be
known, he determined to encamp, the better to keep his army from being
separated by quartering in several Villages; to which purpose he made choice
of an advantageous place for the line and other conveniences, and began himself
to remove the turf. This example was of so powerful incitement, that the works
were suddenly advanced, and a large entrenchment being finished within a few
days, afforded the Troops of Hannibal all the security which could be wished
for in Towns, and restrained such Soldiers as he had brought out of Italy,
from forsaking their colors, and withdrawing after the service of diverse
Campagnes. As soon as the circumvallations were completed, Hannibal was
desirous to take a little repose in one of those Tents which were prepared for
him; But when he earnestly inclined himself thereto, he was assaulted by so
many violent inquietudes, that he was driven at length to bemoan the impetuous
incursions of his anxious and pensive thoughts; and this grand personage, as
fierce and haughty as he was, found himself capable of sighing in the presence
of his beloved Aspar, whom he had retained alone with him in his Tent.
Sometimes he expressed very tender and sensible regrets; and soon after
following the notion of his insolent spirit, he thundered forth reproaches
against a Princess of too great rigor; and endeavored, as it were, to break
those fetters which he felt so burdensome upon him; but within a small while
love prevailed upon him to esteem and term them glorious; and he was even
driven to calm his fierceness, and make it comply with that imperious passion
which uses not to yield to any other. Alas! Aspar (said the Prince, as soon as
his agitations permitted him) Thomira is in Africa; but do you believe she has
changed her former humor by being removed into another climate, and that those
weak considerations you speak of can effect any thing upon a mind that has
resisted the rudest assaults of Fortune? No, No, Aspar, it is not possible: I
shall meet with the same unmovable severity, which I attempted ineffectually
both in Spain, and at Capua; My Princess will never suffer her self to become
flexible, and I know but too well, that she will always continue to be
disdainful, and thy Master be for ever miserable: Ah! Hannibal (proceeded the
Prince) behold the worthy fruit of thy passion! Thou see thy self constrained
to come to be the defense of thy Country, after thou have fallen short of
becoming Master of the Universe: Thou oughtst to have marched to Rome after the
battle of Cannae, instead of retiring to Capua; and rather have gone to give
Laws in the Capitol, then to receive those of a woman, when Fortune had put the
opportunity into thy hands of showing all the world, that it is entire conquest
was destined to Hannibal. But how speak thou, O Hannibal (said the Prince,
checking himself the next moment) Is this the respect thou owe to the
Princess Thomira? Know thou not well, that thy servitude is worthy to be
preferred before that absolute Empire whereunto thy ambition caused thee to
pretend, and that thy chains are of greater value then the most glorious
Scepters? Yes, divine Thomera, (proceeded he) I have done that which I ought to
do, when I went to Capua, to adore you there; my affection was worthy of you,
when it admitted no other consideration but you; and I could not give a fairer
Testimony of the esteem which I have of the incomparable Thomira, then by
preferring her above the Empire of the Universe: But further, Most excellent
Princess, consider I beseech you, the greatness of my respects; I believed my
self more glorious, when prostrate at your feet, then commanding in the head of
a triumphant Army: I have never yielded to any but to you, O Thomira; and if I
have given bounds to the extent of my glory, I have not done it but at your
feet, my adorable Princess. But too severe Thomira (resumed this passionate
Prince) I have brought my glory at your feet, without laying my Conquests
there; I have sighed a thousand times without being able to mollify you, and
having as often found you averse from compassion, obtained for recompense of
all my pains, only the satisfaction of having suffered them for you. These and
more were the complaints of this high-spirited Prince; in which he was
sometimes gentle and submisse, and anon hurried by the impetuo^ity of his
temper to reproaches and renuntiation of his bonds: Sometimes he accused and
exclaimed against the Princess Thomira, but oftener protested himself her
adorer, and it may be believed, that the mind of this great person wavering by
so many diverse motions, did not appear strong in this encounter but by the
violence of its agitations. At length it became seasonable for Aspar to employ
his tongue and endeavors in order to the calming of his Masters disquiets: My
Lord, (said this faithful Attendant to the Prince of Carthage) I have had much
difficulty to restrain my self from interrupting the course of your Speech: You
have not yet seen the Princess Thomira in Africa, and nevertheless conclude
with assured belief that she is still incompassionate. I confess I cannot in
this occasion but dissent from you, and I crave your permission to tell you,
that I am in no small admiration, that a great personage should be afflicted
with evils, which he frames to himself to be persecuted by them. Ah Aspar
(answered the Prince Hannibal) how little am I capable of this kind of
weakness wherewith you charge me? My unhappinesses have a more real
foundation, being the true effects of the obdurate, immovable humor of
Thomira; I undergo them, because Thomira is insensible, or because perhaps she
is only sensible for some other; and I believe her chains, which I will always
wear (after all I have said of them) will be no other then my perpetual
punishment. Under the allowance of your favor (replied Aspar) I am bold to
assure you, that I expect some alteration in their fortune: A strong conceit,
which I know not well how to express has possessed me, that the Princess
Thomira will render her self pliable, and recompense the greatness of your
services, and to persuade me to this more effectually, it presents it self to
my mind as a certain presage the Gods have sent me for the consolation of my
Master. I forgive all to your zeal (answered the Prince) but you know well that
I am an enemy to the lightness which induces to give credit to presages:
Otherwise I believe the Gods would inspire them to the person concerned: And
since you say it is for my consolation, do you conceive they are destitute of
other means to give me enjoyment thereof entire? And this perhaps (interposed
Aspar) is the reason that the Gods have not revealed the secret to you, because
you would have been altogether incredulous; and therefore have judged your soul
not capable of this sort of impressions: and if the Gods cause advertisements
to be given you, instead of effecting your absolute satisfaction, it is for
that they would have you address to them, and bring you to confess, that all
your grandeurs are too short to afford you contentment of themselves. In the
mean time (added he) if it be your pleasure to be further lightened in the
matter, we will go and consult at the Temple of the Sun, a few furlongs distant
from our Camp, and perhaps you will see that their answer will confirm my good
belief: The Prince Hannibal had no great inclination to trouble himself with
superstitions, although he was otherwise no contemner of the worship which is
due to the Independent powers; and if he gave not credit to certain
divinations, which find admittance only in vulgar souls, yet (notwithstanding
the misreport of Fame) he bore a veneration toward Oracles, and the
admonitions delivered by them: Wherefore he determined to go to the Temple
where Apollo rendered answers every day; and having spoken to Maharbal and
Bomilcar, he went forth of the Camp, accompanied only with his Attendant, and
took the way leading to the Temple, though he expected not much redress to his
affairs. The Prince by the way mused upon the several accidents of his life, he
recalled to memory some part of his Conquests: he saw himself victorious over
the Olcadians, the Oretanians, Carpentanians, Illergetes, Bargusians, and
Ausetanes, of Aquitane, and the Gauls upon the banks of the River Rhosne; he
remembered his Umpirage between the Kings of the Allobroges, and considered his
passage over the Alps, till at length he found himself victorious over the
Romans near the Po at Tretia, at the Lake of Thrasymene, Cannae and Herdon. He
farther seemed to behold his Army encamped before the proud Rome, and
contemplated in his fancy, his being at the head of two thousand horse against
the Gate Capena. But after having repassed over all these happy successes, he
beheld all his affairs overturned at a blow, he durst not so much as think of
the winning of Cities, but endeavored to deface that of Saguntum out of his
memory, contenting himself with considering this great revolution, to the end
he might better judge of the greatness of the passion which has caused it.
This last thought was enough to have confounded a spirit less courageous; but
ere it had no other effect then the rendering that of the haughty Carthaginian
more stern and resolute, whose great heart invigorating it self to repel this
semblance of reproach, promised him more by the winning one simple field in
Africa then by all those battles he had gained in Italy. Whereupon he employed
his fancy wholly upon the Idea of his Princess till he arrived at the gate of
this proud Temple, whose magnificent Architecture deserved some moments from
his eyes, had he not had a design which took him off from all other; Insomuch
that he entered without taking any regard to the rich portall of the Temple, and
going directly to the Altar, he prostrated himself before it with this prayer;
Great Gods! I need not declare the occasion that brings me hither, since the
profoundest secrets of my soul are open unto you. I am not come to supplicate
any favors from you, being of belief that I ought not to beseech any from a
Justice, which without expecting the discernment and prayer of mortals bestows
them on such as merit to receive them. Nevertheless if the curiosity we have in
those things which concern us be any wise pardonable, be pleased to let me
know, whether the Princess which I serve, will ever become compassionate and
sensible of my misery, and if I may at length hope to be happy after so long
suffering for her. Hannibal having uttered this prayer aloud, held his peace,
and a few moments after a dreadful voice delivered this obscure Oracle; Thy
happiness shall bear its date,
From the declining of thy fate.
Prince Hannibal was strangely surprised with this answer, and although he was
no more knowing of his destiny then before, he nevertheless rendered thanks to
the Sun, and went forth of the Temple, musing on the obscurity of his Oracle.
But he had not proceeded many paces, when turning toward his attendant, he
required his opinion concerning the interpretation of what they had heard;
Aspar (said the Prince) do you observe, that instead of the ordinary
obscurities there use to be in Oracles; Apollo has delivered me one with a
contradiction in it? The God has well signified that I was unworthy of the
favors I demanded, in that he has rather perplexed my mind, then enlightened
it by his answer. How do you expound it? Thy happiness shall bear its date,
From the declining of thy fate.
Does he mean that the beginning and the end, which are two contraries, are the
same thing in my happiness? or would he show, that I am to find my
satisfactions at the same time that I shall lose them. This impossibility would
put my mind upon the rack, did I consider it with that attentiveness and
anxiety which is requisite to unfold it, or rather did I not remit the care of
that life to Heaven, whereof it reserves the conduct to it self when it speaks
so obscurely. It is very difficult, My Lord (answered Aspar) to consider
unpassionately those things which concern our selves; and it is so hard to see
clear through those inquietudes which excite the passions, that I do not wonder
you apprehend obscurity in this Oracle, being you judge of it, taking in the
consideration of your own interest, and that we seldom are upright esteemers
of those things wherein our particular concernments are included. Nevertheless
(proceeded he) if you please to follow me to dilate a little upon its
interpretation, you shall see that the intricacy of it is not so great as you
believe, that it is far more advantageous to you, then it promises at the first
thought: You know, My Lord (continued Aspar, perceiving his Master to favor
him with audience) that we never taste happiness in its purity, that all things
in the world have their mixture and allay; and we too much experience that
Fortune, which is believed to preside over Events, bestows and takes back her
benefits with the same perpetual levity; So that we never enjoy an entire and
secure contentment. I shall pass yet further, and presume to affirm, That if we
were arrived at the compleatest attainment of all those goods which compose
that felicity men so much talk of, and never find; I say, I shall dare to
affirm, That we should have such solicitous apprehensions of falling from that
happy estate, as would make us capable of sighing in the midst of our delights;
since the greatness of our satisfactions, would be in some sort, the measure of
that fear we should have to lose them. But, My Lord, the revolutions which you
fear are of a quality to afford you satisfaction, and make you pass for the
least unhappy of men. Yes, My Lord, this Oracle is the most advantageous that
could fall within your wishes; since it gives you assurance that the end of one
happiness, shall be the beginning of another; whereas usually one misfortune is
but the introduction to a greater, till we become at last precipitated into an
abyss of miseries. You know also, My Lord (added he) that happiness has
different kinds of appearances, therefore why should you think it strange to
gain one sort with the loss of another. Hannibal was either satisfied, or
seemed to be so with this interpretation, but being as little instructed of the
nature of the happiness he was to lose, as able to conjecture of what kind
that was the fates had designed him, he resolved to await the explication from
the event with patience; and being of an humor which did not permit him to
fear much the assaults of fortune, he also was not very capable of expecting
her favors with very eager inclinations. Having his mind possessed with this
thought, there appeared to his sight something of a glittering brightness; Upon
which turning his eye toward the way which crossed his, he beheld a Cavalier
followed by four others, and advancing toward the place where the ways
crossed; the first of these unknown persons did by a nobler air evidence
himself the Master of the rest, rather then by the disparity of his Arms; which
although of silver, enriched with scales of burnished gold, and beset with many
jewels, did less draw the eyes of Hannibal by these ornaments, then by the
fierceness of his countenance, and the gracefulness of his port. The
Carthaginian Prince would have passed on after he had a little considered this
stranger, but he was surprised when he saw himself accosted, and heard these
words, I know by your Arms (said the stranger) that you are a Carthaginian;
therefore inform me if it be true that Hannibal is encamped within a few
furlongs of Leptis. The Carthaginian Prince who was accoutred with a very plain
suit of Arms, the better to pass unknown in his short journey, ought not
reasonably to have been surprised with this discourse of the stranger; but he
was so notwithstanding in a great measure, and as he had not quitted the heart
of Hannibal by laying aside his arms and harness, he could not suffer these
words, which he esteemed not civil, and fiercely answered thereunto; If you
are of the friends of that Prince, and would serve him, I will soon accord your
demands in giving you the news of him: I will not receive them on those terms
(replied the stranger) and I am -- Show then (interrupted the impatient
Carthaginian) if your valor be sufficient to merit this advantage, and know
that a Prince that has such friends as my self, would perhaps take little care
to gain persons of your account. He said no more, but drawing his sword
assailed the stranger, who had soon drawn his, and being not able to prevent
him, contented himself to receive him with a very gallant and heroic firmness.
The other four Cavaliers, knowing the generosity of their Master, were
constrained to be spectators of the combat, and obliged Aspar to be so by their
example. These two valiant warriors dealt great blows to one another; which
they warded with their shields for a long time with much dexterity; till at
length the stranger was wounded in the right arm, and having drawn blood from
Hannibal by a hurt he gave him in the left, he received at the same time a
stroke that proved the weakness of his curasse. Whereupon the stranger, who was
one of the bravest persons in the world, and had never been treated in this
manner in his combats, perceiving his flux of blood, changed all his
fierceness into fury, and flew upon his enemy with so impetuous a Violence,
that the great Hannibal stood in need of his whole force and skill. But at
length this haughty Prince being incensed to find a resistance he used not to
meet with in his encounters, discharged from that arm (so dreadful to many
Nations) such a heavy blow upon the head of the stranger, that it made him
reel, and would without doubt have born him from his horse, had not two of his
Cavaliers speeded to his succor, while the other two run to revenge him; Of
which the first that lifted up his sword to strike the Prince Hannibal, soon
received his death as a punishment of his temerity in presuming to attaque this
great man; and the other, whom Aspar engaged, would have perhaps followed the
fate of his companion by a less honorable hand, had he not suddenly cried out
for sparing his life, to go and provide with his companions for the
preservation of that of his Master. The Prince Hannibal caused Aspar to retire,
and went himself to see in what condition his enemy was, and to offer the
strangers all manner of assistance. He found that they had taken off his
Helmet, and perceived an aspect composed of fierce and comely with several
marks of greatness. The stranger was not in so bad estate as was supposed, and
seeing his Enemy approach, he endeavored to re-enforce himself to go against
him, but was restrained by his attendants, and arrested himself when he
understood the intention of the generous Hannibal. He was surprised with the
good meene of this Prince, when he saw him lift up the Visour of his Casque,
and remarked in his Visage so noble and great an air, that he was as much
astonished therewith, as he had been ill-treated by his valor. Valiant Sir,
(said the unknown person) I wonder not that you are friend to Hannibal, since
there is so much resemblance between you in the most heroic of all qualities;
but I believe that Prince loves little of the world, if he love not such
persons as you* and I think if he had more friends of the like valor, he might
promise himself success in Africa, more advantageous then those his arms have
had in Italy. Hannibal is not so happy in friends as you imagine him (answered
the Prince of Carthage) since you have refused to be of their number; but
however, if you please to go to his Camp, you shall there receive such
treatment as shall restrain you from hating a man who perhaps never offended
you? Hate (said the stranger) I honor his person, and admire his high
reputation too much to be guilty of such sentiments; but I told you before, I
could not serve him, because I was engaged on the contrary side. Nevertheless,
upon your word, I will go to the Camp of Hannibal, provided you promise me I
shall leave it at my pleasure, and that neither the knowledge of my condition,
nor that of my engagement for the Romans, shall be any cause to retain me in
the Carthaginian Army, when it shall be fit for me to go serve against it.
Hannibal accorded the stranger his desires, and having seen him mounted on his
horse with one of his Attendants behind him to hold him up, they took the way
to the Camp together. These great Persons had an extreme desire to know one the
other, and viewed each other many times, to learn that which they durst not
enquire of: but after they had marched some time without any speech at all, the
stranger at length ended the silence to render thanks to his Conqueror, and to
desire the knowledge of his Name, who had so generously obliged him. Scarce had
he began to speak, when he spyed a Body of Horse making toward them with a
large trot, which he perceived were Carthaginians. Wherefore, to prevent being
known by any of this Troop, he pulled down the visour of his helmet; but he no
sooner understood that these Carthaginians came to attend their Prince as his
guard, and that the person with whom he had encountered was the great Hannibal,
but he approached with a very submiss action, and told him obligingly that his
ignorance had made him guilty of a great mistake; and my Lord (said he) you
could not have made your self known in a more heroic manner; your great
strokes sufficiently spoke you the famous Hannibal, and if your arms and
hab^liments caused you to be taken for a Carthaginian, yet I might have better
known by your actions, that you were the illustrious Prince of Carthage. But,
my Lord (added he) to take away a part of the regret which you may possibly
have for drawing your sword against me, and to testify to you that I was not
altogether unworthy to be treated favorably, I will decla^^ to you that I am
King of a Realm sufficiently large; and as soon as I shall have taken a little
repose, I shall let you see by the story of my life, that the quality of King
possibly is not the thing which will most affect you. Upon this Declaration
Hannibal redoubled his civilities, and craved pardon of the stranger for that
he had not treated him as he should have done, had he understood his true
condition: My Lord (continued the Prince of Carthage) your self only ought to
have regreat for measuring the sword against a man that appeared no more then a
simple Carthaginian; and if Fortune has given me some advantage, she has only
played a new prank of her old game; and by a Caprichio ordinary with her
inclined to be your enemy, because she delights to overturn the powerful, and
to favor me, believing she should raise a man whom she took for an ordinary
Native of Carthage. Your Victories (replied the stranger) have no dependence on
her, and your valor does always so assuredly produce its effects, that it is
easy to judge it holds nothing from the Empire of that inconstant Goddess.
These two Princes continued on their conversation in very obliging terms, and
ended not till they arrived at the Carthaginian Camp. There Hannibal took all
possible care for the King whom he had wounded; he lodged him in one of his own
Tents; and caused him to be presently dressed by his best Chirurgions; by whom
he was informed to his great joy of the curableness of the Kings wounds:
insomuch that he would go in person to give him assurance of the contentment he
received thereby. Being there, he heard a noise in his Tent, which obliged him
to turn his eye about to discover the cause; whereupon he saw Adherbal entering,
who was a Carthaginian of quality, and in no mean esteem with him. The Prince
had not time to demand the cause which had so much moved him; for Adherbal
immediately as he entered testified his surprise and joy, and following the force
of his impetuous humor: My Lord (cried he) To horse, Laelius is ours, with a
thousand Talents, Hannibal could not contain from smiling at this strange
introduction, and by and by looking seriously upon Adherbal, Recollect your
self (said the Prince) and speak more clearly if you would be understood.
Although Adherbal was in favor enough with his Prince, yet he was sensible he
had committed a miscarriage in not delivering himself but by a transport; and
after having made a low reverence as to crave pardon for his fault, he offered
a more particular discovery. Hannibal commanded him to speak aloud, not seeing
any person in his Tent whom he might suspect. Whereupon Adherbal presented a
Numidian, who came from the parts of Vermina, to advertise that Laelius was to
pass within a hundred furlongs of Capsa, with only four thousand men; that
with those few Forces he conveyed a magnificent Present, worth above two
thousand Talents, which the Republic of Rome sent to Masinissa, and that this
Numidian, very well knew where there was a convenient place to surprise the
passage of the Romans: Hereupon the Carthaginian Prince discoursed with the
Numidian and having received his advice, caused his Attendant Aspar to be
called, and whispering something in his ear, he commanded him to go forth and
use extreme diligence. This order being given, he turned himself toward this
illustrious stranger, and protested that he could not resolve to leave him,
were it not convenient to permit him to his quiet, and necessary for himself
from time to time to take care for the affairs of his charge. After this
complement, he went forth of his Tent, and betook himself to choose out the
best Horse which Bomilcar had brought, to whom he gave the command of them, and
of several other Troops he added to form a body, being not willing to go
himself in this expedition, either by reason of his hurt, or out of some other
consideration. The Prince having given such orders as were necessary, retired
to his Tent by the counsel of the Chirurgions to take his rest. He passed the
Evening, and almost the whole night with devising means to see his Princess,
so that he could not sleep till about the break of day, and waked not till very
late. Which he no sooner did, but he remembered the promise of the wounded ^ing,
and deeming that he might take this occasion to learn his name and adventures,
he sent to know in what condition he was. The messenger which went to that
purpose returned presently with News that the King had passed the night with
very great unquietness, that he had not fallen asleep but two or three hours
since, and that the Chirurgions thought it not fit he should be visited so
soon. This answer obliged the Carthaginian Prince, to entertain himself a part
of the day with Maharbal, and some eminent Officers who were present at his
rising; and as he was telling them of the news he had received of Antiochus
King of Syria, he saw Bomilcar enter accompanied by Adherbal, and the Numidian
Courtier. Hannibal perceived a deep sadness in the countenance of Bomilcar,
and being desirous to know the occasion, What (said he obligingly) can Bomilcar
be sad when he comes from fighting? I come not from fighting, My Lord, answered
Bomilcar, Laelius is retired to a fortress, which the Romans have possessed for
about a month, and being not in a condition to go force it, I am returned, but
less troubled for his retreat, then at the news which the Courtier of Vermina
has given me. But, My Lord (added Bomilcar) I most humbly beseech you to
dispense with me for relating it to you this day* and to permit me to acquaint
you as late as I can with a misfortune, whose greatness surpasses your power to
redress it. These last words of Bomilcar amused Hannibal extremely, and as the
Prince deliberated what resolution he should take, whether to be better
informed, or to expect yet some time, there came one to tell him that the King
requested him to take the pains to come to his Tent. Hannibal was glad of this
means to break off his irresolution, and although he had inward sentiments of
sorrow, yet he promised himself a kind of consolation from this visit,
believing that the conversation of a sick person would be melancholic and
suitable to the humor that had seized him. The wounded King was aware of the
alteration of Hannibal, and interesting himself in that which afflicted this
great man, he demanded of him with much civility the cause of his sadness.
It Is not My Lord (continued he) the retreat of Laelius, I have been told, which
afflicts you, if it were, I should be perhaps against my self, and partake in
the ill success you have had, although I am extremely concerned in that affair*
as you shall know more at large by and by. No, No, My Lord (answered Hannibal)
it is not the retreat of Laelius that afflicts me, and since you deal so
generously, and none else is privy to our discourse, I shall not scruple to
tell you that Laelius is not in security but by my means; and to lay my
thoughts open to you freely, I believe it is never fit to seek to fight with
advantage in a single combat; also I conceive that slights and artifices cannot
pass in such occasions but for props of weakness, and that generosity ought to
esteem them either as a pitiful sort of assistance, or a means to steal a
victory. But I reason after another manner (proceeded he) when it is requisite
to preserve my Troops in a day of battle; and it suffices to tell you, that I
have in a manner caused the retirement of Laelius, to show you that I have
employed the sole means that was left me to preserve the most effective Troops
of my Army. For in a word (added he) I should have infallibly lost those which
I used in this service, and lost them even in gaining this small Victory, which
in appearance I ought to have expected: for my soldiers being become rich by
the booty of this great prize* would without doubt have deserted me, and being
almost all of this Country, they are so well acquainted with the by-waies,
that it would have been impossible for me to have pursued after them; and
perhaps I should also have lost those I had sent to recover the others.
Nevertheless, I confess, I should have weakened the forces of the Romans, but
at the same time I aver, that it was not expedient to hazard my Troops to
attaque some of theirs which were divided, and that it is better to preserve my
strength entire, to the end I may be able to fight the grand Army of the
Romans, and one single Victory render me Master of all the rest. This is, in
few words, the reason which induced me to act after a fashion not ordinary, and
which may make me pass either for a subtle Captain or a humorous contriver,
according to the diversity of judgments which may reason upon my conduct. Your
conduct My Lord (answered the wounded Prince) is not an ordinary conduct, and
all the world knows, that your prudence has caused you to be regarded in
battles as the Father of your soldiers; so effectual has it been to their
preservation. In reality every one has believed that your wit did not less
triumph in Italy, then your courage, since it has produced you many a Victory,
and sometimes furnished you with means wholly extraordinary to avoid dangers,
the eyes of all other mortals would have considered as inevitable. But, my
Lord, when you acted like the General of an Army, it has been in a gallant
manner: for that is truly to overcome like a man, when prudence bears a part
in the victory, as it is to overcome after the manner of brutes, when force
alone gives all the advantage. This prudence notwithstanding, has acted less
then your courage in particular engagements, wherein you have always behaved
your self with an ardour so noble, that the world has oftentimes been induced
to believe, that you designed no other end of your pains but the conservation
of others. For, in short, to omit those actions whose glory dazles the sight of
the beholders, I will only mention your exploits of yesterday, and show you
that the retreat of Laelius affords evidence that you know how to preserve an
Army, as the combat you had with a Cavalier who might have been seconded by
four others, shows that you go not with very great precaution at such time as
only the safety of your own life is concerned: and nevertheless, the condition
which I am in, manifests that you know how to overcome in all fashions. Ah!
it is too much My Lord (interposed the Prince of Carthage) how do you treat
Hannibal? Do you serve your self of some preoccupation of sadness appearing
upon his countenance, to continue a discourse which he ought not to permit? and
would you have him render himself unworthy of your obliging expressions, if he
should show himself capable of hearing them? If your actions had less splendour
(replied the King) you would have reason to interrupt my discourse, and your
modesty might with justice be offended: But My Lord in the estate wherein you
are (continued he with an obliging smile) you would have more difficulty to
silence those tongues that are employed in your praises, then you have had to
perform those fair actions which make them speak. The King proceeded no
further, because he saw Aspar was entered into the Tent, and drawing toward his
Master to speak to him. This person judging that he ought to lose no time, My
Lord (said he presently to the Prince Hannibal) I shall not render you account
of what I have done, since the success has manifested that I have fortunately
discharged my commission which you gave me; but it is fit that I present you
with news that will afford you joy, and tell you that our Re-publick has made
alliance with Syria, Macedonia, Bithynia, that levies have been made for us in
these three Kingdoms, that King Antiochus the Great, with the Prince Persius,
and the young Prince Nicomedas, have dis-engaged themselves from their Troops
to be rather with you, and to lose no opportunity of fighting. I have met
Magar, who came with all speed to give you this advertisement, but being his
horse began to be no longer able to serve him, and mine was yet fresh, he
charged me to come with diligence to assure you that those Princes would be
here within two or three hours, and that their Troops which compose between
sixty and eighty thousand men, and are commanded by the Kings, Philip and
Prusia's, will reach Carthage within five or six days. The Prince Hannibal was
extremely satisfied with this News, and having made his complement to the sick
King, took horse notwithstanding his wound, and went to meet Antiochus,
Nicomedes and Perseus, being accompanied by Maharbal* Bomilcar, and the most
considerable Officers of his Army. He met the Princes about seven or eight
furlongs from his intrenchments, and first embraced the King of Syria with
great protestations, and then also carried the Prince of Macedonia, and the
young Prince of Bithynia, Maharbal and Bomilcar took their turn to make their
complements, and the Officers of each part saluted one another very civilly,
but with address, out of the respect which they owed to the presence of so
great Princes, Hannibal, the King of Syria, Nicomedes, Perseus, Maharbal and
Bomilcar remounted their horses, and putting themselves at the head of above a
thousand Officers, took the way toward the Camp. They had scarce marched a few
moments, but Antiochus told the illustrious Hannibal, that Asia would not less
interest it self in the important war of Carthage and Rome, then Europe and
Africa; and the desire which I have had to be concerned in a quarrel of so
great extent, has brought me to the famous Hannibal, under whom I shall
venture my fortune and receive his orders. Hannibal will receive yours, My
Lord, (answered the Carthaginian Prince) and the great conquests you have made,
and the name of Great, the world has given you, teach me sufficiently that I
ought to follow the King of Syria to be conducted to victory; and if all that
you have done in Asia (continued he) should not evince you a transcendent
Martialist, yet that which you do in this conjuncture is so glorious to you,
and advantageous for me, that I am to seek for terms to express my resentment
of it. For, My Lord, you take arms, without that the necessity of your affairs
obliges you to do so; you pass the sea to seek war, and choose a side that is
weak, and seems to have been abandoned by Fortune. How therefore shall I style
these actions? Our enemies themselves, what can they say of them? Will not they
be constrained to acknowledge, that the Virtues are not always Romans, and
that the Nations, whom they call barbarous, know how to practice the most
heroic? What I do My Lord (modestly replied Antiochus) may be very differently
interpreted, and not only our enemies, but the most disinterested people from
both parties may say, that my proceeding is more politic then generous. It Is
not unknown (pursued he) that your Republique, and that of Rome are the two
greatest powers upon earth, and that the greatest part of Kings cannot subsist
but by protection of one of them, and consequently that it is necessary to
contribute to the rendering their strength equal; since by that means Carthage
will always bound the ambition of Rome, and Rome balance the arms of
Carthage. If one of these Republiques (proceeded Antiochus) were not a
powerful obstacle to the other, who would be able to withstand that which were
Victorious? Who could bear up against the force of Rome, if Carthage were
overcome, or oppose Carthage, if Rome were subdued? Should this happen, I
believe few Princes could preserve their States. Wherefore it is requisite that
they league with one of the sides as soon as it grows weak, and contribute to
that mutual resistance wherein consists all their security. You see My Lord
(added the King of Syria) what judgment may be made of my proceedings by those
which do not know Antiochus; but I am satisfied that I come to serve (...)
Prince who will judge more favorably of things, and have the generosity to
believe it is no fear that makes me act in this conjuncture, and that the breast
of Antiochus is not very capable of giving entrance to that passion: Rather
(replied the Prince Hannibal) it is your own generosity that convinces him; and
the King of Syria acts in a manner so noble, that that conduct, which diverse
may term a Maxim of state, cannot pass in his esteem for a sentiment unworthy
the greatness of his courage. Hannibal ending these words turned himself
toward Perseus, and gave him many Testimonies of his acknowledgement, and
protested to him that the obligation which Carthage had to the King his Father
was double, since he had broken the alliance wherewith he stood engaged to the
people of Rome, and enter into confederacy with the Republic of Carthage. My
Lord (answered Prince Perseus) the Romans are so puffed up by the Victories of
Scipio, that their pride seems to be insupportable. The King my Father has
thereupon conceived an aversion from them, and being unwilling to partake as an
Allie in the tyrannical design of a people which affects a universal Empire,
he has forsaken the league he had with them, and contracted one with Carthage.
Nevertheless he could not satisfy himself with this naked confederation,
unless he raised auxiliaries to his confederates, and the esteem he bears of
the great Hannibal has induced him to come into Africa, to join himself in the
war, and serve him with his person. The Prince of Carthage rendered thanks to
him of Macedonia by bowing of his body, when the Prince of Bithynia, who all
this while viewed the great Hannibal with attention, began to speak to him as
soon as he saw he might do it without interruption. My Lord, said the young
Nicomedes, I do not so well understand the design of the King of Bithynia, as
the Prince Perseus does the thoughts of the King of Macedonia: but if I might
presume to declare mine, after such discourses as persons of my age are not
capable of, I could protest to you that I have so much admired the high renown
of Hannibal, that the esteem I have for that illustrious Prince has brought me
to his side and Army to learn the Rudiments therein of a profession, of which
he is so excellent a Master. But My Lord (continued the young Nicomedes) I am
come only by inclination, and without other reasoning then what I have drawn
from an internal motion: I have believed that I ought to esteem the Prince
Hannibal, without conceiving a hatred against the Romans, which might be
suspected, and my heart one day reproach me as an effect of my fear. The young
Nicomedes pronounced these words with so pleasing ferocity, that the Prince
Hannibal was charmed therewith, and instantly felt that inclination toward the
Prince of Bithynia spring up in his breast, which he preserved and cherished
there all the rest of his life. Was it not generous enough Nicomedes (answered
the Prince of the Carthaginians) to have benevolence for me, without ratifying
it to me by so fair effects, in forsaking the pleasures o^ Cities, to expose
your youth to the travels and dangers of war? How do you treat me, My Lord!
(interrupted Nicomedes) would you have me be of a party, and do as they, which
daring not declare themselves, are contented to assist the persons whom they
love only by secret vows and wishes? No, No, My Lord, Nicomedes is none of
those word-friends, he will make his actions speak the sense of his mind; and
if he leaves Bithynia in his fifteenth year, it is for that he believes the
residence in Towns not honorable, when all the world is in the field: besides
the age I am of (continued Nicomedes) being apt to receive impressions, has
caused me to come to the great Hannibal to receive good ones from him. Scarce
had the Prince of Bithynia ended these words, but they were just at the
out-guards of the Camp. Into which being entered, Hannibal received these
generous confederates in the most magnificent of his Tents, where he made them
be served with a very noble collation; During which they entertained themselves
with variety of discourse, which at length insensibly came to be concerning the
wounded King. Antiochus, Perseus, and Nicomedes signified their desire to go
visit him, and the Prince of Carthage being informed that they might do it
without incommoding him, himself conducted them toward the generous stranger.
The first complements were very short and conformable to the nature of the
place, and the profession of the persons that made them: After which the
wounded King addressing to the King of Syria: You may judge (said he) My Lord,
of the treatment which the friends of the Prince Hannibal may hope, since his
enemies receive so good. Yes, My Lord, I am an enemy of the Prince Hannibal,
because I am engaged with his enemies; nor am I much troubled to make an
avowance thereof unto you, which may speak my ingratitude, So that at the same
time I advantage the glory of my Benefactour. Enemies of your quality (answered
Antiochus) will without question be always well treated by such persons as
Hannibal; and this Prince is so great a lover of virtue, that he testifies his
esteem of it, wherever he meets it! I know not what Hannibal has done
(interposed the Prince of Carthage) to be treated in this manner, and as little
whether you -- He has done such brave things (interrupted the Syrian King
instantly without suffering Hannibal to continue) that we should be ravished to
know all he has done: Ah! my Lord (added the wounded King) I should be more
particularly obliged to you then these Princes, if you would do us the grace to
cause the History of your life to be recounted unto us; since having been so
frequent a Victor, I should have the consolation to observe some occurrence,
semblable to my late one, in that recital. Oh, my Lord (cried Nicomedes with a
pleasing transport) make me know fully, that which I have so often admired. And
if I might be permitted, said the Prince of Macedon, to add my prayers to
those which ought to be more prevalent, I should request the same favor, My
Lords, (answered the Prince Hannibal, you demand so small a thing that I wonder
you should ask it with so much instance: Nevertheless you shall be satisfied,
and Aspar shall relate you what he knows of my life. After these words the
Prince of Carthage commanded his Attendant to be called, and in the mean while
continuing the conversation with the Princes, he told them, that in a little
time they would perceive that that Hannibal, who was so much talked of, was
perhaps but little known; and soon know the difference there is between the
Hannibal of Carthage and the Hannibal of the Princess Thomira: O believe
notwithstanding, answered Antiochus, that the first, which is he you speak of,
is sufficiently known: and since few persons know what is that renders him
different from the other, I conceive the impatience is reasonable which I have
to know it. Yet I would not (replied Hannibal) that the particularities of my
life should come to the knowledge of the people: there is a certain stupidity
reigning amongst them, which hinders them from judging truly of things, and
makes them condemn all they understand not; and therefore it is not fit to
discover that to them which they cannot know but imperfectly; and since the
loss of our liberty passes with them for a weakness, and it is not necessary
to encounter their Sentiments, how unjust soever, I conceive it not within the
rule of prudence to let the multitude know what passes in the breasts of great
men who are separated from the crowd: Let them therefore only understand, if a
man has Ambition, since that passion is not noble when it is not known, and
ought to produce effects of gallantry to be commendable. But the case of Love
is far different; this passion pleasing it self with making a secret of every
thing; and it would be to commit a profanation to divulge its secrets to
persons who are incapable to gust them in their purity. So that there is I know
not what of mysterious in it, which looses its value as soon as it becomes too
much discovered; besides that this fair passion not acting but according to the
disposition of the persons it subdues, it is difficult for vulgar souls to
believe that it can inspire others with noble sentiments, at the same time that
it inspires them with low, and oftentimes criminal conceptions. In which
regard as I am very well pleased that Hannibal passes in the apprehension of
the people for only an Inamorato of glory; so I am glad on the contrary that
amongst you, My Lords, he is known to be the slave of the most excellent
Thomira. Yes, My Lords, I am not unwilling to let you know all the
particularities of my engagement, and although it renders me unhappy, yet I so
much esteem the fair cause of that unhappiness, that I account it my glory to
have it known to such persons as you; and I shall even find consolation, if
you measure by what I suffer, the greatness of the respects I have for a
Princess who ought infinitely to be honored. The Princess of Castulon is so
reasonable, answered Perseus, and I have heard speak so advantagiously of the
beauties of her soul, that it is past my comprehension how she could refuse her
esteem to the Prince of Carthage: and I comprehend less (interrupted the young
Nicomedes) how she has been able to retain that esteem without proceeding to
something more tender. You are too obliging, answered Hannibal to the Prince of
Bithynia, and I believe it not difficult to comprehend, for what cause the
Princess Thomira could never resolve to render Hannibal happy; since the first
impression she received of me was an impression of hatred; and when I have
endeavored by my services to root out of her breast the aversion she had
against me, I have perceived in this fair Princess so profound a sadness, that
I believed her own grief would employ her enough to divert her from taking care
for that of another. But, My Lord, said the wounded King, this profound sadness
ought not to discourage you; for certainly the Princess of Castulon could not
appear sad before you, if she had only hatred for you; and the presence of an
enemy, of whom she might revenge her self by making him suffer, would not only
not render her sad, but be a means to moderate all her disturbances. Yet I
proceed further, and believe that Thomira is not sad, but for that she feels in
her breast something for you very contrary to hatred, and is not afflicted but
by the combat which is in her spirit between a kind of seemliness which acts
against you, and certain inclinations which are favorable unto you. Besides I
have heard from the mouth of this fair Princess (by an adventure which I shall
recount to you hereafter) some complaints which had something of so sweet,
something of so tender, and something so sensible and touching, that I could
not but accompany the tears I saw fall from the fair eyes of this amiable
mourner with my own. But My Lord, continued he, seeing Aspar enter, you may
please to permit me to make that rehearsal, after we have heard that which we
expect from your attendant: And for the present, no more to misdoubt the
sadness of Thomira, you may believe, that since the heart of this fair Princess
gives entry to troublesome passions, it will not refuse it to those which enter
with sweetness and pleasingness, and even without any ones taking heed unto
them. I shall do all that pleases you, answered Hannibal with an air wholly
changed, and a countenance which the Idea of Thomira afflicted had rendered
extremely sad: Yes, I shall do whatever pleases you, and cause all the
particularities of my life to be related to you, and will learn no more then
what you please to let me know, whenever you think it seasonable to inform me.
Aspar (continued he, turning to his Attendant) relate to the Princes all you
know of my life; but remember, that it is not fit your zeal should transport
you in speaking of your Master, and I forbid you all exaggerations whereinto
you are sometimes carried. The Prince of Carthage went forth at these words
making a low reverence to the four Princes. After which Aspar approached his
illustrious Auditors, and having observed their silence, himself also continued
a few moments without speaking to recollect his Idea's, and put a kind of
order into his memory according to the diversity of times and the importance of
the principal evincements he was to relate, and then began his story in these
words.

The History of Hanniball.
THe Prince whose life I am to represent unto you, has achieved such
excellent exploits, and so little ordinary to the rest of men, that my recital
would seem prodigious, and filled with the exaggerations which are forbidden
me, did not you already know that I am to speak of the famous Hannibal: The
praises which I am obliged to express of this great person, would appear with
reason suspected in the mouth of a Domestic, if all the world did not
authorize them by the remarkable interest it has taken in the victories of my
Master. The command therefore which I have received is very well pleasing to
me, My Lords, since it gives me place to make the Elogium of Hannibal (so I
call the story of his life.) But how agreeable soever the matter be which I
undertake, it nevertheless seems to me so great and difficult, that I may with
justice fear lest my expression be inferior to it, and do not cloud the luster
of those actions it would discover. But it is necessary that I obey, whatever
the event be. Yet before I enter upon my Subject, I conceive it to the purpose,
to tell you something by the way, concerning the illustrious house of Barsa,
from which my Master is descended; as also necessary to declare unto you how
justly that house possesses the Sovereign authority it has in Carthage, and
let you see he has not without powerful inducements broken the alliance which
we had made with the Republic of Rome. For in truth I am obliged to convince
the error of those Nations, who would make Hannibal pass for an Usurper of the
power he has in Carthage: and I ought also to show that this Prince has made
war upon the Romans more out of justice then ambition, to the end my Discourse
may at least set forth the equity of my Master, if it cannot sufficiently
represent both all his fair actions and illustrious qualities. To speak
therefore of the establishment of the house of Barsa in Africa, it is
convenient that by the way I speak of the foundation of Carthage, since this
puissant Republic is not more ancient then the illustrious Family of the
Barsins. You know, My Lords, that the fair Dido, daughter of Belus King of the
Tyrians, was constrained to fly from Tire, to escape the cruelty of her Brother
Pygmalcon, who had treacherously murdered her Husband Sicheus; so that
happening to arrive at this part of Africa, which was called Zeugitana, she
bought of Jarbas King of Getulia as much land as could be encompassed with the
Hide of an Ox: whereupon causing the same to be cut into small thongs, it was
very easy to enclose a considerable circuit, wherein she made a City to be
built which she called Carthage, and in the middle thereof raised that fair
Cittadell, which we rightly call Byrsa, the word signifying a Hide, The
Government of this Citadel was given to a great Lord, who had refused to
abandon the Princess Dido; upon which occasion the Africans not knowing the
surname of that illustrious Tyrian, called him the Lord of Barsa, finding this
pronuntiation more conformable to their language then that of the word Byrsa,
which being Greek was uncouth to them. But afterward this illustrious name
became greatly extended, since no small part of Africa bears it. Behold
therefore, in a few words the original of the name of Barsa, but I humbly beg
your permission to dilate a little more that which I have to speak, and to draw
from the end of the first Punick war the true causes of this second, and the
lawful authority of the Barsins. Nevertheless I shall not relate the
particulars of that first war, the people and Nations that were concerned in
it, the several fields and battles, and the time it lasted, have rendered it
sufficiently known to all the world: It suffices to say that the Carthaginians,
the Romans, Hiero King of Syracuse, and diverse other of their Confederates
waged it in Africa and in Sicily, and continued it four and twenty years: You
know also that it was composed after the defeat of Hanno who commanded our Navy
by a Peace, and an Alliance, which Amilcar and Lutatius made between the
Carthaginians and the Romans, whose Generals they were, comprising therein the
King of Sicely, and the Allies of either Re-publick. The Senate of Rome in
stead of giving their consent, sent ten Delagates; who adding hard conditions
to the Treaty of Peace, would oblige Carthage to pay a thousand Talents above
what had been agreed between Amilcar and Lutatius, and stood upon great
advantages to themselves concerning Articles of Navigation and commerce.
Amilcar could not suffer this oppression, and having still at Eryx his Army
which they could not yet overcome, put himself in a posture to impose the same
condition on the Romans by a way more glorious. But at the same time he
received News that there was great troubles at Carthage, that he was enjoined
to yield to the times, and to close up a peace rather necessary then
advantageous. Whereupon Amilcar was constrained to finish the Treaty with
Lutatius, and to undergo after the conclusion of this peace a war in his breast
more cruel and insupportable. He saw that the honor of Carthage received a
blot which seemed inextinguishable; he knew the treasure of this Re-publique
was exhausted, and perceived himself constrained to live in peace with a people
that caused these mischiefs which he was to suffer, without daring to pretend
to bring a remedy unto them after having signed the Articles. This was not
because the heart of Amilcar had consented to this peace; but that Prince knew
that in an affair of this nature, there is always some party discontented, and
that it is enough that Treaties be made according to the accustomed
formalities, without that one be obliged to know the inside of the persons that
make them. After he had ended this Negotiation, he passed with very great
disquiet a part of the Night which followed that accord, till at length Nature
would repair the strength which the agitations of Amilcar had dissipated, and
cause this Prince to taste a Dream more pleasing then the troubles which
preceded it had seemed to promise; which dream was continued without
interruption till the approach of day. The fair Queen Dido appeared in the
Chamber of Amilcar, but so as she seemed all clothed with light, and showing a
countenance satisfied and smiling, convinced the Prince that all apparitions
are not always dreadful. This agreeable Spectre, did not less evidence its
joy by its words, then by its gesture. Amilcar, said she presently to the
Carthaginian General (as we have since understood) Amilcar, chase away all that
pensiveness and gloomy melancholy that afflicts thee; Thy wife has this night
made thee Father of a Son, who will be the glory and stay of Carthage. Yes,
Amilcar, thy illustrious Son shall revenge our losses, and make the Romans
feel, that Tyrants are not always secure; and that the revolt of Sardinia will
supply a mean to break the peace of Sicily. Beside the interest of my City
(continued this bright Queen) I am to consider that of my reputation, which the
Romans must endeavor to raze out of the minds of Posterity, to augment that
of a Vagabond. These malicious flatterers of a miserable Trojan (proceeded
Dido) will assault my glory; and which is more, dare to aver that I did not
cast my self into the flames, but through an excess of love which I had for a
stupid insensible person; although all the world knows that I did that action,
which will be ever deemed glorious, only to avoid the pursuits of Hyarbas King
of Getulia, who was importunate to receive that faith, which I yet reserved for
the unhappy Sychaeus. Amilcar started and awaked at this part of the discourse,
and thinking to return an answer to this great Queen, he perceived she was
vanished; although he believed he saw still some glimpses of fading light in
his chamber. This Prince being ravished with joy, instantly caused himself to
be made ready, to go and give orders for the imbarking of his Troops, and
having already prepared all that was necessary thereunto, when he treated the
peace with Lutatius, he was quickly in a posture to set fail; which he did
within a few days, and by a favorable wind came happily to the Port of
Carthage. All our principal Citizens repaired immediately to him to testify
their partaking in his satisfaction; they congratulated the happy delivery of
the Princess his Wife, and manifested for the birth of Hannibal (for this was
the Prince of whom the Queen Dido spoke) as much joy as the present estate of
public affairs could permit. The Prince and they which saw the admirable
Infant, were astonished at the sight, and presaged such great things from him,
that even without design they made the horoscope of this young Prince by such
exclamations. The little Hannibal did not weep as other Infants of that age use
to do, but fixedly beheld all those which stood about him, which raised a
conceit in those that saw him, that even his first Infancy was fierce: After
the first transport of joy for the birth of Hannibal, and the sight of the fair
Princesses Asdrubelea, and Magarisbe* Daughters of Amilcar, the Prince was
^nformed of a strange multitude of Mutineers, of the remnant of Hanno's Army
was at Sica and the Villages thereabouts; that their number increased
prodigiously every day, and that they demanded the Ar^ear that was due to them;
that Carthage not being in a condition to pay them, it was to be feared ^est
some greater disorder might arise. He learnt moreover, that those Troops were
composed of Africans, Gauls, Spaniards, Greeks, Lygurians and Baleares; as
also that their Leaders were Spendius a Campanian, Matho a Lybian, and Autharic
a Gaul; Nevertheless he believed it no difficult matter to calm this Tempest.
Whereupon he he determined to act like a Noble Patriot, and sold all that he
had of value to discharge these malcontents, and by that means to appease the
troubles in their birth. In order whereunto, there was one Giscon deputed to go
to them, being a person well respected by those Troops which he had sometimes
commanded under Hanno: he was empowered to act according as he should see
requisite, to grant the factious all they pretended to be their due, and also
whatsoever they demanded; So that the Carthaginians hoped a happy procedure of
this affair, and conceived they should at length have respite after a war
which had not permitted them any in four and twenty years. But alas, how
appearances did abuse use and we soon found how lightly men embrace those
conceits which flatter them: The offers of the Carthaginians increased the
insolence of the seditious, who believed Carthage was fearful when she became
indulgent, and demanded the prices of those horses which they had lost in
Sicily, that of corn which was formerly promised should be sent to the Army,
and a thousand other things which were till then unthought of by them. Giscon
conceded them according to the order which he had received, and as he was upon
the point of settling these hot spirits, Spendius whom I before mentioned, the
privy Leader of this pernicious Ligue, broke off all negotiation with Giscon
and African, and began that irreconcilable war. This perfidious Spendius was
once Servant to a Roman Citizen, but had quitted his Master, and listed himself
in our Troops: Upon which account he believed if the peace with Giscon treated
took effect, it would be necessary to deliver him up, according to the
Agreement between the Carthaginians and Romans, and that so he should be
punished after the rigor or the Laws as a Fugitive slave. This Consideration
moved him to ward off his own unhappiness with ours; and mounting upon a raised
Turf to be the better seen and heard, he suddenly uttered these words to the
Troops which were thronged together to hear him. My Companions, behold the day
which promises you all the advantages which you can wish: It Is endeavored to
appease you with a pittance of money, after you have been enforced to undergo
the greatest rudeness; Accept of this money since it is in your power, and to
get more let us march to Carthage as the source of riches. It Is thither, My
Companions, we must go to get support to live in quiet the rest of our days;
It Is there where Africa will style you her Deliverers, when we shall have
overcome that City, which would be her Sovereign Mistress; In a word, that is
the place where we shall evidence that it is not safe to provoke a -- Soldiery.
There is no doubt to be made of the success of this Enterprise, I will
undertake for the Event; It is enough to tell you, that you are feared, to let
you see at the same time that you are Victorious. Take therefore this money of
Giscon, since it is due to you; seize his person, and all his train of
Carthaginians, lest they give our Tyrants notice of our design; and let us go
carry them the Tidings thereof our selves, effecting it with sixty thousand
men. The Discourse of the perfidious Spendius had but too much power upon the
minds of this rebellious multitude, insomuch that Giscon was immediately clapped
under a Guard, with seven hundred Carthaginians who had convoyed him; and the
Law of Nations was violated in the person of a Delegate, and such a Delegate,
who had not repaired toward them but to give them satisfaction. Spendius being
unwilling to lose this occasion which he had so much desired, divided his
Troops into three bodies, making the first of Lybians and Baleares, which was
commanded by Matho, the second consisted of Gauls and Spaniards, of whom
Autharic was Leader; the third, which Spendius chose to command himself, was
composed of Greeks and Ligurians. This division was but too well contrived, and
it suffices only to know the Situation of Carthage to conceive the pitiful
estate whereunto we were reduced, I believe, you know, My Lords, that our City
is built upon a Cape, and consequently is advanced something into the Sea; that
it is on one side environed with the waters thereof, and on the other side with
a Lake, which together almost give it the form of an Island: So that it adheres
to the Continent of Africa only by a tongue of Land; on one side of which Tunis
is seated which looks toward the Lake, and on the other is seen the City of
Utica upon the Seashore. About the middle of this tongue of Land slow the
streams of Mach^ra, whose discharging is not much remote from the Port of
Carthage. This River is not altogether fordeable, nor wholly Navigable, and the
only passage is at the Bridge of the City Sephira, which is further advanced
into Africa. Spendius marched toward Utica, with his forces, who were much
augmented by the way; and immediately took order for drawing of a Trench,
whilst Autharic made preparations for the winning of Sephira, and Matho betook
himself to besiege Tunis. Behold all our Revenues debarred by the siege of these
three Cities; Behold also our Enemies possessing this tongue of Land I spoke
of, which only affords commerce with Africa, and three armies ready to be
united according as any enterprise should require. But it is better to unwinde
my self from this part of the story, and silently pass over all the cruelties
which the seditious exercised during the war. It suffices to tell you, that
this irreconcilable war was more bloody then can be imagined, the Rebels gave
no Quarter; they stoned all the prisoners, and put to death all the Officers
considerable they took, with excessive torments upon the Cross: In a word, this
cruel war was remarkable for more inhumane actions, then ordinary war are
eminent for generous Achievements. The great conduct of Amilcar and Hannibal
was no advantage in this conjuncture, and these two Heroes being destitute of
Forces proportionable to those of the Revolted, were constrained to attend some
succors from Sardinia; when (in the mean time News was brought, that all the
Garrisons of the Carthaginians in that Island were cut in pieces, and the Romans
received into the most considerable holds. With this News was joined that of
the loss of Tunis, Utica and Sephira, it was also said that Hippo, which had
been always faithful to us, during the war of Agathocles, and that of the
Romans, had opened its gates to the seditious; and for a completing of our
misfortunes, two days after we beheld from the tops of our Towers an Army of
about fourscore or a hundred thousand men coming to besiege us. Then it was
that despair possessed the hearts of the Carthaginians, and this poor people
resolved to abandon the City, since they had the Sea free to save themselves,
But Amilcar, whose heart was invincible, detained them, and told them, that
affairs were not come to so deplorable an extremity as to have recourse to
remedies of that nature. He showed them that they might receive succors from
Sea; that they knew that Naura Prince of Numidia had fifteen or sixteen
thousand men beyond Sephyra, with which he designed every day to break through
the Enemies and put them into Carthage; and at last (added he) they should
always have the same opportunity of embarking, since the enemies had no
shipping. The Senate and the people were immediately instant with Amilcar to
take upon him the care of this important affair, and all with a common consent
put the Sovereign authority into his hands, choosing rather to give their City
to an illustrious Citizen, then to abandon it to the Barbarians. The Prince
Amilcar was in great thoughtfulness, framing and quashing designs in his mind,
and felt inquietudes conformable to the miseries of his Country; insomuch that
I think in this distressed conjunction any other spirit would have been broken
but his. But at length this great man, to whom nothing seemed impossible, took
a resolution to deliver Carthage; but such a resolution as was not less
extraordinary then the soul that framed it, or the miseries unto which our City
was reduced. The Prince caused a Muster to be made of all their Troops, and
found that the Soldiers and the Inhabitants could not furnish more then thirty
thousand fighting men, of which he drew off twenty thousand and embarked them,
leaving the other ten thousand to guard the City. Amilcar had observed that
there was a very strong wind up, and thereupon judged that that wind entering
upon the mouth of the River Machaera, did there increase its violence; being
straightened and enclosed; so that by reason thereof, the current of the River
being in some measure repelled, the tumultuous waves recoiling into the River,
and driving back the Channel, made the River Navigable. Wherefore the same
night the wind arose, he put his men upon the River, and went to unship his
Army beyond the Enemies Camp in a place secure from discovery, from whence he
speeded one to Narva, to enjoin him to come to Sephira, whence he was not far
distant, assuring him by his Messenger, that himself would be at the foot of
the walls of that City in the head of twenty thousand men about break of day,
Narva could not at first give credit to what the envoy related, and if any
other but Adherbal, whom he knew full well had brought him these surprising
tidings, he would not perhaps have believed him; but at length he credited the
message and exactly obeyed the Orders of Amilcar. These two Princes lost no
time, and determined to carry Sephira by surprise; in order to which they
immediately caused Blinds to be provided, under which they advanced Rams to
batter the City; and they managed their enterprise with so good success, that
the Garrison being terrified by their attempt which they conceived miraculous,
betook themselves to flight at the first appearance of a breach, and ran to
give the Allarm to the Camp before Carthage: whereupon Amilcar and Narva entered
Sephira without opposition; and after they had disposed a Garrison in it of
about four thousand men, they advanced toward the Rebels Camp. The young Narva
put himself in the Head of a thousand Numidian Horse, whom he chose out to go
and face the Enemy, and to endeavor to draw him out of his entrenchments to
some skirmishings. But as he advanced directly toward the Camp, he met
Spendius followed by three or four thousand men, whom a different design had
lead toward Sephira. Narva was extremely glad of this occasion, and turning
himself to speak to the Numidians which he conducted. My friends (said the
Prince, with an air that breathed nothing but encounter) you see we shall meet
with what we go to seek after; let us charge the Rebels, and make me know that
it is not without cause that I have chosen you forth, as the bravest courages of
my Troops. After these few words, Narva cast his eye toward the side of
Carthage, and as if that sight had more powerfully animated him, he
incontinently defied Spendius with a great cry, and ran up to him with his
Sword in his hand, but with so much fierceness, that the enemies were daunted
with it. Spendius notwithstanding endeavored to reassure both by words and
actions, and received Narva with a boldness greater then his crime could have
permitted. So there became a bloody combat, and sufficiently obstinate and
resolved. Spendius was wounded on the thigh; and the sight of his blood
augmenting his rage, he laid upon the generous Narva with such fury as would
have been insupportable to an ordinary valor: this of Narva's was of another
nature then to see it self surmounted, and the Prince so well redoubled his
efforts at the same rate the Rebel renewed his, which drew blood from the
Traitor Spendius by two wounds in his right arm, and evidenced the remarkable
difference there is between actions of generosity, and those which are animated
only by despair. At length, Spendius, whom rage began to blind, and betray,
took no further ^eed to his guard or the defect of his Arms, but incessantly
assailing, and spending his fury, gave place to the Prince Narva, to preserve
his judgment at the measure he lost his own. The generous Numidian was
slightly hurt, but he enforced Spendius to disengage himself from the Combat,
and with such valor continued on fighting, and was so vigorously seconded by
his own Troops, that the Enemies gave back, as soon as they had brought off
their perfidious General. Narva pursued them for some time, and made three
hundred of them prisoners, besides that the appearance of the dead seemed to
show that he had slain five or six hundred Rebels, and had only lost about four
and twenty of his own Cavalry. Soon after he caused those of his own, or the
Enemies which were capable of succor, to be raised up and taken care for; the
prisoners he gave order to be guarded by some of his Troops, and went to join
with Amilcar, who received him with great acknowledgements and affection. The
Numidian Prince rendered him account of that which had passed, and modestly
mentioning his own actions, contented himself with telling him that Fortune had
not favored Rebellion, and that the little he came from performing, might in
some manner serve for a succesful presage. Amilcar, notwithstanding, soon
understood how the affair was managed from the mouths of the Numidians, and
even from those of the Prisoners: upon which having embraced Narva, and styled
him the generous Deliverer of the Carthaginians; Ah, My Lord (answered the
Numidian Prince) I am but little qualified for the bearing of that glorious
Title, and you have too much goodness to receive a relation favorably, which
the Numidians have not been able to make without the transport of that zeal
which they have for their Prince, and to give belief to the discourse of a few
Prisoners, who to excuse their defeat, choose rather to represent me as
valiant, then to pass themselves for cowards. Nevertheless these considerations
do not so far remove me from the quality of a Deliverer, as (that which my self
have of being a slave. Yes, my Lord (continued he) I am a slave, but it is to
the fair Princess Asdrulia. So that, My Lord, you perceive Narva is unworthy of
your Caresses, you see that he does more against you, then he is able to do for
you, since the whole Republic partakes in the little services I render you,
and that you alone are concerned in the offense and presumption I have been
guilty of in casting my eyes upon the divine Princess Asdrulia. This crime has
notwithstanding seemed not to me unhandsome; and I should not have confessed it
in any other occasion, having only declared it in this, because your affairs
are in no condition to give me hopes of a long life. So that I have thought fit
to beg my pardon, upon a belief that I had not altogether bad grounds to desire
it, and was loath to carry a crime longer about me, which I am upon the point
of washing away with my blood. Narva, in the close of these words, was casting
himself at the feet of Amilcar; but the Prince prevented him, and having
embraced him with greater tenderness then before; Generous Prince (answered he)
I am perfectly obliged to you, both for the important services which you render
to Carthage, and the esteem wherewith you honor Asdrulia. This latter
Obligation, which is particular to my self, produces more powerful resentments
in me; and as I have no partaker in it, I am sorry it is not in my power alone
to satisfy you, and that Asdrulia does not so absolutely depend upon me, as to
dispose of her in your favor, If the first words of Amilcar were pleasing to
the Numidian Prince, the last seemed to him so surprising and fatal, that he
changed color, and exclaimed with a tone that testified his sadness and
despair: Ah! My Lord, you ought for my satisfaction to have better disguised
this refusal, and preserved the life of Narva yet a little longer, since you
have judged it not unprofitable to your affairs. I do not conceive (answered
Amilcar, that you have reason to be affected as you seem, nor that my
expressions ought to have caused that alteration which I remarked in your
countenance. It is true, My Lord (replied Narva) that I ought not to be
surprised when you refuse me a Treasure which I ought not to have obtained; but
it is also true, that the manner wherewith you have refused me is not very
ordinary; and I believe, if the Prince Amilcar has not power over the Princess
Asdrulia, it is very difficult for him to tell on whom she depends. On the
sword of Narva (interposed the prince Amilcar) it is that which has this day
began to break the fetters of Asdrulia; it is that which shall defeat those
Troops which appear to treat her like a slave: in a word, it is that sword
which shall with more glory win Asdrulia, then if he obtained her only by the
consentment of Amilcar. For I could not justly affirm, that Asdrulia depended
absolutely on me, since she is in a City besieged, and that your valor has
even acquired this day a new right over all the Carthaginians. The passionate
Numidian could not hear these words without casting himself at the feet of
Amilcar, to render him thanks; and the joy which possessed him, carried him
beyond the bounds of moderation: he believed that an Army of fourscore thousand
men was not at all formidable, he termed them a flock of feeble sheep which he
would dissipate; and his choler adding flame to his love, joy, and hope, he was
so much transported, that the blood broke forth of his wound with violence:
which Amilcar observing, he instantly caused the hurt of the brave Numidian to
be searched, and appointing him to be removed to bed, began to exercise such an
authority as infinitely charmed the Generous Narva. The Chyrurgions assured him
that the wound of the Numidian Prince was not at all dangerous, and being but
in his left arm, was no hinderance to the Princes from deliberating concerning
their affairs. They determined therefore to grant both life and liberty to the
Prisoners, judging it only then fit to employ violent remedies when gentle
were unprofitable, and that clemency and hope of pardon might melt and reduce
the spirits of the most rebellious. Whereupon they declared to the Prisoners,
that they were at liberty, that they might retire where it seemed best to them;
and that the Carthaginians did not fight but to defend themselves, not to
cruelly massacre the Troops which had been dear unto them. The Prisoners
ravished with this so agreeable and little expected sentence, testified their
resentment of it by a great shout of joy, protesting that if they returned to
their Army, it should not be but to speak to the advantage of the
Carthaginians, and to solicit their Companions, there to make peace with a
people so courteous and noble. To this effect they undertook the enterprise
with success enough, and had undoubtedly brought the whole Army to have
recourse to the Amnesty which Amilcar offered, had Spurius interposed an
obstacle thereunto by a wickedness worthy of its Author. This Traitor judging
that the clemency of Amilcar might withdraw the Rebels, cast about to engage
them in the perpetration of a great crime, to raise in their spirits a
perpetual despair of pardon, and to fight like men that expect no quarter.
Wherefore he caused a kind of Tribunal to be brought, which was provided for
that purpose, and beholding all the Officers which he had summoned about him,
he spoke to them in this manner; My Companions, I esteem you too much, to be
able to suffer to the prejudice of your Glory, a certain report which is blown
about the Army; I have, notwithstanding my wounds, enforced my self to come
and advertise you of it, and to furnish you with an expedient to teach all
Africa, that they which are engaged for its liberty, are not capable of a
sordid thought. I have been told (but I crave your pardon if I dare to speak it
as of my self) I have, I say, been told (^since it is necessary you should know
it to suppress the imposture) that you were upon the point not to quit your
glorious undertaking, or retire home to your Houses: but, that which is now
stranger then these, to deliver your selves up into the hands of your enemies.
Yes, my Companions, I have been told it more then once; and moreover, I have
been credibly assured, that a counterfeit goodness of Amilcar had induced you
to take up this resolution, and that the mercy he had shown to some of our
Soldiers, was an invitation to this design: Do not you see, my Companions
(continued the Traitor) that this pardon is an effect of the weakness, rather
then of the Generosity of our Enemies? They give the same thing to day which
they intend to take to morrow, and teach us that they dare not injure those of
our party for fear of provoking us: in a word, not being able to conquer by
open force, they pretend accommodation and peace which would be at length more
dangerous to us, then a cruel War. This artifice is too course for your
understanding, and your courage is too great to permit you to employ the pity,
rather then the strength of your Enemies: You will, I question not, be shortly
in a condition to Pardon your selves, and to punish, and rule in Carthage in
your turn. It is fit therefore that you demonstrate your selves not base enough
to hope in the clemency of another: it is fit to offend our enemies, that they
may see that we fear not such persons as we provoke. You have Giscon in prison,
one of your Tyrants; punish him and all the Carthaginians that you have with
him; revenge your selves for the miseries they have formerly made you undergo,
and preserve the right which force has given you to do justice, and to condemn
your persecutors.

This discourse of the inhumane Spendius was followed with a confused muttering
of voices, which seemed to be divided: but at last these perfidious Auditors
having given a cruel applause, ran instantly to sense on Giscon, and the seven
hundred Carthaginians above mentioned, and loading them with strong fetters,
they lead them forth of the Camp into a little valley. Ah, My Lord (said Asper
sighing) how cruel is my memory in representing to me again the inhumanity of
these revolters? yet I will not describe it to you, that I leave not an
unpleasing Idea in your minds, but content my self to tell you that they
stoned all the Carthaginians after they had first cut off their hands, and
crucified their unfortunate Leader, whereby he endured the most cruel torments
that rage could possibly suggest to Barbarians. Amilcar quickly received the
news of this cruelty, together with the particularities thereof, which I have
passed over in silence; and desiring to render the last duties to the
Carthaginians, he dispatched a Messenger toward Spendius to demand their
bodies. This Traitor, either to follow his own perverse inclination, or to yet
more inflame their spirits, answered that he would not render them: that all
the Carthaginians should be always treated in the same fashion; that there
should not be security so much as for Envoyes and Messengers; and for what
concerned the Allies of Carthage, they should be sent back after, only their
hands were cut off. This answer provoked Amilcar and Narva in such manner, that
these two Princes put themselves at the Head of their Army, to march directly
against the Enemies, and to draw them out to fight; for the Prince Narva was
now perfectly cured: and I have made (proceeded Asper) my relation without
distinction of times, to avoid being troublesome by endeavoring to be
circumspect. The Princes had not long marched, but they received intelligence
that Matho and Authoric were advancing with forty thousand men; which news
giving more joy then fear to the Carthaginians and Numidians, Amilcar and
Narva, hoped a very advantageous success. The Armies were no sooner in sight,
but the Princes omitted nothing of that which experienced Generals ought to do
in the marshalling and disposing of their Troops, and contenting themselves to
speak in few words to those whom they lead: Let us on my friends (said they)
and revenge our Comrades; you are not going to fight with valiant Enemies, you
are going to charge base Murderers: but do not flatter your selves, they are of
those base ones that give no quarter, and so ought to oblige you either to dye
or overcome, and to choose death in the heat of a battle, not to suffer it
afterward by the tortures of Barbarians. The Carthaginians and Numidians
answered with a great shout, that joy and undauntedness made them rush
forwards; and they went against the enemy with countenances that promised
nothing but Victories, and fought very valiantly. If the passionate Narva
performed brave actions, the Prince Amilcar also, though somewhat more advanced
in years, discharged his part so well, that the Enemies were wholly defeated,
Autharic slain by the hand of Narva, and Matho made prisoner by Amilcar. At the
same time Hanno, who commanded within the Town, made a fally out upon the
quarters of Spendius, where he got very great advantage, in so much that the
Carthaginians were upon the point to march directly to the Rebels Camp to force
their Trenches. But Amilcar restrained them, and determined to call a Council
of War, wherein it was resolved by the advice of the Prince, to withhold the
Carthaginians, and not to enterprise so suddenly the raising of the siege; but
to entrench themselves near the enemies Camp, and cut off all their Avenues.
There was no delay to put this design in execution, so that within a few days
the Barbarians saw themselves enclosed between the City and Amilcar's Camp; and
though on the other two sides they had only the Sea and a Lake, yet they were
destitute of Ships and Boats to do themselves any benefit by them, whereby they
were reduced in a short time to a strange extremity, for refusing with an
inconceivable obstinacy the peace which was offered them, there became so great
a famine in their Camp, that they were constrained to kill and eat all their
Horses of service; they even eat those which were slain at the assaults which
were made at several times. There cruelty rested not here, they murdered diverse
of their Companions which were wounded, instead of succouring them, and were
brought at length to cut the throats of their slaves and eat them. Amilcar
intended to let them perish by little and little; but the impatient Numidian,
who desired with all speed to see the Princess Asdrulia, was in the mind to
attempt their lives, which he did with so great valor, that being backed by
Amilcar, and assisted by a sally which Hanno made at the same time, there was a
complete Victory obtained. Spendius was taken prisoner, all his Troops cut in
pieces, except a few Soldiers that were drowned in the Sea and the Lake, by
which they endeavored to save themselves. After this defeat, the Conquerors
entered into the City, where they were received with all the joy and
acclamations wherewith important actions are wont to be solemnized. And as they
beheld Spendius and Matho who were led after the Princes, they fell upon the
Traitors, and tearing them in a thousand pieces, punished them for some part of
their crimes. On the morning after, there was a great Sacrifice celebrated to
render thanks to the Gods. After which Amilcar intended to recompense the
Numidian Prince, by giving him his Daughter the fair Princess Asdrulia. I will
not entertain you with the description of the Feasts and public rejoycings,
nor hold you with discourse of Narva's joy, or that of the Princess Asdrulia,
nor of their loves which preceded that Declaration which the Numidian Prince
made to the Prince Amilcar, as being not much to my story. I shall only tell
you, that upon the end of this War, which was termed Irreconcilable, because it
could never have ended but with the total ruin of one party, Hippo, Ulica, and
Tunis, put all their Garrison to the sword, and deputed some of their prime
Citizens to Carthage, to declare their return under its Government. Soon after
the Assembly of the Estates General was holden, wherein it was ordained (that
seeing the Prince Amilcar had always very well served the Republic, had sold
all his goods to discharge the debts of the public, that he had even bestowed
the Princess Asdrulia his Daughter to acquit Carthage, of the services it had
received from Narva; It was ordained, I say, that the Prince Amilcar should be
confirmed in the charge of Prince of the Senate which had been formerly given
him, and which he had made no use of, but to the quiet and advantage of the
City, even with the peril of his own life. After which the affair of Sardinia
was deliberated upon, it was believed, there could have been no commotion in
this Island without some foreign Abetters; and so that it must needs be that
the Romans had stirred up the Rebellion, which they had made sufficiently
apparent, when they put themselves into the best of its fortresses. And being
it was not permitted to abet the Rebellious subjects of a Republic that was in
league with them, the injustice of the Roman proceedings was laid open; but
without clear examination of the nature of the offense which Carthage received
thereby, because she was not yet in a condition to demand reason of them for
it. You see therefore, My Lords, how the Illustrious Amilcar obtained the
charge which is so worthily executed by the Prince Hannibal at this day; and
you also understand the reasons which have obliged my Master to make War upon
the Romans; and that this is enough to authorize a digression in some measure,
which possibly may have seemed too tedious. Now whereas I have neglected to
observe the di^ference of times, you will not wonder if I tell you, that the
little Hannibal was now grown to be capable of receiving some instructions, and
that his excellent genius supplying the defect of his age, he so well seconded
the care of his Masters, that he gained the admiration of all the City. The
Prince Amilcar beheld these fair beginnings with some pleasure, and not wholly
relying in the esteem of the people, who too forwardly admire any thing they
find in persons raised above them, he designed to educate the young Hannibal
after a clearly particular fashion, and to lead him to the Army as into an
Illustrious Academy, where he might learn and practice the exercises which
should be appointed him. Occasion was not slow to present it self: for the
young Prince had scarce completed his ninth year, when news was brought to
Carthage, that in Spain the Victones were revolted, and that not content to
refuse the payment of the ordinary Tribute, they had slain those that were to
exact it, and used all the Carthaginians in the same sort, who had put
themselves into a posture to maintain them. The Prince Amilcar determined to go
and ^ame these Rebels, and when all things were in readiness for this
expedition; he would not set forth from Carthage till he had first rendered the
Gods propitious. Wherefore he repaired to the Temple to Sacrifice, and as he
prayed to the Gods to protect the interests of a just Dominion, and to give
Carthage good success in the War which he undertook; At this word of War, the
little Hannibal, who had followed his Father, interrupted him, and by a young
transport which made him loose all considerations: How? to the War? (said he
with eagerness) I will go to it. Amilcar, notwithstanding his attention at his
prayers, was touched with this distraction, which appeared to him as charming,
as it was extraordinary, and thereupon calling to mind the apparition of Queen
Dido, with what she had foretold of Hannibal, and thinking on the loss of a
part of Sicily, and the usu^pation of Sardinia by the Romans, he conceived
that it would give a strong impression of hatred to his Son toward a people
with whom he had in appearance made a Peace, which he had very great cause to
break. Whereupon he took the hand of the little Hannibal, and causing him to
lay it upon the Altar (as all the world has known since) Hannibal (said he to
him, will you swear before the Immortal Gods to be an Enemy to the Romans who
have taken Scicily and Sardinia from us? I will do it (answered Hannibal, with
a countenance beyond one of his age) and I swear by the great Gods, (cried he,
turning his face toward the Altar) that I will be an enemy to the Romans to
my last breath. Amilcar, after this Oath, and some prayers which he made
besides, went forth of the Temple and retired to his Palace. He was ravished
with having seen in his Hannibal so fair tokens of future greatness, and to
enjoy the pleasure yet more, wherewith he could not be satisfied, he caused him
to be brought to him to consider him attentively. But he was strangely
surprised, when he saw that sadness had chased from the visage of Hannibal,
that young fierceness which was wont to animate him, and observed a melancholy
in it, of which he could not have been capable of in the tenderness of his
years. Amilcar caressed the little Prince, and demanded the cause of his
discontent; to which he urged him so pressingly, that the generous youth
answered him; Ah, My Lord! I am an enemy to the Romans, and do not yet make War
upon them. Amilcar was transported with joy at these words, he kissed his dear
Hannibal a thousand times, and told him to comfort him, that he was not yet in
a condition to make War; that neither his Oath nor his Honor did oblige him to
an impossibility; and that he must expect strength from time to execute his
generous designs. But, My Lord, (answered Hannibal) why do you delay to do it?
I wait (replied the Prince Amilcar seriously) till the troubles of Spain be
composed. After which I intend to go into Italy, and I promise you to carry you
thither. Soon after the Prince Amilcar performed what he had promised to the
little Prince; he lead him into Spain with him, to render him known and dear to
all the Troops which he commanded: and although the little Hannibal was yet
incapable to serve in Armies, and that some friends represented to his Father
that that was not a fitting place to breed and frame the manners of a young
Prince; nevertheless, Amilcar liked better that Hannibal should acquire an air
and deportment too free and fierce in an Army, then to be accomplished in the
delicate politeness of Carthage: Beside this consideration which Amilcar had to
render him wholly a Warrior, because he knew him completely generous, the
tenderness of paternal love was so prevalent in this regard, that would not
permit Amilcar to be separated from his dear Child, for whom he had an
affection as extraordinary as his hopes. I will not trouble you, My Lords, with
relating the imbarkement of the Prince Amilcar, or his voyage, seeing he
arrived at Spain without any remarkable adventure: Nor will I detain you with
the conversations he took delight to make with Hannibal, and the agreeable
answers made therein by this little Prince; having so great matters to
rehearse, that to avoid being extremely prolix, I am constrained to pass over
the pleasant in silence. You shall only know (continued Aspar) that the Prince
Amilcar defeated the Rebel Victones, and reduced them under the Carthaginians
obedience; and likewise that he governed the affairs of Spain in sufficient
peace during some years. It was about this time that I was given to the Prince
Hannibal, and at the same, that with all the Carthaginians, I admired the brave
qualities of my Master. The aspect of this Prince began to seem very high, his
eyes were filled with a fire that may be truly termed Martial, his stature was
comely, his genius solid, although very active; but it may be justly said, that
all these qualities gave place to the greatness of his courage, of which he
gave so glorious proofs, and his valor, although in the blossom was so much
admired, that Amilcar did not consider him, but with greater transports of joy
then I am able to express. For the Vectones having not continued in their duty,
but for want of power to quit it with strength enough, had always in their
hearts the seeds of Rebellion: and as people which are tainted with this kind
of malady; are like ordinary sick persons, who seek rest by tossing up and
down; so the Vectones stirred again, without considering that they did in
effect lose that quiet by their revolts which they imagined they should obtain.
Advertisement was given Amilcar, that within three or four principal Cities
they had began to proclaim Liberty; and being this word is apt to touch the
hearts of people, and that example is very powerful in this sort of
conjunctures, eighteen or twenty of the best Cities of Spain did the same
thing; so that in a short while after Amilcar saw an Army of forty thousand men
upon him. Wherefore the Prince took the Campaign with all the forces he could
assemble, intending not to give the enemies time to understand their own and
increase them, but resolved forthwith to present them battle. It was in this
occasion where Hannibal signalized himself by a hundred gallant actions which
he performed at the Head of the Volunteirs. But I should never come to an end,
if I should reckon up all the places where he fought. Therefore to be brief, I
must assure you that he fought every where, where his presence was necessary;
and that wheresoever he fought, he animated his party both by his voice and by
his example, and beat down all his enemies that made head against him. At
length the Prince Hannibal put the Rebels to slight, after he had slain fifteen
thousand of them. I say the Prince Hannibal, My Lords, since it is certain that
he carried this Victory by his conduct, and by his great courage. The Rebels
rallied again, and fought several times after, but the advantage continued
always entire with us. During this war it may be said, that my Master began to
discover those fair accomplishments and habitudes which now fill the mouths of
the whole world. He never thought upon himself till he had put every thing
else in order; he neither eat nor slept, but when time and the exigence of
affairs permitted him: he oftentimes lay in the Corpse du Guard, but that which
has been observed for the most generous and singular in this Prince, is, that
in this War, and in all others, as without doubt you all know, My Lords, he
has been always the first to charge, and the last to make the retreat. But,
My Lords, I come at length to give you an account of that bloody battle of
Castel-alto, where the Vectones were absolutely defeated: but, alas! where we
finished the Victory with the loss of the great Amilcar: This Prince not being
able to suffer that Hannibal should be exposed to so great dangers, rushed
forward to partake with him who was figting on all sides; and after he had
performed all that a valiant man, and of an age less declining could have done,
he was dispatched with three or four wounds which he received at the same
instant, and could utter only these words; Ah, Hannibal! I leave thee in
danger! My Master, who had never cast eye upon his enemies but to beat them,
knowing the sound of this voice, turned his head, and seeing the great Amil^ar
fall under the Horses feet, whom he loved and honored infinitely, he cast
himself upon the ground to embrace him, and perceiving that he was dead, he
uttered all the resenting words that tenderness could inspire a Son with, and
afterward betook himself to do all that rage could enforce to, when in its
greatest extent. For having caused the body of Amilcar to be carried to the
Camp, and being become more terrible, and covered all over with blood, he
remounted his Horse, and soon carried terror and death to every place, where he
discharged his dreadful blows. It is impossible, My Lords, to represent unto
you, all that he did in this fury; it is enough to let you know, that never any
enraged Lion in our Africa did so much as our provoked Prince did in this
occasion. At length our enemies were cut in pieces, and the Prince Hannibal,
who had committed nothing that a man resolved to perish could attempt, found
himself but lightly wounded in three places of his body. After this general
defeat of the Vectones, which cost us so dear, my Master caused the body of
Amilcar to be interred, with all the military pomp that could be imagined. But
the tears of the Carthaginians were more glorious to the deceased Prince, then
any ceremony whatsoever; and it is credible this death did so sensible touch our
Soldiers, that it might have been conceived by our Army, that the loss of
Carthage was involved in that of Amilcar, if that Prince had not repaired it in
leaving us the great Hannibal. For all the Commanders and Soldiers remarked in
my Master all the accomplishments of Amilcar, and had then saluted him General,
if at Carthage it had not been deemed convenient to make a kind of inter-raign
by putting the sovereign authority into the hands of the Prince Asdrubal, who
was Brother-in-law to Hannibal, by marrying the Princess Magarisbe: for my
Master was looked upon as too young to manage the affairs of our Empire You
know without doubt, My Lords, that Asdrubal was slain three years after his
advancement, and that the Prince Hannibal was declared Prince, of the Republic
of Carthage, and Generallissimo of all its Armies, notwithstanding the
canvasings of Hanno, who was head of a contrary party. My Master was no sooner
raised to this great dignity, but he framed a design not less noble and
eminent, then the condition he was in, for not contenting himself to go into
Sicily or Sardinia to recover them, he de^^rmined to carry the War into Italy
and gain a conquest worthy of his courage in marching against the proud Rome.
But being of a deep entendment, he would not enterprise this War but upon
reasonable grounds, because his late Brother-in-law Asdrubal, had also made an
alliance with the Romans, of which the principal Article was, that the River
Iberus should part both the Empires, and that the Saguntines should be Neuters.
Hannibal, to the end he might be better served by his Soldiers, and not incur
the hatred of the people, made it evident that he had cause to complain of the
Saguntines, who had joined themselves to the interests of Rome, contrary to
what had been agreed, and drew forth his Army to march against the Sag^ntines,
declaring it his purpose rather to revenge the outrage, then to possess
himself of the Territories of another: he saw notwithstanding that Rome would
declare her self for a people that had declared for her, and that so the
Romans appearing invaders of the Carthaginians, he might represent them odious
to the Nations which should be infested with this War, and might fight his
Enemies with the aid and assistance of several people, who would look upon him
as a Prince injustly attaqued. But in the first place, before he set upon the
Saguntines, he marched against the Olcades, who are situated on this side the
River Iberus. I shall not recite you the particular adventures of this War; but
only tell you, that Hannibal in four months conquered this Province, and took
the rich City Carteia, which was the Metropolis of it. From Carteia he went to
take up his winter quarters at New Carthage, where he caressed all the
Commanders and Soldiers of his Army, commending the vivacity and greatness of
their courage; and thereupon making a division to them of all the spoils, he
yet more satisfied them then by all his Elogiums. As soon as the Sun by his
approaches began to chase away the cold, which is wont to incommodate Armies:
Hannibal took the field, and caused his to march against the Vacceans. This
Prince was too valiant to meet with any great resistance; so that he overcame
the Vacceans, be sieged and took the great Cities of Hermandica and Arbacala;
and after so good success, attaqued also the Carpen aines; But it was not
without pains that my Master a^chiev'd this last enterprise; for their Army*
which consisted of a hundred thousand men, was yet extremely engrossed by the
Soldiers, which were saved of the Olcades, and by very many others which had
fled from Hermandica and Arbacala. The Prince Hannibal intended to refresh and
recruit his Army which was weakened by several battles, and the Garrisons which
he was enforced to draw out of it: whereupon he designed to divide this Victory
between his wit and his courage; For making semblance to avoid the encounter,
he passed the Tagus unawares to the Carpentaines who were asleep; and so well
managed his affairs, that about break of day the Enemies perceiving our fl^ght,
cast themselves immediately into the Tagus all in disorder, to pursue the
Troops which seemed to fear them, and not to lose this occasion of beating the
great Hannibal. But if they deceived themselves, when they judged we had taken
flight to avoid the combat, they did so much more, when they believed
themselves able to overcome the famous Prince of Carthage. For, my valiant
Master no sooner observed the Carpentains disorderly fording the River Tagus,
but he placed forty Elephants upon the bank to crush such as should endeavor
to gain it: after which he entered into the Tagus at the head of all his
Cavalry, and suddenly dyed the waters with the blood of his enemies: He beat
down and trampled on every thing that opposed him, and showed that he was not
less invincible in this kind of field then in the ordinary. Nevertheless to
have one more solid, he gained the other bank of the River; and there it was
that he performed actions wholly miraculous, for he slew the General of the
Enemies, and at length completed the entire overthrow of the Carpentains,
whilst the Tagus wafted with its waters, the first effects of his valor, and
first marks of his Victory. Upon so many glorious successes, the Prince
Hannibal saw himself absolute. Master of all that part of Spain which is on
this side of Iberus, except the strong City of Saguntum, and that which
belonged to their Jurisdiction: wherefore he resolved no longer to defer the
siege of this City, but advancing his victorious Army toward it, he caused a
Line and a ^rench to be drawn about it. He determined to storm this City in
three places, and accordingly appointed Quarters. My Master himself would
command on that side of the plain where the walls were weakest, because he knew
that all the choice of the youth of Saguntnm would be placed to fight there,
being commanded by valiant persons, who had put themselves into the City, and
as the Prince Hannibal preferres the fighting at hand blows before all other;
he hoped they would make sallies out at his place; and also that having more
easily made a breach in the walls which were not regularly fortified, nor
flanked but upon one side with a great Tower, he might soon obtain his
enterprise by entering into the City. Maharbal, Son of Himilcon, first
Lieutenant General, commanded on that side which was next the Sea: for you
know, My Lords, that Saguntum is not very remote from it, and that the
Saguntines who came from the Island of Zacynthus, being mingled with the people
descended from the Rutilians, chose this situation as the fairest and most
advantageous that could be desired, wherein he built a City. If I may be
permitted to speak a few words on this subject, I shall tell you, that Saguntum
was become extremely puissant in a short time: for if on one side it had a most
fertile plain, and of great extent; on the other side the Sea supplied it every
day with new riches; besides, that this Town after its establishment, drew all
the good Houses of the Vicinage to it, who were glad to go live with a people
which had the reputation of being well governed, and the urbanity of whose
manners was according to fame, in very great esteem. But I must reassume my
story, and tell you, that Anno second Lieutenant-Generall, and Attaines King of
the Turdetaines, commanded the third quarter, which was on the side of the
mountain which separates Spain from the Celtiberians; and that we understood by
some Prisoners we took, that Lucius, Prince of the Celtiberians, had put
himself into Saguntum with some Troops. We also afterward learned, that there
was entered into it a young Roman of great quality, and very much courage, whom
we were told was Regulus. I shall not need to tell you that Lucius commanded
the Quarter, which my Master was to attaque; that the Prince of Castulon who
was Prince of the Senate of Saguntum, was to oppose Maharbal; and that Regulus
his command was to resist Anno. If you please, all but the particularities
which concern my Master shall be omitted, since it is his life that I am
recounting to you; and I conceive that it suffices to tell you, that during the
length of the siege, Maharbal and Anno fought very valiantly, and with success
as various. Sometimes there was a breach made in the walls of Saguntum, and the
Citizens were closely assaulted; but soon after, the Saguntines having repaired
their walls, issued forth with great alacrity and bravery, and attempted even
to burn the Engines of the Carthagin^ans, after they had also beat them back to
their Trenches. But all these efforts were nothing to those which passed
between the great Hannibal and the valiant Lucius; for I believe, never was any
Quarter seen either more boldly assaulted, or more vigorously defended. My
Master conceived much choler to find this resistance; and to the end he might
mate the Saguntines even in their own City, he caused a prodigous Mactrine to
be framed, which might overpower all the defenses of Saguntum, and which was
to be impelled against the walls. While this moveable Tower was finishing, the
Prince Lucius sallied forth in the Head of five or six thousand men, and came
to defy my Master with a confidence very warlike. The herce Carthaginian
presently put himself in the Head of a number of his own, which was within a
little equal to that which Lucius had; and these two generous Princes soon
began a combat with such valor, that their Troops remained almost unmovable
to regard them with attention. Hannibal! (cried the Prince of Celtiberia) you
must either perish or make Lucius perish, to facilitate the winning of
Saguntum. I do not find much appearance of the former (answered the Prince of
Carthage fiercely) and my sword shall soon declare the rest. They were too
eager to continue longer, and lose the time they meant to employ in fighting
and victory. The Spears which they made use of in the first brunt, were
immediately broken in a thousand pieces, and their Horses, although very strong
and robust, were scarce able to hold up the first charge; that of the Prince
Lucius was a horse of Lucitania, and that of my Master of Carthage. The valor
of the Celtiberian Prince was indeed remarkable, but it was not wholly equal to
that of my Master; for after their mutual resistance had dured some time,
Hannibal hurt Lucius in the right arm, avoiding all his blows with an
admirable address. Nevertheless, the Prince of Celtiberia, who had designed to
perish or conquer, and spoke accordingly at the beginning of the encounter,
dealt his enemy so great a stroke that it pierced his thigh, and even nailed
it, as I may say, to the bow of his saddle, wherein the sword of the
Celtiberian remained fixed, the Prince not having force to draw it forth; for at
the same moment, my Master gave him such a thrust with so great adress, that
his sword meeting with the defect of his cuirace, was sheathed in the body of
the Prince of Celtiberia, and was also fastened there either by the closure of
his arms, or the force of the pass, that my Master abandoned it, being not
willing to lose time in drawing it ^orth. But on the other side, encouraging
his Horse with his voice and his spur, he embraced his enemy, and shook him so
rudely, that he caused him at length to tumble between the feet of the Horses,
where presently there were seen issuing from him two or three rivulets of
blood. Upon this ill fortune of Lucius, the Saguntines and Celtiberians
assailed the Carthaginians vigorously; and either party having put themselves
in order for the ready succor of their Prince, there immediately began a most
bloody encounter. You wonder, perhaps, My Lords, how these Troops could
continue in sight thus with fighting; but your wonder will cease, when you know
that Lucius (according as we learnt of a Saguntine prisoner) had promised that
day the Princess of Castulon, daughter to the Prince of Saguntum, to fight with
Hannibal, and that to show that it was he that combated the Prince of Carthage,
he had prohibited all his Troops to set upon those of Hannibal, and enjoined
them to be contented with defending themselves in this o^casion. My generous
Master had no sooner observed the countenance of Lucius, and that of the
Saguntines, but in a manner he judged of their design; and therefore giving
order to the Carthaginians, little different from that of Lucius, he began the
fight which I have related to you. This particularity, which was perhaps
hitherto unknown to you, is not the only one of remark in this adventure; but
that which was somewhat more extraordinary was, that the Prince Hannibal bore
away the sword of Lucius, the guard of which was enriched with Rubies, as that
of my Master, which Lucius carried with him, had the guard covered with
Diamonds. In the Camp and the City the wounds of these two generous Princes
were so resented, that in a manner there was nothing done during two months,
and Saguntum was rather enclosed then besieged: not but the Carthaginians did
continually labor against the wall with the moveable Tower I spoke of, or in
preparing battering Rams, and all kind or Engines necessary to batter a City.
The Saguntines on their part, forgot not to repair their walls, and also to
forge a sort of weapon which I had never till then heard of. For they invented
a kind of Dart, which they termed Falarick, the Spear of which was square like
that of a Javelin; but that which was most admirable, was, that they covered
the point of the Falarick with certain Materials extremely combustible; to
which they gave fire when they cast them forth, whereby the motion augmenting
it into flame, they almost burnt all the Engines on which the fire could lay
hold. But this is not all the power of a Falarick, for the Spear of it being
three feet in length, it easily pierced the arms and bodies of the Soldiers,
and did not less amuse them when it lighted only upon their bucklers: for the
fire seized on them in such sort, that the soldiers were enforced to quit
them: and they did not only in this condition remain exposed to the blows of
their enemies, but likewise caused terror in their companions. After these two
months were past, during which there was nothing but some slight on-sets made,
Hannibal began to be in a state to mount his Horse: wherefore he resolved to
press the City vigorously, and caused a rolling Tower which was new made to be
advanced against the walls, placing in the highest story thereof Catapults and
Balists, and began to fight the Saguntines in their own City, and showed them a
dreadful fortress which over-awed all their fortifications. The Saguntines were
astonished at the sight of this formidable Machine* so that not daring to
appear upon the walls, they afforded time to the Prince Hannibal to execute his
enterprise. For he sent five hundred Africans with Pix-axes and Matocks to
demolish a pane of old wall which was not built with lime, but only cemented
with a kind of mortar made of earth. At the same time advertisement was given
my Master of two Ambassadors which were coming to him from Rome. Hannibal
immediately sent some persons to the Seashore, there to attend their arrival,
and to denounce to them not to hazard themselves to pass into the Camp of the
Carthaginians; for perhaps it would be dangerous for them, since they were to
traverse a Country which was universally in combustion. This is the naked
verity of this affair, although some have presumed to say that my Master gave
them audience. Nevertheless it is true, that however the business was carried,
the Roman Ambassadors had no satisfaction from the Prince Hannibal, and were
constrained to go to Carthage to endeavor to speed better there. In the mean
time, my Master, who would lose no time, caused his Rams to be drawn against
another pane of the wall, and battered it in such manner, that it fell at
length about the same time that the five hundred Africans beat down theirs.
Then the Carthaginians seeing the City open, shouted forth with so great a cry
as might have struck dread and terror into the Saguntines. But it must be
confessed that they fought with greater valor then before: and I know not
whether despair augmented their courage, or necessity caused them to employ
their utmost powers; but however it were, I assure you they did things beyond
belief. Lucius, although yet feeble, appeared in the head of them; Regulus
hastened to his aid; and these two valiant persons beating down the ruins of
the walls and houses, performed such gallant actions, as it may be thought that
never in the like occasions was ground disputed with more generosity. But at
last the Saguntines perceiving that their efforts did but defer the taking of
their City without being able to hinder it, they took so strange a resolution,
that all Posterity will be astonished at it: For they separated themselves into
two Troops, whereof one did still make some resistance to my Master, while the
other repaired to the great Court of the Palace, to prepare a great pile of
wood wherewith to burn whatsoever was precious in Saguntine. These wretched men
carried on their resolution yet further, and not content to burn their richest
movables, they cast themselves into the fire, being driven either out of
excessive generosity, or extreme despair. This rage of the Saguntines (if I may
so call the passion which animated them) increased that of the Carthaginians,
who saw themselves deprived of the booty which they had hoped; but it increased
it in such sort, that never was there seen so great a desolation in a like
rancounter. The Prince Hannibal was constrained during three or four hours, to
behold many excesses, which he could not hinder, but at length after he had put
some order in the City, he advanced to the Palace, whose Gates were thrown
down, whereby many Carthaginians crowded in. But scarce had they made a few
paces in the first hall, but there was presented two Prisoners of a very noble
aspect, which it was said were Lucius and Regulus. Hannibal suddenly caused the
Soldiers which environed them to retire; and beholding the Prince of
Celtiberia attentively, he asked him what he could expect from an enemy whose
life he had attempted, and who by the fortune of War had now an absolute power
over his? I expect (answered the generous Prince) with sufficient indifferency,
any thing that can possibly befall me; and without pretending to a favorable
treatment, I conceive I have deserved death, in that I have not given it to the
destroyer of Saguntum. Nevertheless (added he) if I may be permitted to make
one request after this free confession, I should presume. O Hannibal, to
beseech your care of the fair Princess Thomira, and not to suffer a person
wholly adorable to be treated without respect. She is in a Chamber under the
guard of an Officer whom I heard called by the name of Magar, and whither she
was conducted by me, after I had restrained her from the death she would have
inflicted upon her self. Behold all that I request (continued he) to dye
entirely satisfied, as indeed I shall do, if I learn before hand that Hannibal
is not less generous toward the Princess of Castulon, then he has been valiant
against the Saguntines, and against a Prince who tenderly loved that poor
people, My Master, who is of a haughty humor, had much regret to suffer the
former words of Lucius, and not being able to conceive that such language ought
to be used before Hannibal, he was at the point of falling upon the Prince of
Celtiberia. But this Illustrious Carthaginian moderated his choler, to which
his temper so much disposed him by his generosity, and considering the young
Prince, unfortunate, a prisoner, and withal generous, he esteemed him the more
for it, and would not condemn in L^cius such sentiments as ought to be
generally approved. Moreover, he knew that a Prince who was destinated to a
Throne, ought never to act otherwise then nobly; and that since Lucius gave
marks of his great courage even in his bad fortune, it was fitting to preserve
him to reign one day in Celtiberia as a Prince truly worthy to govern so
Warlike a Nation. Whereupon after a little musing, he was about to speak to
Lucius and Regulu^; but observing suddenly that they were all covered with
blood, and wounded in three or four places, he was sensibly touched with it,
and so putting them under the guard of A^herbal, he commanded that a particular
care should be had of them. Scarce had my Master given this Order to Adherbal,
but Magar came to tell him that he had seven or eight fair prisoners in a
Chamber, where he had left the Captain of the Guard to the King of the
Turdetanes; but that amongst those Prisoners there was the fairest person that
ever eye beheld, and that she was said to be the daughter of the Prince of
Castulon, prefect of Saguntum, who was miserably slain. Besides (added he, with
a transport which he could not contain) I have seen this admirable Person; but
I dare assure you, My Lord, that I never saw any thing so fair, and that I do
not except even our fair Princess Saphonisba. After this advantageous relation
of Lucius and Magar, the prince Hannibal intended to go to the Chamber where
the fair princess of Castulon was, to endeavor to administer some consolation
to the misfortunes he had caused. But scarce had the Guard opened the door,
but my Master was surprised when he saw the Chamber so splendidly beset, and
understood that the King of the Turdetanes had sent his Guards to the Palace,
as soon as Saguntum was taken to secure the retreat of the fair Thomira from
the insolence of the Soldier. The prince of Carthage advanced a few steps in
the Chamber; but as soon as the prisoner-Ladies learnt who he was, the
principal of them came to cast themselves at his feet. My Master soon put
himself to the trouble of raising them up, and perceiving the tears of these
fair Captives, he resented (at least as he told us afterward) I know not what
agreeable emotion, which made him find more sweetness in the winning of
Saguntum, then he had tasted in all his Victories. It is true, this thought was
of no long continuance; for casting his eyes to the b^d, on which the princess
Thomira was, he became as it were immovable by a sudden astonishment, or by I
know not what kind of ecstasy which seized upon him. This bed was covered with
a pavillion of cloth of Gold and silk, the color of which was extremely
glittering, and approaching to that of fire: but Thomira so powerfully drew the
eyes of the standers by upon her self, that they could not be diverted to the
regarding of the richness of this Furniture. This fair princess was carelessly
laid upon the bed; and if we could conjecture that her stature was comely, her
countenance, which we saw without obstacle, appeared incomparably more lovely.
Her color was extremely clear and delicate, her hair as black as Ebenie, her
eyes large and well fashioned, very pleasing, and of the color of her Hair:
and although Thomira held them open, yet thy seemed to have their sight retired
into themselves, either by reason of a profound sadness, or that they might
behold nothing, because they could not see any thing but objects of sorrow. If
tears did not fall from these fair eyes, no more did sighs break forth of the
fair mouth of Thomira; but this afflicted beauty disdained both sighs and
tears, as Tokens too conformable to vulgar sorrow. Besides, these Graces which
I have mentioned in brief, chance contribute something to augment her
comeliness, as if it had been designed my Master should see it in its
perfection; there was so agreeable a reflection of the color of the Pavillion,
and the Pillow on which she supported her self, upon the cheeks of this fair
princess, that it seemed as if they received by an innocent lone, a vivacity
which they could not have naturally in the condition this afflicted fair was
in. In a word, this admirable beauty of Thomira was not that which moved most
resentment; but there was observed upon the divine countenance of a princess,
of sixteen or seventeen years, so languishing an air, and so sweet and charming
a sadness, that all the hearts of the beholders were melted with the spectacle,
and possessed with a compassion more strong and unquiet then is ordinarily felt
in cases of moving pity! Nevertheless we soon remarked the difference between
the deportment of my Master toward this charming object, and the attention of
the Carthaginians which followed their Prince. For the illustrious Hannibal
fixed his view so firmly upon the countenance of the Princess Thomira, that he
was not able to turn it aside; and although he was several times advertised of
some small disorders amongst the Soldiers which his presence might quiet, yet
he could never resolve to leave the room, but answering as briefly as he could,
he remitted all affairs to Maharbal. But soon after notice was brought him,
that Regulus would not suffer his wounds to be searched, and protested
confidently that the Son of the unfortunate Atilius liked better to dye, then
to receive his cure from Carthaginian Chyrurgions. Let others be appointed then
to do it (answered the Prince Hannibal) and as he who spoke to him was
exaggerating the aversion which that Roman had against all Carthaginians, my
Master commanded him silence in a way sufficiently rough, and gave us to know,
that he considered all these informations and discourses but as troublesome
distractions.

But he failed not speedily to redouble his attention in beholding the fair
Princess Thomira, as if he would repair the loss of some moments which believed
he had misployed: and this great man seemed so touched with considering this
lovly-sorrowful, that we perceived an alteration both in his countenance and
gesture. His fierce air became sweetened by little and little, and he found
himself inclinable to sigh; by which marks of his compassion, I observed that
great souls are liable to the softer and more tranquil passions. This Prince,
as an evidence of his tenderness and respect, durst not speak to the Princess
of Castulon: and although he believed any other tongue as well as his own,
incapable to sufficiently express his sentiments, yet he found himself
constrained to request one of the Saguntine Ladies to comfort the Princess
Thomira, and to assure her in his name, that she should be treated with all
possible respect. This Lady discharged her commission with joy, and being
approached to the afflicted Princess, told her all that she thought effectual
to moderate and calm her sorrows: Madam (said she, endeavoring to compose all
her inward grief, by appearing a little satisfied) our misfortunes are not in
that extremity which you believe, and the Prince which has caused them, has
the generosity to mitigate them, and make us hope much more then we durst
pretend to in the unhappy estate whereinto he had reduced us. Do not conceive,
Madam (added she) that I flatter my self in my misery; the Prince Hannibal
commanded me himself to speak to you in this manner; and for that he does not
assure you so much by his own mouth, it is because in the condition wherein he
sees you, he believes that you cannot hear it, not receive agreeably that which
he would offer unto you. Great Gods! Is Hannibal then in my Chamber? (cried the
Princess of Castulon) Yes, Madam, answered my Master, he is; but it is to offer
you all the honors and respects which are due to persons of an extraordinary
merit. O Gods! (replied Thomira) after which she turned her face toward the
contrary side, to avoid the danger of seeing the person who had made her
miserable. Hannibal understanding that his presence might further augment the
inquietude of this fair person, with great reluctance he went out of the
Chamber, having first commanded Magar to take care of the service of Thomira
with much respect, and that all the Prisoner-Ladies might receive civil
treatment. But at the same time that my Master would leave Thomira to avoid
inquieting her, the Idea of this afflicted Fair, began to inquiet him in so
strange a manner, that it was a great aggravation to it, that he could not
precisely judge whether his inquietudes were really pleasing or perplexing.
Whence comes it (said he within himself, after he had given necessary Orders
for the Troops and the City, and was retired into a Chamber prepared for him)
whence comes it (said the Prince) that I feel certain agitations which I never
resented hitherto? whence comes it that the sight of a few prisoners has
caused in me I know not what kind of emotion which pleases me, and yet is
troublesome altogether? Is it, for that I was not prepared to see things not
ordinary in the taking of Cities? Have thou not seen, O Hannibal, the fair
prisoners of Carteia, Hermandica and Herbacate, and many other brave Towns
which thou have reduced by thy arms? shall not thou see the like in Italy? and
do thou not intend also to see of them at Rome? and this Hannibal who has
contrived the greatest design that can fall within humane invention; this
Hannibal who is resolved to attaque that proud City, whose ambition is to pass
for the Queen and subduer of all Nations; this Hannibal, who will either perish
or render himself Master of the world, is it fit for him to be touched with
certain small occurrencies which have nothing of surprising or rare in them?
No, no, Hannibal, thou ought not to be touched with them; it is enough that
thou show some testimonies of compassion to the persons whom thy Victories
make unhappy; but thou ought not to express an abject tenderness which is
unworthy the heart and glory of Hannibal. This Prince believed that he had
taken a resolution sufficiently strong to pass away the night with quiet; but
after some moments of repose, the Idea of Thomira returned into his
imagination; but the Idea of Thomira perfectly fair, afflicted, and that by
Hannibal. This caused tender sentiments to succeed in my Masters breast to
those former severe ones, and representing to himself the princess of Castulon
in the condition he had seen her, he observed so many charms in her eyes and
countenance, together with a languour so affecting, that the Prince had
instantly certain transports, whose nature he did not understand. But as this
great man has a strong soul, his mind would confirm it self against these
sorts of attaques, which notwithstanding were sometimes not otherwise then
pleasing: he believed that he did not well support the glory of Hannibal, when
he found himself of sentiments which he judged not heroic, and therefore
endeavored to chase the Idea of Thomira out of his mind, and extinguish those
thoughts which seemed most conformable to his inclination. Wherepon he repassed
in his memory all the eminent adventures he ever had achieved, and gave
himself to think upon whatever glorious attempt he had made; and conceiving
these thoughts more generous then those concerning of Thomira, he filled his
imagination with nothing but battles, taking of Cities, Victories, and great
exploits. Now it is (said he) that I acknowledge my self to be truly Hannibal;
and I am no longer that weak Carthaginian, that could think upon nothing else
but a distressed Damsel. Yes, Thomira (pursued he) Hannibal thinks no more of
you, he has driven away that impertinence which began to tickle him, and his
mind is now strong enough to resist all your attaques. But what say thou, O
Hannibal (resumed he soon after) thou speak of resisting the attaques of
Thomira, and do thou not know that that young Princess is in a condition
rather to receive succor from all the world, then to hurt any whatsoever? What
is that which blinds thee, O Hannibal? is it that thou belivest there is any
glory to be gained in chasing from thy imagination the Idea of a Princess who
is absolutely fair and sweet? and of a Princess, who instead of attaquing thee,
is upon the point of being crushed with the violence of those sorrows which
thou causest her? No, no, Hannibal, there would be as great inhumanity in
endeavoring to resist such attaques, as there would be weakness not to resist
in a combat: therefore resume that compassion which thou termest weakness; and
permit that gentle motion to act to its full extent; nor constrain thy self to
prescribe it bounds, which would not be less condemnable then the excesses of
other passions. These various and contrary thoughts, which seemed to destroy
one another, possessed the Prince during part of the night; after which he
slept peaceably enough, and for some hours enjoyed a repose which the
agitations that preceded it, made him find more sweet and comfortable. On the
next morning, as soon as the Prince was in a condition to be seen, he was
visited by all the principal Officers of his Army: ^^^nibal received them very
civilly, and had power enough over himself to show them an air of his
countenance open and smiling. Nevertheless their presence raised in him a
secret shame, when he recollected that a Prince who commanded so many brave
men, had during almost the whole night been engaged in a combat of a very
strange nature, from which he knew not justly whether he was come off conqueror
or worsted. But he was careful enough to disguise the coffeehouse he
conceived for it, and spoke to Maharbal, Hanno, and three or four other
considerable Carthaginians, who were also in his Chamber, almost in the same
manner he was used to do. He informed himself of the health of Lucius, and of
that of Regulus; and he even adventured to demand the news of the Prince of
Castulon, without fearing to give intimation of the great interest he had
therein. My Lord, as for this last (answered Maharbal) it could never be known
exactly what is come of him: some say that he cast himself into the fire, to
avoid combeing under the power of the Carthaginians; but others on the
contrary, that he drew near the Pile, but could not be afterward seen whether
he betook himself. For the wounds of Lucius and Regulus (continued he) they are
not at all dangerous: your Chyrurgions have very particular care of the Prince
of Celtiberia, as those of Attanes have of the Roman Prince, who would not owe
his cure to Carthaginians. But Regulus proceeds yet higher (added he) for he
will not so much as treat for his ransom with the Carthaginians, and choose
rather to dye a prisoner, then to receive liberty from any one of a people, to
whom he declares himself, even in his present condition, that he is an
irreconcilable enemy. He has won to him one of his Guards, and sent him to the
King of the Turdetanes, to beseech you to take some course that he may be given
to him, offering him a Ransom very considerable, as I have learnt from the
Messenger, who would not discharge this commission without advertising me of
it, and therefore came to inform me of all that concerns the negotiation, and
of the favorable answer of Attanes. Scarce had Maharbal pronounced these last
words, but the King of the Turdelanes, of whom the discourse was, entered into
the Chamber of Hannibal. The Prince of the Carthaginians went five or six steps
toward him to receive him, and observed in his countenance very many tokens of
trouble and discontentmen^. After the first words of Civility were over.
Hannibal obligingly demanded of the King of the Turdetanes, the cause of that
sadness which appeared in his looks; and Attanes having signified that he would
reveal it in private, Hannibal and he removed toward a large window of the
Room; My Lord (said Attanes) I have a favor to request of you; but I have also
just cause to fear, that you will have reluctance to accord me it. I know,
perhaps (answered Hannibal) what you would demand of me. How, my Lord?
(interrupted Attanes) do you know what the favor is I come to beseech you for?
I believe I am not mistaken (answered Hannibal) when I conceive that you
pretend to a person over whom I have power by the right of Arms: but you need
not (continued he, perceiving Attanes to be more troubled) to testify any
disquiet, for a thing which you shall easily obtain. Attanes thereupon made a
low reverence to the Prince Hannibal, and giving him thanks, instead of the
request he had intended to make him, he protested that he would be devoted to
his interests to his last breath. It is most just (said he) My Lord, that I
employ my life for you, since you do preserve it to me, and render me happy by
granting me the fair Princess, whom you have so generously bestowed on me, and
without whom my life could have been no other then a continual torment. Yes, my
Lord, the princess Thomira can alone render me happy; and since you do me the
favor (...) The Princess Thomira alone render you happy (interposed the
impatient Prince of Carthage) and is it that fair princess which you demand?
How, My Lord? (answered Attanes) are you surprised with hearing the demand you
prevented me from making to you? I conceived (replied Hannibal) that you would
have demanded Regulus of me, and could not have imagined you should have the
sentiments which you express, for the Princess of Castulon, after what you have
done. For in brief, your procedure is not effectual to persuade it, and I
believe it not much more to gain the favor of Thomira. It is true, it is not
very ordinary to do as I have done (answered Attanes) But, My Lord, Love has
its extravagancies as well as his blindness; so that without other deliberation
then that which I drew from my despair, I believed that since my cares,
services and respects, would only cause the contempt and aversion of Thomira,
I was to take a course wholly contrary for the obtaining a contrary success; so
that I have now a sufficiently powerful means to vvin the heart of Thomira.
Serve your self then of those means (replied the Prince Hannibal roughly)
perceiving a hatred to rise in his breast against a man who pretended to
interest in that of Thomira) and demand nothing of me after this confession
which you have made, that you have taken arms to satisfy your passion rather
then to advantage the concernments of Carthage. After this discourse the two
Princes rejoyned themselves to Maharbal, Hanno, and the other Officers which
were with them; and there was an observable of no little rarity, that all this
great company kept silence a considerable time together. Hannibal had a
coffeehouse upon him, whose nature he did not understand: he ransackt his
whole soul over to find its cause, but was as far to seek as before: for
believing himself to be yet free from love, he could not conceive that
jealousy should beget these disquiets of mind. Attanes resented a kind of
repentance, which how piquant and disquiet soever it was, it argued a great
distraction; and I conceive that in his inquietude, he accused himself of
having spoken too much before the fierce and puissant Prince; and perhaps also
he blamed himself afterward that he had not spoke enough, nor answered to the
last words of my Master. Maharbal, Hanno, and the rest dared not to begin the
conversation, either out of respect, or for that they took that time to
ruminate upon the cause of that which they observed upon the countenances of
Hannibal, and Attanes. But, My Lords, all this company kept silence, as I told
you; and when they began to break it, the conversation was so irregular, that I
should be as troubled to describe it to you, as themselves were to make it. It
is true, that it lasted no long time; for the King of the Turdetanes not being
able to support the presence of the fierce Hannibal, after that which had
passed between them, separated himself from them, and left the room, after he
had performed the same civilities he was used to do, although with an air that
seemed extremely forced. My Master, whose humor is haughty, constrained
himself very little, and returned the King of the Turdetanes only the
civilities, which he could not avoid making him, and whereunto seemliness
obliged him. After which he came up again to Maharbal and Hanno, but feeling
the impatience of being alone so much increase, he gave so visible tokens of
it, insomuch that Maharbal and Hanno making a low reverence, went forth, and by
their example obliged all the other officers to do the same. My Master being
alone, walked in his Chamber with large steps, without well considering what he
did, and cast about in his mind a thousand different thoughts. But at length
all those Cogitations gave place to those which he had conceived against the
King of the Turdetanes. How, Attanes? (said he to himself) do thou pretend to
the heart of Thomira? How? do thou pretend to the possession of the fairest
person that ever was? Ha, Attanes! do not flatter thy self herein; thou shall
never obtain the Princess Thomirr of Hannibal; but if you be obstinate in this
pretension (continued he, following the violence of his humor) that Hannibal,
even that Hannibal of whom thou pretendest to obtain her, shall carry fire and
sword into thy States, and tear out that heart which dare insolently to offer
it self to the fair Princess of Castulon. Thus continuing several turns about
the Chamber, he caused me to be called, and doing me the honor to communicate
his thoughts to me, he would needs know those which I had upon this occurrence.
My Lord (answered I) you bring me into a strange perplexity; but since it is
your pleasure to have me speak, I shall do it sincerely. I do not see
(continued I) that you have cause to be so highly troubled as you are; for
since the Princess Thomira is of very great merit, you ought to be glad in
seeing her your Queen: and since the King of the Turdetanes, who has served
you, loves passionately the Princess of Castulon, you ought to be ravished with
joy, to reward the services of Attanes by granting him the fair Thomira. How,
Aspar? (replied my Master roughly) would you have me so weak as to abandon the
Princess of Castulon? Alas! have I not rendered her unhappy enough, without
delivering her into the hands of a man, against whom she has a manifest
aversion, which has been justly augmented by the new causes he has given her
at the siege of Saguntum! No, no, Aspar, I will never do it; I have other means
to acquit my self toward Attanes, without giving him that precious
recompense: and I conceive Thomira deserves to reign over other people then the
Turdetanes. Peradventure you reserve the fair Thomira for a greater Prince
(said I to him smilingly, with a liberty which was oftentimes permitted me) and
perhaps you have not conconceiv'd aversion against the King of the Turdieanes,
but by reason you have conceived some other matter toward the Princess of
Castulon. I think thou art become a fool, Aspar (answered my Master, being much
provoked with my discourse, but notwithstanding enforcing himself to smile
soon after for suspecting me capable of such dullness) but to oblige me more,
you ought to have told me in express terms, That I am enamoured on Thomira. It
is true (added he more seriously then he would) that I have very different
sentiments for this Princess, from those that I have for Attanes. But that some
other matter which you mean, without doubt maliciously, is no other then a
compassion, which is really very tender, and an esteem which I am obliged to
have for a Princess whom I believe the fairest person in the World. It is free
for you. My Lord (replied I with a little merriment) to give things what names
you please. Yet I have sometimes heard that such kind of sentiments ought to be
termed love. Notwithstanding, I shall call them as you please, and choose
rather not to well express their nature, then to give them a name which might
seem to please. But, My Lord (continued I more seriously) if I suspect you
capable of a passion which you call weakness, I charge you at least with a
weakness which a thousand illustrious examples have authorized as noble; and if
you believe you are incapable of it, it is, for that in truth you understand
better the conduct of an Army then the first approaches of Love, which never
enters into our breasts, but under the appearance of some other passion, and
never dares own its true name till it has rendered it self absolute Master of
the soul. To give you therefore the pleasure of believing that it is become
Master of mine (replied my Master with a half smile) I will go visit the
Princess Thomira; and moreover I will not do it, till you have first sent to
know if it may be without inseasonableness and inconvenience. I soon did what
my Master appointed me, and understood that the Saguntine Ladies, who were with
the Princess, had answered, that the visit would be not only not incommodious
but of great advantage to Thomira. Hannibal had no sooner received this
favorable answer, but he hasted to the Chamber of the Princess; where, as the
Saguntine Ladies who were her attendants, came forward to receive him, there
appeared so many tokens of sorrow upon their countenances, that my Master was
much astonished, and dared not to turn his head toward the bed of Thomira. He
had not the assurance even to require the cause of the sadness he observed; and
I believe there would have been a long silence, if one of the Ladies to whom
the rest seemed to give place, had not begun to break it, and with a low voice
told to my Master, that the Princess was dangerously sick: but, My Lord,
(continued she in the same strain) that which afflicts us most, is, that the
Princess will not admit of any remedies, and even refuses to take that which is
pressed upon her for the support of life: so that we are in danger of losing
the most fair and lovely person upon the earth: and perhaps, yes perhaps (added
she, redoubling the violence of her sighs) we shall be sufficiently unhappy to
lose her within a few hours, if we may credit the fatal report which the
Physicians have made concerning her. Hannibal being terrified with these last
words, continued as it were immovable; and his soul was so overwhelmed with his
sorrow, that the Prince seemed deprived of the use of his senses, and could
only utter these words, Ha, Madam, what say you? but afterward when his fiery
temper had rendered him more disposed to express his grief by transports, then
complaints, he found himself affected with I know not what ardency to behold
Thomira; and thereupon cast his eye upon this young, absolutely fair and
charming Princess, and surveyed those beauties and charms which were menaced
with approaching loss, and considered Thomira as the greatest, and yet most
patient and innocent sufferer that he had ever seen. In a word, my Master
beheld the fair Thomira in such a charming plight, as to be infinitely touched
with her, and to augment the violence of his passion. It is true, that this
passionate Prince not being able to sustain this sight long, turned himself
toward the Lady that had spoken to him, and looking upon her with an anxious
air, No, no, Madam (said he with an unexpressible assurance) the Princess will
not dye; but those ignorant and odious persons that threaten us with such a
loss, shall themselves perish before this happens. I will even destroy every
thing that does not contribute to the recovery of the Princess, and will do
such things as will amuse all posterity. After these words, my Master made a
few turns without speaking, and then suddenly approaching the same Lady, and
laying hold of her arm without knowing what he did. Madam (said he) be
stirring, give orders, promise all, give all, command; Yes, Madam, command, but
save the Princess. After which, without expecting the Ladies answer, he stepped
forward to see the Princess; but being no more able to bear the powerfulness of
that view then at the first, he went forth of the Chamber, and entered into a
large Hall, where he walked for some time, and turning himself toward me,
Aspar (said he) have you seen the Princess? and can you wonder at my despair,
having heard what has been told me? Will you say perhaps (continued he after a
few moments) that I have an affection toward Thomira? and will you not also
confess, that I have a passion for her which is infinitely above that love?
This discourse strangely surprised me, when I considered that at the same time
the Prince told me he neither was nor would be in love, he had such symptoms
as not only evidence, but transcend the ordinary standard of that passion;
that at the same time, I say, he should tell me he had sentiments infinitely
above those of Love. It is true, My Lord (answered I at length, perceiving he
expected my reply) that you are extremely passionate for the princess of
Castulon. You may add, Aspar (interrupted he) that I resent that which never
any other person has done; so that Love which is a common and general passion,
could never cause me to have such resentments, nor produce so extraordinary
effects. It is true, My Lord (answered I) that Love is a common passion, but it
is also true that the soul of the prince Hannibal, being no ordinary one: I do
not wonder that the molestations which a passion excites in it, be conformable
to the place wherein they are excited. I did not continue on my discourse,
because I observed my Master was making toward the Chamber door, to hear what
was said there: where, after a little harkening, without being able to
understand distinctly, he heard the princess cry out, O the great Gods, most
just and most good! is it not enough for this unfortunate Damsel, after having
lost her Father, and beheld the destruction of her Country, but I must needs be
obliged to him who has caused all these miseries, and for whom I ought to have
nothing but aversion and detestation? And you pitiless Nadalia (continued the
princess) would you have me protract an unfortunate life, and that grief should
by long torments bring me that which my disease is ready to afford me in a few
hours? The impatient Prince could not hear more, but entered into the Chamber,
and approaching toward the princesses Bed, wholly amorous and afflicted, Ah
Madam (said he) will you then dye? will you dye, most excellent Lady? Yes, my
Lord, (answered the princess) and I am not sorry that I shall do it in your
presence, to acquit my self of the obligation I have to you* for in the
condition I am in, I can do no more for you then give you the satisfaction of
seeing a Virgin dye, who has made vows against you, and bewailed your
Victories. Your complaints have been with reason (replied the Prince) and I
wish I had rather lost a thousand lives then to have caused them. Ah, my Lord,
(answered she) do not carry your generosity so far, unless it be intended as a
piece of cruelty to me. Ah Madam (replied he) do not carry your design so far,
unless you intend it should be fatal unto me. As they were upon these terms,
one of the Physicians came to present some kind of portion of Thomira, which
she refused, not without a kind of pleasingness; she refused it with a certain
tranquillity of spirit, and a stediness of soul so heroical, that she caused in
those of the assistance a mixed passion of an extraordinary admiration, and an
extreme despair. At length, while things were in this pitiful estate, Nadalia
came to my Master, and beseeched him to permit that the prince Lucius might be
brought into the princess's Chamber. My Master granted it at first, and soon
after saw the prince of Celtiberia there, who approached to the Princess, after
his civilities to my Master, who returned the like, and retired into the Hall.
Lucius beheld Thomira, and Thomira Lucius, while both these illustrious persons
expressed their affliction by their tears, ^eing not able to do it with their
Tongues. The fair eyes of Thomira issued ^orth a stream of liquid crystal, and
those of Lucius melted into some drops, accompanied with deep-fetch't sighs;
whether it were that this mutual view was a new cause or grief greater then
their power to sustain; or whether there were something more tender and
touching then the great misfortunes which had already fallen out, and were
less proper to pierce the soul then to overwhelm it. But, Nadalia, being
willing to lose no time: My Lord (said she to Lucius) the Princess is resolved
to dye. The princess resolved to dye? (interrupted he.) How Madam? (said he,
turning to Thomira) will you then be obstinate against life? Lucius, I must be
so (answered this afflicted Beauty.) Must be so, Madam? (cried Lucius) Ah,
Madam! what say you? ought you not to preserve one of the fairest persons in
the world? ought you not to preserve a life which is so precious and necessary
to all that are devoted to you? Alas, Madam! (added Nadalia) can you refuse the
prince Lucius that which he requests? And although he were not such as he is,
could you, without being affected, behold a young prince, who has left the
Court of the King his Father, to come and embrace your quarrel; who has spent
his blood, and that of his subjects for your interests? who has adventured to
grapple with the most redoubled valor in the world? and in a word, a young
Prince who has been ready to dye for you: Will you not be drawn to preserve
your life at his request? I perceive well, Nadalia (answered the Princess) that
I am culpable, and that I shall die ungrateful; but I also perceive, that I am
not culpable in any other respect, but because I am a Woman, and because I am
weak; and for that not having strength enough of soul to preserve an unhappy
life; there remains nothing but a necessity to dye, which would be a sufficient
contentment, were it not troubled with the regret I have to leave such persons
as are dear unto me. I will not tell you (continued she) in extenuation of my
crime, that if Lucius had dyed for Thomira, he should only have ceased to be
happy; whereas, if Thomira should live for Lucius, she should only preserve
her sorrow, to be perpetually tormented by it; so that if there were no
difference between the soul of Lucius and mine, if there were none between the
losing a happy life, and the preserving a miserable (which yet there is not)
although, I say, all this were equal, yet were your demands too high for me to
accord unto. For, in brief, I sufficiently find, that grief acts much more
sensibly then joy, and that a person suffers more that is overwhelmed with
misery; then when he renounces some contentments which may betide him during
the course of a happy life.

These words of the princess made it appear, that she was not in so weak a
condition as she head signified before, and that the disquiets of her soul did
not hinder her from discoursing of these things with clearness and freedom of
spirit, which yet could gain nothing upon the minds of Lucius and Nadalia. The
Celtiberian Prince beseeched her very earnestly, and added reasons to his
prayers. Nadalia also did the like: and as they saw that Thomira remained
inflexible: Ah, Madam! (said Lucius to her, with a tone declaring both his
grief and his despair) is it your pleasure to have me dye: I will so, Madam; I
will dye immediately, to avoid the time of seeing or hearing that doleful fate
you threaten us with: and I question not to find means to dispatch my life. I
will furnish you with them my self, My Lord, said the generous Nadalia, and
this Poniard (continue she, drawing one from her sleeve) shall serve you to
execute a just design, and afterward serve my self with it by following so
glorious an example; for, in truth, if Thomira dye, there is no reason for us
to survive her. My Lords, the Princess implies her pleasure concerning our
fates in her own resolution not to live; and therefore this Poniard which was
intended only to secure me from the insolence of the Soldiers, which is too
ordinary in the taking of Cities; this Poniard shall be sheathed in our
breasts, (alas! how incredible a while since?) by our fair Princess. It shall
pierce none other but mine, cried the desperate Prince of Carthage with a
terrible voice, and running the bed of Thomira; And this Hannibal, this
Barbarian, who has been able to reduce the adorable Thomira into the condition
she is in, is minded to sacrifice himself as a Victim to establish your common
repose. In saying these words, he laid his hand upon that of Nadalia, and
offering to seize upon the Poniard; Ah, my Lord, said Thomira; Ah, Lucius! Ah,
Nadalia! you have prevailed, I will live that you may, I will live that you
suffer not a death which seems more terrible to me then that which I was going
to suffer my self: I will do all that you desire I should for the preservation
of a life, wherein you take so important interest. Never was seen so speedy and
great a change as that which these words of Thomira caused; all the tumultuous
and fatal thoughts which reigned before in the minds of those present, were
dispelled by this one sentence: and hope, and joy, with the pleasingness that
accompanies them, took complete possession of the same minds, after they had
chased from thence all that is wont to withstand and be contrary to these
amiable passions. At the same moment one came to assure Thomira, that the
Prince her Father had been seen taking the way of the Seashore with a body of
Horse: and to make the face of things absolutely new, my Master pronounced
aloud, that the Princess gave liberty to Lucius, Regulus, and Nadalia; and not
only to all the people of Saguntum, but even to all those who had taken arms
for her interests. You may judge, My Lord, said Aspar to his Illustrious
Auditors, whether all these things together, and joined with sovereign
remedi^s, did not produce a speedy effect: and without holding you longer in
the describing a malady wherein you can find nothing agreeable besides the fair
Princess that suffered it, I shall content my self to tell you that the
incomparable Thomira was within a few days in a condition to leave her bed,
and soon after also her Chamber. Aspar held his peace at this part of his
Narration; either not presuming to pursue it, without understanding whether it
were their pleasure to hear the continuation of it, or perhaps to re^ume new
Idea's: but as soon as he perceived the King of Syria, the wounded King, the
Prince of Macedonia, and he of Bithynia, seemed by their silence to expect the
sequel of Hannibal's Adventures, he reassumed his discourse in this manner.

The End of the First Book.
The Grand SCIPIO.
The First Part.
BOOK II.
NEver did they which had escaped a shipwreck, resent so perfect a joy as that
was, which the recovery of Thomira raised in the breasts of all the City of
Saguntum; nor did the Sun, after a dissipation of the Clouds, that seemed to
obscure him, ever appear so bright and glorious, as Thomira did, when she was
established in her former health. All the World, both in the City, and in the
Camp, testified their chear^ul sentiments for it; and such Ladies as had
suffered no considerable losses, seemed as if they had become more fair and
charming. But all these changes were nothing c^mparable to that which was
beheld upon the countenance of Nadalia; for this fair Virgin, who a little
before appeared full of zeal and generosity, was now wholly amiable and
sprightly; it is true, that she accompanied her joy with a certain fiercenes,
which yet advanced her beauty: And this will not be accounted strange, if it be
considered that Nadalia was the daughter of Alcon, one of the principal
Senators of Saguntum, that she was fair, and but in her eighteenth year; and
above all this, she had a generous soul, as unquestionably you have observed,
by that noble proof I have shown she gave during the sickness of the Princess.
But if this lovely Virgin was wholly given up to joy, after the recovery of
Thomira, for whom she had an extreme tenderness; my Master was so abandoned to
the violence of his love, that he determined to declare it to his Princess,
both to comfort his mind, and to direct his carriage for the future. He did me
the favor, to communicate to me his design; but I soon knew, that it was not
so much to know my sentiments of it, as to have the satisfaction of speaking of
his Pr^ncess. Aspar (said he to me) do you not perceive that we had seen but
hal^ of the Princess before? Was it then possible to admire the majesty of her
port, and the vivacity of her countenance? Could we, I say, admire the
brightness of her eyes, and that air which instantly subdues the heart,
without that one can know the cause of that conquest, if it were not that she
is well known, to be the most charming thing in the world? so that it is
certain, that whosoever had had no love for Thomira in her sickness, ought now
to adore her. But to what purpose is it (proceeded the Prince) to have love and
adoration for Thomira, if Thomira know it not? It is necessary to let her know
it (said he) and that either she be sensible of what she makes me suffer, or
that I shortly dye at her feet. But alas! wherein will it advantage me to let
her know it, if Attanes have the means to win her heart? He has no such means
(recollected he instantly) and I should do you injury, my adorable Princess, if
I believed that Attanes could prevail upon your affection, after he has born
Arms against you, having sound you insensible before he had committed that
crime. Do not wonder Aspar (continued he) that I reason in this manner, having
my self also born Arms against Thomira: for although there were no difference
between the King of the Turdetans and Hannibal, yet there would always be in
this, for that I was a declared Enemy, and but acted as ordinarily Enemies do;
whereas the offense which has been received from Attanes, has a more
surprising and cruel appearance, as being received from a hand from which
wholly contrary treatment was expected. Besides, that which may possibly cause
aversion against me in the breast of Thomira, may as well cause esteem; and
that fair Princess can never think of Hannibal, when he was in the head of an
Enemy Army, without perceiving at the same time Hannibal victorious; and then,
that Hannibal is not a conquest absolutely unworthy of Thomira. Let us go then
(added he, being moved by violent and haughty humor) and make it seen that my
Rivals are as little formidable to me, as my Enemies have been hitherto in the
head of their Armies: Let us go tell the Princess that Hannibal loves her,
that Hannibal adores her, that Hannibal, who by his birth raigns over one half
of the world, and wears that by his side wherewith to subdue the other, and lay
at the feet of the Divine Thomira, all the Crowns in the earth. In ending these
words, he went toward the Princess of Castulon, with whom he found Nadalia,
three or four fair Ladies of Saguntum, Anno, Magar, and Alorca, who was a
Spaniard of quality that had served in our Army. My master immediately learnt
there, that Attanes could not obtain a sight of the Princess; and soon after
understood, that she was pleased to walk upon a fair Turrace, which was on the
top of the Palace: Hannibal led the Princess by the hand, being ravished with
joy at the opportunity: Anno lead Nadalia, and Magar Alorca, and my self
attended upon the other Ladies which were of this presence. But this walk,
which was imagined would have been very pleasing, was really sad in its
beginning; for the fair Princess of Castulon could not behold from the Turrace,
the ruins of Saguntum without sighing; which prevailed on my Master to sigh
with her, instead of declaring his passion, as he had resolved: So that he
dared not open his lips to her, seeing her persist silent; by which testifying,
that he lived not but in her: He gave fair proofs of his passion, although
without the discovery which he intended. Nevertheless, it was requisite at
length for him to speak; and so he protested, That Saguntum should never have
been besieged, if Hannibal had known the fair Thomira. And I swear to you,
Madam (continued he) by all that is most sacred, that I am so far from
attaquing any place which should have the honor to enclose your divine person,
that I should have had veneration toward it, and have lost my life in defense
of it: Wherefore I am minded to make the utmost reparation possible; and by
your commands, to render Saguntum so proud and magnificent, that it shall
shortly be the first City of Spain, not excepting our new Carthage, for all the
expense that Asdrubal has laid upon it.

Alas, my Lord (answered Thomira) why is it that you have done what is past
before your eyes? or what induces you to do as you do at present: For
unfeignedly, my Lord, never did any person act so nobly as you: And not to
speak concerning the offer which you make me, of repairing Saguntum, or the
life you have given to the Prince Lucius, or the liberty which you have granted
all the prisoners: I observe something yet more obliging and generous in your
manner of acting; for you would have me give orders for the repairing of
Saguntum, you give life to a Prince, who has attempted upon yours; and whereas
you give life to Lucius, and liberty to the prisoners, you give both the one
and the other in my name, and treat your prisoner as a Sovereign. The Princess
(interrupted the passionate Carthaginian) whom you unjustly call a prisoner,
shall rule every where that I have power. And you ought not wonder, Madam
(proceeded he) beholding the princess with eyes that spoke what his mouth was
going to pronounce) that I give life to a Prince who has attaqued mine; since
I adore a Princess which has wounded me much more dangerously, and gained a
victory over me, which never any person did before, nor shall any other
hereafter.

The Princess was infinitely perplexed with this discourse, she could not
resolve to mistreat a Prince, to whom she had so many and late obligations; nor
could she resolve to return a favorable answer to the author of all her
losses: So that having continued silent some moments; My Lord (answered she)
you only heard that which obliges me to render you thanks, and interrupted me
when I was come to tell you the cause I had to complain of you: For, my Lord,
if you are the Prince that has treated me very generously, you are also the
same Prince that caused many thousand men to Perish; you are the same Prince
that brought me into a condition of lamenting a hundred times a day, when I
think upon the Prince my Father, without knowing precisely where he is, I
sometimes imagine him in a fire, where he is devoured by the flames, and if I
can believe that he has escaped that fate, then presently I conceive, that the
prison or grief, are ready to do that which the flames have not: So that you
may please to judge, my Lord, of the commiserable estate wherein I am; since,
if on the one side, I owe you all, on the other I am obliged to consider you as
my enemy: And I would the Gods had pleased (continued she, lifting up her fair
eyes toward Heaven, from which some tears slipped) that the loss of my life
could establish the repose of yours; you should find I will soon give it with
contentment, and that at least I know to do that out of gratitude, which you
have done out of pure generosity. There is no need of that, Madam, replied the
passionate Prince, being sensibly touched with the tears of his Princess; and it
suffices me to hear some favorable words from your mouth to -- He could not
proceed further, by reason of the coming of Lucius Maharbal, and Adherbal, to
do reverence to the Princess and to him, having entered without desiring
permission, because the Terrase was a place where people walked ordinarily, and
there was a considerable multitude there at that time. Whereupon the Princess
was very glad, and to the end Hannibal might no more have occasion to be alone
with her, she made semblance that she had walked enough, and having called
Nadalia and the other Ladies, all the company entered into a large and
magnificent Pavilion at the end of the Terrase, which was provided with rich
cushions and furniture within a few days before. Thomira and Hannibal were too
sufficiently taken up with their own thoughts, to be able to begin the
conversation immediately, so that the Prince of Celtiberia breaking the silence
which had an aspect of too much sadness, Madam (said he to the princess) I
perceive well that you have been touched with the view of so lamentable an
object; but the soul of the Princess Thomira is so firm, that I believe she can
with no great pain compose and calm this kind of affliction. In sincerity,
Lucius (answered Thomira) I would not upon any terms have such a soul as you
speak of, and I had rather be guilty of weakness then own such a strength as
renders a heart insensible.

The Prince of Celtiberia would not have you insensible (said Maharbal) but he
would neither have you permit your self to be so sensibly affected with the
sight of some ruins, which in truth ought to be no cause of admiration, after
you have seen the things which caused them: and for my self, Madam, added he
in favor of the Prince of Carthage, I could wish to see you above all
passions, except ambition, which seems only worthy to reign in your soul. It
has at least appeared the strongest heretofore (answered the Princess) but a
Victory of the prince Hannibal, added she, sighing, has caused me to change
those thoughts, and resent a passion which I find more violent. It is easy to
judge, said the prince of the Carthaginians, that there was a time when
Ambition was not only the strongest, but even the only passion which reigned
in the breast of Hannibal: But, Madam, added he with a lower voice, and
beholding his princess, a victory of the princess Thomira has made me quite
discharge such thoughts, and resent a passion which I find more violent. It is
easy to understand, Madam, said Nadalia, interrupting my Master in favor of
the princess, and yet making a handsome semblance not to take notice of his
speaking low, it is easy to understand, said she, that grief is the violent
passion which you have resented; but I beseech you, Madam, chase it from your
breast; for, in truth, pursued she with an air, expressing her contentment to
divert the Princess, I look upon grief as a thing so deformed and frightful,
and your soul seems to me so fair and noble, that I cannot longer approve their
being together, or that a passion which makes so many miserable should have so
excellent a habitation: besides, without vanity, added she smiling, I cannot
believe, but at least I am somewhat more amiable then sadness, and upon that
reason cannot endure that that possess the place, a little part whereof would
render me the most happy person in the world. You have no need then to doubt
your felicity, my dear Nadalia, answered the Princess, and it would be
injustice to refuse you a heart you have so good a title to, and which cannot
be given you but with an extreme satisfaction. You do me too much honor,
replied Nadalia, I render you a thousand thanks, and protest to you; that if I
have demanded so valuable an advantage in an extraordinary manner, it is
because I believed, that had I demanded it seriously, I might have been judged
too ambitious: besides, that to speak the truth, I have resolved to turn all
things to this air, the better to divert you; and I beg the permission of the
Prince Hannibal to use this liberty. Ah, amiable Nadalia, answered Hannibal,
can you be guilty of such injustice! and do you not know that the Princess
alone has authority to permit, forbid and command? Well, beautiful Nadalia,
said Anno, who had not spoken till then, and had no attention or regard but for
this lovely Saguntine. Well, said he, in favor of the Prince Hannibal, or
rather in his own, to cause Nadalia to speak; can you give an account what
passion it is which has rendered it self more powerful then ambition in the
soul of the Prince of Carthage? In verity, Anno, answered Nadalia with her
wonted pleasantness, you are a very knowing person that conceive it possible
for me to know the secret of another. Declare your self (added she subtly)
if you would have me know yours. Ah, fair Nadalia (cried he, without well
regarding in what presence he was) how happy should I be if you knew it! I know
not, said Hannibal to Anno, whether Nadalia would find it difficult to know
what you have in your heart; but for my self, I know well that I take so
little care to hide what I have in mine, that she may very easily divine it.

You have there a great stock of generosity, My Lord, which has been so
advantageous to us, answered Nadalia, that we can be as little ignorant of it
as forget it. Ah, fair Nadalia, replied Hannibal obligingly, observing the
pleasure the Princess took in hearing the raillery of her amiable companion,
your earnest offends me, and you give me cause to think that I am not of the
number of your friends, since you speak to me with constrain, and that you
quit the pleasantness you took a resolution never to renounce. Without deceit,
My Lord, I dared not to tell you things as I imagine them: for I fancy them in
such an old guise that I divert my self with the most serious and troublesome,
when they are passed. So that when I resolve in my mind the transports which
you had about fifteen or sixteen years ago; for if you please to remember, My
Lord, pursued she, you were in much choler against the sickness of the
Princess, not sparing the Physicians who were declared enemies of it, When, I
say, consider, all your transports, I cannot but believe, that you took the
Fever for an Army, or a City which you resolved to overthrow by force, or --
Ah, cruel Lady! (interposed my Master) why do you speak of a thing which we
ought to forget? I know, my Lord, replied Nadalia, the reason you would have it
forgotten, it is because you promised me then to make me rule: judge then
proceeded she smiling, if it does not concern me to remember it; and if,
although past misfortunes were not pleasures to me, as I have already told you
they were, I ought to forget a thing which touches me so importantly? I should
not have forgot that which I had promised you, said my Master to her, and
within a little time you shall see if I esteem Nadalia, provided in the mean
time you content your self to rule in my heart. Sincerely, My Lord, replied
she, you do me to great an honor, but you may please to permit me to refuse
it; for I like better to reign peaceably in a little corner of earth, then with
tumult in your heart. In brief (continued she with the same smiling air) to
tell you things as I apprehend them, I conceive your heart is a thing to great
and filled with Armies, Provinces, conquered, and to conquer, that I cannot but
tremble to consider the poor Nadalia in the midst of that tumult. Moreover if
it be allowable to reason concerning hearts; from what I have heard spoken of
the Sea, I should never be safe in yours; for I have heard our Mariners say,
that the greatest Seas are the most tempestuous. Amiable Nadalia (answered my
Master, smiling after his manner) all these Armies, and all these Provinces
which frighten you are no longer in my heart; but you will find so fair
treatment there, that you will continue in it with pleasure, and confess that
that which I preserve in it, is a thousand times more valuable then all that I
have chased out of it; yea, then the entire conquest of the world. Hannibal
pursued this discourse, carrying a hidden sense along with it, advantageous to
the Princess. And Thomira, Nadalia, Lucius, Maharbal, and Hanno, having
continued the conversation for some time, all this noble company retired. My
Master was no sooner in his Chamber, but he sent to call one of Th^mira's
Domestics, to cause him to make a more exact discovery what he had began to
tell him concerning the Prince of Celtiberia, and the King of the Turdetanes.
This Saguntine related to the Prince Hannibal, that the Queen of Celtiberia,
Mother of Lucius, was sister to Edescon, Prince of Castulon, and the Saguntine
Senate, who was otherwise called the Prefect, and that his charge
notwithstanding was no other then that of the Roman Prefects. He told him also,
that the princess Imilca, wife of Edescon, being dead ten years since, Thomira,
who was always called the princess of Castulon, as her Father bore always the
title of Prince of the Saguntines, had been brought up with the Queen of
Celtiberia her Aunt, whereby there was contracted so firm a friendship between
Lucius and her, that they had used no other appellations between themselves but
those of Brother and Sister. That afterward Lucius being become passionately
enamored of the princess of the Ilergetes, the worth of this Prince and the
diligences of Thomira, had so effectually prevailed, that Lucius within a a
little time received as many tokens of esteem and good will from his Princess
as he could possibly wish: But, my Lord (added he) you began to threaten
S^guntum at such time as preparation were making for the marriage of the prince
of Celtiberia, and the princese of the Ilergetes; and you advanced against this
poor City when these too illustrious Persons were just ready to be ranked under
the Laws of Hymen. Upon which the Prince Lucius, not willing to taste these
delights he had so much desired, while his Uncle and the illustrious Thomira
were besieged by a formidable Conqueror, came and put himself into Saguntum
with four thousand Celtiberians; since which there has nothing passed of which
you have not sufficient knowledge: you, I say, My Lord, whose valor has done
all against us during the siege of this City, as after the taking of it your
Generosity has done all for us. Concerning the King of the Turdetanes,
proceeded the Saguntine, there are very many things to be related; but I
believe you will know enough of him, when I shall only have told you, that for
these two years past, this Prince has been desperately amorous of the princess
of Castulon; but Thomira never had any inclination to affect him; so that
Attanes joined himself to your Army, induced perhaps thereunto by his despair.
It is true, that as soon as you were entered the City, that Prince sent his
Guards for the defense of Thomira, and had it not been for that care, I can
assure this generous Princes had not survived the storm. For Lucius had great
difficulty to draw her away from the Pile, into which she would have cast her
self; and besides however calm and moderate she seems, it is certain she would
have given her self another manner of death, if the Captain of Attanes Guards
had not assured her that her Father was living. Moreover, without this arrival
of the Turaetanes, the Prince of Celtiberia who alone had power to persuade her
to live, would without doubt have himself perished in the defense of this fair
Princess. My Master was extremely satisfied with hearing that Lucius was not
his Rival, and that Attanes was one, but hated; and afterward considering of
the means to gain Thomira's heart which Attanes had told him of about fifteen
or twenty days before, he demanded of the Saguntine, if it were true that the
King of the Turdetanes could not come to the sight of the Princess. There is
nothing more certain, My Lord, answered the Saguntine, and that which makes me
believe that Attanes is yet more perplexed in his mind then before, is this,
that at the same time she would not admit him into her presence, she received
Regulus very obligingly, and showed him all the honors and civilities he could
expect. How? (interposed Hannibal a little troubled) is Regulus so well treated
by Thomira? Regulus, who is no relation to Thomira? He is so without question,
replied he, although not so well as Lucius, who is the relation, perhaps, you
understand; and it must be acknowledged, that if Regulus be esteemed, he
deserves it. For Regulus has a very comely person, a good genius, and a heart
extremely generous, and does all things in so noble a manner; that excepting
you, My Lord, and the prince Lucius, I cannot say that I ever knew a Prince so
well accomplished. The Princess has also caused very great care to be taken of
him, as soon as she was in a condition to do it: she has visited him two or
three times, and obligingly reproved him, for that he had adventured to come
abroad to give her thanks for the goodness she had toward him. But, My Lord
(continued the Saguntine) it is sincerely true, that they have spoken very
advantageously of you; and that the princess blamed Regulus for designing to
depart without coming to attend upon you: I confess, Madam, answered Regulus,
Hannibal is a brave person, generous, and in a word, an Illustrious Prince; but
when I consider that Hannibal is a Carthaginian, I cannot resolve to show him
civility: and I shall never do any, to what person soever of a people whose
only name gives me horror. Let him do what he pleases, provided he be gone
(interupted Hannibal roughly) and as he pronounced these words, Attanes, who
came to bid him adieu, entered his Chamber, and made him a Complement so loose
and expressive of the trouble which the hatred of Thomira had raised in his
mind, that Hannibal was more ravished with it then he could have been with the
most eloquent discourse.

My Master showed many Civilities to the King of the Turdetanes; and when he
repaid his visit, he assured him that he would make it his care to act for the
good and advantage of his State. From Attanes, Hannibal went to wait upon the
Princess Thomira, and by good fortune found her without other company then that
of two of her Virgin-attendants.

My Master was ravished with this occasion, which afforded him place and
convenience to speak to the Princess; but immediately as he was going to take
the benefit of it, he was diverted by a certain trouble, though no other then
pleasing, which hindered him from speaking: for he was seized with such a joy,
when he saw himself in a condition that he might abandon himself to pleasure,
and behold without obstacle his fair Princess, that is eyes, his countenance
and behavior spoke sufficiently what his mouth could not. Thomira declared her
self in no other then in the same silent fashion, and modesty producing the
same effect in her breast that transports did in that of Hannibal, she da^ed
not to look up on this passionate Prince. This disturbance caused her to blush:
and that sanguin and her fear rendering her more fair and lovely* spoke so
sensibly to my Master, that being carried by the violence of his passion, he
went to lay himself at her feet, without considering that there were two
Virgins in the Chamber; if the Princess, who was surprised and displeased with
it, had not hindered him from doing it.

About this time came one to make excuses to the Princess on the behalf of
Nadalia. I will not receive them (answered Thomira) but on condition that she
come instantly and make them her self; and you may tell her (added she, turning
to him that brought the message) that I complain extremely of her. Madam
(answered the Saguntine) Nadalia will be constrained to see the Troops of
Attanes march away: for Alcon, who is just now arrived, has something of so
great importance to communicate to the King of the Turdetanes, that it is
necessary for Nadalia to attend till Attanes be departed to see her Father*
But, Madam (proceeded he) there being great concourse to see this departure,
Nadalia being not permitted to speak with you, has had the contentment to
employ that time in speaking of you, with the Prince of Celtiberia and Regulus,
who as you know, is to go along with Attanes: and being they are not to go till
an hour hence, Nadalia cannot have the honor to see you till after that time.
The Princess of Castulon was desirous to have drawn the discourse out longer
with this man, both to have the pleasure of hearing him speak of Nadalia, and
to hinder the Prince of Carthage from discovering to her the sentiments, she
thought she too well knew already. But then judging it not to be seemly, she
began at length to speak to the Prince Hannibal, to the end he might not have
time to entertain her with a passion that so much displeased her, that she
could not reasonably return a pertinent answer unto it. My Lord (said this fair
Princess unto him) you will permit me to make vows for a Roman, and to wish
that Regulus, who is not yet perfectly cured, may not suffer harm by the voyage
which he undertakes. For truly, My Lord (continued she to hinder him from
speaking) although I had not a tender soul, yet I ought in reason to interest
my self in the indisposition of Regulus, since he suffers it not but for having
defended Saguntum; besides that, my own misfortunes are sufficient instructers
to me, to have compassion of those of another.

It is not necessary, adorable Princess (answered Hannibal) to justify your
compassion before a Prince, who desires with all his soul to be able to excite
it in yours. You have for Regulus fair Thomira; have some, I beseech you
toward a Prince that adores you: Regulus has fought for you, Regulus has
received his wounds for the interest of Saguntum; in a word, Regulus has
served you. But, divine Princess, if it be lawful to judge of actions according
to the intention of him that has performed them, we may say, that you are not
obliged to Regulus, since he took arms rather against the Carthaginians, then
to serve the princess of Castulon, and designed more to satisfy his passion,
then to assist Saguntum; seeing we know the other Romans, who had not the same
interest, abandoned it. The case of Hannibal is far different; Hannibal acts
not but for Thomira. If Hannibal suffers, Thomira is the only cause that makes
him suffer; and in a word, Hannibal considers more the Princess Thomira then
all the world together besides.

I know well, Madam, you will say I have ruined Saguntum, but I can make out
that even this serves to prove the greatness of the respect which I have for
you. I have besieged Saguntum, because it had leagued it self to my enemies
party, contrary to the Treaty which had been made, whereby the Saguntines were
obliged to bear themselves neuters; in which, Madam, the resentment I have
shown, has been just and honorable: and you ought not to have any against me,
seeing it was not possible I should disoblige you at such time as I had not the
honor to know you. But ever since I received that happiness, I have acted
after a manner wholly contrary: I have pardoned all the Saguntines, I have
changed my hatred toward that people into amity, and so have not acted against
you, but only during the time I was not capable of offending you. Therefore be
pleased, divine Princess, to have compassion on me, and do something for a
Prince who would do all for you, and who demands nothing (added he with a
transport worthy of Hannibal) that you should render him happy till he has
rendered you the Sovereign of the world.

After these words, my Master awaited the answer of Thomira, who could not well
resolve to speak; till at length finding her self obliged thereunto: My Lord
(answered she) I am constrained to acknowledge, that it is very difficult to
consider the great qualities you are master of, and to receive the affects of
your generosity, without much resentment, and even (added she blushing) without
conceiving an esteem of them, and being glad you were pleased to manifest them
toward me. But, My Lord, I conjure you with all my soul to contain your self
within that esteem, and not to pass further, but renounce that weakness which
may in some measure soil the glory of Hannibal, and perhaps will only serve
to render you unhappy, if it be true that your happiness depends upon Thomira.
For if the Prince Edescon be yet amongst the living, you ought to expect
nothing from me: he it is on whom I depend, and to him only it is requisite
that you address. But if his death (proceeded she sighing) has rendered me
Mistress of my own inclinations, I cannot favorably yield my self to a Prince
who has caused me such a loss. Ah! Madam, (interrupted he, being desperate by
these last words) If it were so, I should be an innocent cause of it, and you
could not be at all equitable, in punishing me for a contingence which I would
have bought off at the price of my life. Scarce had my Master pronounced these
words, but the Prince of Celtiberla and Alorca, entered into the Chamber of
Thomira, and soon after also Hanno, leading Nadalia in his hand. After Lucius
had discharged and received the civilities usual in these occasions. How do you
Nadalia, (said the Princess to this young beauty) presume to come into the
presence of a person whom you have incensed? I acknowledge, Madam, (answered
she) you have reason to be incensed against me, if you have any to be so
against such persons that suffer, and that for your sake.

But you may discharge your choler if you please (pursued she with her usual
pleasantries) against me, and add one unhappiness to another, as if the poor
Nadalta had not suffered enough during the time that she has been deprived of
the honor of seeing you. If you had suffered as you say (replied the Princess)
you might soon have given your self a remedy. Sincerely, Madam, I have suffered
very much (said Nadalia) but to tell you the naked truth, I have not suffered
so much as I believed I should have done; for I have had some divertisement in
beholding Attanes's Troops march away. In truth (replied the Princess smiling)
you have had a strange kind of pleasure. How, Madam, (said this lovely Virgin)
this pleasure is greater then you imagine; not for that I am of the humor of
those Ladies who crowd to see the arrival of Soldiers; for I should find no
pleasure therein, unless they came as the prince Lucius did into Saguntum; but
I should have the same forwardness to see them march away; and methinks there
is nothing more agreeable then to behold the departure of an Army.
Nevertheless, it is true, that I have quitted this pleasure to come to a
greater. You are then far from having one unhappiness upon another (answered
the Princess) since you do not forsake one pleasure but to come to a new. You
may judge of the greatness of it (replied she) when you are assured that it
gave me absolute contentment, even at such time as I was absent from you: and
although it were shared between the Prince Lucius and me, yet it is true (added
she soothingly) that it was not comparably great to that which I receive at
this present. I do not doubt (answered the Princess obligingly) but you receive
satisfaction at the present, since you have the goodness to receive it when you
give me greater. Alas, Madam (cried Nadalia) I am able to give nothing to a
fair and great Princess as you are; and I do not expect so much as
divertisements. You are too modest (replied the Princess) but I presume the
prince Lucius will inform me what satisfaction it is you have shared with him.
Lucius (proceeded she, addressing to the Prince of Celtiberia) have you had the
same pleasure with Nadalia? Yes, Madam (answered he) since we spoke of nothing
but of you. I am perfectly obliged to you (replied the Princess) but she
pronounced these few words with a kind of air so sweet and charming, that my
Master was awakened from a profound amusement, whereinto the conversation he
had made a little before had plunged him. In the mean time Nadalia according to
her agreeable humor, told the Princess that she was not so much obliged to the
prince of Celtiberia as she imagined; for it is I (proceeded she smiling) who am
the cause that he spoke longer concerning you then he would otherwise have
done, having induced him thereunto by a promise that our next discourse should
be of the princess of the Ilargetes. How? fair Nadalia (answered my Master)
take care to what you say, and do not aggrandize the obligation when you go
about to diminish it; for, pursued he, you make show that a Lover took pleasure
in speaking concerning the princess of Castulon, although it appears that that
discourse did defer another which he was to make afterward concerning the
person whom he loved, so that the prince Lucius found her discourse agreeable,
which most other Lovers would have esteemed troublesome and tedions: It is
true, My Lord (answered the fair Virgin) that I have not spoken according to
the rigor of verity; but it is also true, that in this particular my little
experience serves to excuse me. Nevertheless I may possibly conceive, that that
which in your apprehension represents that discourse troublesome, may render it
extremely agreeable. For seeing I promised to the prince Lucius to speak
concerning the Princess of the Ilergetes, provided he would first do so of the
princess of Castulon. I may say, that that promise was the cause of the
discourse that he made me of her, and that the inducement being pleasing, the
consequence could not but be delightful. But I know not, My Lord (added she
smiling) if I have not entangled my self with this effect and the cause. I
would to the Gods you were (said Hanno) and that I were the cause, I would
entangle her after another fashion, said prince Lucius, for I am minded to
quarrel with her. Have you not committed an injustice, fair Nadalia? for I am
constrained so to style you, whatsoever enemy I am to you; have you not, I say,
committed an injustice in declaring that I entered upon the discourse of the
princely Thomira, only as a preface to that of the Princess of the Ilergetes?
and can you be ignorant that Lovers are always in a readiness to give
themselves contentment without the assistance of others, and that there needs
no more but to think upon the desired object. Wherefore, fair Nadalin, I have
not spoken of the princess of Castulon, but for her own sake, without regard to
your succeeding promise; and I conceive it more advantageous to contemplate on
the perfections of the beloved person, then to confine them, and narrow them in
language; so that a conversation of this kind cannot but retrench somewhat of
the pleasure of a Lover, since it seems to dissipate some part of those fair
Idea's which are the only source of pleasure during absence, and which cause
solitude to be more desirable then company and entertainment.

As the Prince of Celtiberia had ended these words, and observed that Nadalia
offered no answer; How? Nadalia (said he) answer you nothing? without falsehood
my Lord (answered this pleasing Beauty) you ought to have given me time to have
devised a suitable answer; were I so skilled in Rhetoric, or rather (said she,
smiling) were I a lover, I should speak my own sentiments as you have spoken
yous.

All this does not satisfy us (replied Lucius) and it is requisite for you to
defend your Cause after another manner, or to confess that you have injuriously
accused me. I shall never confess that, my Lord, replied she, but shall rather
choose to return you an answer of any thing that comes next into my mind upon
this occasion. Wherefore I am of opinion (proceeded she, with her accustomed
pleasantness) and I know not whether this may not be thought the defending of a
cause that conversation has something more agreeable in it then pensiveness
and musing: and since we cannot speak but of that whereof we think it appears
that conversation affords a double pleasure, and thence that it is better to
speak then only to ruminate in silence. Besides that words have I know not what
of life and quickness in them; and when any one speaks advantageously of the
person we affect, there accrues this satisfaction unto us of seeing our own
sentiments approved, and that joint esteem of another authorizing our choice.
And as for my self, My Lord, (added she) I would not restrain my thoughts in
the manner you mention; for being they would give me nothing but melancholy, I
should be glad to retrench a part of them, by letting them forth in
conversation; but if they purported gladness, I should endeavor to increase it
by communication.

Your Reasons, fair Nadalia (replied Lucius) give testimony of your superlative
wit beyond mine; but they cannot persuade me that you have justice on your
side. As for me (added Hanno) ravished with joy to hear the discourse of this
amiable Damsel) I believe that it is difficult to resist the reasons of
Nadalia, as it is impossible to hold out against the charms of her beauty. My
Master after this took his turn, and expressed himself much to the advantage of
this fair S^guntine; and the Princess of Castulon interressed her self so much
in the praises that were given her, that she appeared more obliging with this
tenderness, then by all that she could have said her self. Alorca, who began to
address to the Princess with an extraordinary zeal, and who testified great
alacrity in every thing that concerned either her service or her inclination,
said that Nadalia deserved all that was spoken advantageously of her, and yet
all that had been spoken to her advantage was not all that she deserved.
Nevertheless, Alorca (answered Thomira) I conceive it reasonable that praises
be applied to some particular quality of the person that is commended; but that
which you have said, is so wide and at large, that it may be applied generally
to persons of much merit, and whom we cannot praise enough. But, M^dam, replied
he, what is that I might declare to be proper to Nadalia, and which may raise
my expressions above what has been said already. You might say (answered
Hannibal) that the Princess Thomira has judged Nadalia* worthy of her esteem
and affection, and so you would signify that which is it more particular and
glorious to Nadalia. This young beauty returned no other answer then a
reverence which she made with a grace altogether charming: After which,
conceiving it now time to leave the Princess, she made her a very pleasing
complement, and very far from ceremony. Thomira embraced and k^ssed Nadalia;
and this fair Saguntine going forth with Anno who led her, Hannibal, Lucius,
and Alorca, went forth also. My Master was not sooner returned to his
apartment, but Alcon who had awaited him, came to do him reverence, and
rendered him an exact account of what he had done in rallying the dispersed
Saguntines. Hannibal made a thousand civi^^ies to Alcon, and offered to give
him the superintendance of all the aff^^rs of Saguntum, and afterward to
empower him with a command which should have no other dependence then on the
authority of the princess Thomira. Alcon rendered acknowledgements to the Prince
of Car^ha^e; and after some little times conference together, this sage Senator
withdrew.

The next morning Lucius visited my Master, and these two Princes contracted a
most firm friendship, protest^ng they would keep the swords they had employed
in the fight between them, to atchieve contrary actions to that wherein they
were engaged, as I have related, during the siege of Saguntum. These two
Princes had scarce exchanged these protestations of a true and inviolable amity
one toward another, but Maharbal, Anno and Alorca entered into the Chamber of
Hannibal.

The conversation that was made there, was agreeable enough, and when it
happned to be insensibly fallen upon the passion of Anno, every one spoke of
the charms that had given it birth. Anno would not make a mystery of a
passion, it was his design to have apparent; and being a great Gallant, and of
a noble and open genius, he did not act after the manner of those close
Humorists, who believe they do things with adress and handsomness when they
carry them secretly. He was satisfied there was nothing but what was
comm^ndable in the love he had for such a person as Nadalia, and that he needed
not be in fear of letting that be known, which he was upon the point of
declaring to Alcon himself. Whereupon he openly affirmed, that Nadalia a
person of so fair accomplishments, that it was glory to wear her Chains, and
above all, for my self (added he) who know her better then any (...) does: for
how fair and witty soever you apprehend Nadalia, she is yet something beyond
what you see. You have without doubt observed (continued he) that she has
uaturally an air of fierceness; but I have perceived that that fierceness does
no more then quicken her sweetness, which without this mixture would have
something of less brightness* I may also proceed, that in private conversation,
this fair Person has showed her self more charming, then she appeared in those
wherein you heard her; and without giving me occasion of precisely knowing
whether she be kind or severe, she has at least made me know that she is the
most charming person in the world. At this transport of Anno, Hannibal and
Lucius, could not contain themselves from sighing, and yet were unwilling to
answer, partly because they had a tender respect for Nadalia, and partly
because they likewise were well affected to Hanno; so that they contented
themselves with thinking it the violence of this Carthaginians's passion, that
induced him to term Nadalia the most charming person in the world, and hindered
him from excepting the divine Thomira, and the fair Princess of the Ilergetes.
The conversation was continued for some time, till at length the discourse fell
concerning Alcon, and the affairs of Saguntum, no person presuming to make
mention of the princess of Castulon, after which Lucius ended his visit,
deeming it to have been of a reasonable length. My Master took this time to go
to the house of Nadalia's Father, whereunto he was accompanied by Anno; for
Maharbal and Alorca left them upon the departure of Lucius, because they
understood at their first coming to him, that he intended to visit Alcon that
morning. The Father of Nadalia received my Master with all the respect and joy
he could express; and although he was a man of experience and great entendment,
yet he could not so well manage his civil resentment of it, but that he
aggravated it in such terms as were too courtly, and not altogether agreeable
to the gust of Hannibal. Nevertheless the Prince turned the matter by with
adress, and having answered very obligingly to Alcon, he afterward discoursed
with him about the rep^ration of Saguntum, and other affairs conformable to his
genius. The Saguntine Senator answered always prudently: And for the
reparation of Saguntum. My Lord (said he) you shall see that I will act both
like a man whose duty it is readily to obey you, and as a Citizen, very zealous
for the good of his Country: so that in a short spare of time, you shall see a
fair City, where at present there is nothing but the face of ruins and
desolations. Yet amongst these ruins, answered Hannibal, are seen the fairest
things in the world: and if I wanted a witness to confirm what I say, I believe
Anno would not refuse to be one. I shall ever be of that opinion, My Lord
(answered Anno, being well pleased that Hannibal had begun this discourse) and
if it be only requisite but to speak by experience to induce belief of what
we say, there reremains no cause for Alcon to doubt of my words. The Father of
Nadalia, who had been a brave person in his youth, smiled at these words of
Anno, and answered that he was not at all surprised with these expressions; for
in our time (added he) we were wont to speak advantageously of Ladies in all
places that we came into; and we spoke so freely of them, that we soon spent
our whole stock of expressions on them. But there is this difference, replied
Anno, that in your time you spoke indifferently to the advantage of all Ladies,
whereas we have yet only commended those of Saguntum, although we have made
former expeditions. I have nothing to answer thereunto, replied the Saguntine,
and though I am of a City whose Ladies you commend, yet I dare not oppose the
praises which I esteem extremely just, since in my conjecture they tend toward
the Princess. Without doubt the Princess deserves more then we can give her,
answered Hannibal, but yet, said Hanno, she is not the only one to whom they
are due; and I should ascribe some to Nadalia, even in the presence of her
Father, did I believe I could do her perfect justice. Do not imagine (continued
he, immediately adressing toward Alcon, who was about to interrupt him) that I
spoke flatteringly: I am not com but to beseech you most humbly to suffer me to
pretend to the honor of entering into your Alliance, and to demand this favor
of you in the presence of the Illustrious Prince of Carthage. Nevertheless I
shall not represent to you the greatness of my birth as means to obtain this
honor, since few persons are ignorant what rank the house holds, whereof I am
descended. But I shall content my self with only declaring my passion; and if
I make this discovery before I have rendered considerable services to Nadalia,
it is for that I believe that all the services which I shall ever be able to
render her, can never be worthy to gain me her heart. Wherefore I am expectant
of that from the goodness of Alcon, which I durst never hope from the
inclination of Nadalia; provided nevertheless, that this fair person have no
repugnance in following your sentiments, if they be favorable unto me: for to
believe that in this case, hers should be conformable to yours, is that which I
shall never have the vanity to hope.

Although the proposal of Hanno was extremely advantageous to the Saguntine,
yet Alcon judged that it was not requisite to answer expressly, and taking upon
him as it were the port of a Senator, which seemed to be conformable to that a
Father is to have when his Daughter is demanded in marriage, he answered Hanno
that he was perfectly obliged to him for the honor which he offered him, and
whereunto he never durst have aspired for Nadalia: he told him also, that he
well understood that his house was very Illustrious, that it had never given
place to any other but that of Barsa, and that the greatest Kings of Africa
were oftentimes entered into his Alliance. But according to the custom (added
he) of persons of this age, who believe that too much consideration cannot be
had in engagements of this nature, you may please to take a few days to try
whether you can continue in the good inclination you have for Nadalia; and for
my particular, I shall employ my self in deliberating upon the matter, and
taking order for my affairs. In the mean time I shall command Nadalia to have
the same civility and respect for you, she ought to have for a person that
designs to espouse her, and on whom, in appearance, she must in a short time
depend. Ah, happy Hanno! (cried my Master) Yes, my Lord, I am so (answered
Hanno) and I am so much more, as I believed I should never attain it; so that,
my Lord, continued he, I beg your permission to cast my self at the feet of
Alcon to return him thanks. Upon which, Hanno having ended these words, was
casting himself at the feet of Nadalia's Father; but Alcon with held him, and
protested that it was on his part alone to render thanks, because he was the
only person that received advantage in this affair. The great Prince of
Carthage was extremely glad to see the satisfaction of the Father, and the
lover of Nadalia; and being he had a great kindness for Hanno, and much
tenderness for Nadalia, in regard to her particular merits, and much more upon
the account of her being extremely dear to Thomira, he resolved to contribute
something to the solemnity and glory of the Marriage. Wherefore he promised
Hanno the Government of Spain, for recompense of the remarkable actions he had
performed in the employments and charges had been laid upon him; and you shall
know this day (added he) in what fashion I will acquit my self toward the
lovely Nadalia of a promise which I have made her. Alcon and Hanno very
respectfully presented their acknowledgements to my Master; and soon after
complemented one the other very obligingly, having observed that the Prince
Hannibal took pleasure in the sight, and that he desired not any of that
cautious heed and circumspection between them, whereunto his presence seemed to
oblige. But at length, after some discourse together proceeding from the
inspiration of a true and sincere affection HAnnibal and Hanno left the
Saguntine Senator, and came to the house where we were lodged, and there my
Master stayed Hanno to Dinner. But they spoke together apart for some time
before they went to the Table; and we observed that Hanno could not contain
from expressing himself extremely satisfied, and that that conversation had
been above measure advantageous unto him.

After Dinner the Prince of Carthage went to Thomira, where the company was
without question very fair, several Ladies of Saguntum being resorted thither;
and besides them there was also Lucius, Maharbal, Alorca, Adherbal, and Magar.
the conversation when it began was extremely agreeable, although sufficiently
serious; for Nadalia did not seem to be so frolic and pleasant this day as
formerly. Every one attaqued her; and when she began a little to disingage her
self, she became incomparably more intricated, till at length she perceived
Hanno entering into the Chamber of the Princess. It is impossible to express
the admirable effects the presence of Hanno produced; it suffices to tell that
the fair Nadalia blushed as soon as she first perceived him, and presently made
him a more respectful reverence then she was accustomed to do. After which she
seemed to be so amused and perplexed, that all the company resented I know not
what kind of emotion beyond my power to express; but Hanno was more sensibly
affected with it then all the rest, and felt himself almost extasi'd by a
secret joy (as he related after) wherewith that sight charmed him. He also
perceived that the red in the countenance of the fair Nadalia, was different
from that which arises from aversion or choler: for indeed it was not difficult
to Hanno, who was a lover, to make that discernment, how ever it might have
been to the rest of the company. For in the like occasions as this, Love is not
so blind as men say; but on the contrary it may be conceived, that a Lover
reads very many things in the air of the beloved person which are invisible to
one that is disinteressed, although such a one may generally judge more
reasonably in all other concernments. But Hanno understood that it was only
modesty painted that scarlet in his Mistress cheek; and therefore perceiving no
token of aversion or distaste in the visage of this fair Person, he was so
perfectly satisfied, that he continued a few moments without knowing what he
was to do. Till at length approaching toward Thomira, and making a low
reverence to that Illustrious Princess, he presented her (as we knew soon
after) the Gift of the Principality of Oreta, which Hannibal bestowed on
Nadalia. If the Present which my Master made, had not been of so great
importance, yet the manner wherewith he did it, could not but be extremely
obliging; for he intended that Thomira should give the principality which
Nadalia received and that Anno should only seem to have taken care of the
affair. All that understood the thing were as strangely surprised at the
unexpectedness of it, as they were extremely satisfied with the Gallantry. The
Saguntine Dames were not less pleased with the matter, then any other
concerned person could be, and instead of envious sentiments, at the
advancements of their equal, they testified only a joy which was remarkably
sincere and pure. But Thomira had not the same apprehensions; the satisfaction
which she received was blended with something of disgust: and if this
Illustrious Person was pleased to behold Nadalia suddenly preferred, ye she
could not but with impatience reflect, that Thomira was anew obliged to the
Prince of Carthage. Whereupon she refused a long time the p^ssing that into the
hands of Nadalia which Anno had put into hers, although she did it with such an
obstinacy which had nothing at all or rudeness, but very much of sweetness
and civility. At length, she told my Master, that things were far better when
they issued from their proper source, and so Nadalia ought to receive from the
hands of Prince Hannibal, a gift which seemed to lose something of its value
when it passed through these of Thomira.

My Master was not backward with his return, to tell the Princess, that she
might give all, since she was Mistress of all: and although it were not so,
Madam (continued he) yet ought not I to cause this present to pass through your
fair hands to make it more considerable? Besides, that I know not whether Anno
would resent it well, that Nadalia should receive a present from my hands. The
Princess of Castulon did notwithstanding still persist in denial; but Hannibal
was instant with her with so much address, and the Prince of Celtiberia added
his prayers thereunto so successfully, that at length the fair Princess put
into the hands of Nadalia the Gift of the Principality of Oreta. This fair
Damsel was so astonished, that at first she believed nothing of what she had
seen. But when she understood that it was the Illustrious Hannibal that made
her such a gift, and the Illustrious Hannibal extremely amorous, she at length
believed, what otherwise she could not have done; and making a low reverence to
the Princess, she without vanity received the important Present which was made
her, and then turned to render thanks to the Princess. But Thomira giving her
to know, that it was the Prince Hannibal, to whom her addresses were due, she
suddenly offered her self to him; but he interrupted her, and told her that he
intended to have made a complement to her himself, after he had demanded the
permission of the Princess. But Nadalia was no sooner out of the arms of
Thomira, who embraced and kissed her with an extraordinary tenderness, but
Hannibal and Lucius made their complement unto her: The Ladies likewise made
theirs afterward, as also did Maharbal, Anno, Alorca, Adherbal, and Magar; so
that the whole afternoon was spent in a very agreeable confusion, and instead
of Nadalia's speaking, all the speech was turned upon Nadalia. About evening
Alcon came to render thanks to the Prince of Carthage; he assured him of an
inviolable fidelity, and was so diffuse and eloquent in extolling the
magnificence of Hannibal, that it would be difficult for me to repeat it to
you: He told him, that it belonged to none but to the great Prince of Carthage
to make such Presents, and to make them to persons which could not deserve
them; So that, my Lord (continued he) it cannot be said that you recompense,
but rather that you confer a largess, entirely pure and glorious. My Master,
answered Alcon very obligingly; after which this Senator presented to him two
persons of a sufficient comely aspect, who were the Delegates of Castulon,
which Thomira would not admit, till they had first assured the Prince Hannibal
of their services and respects. Hannibal shall always receive you (said my
Master to the Delegates embracing them) but he will receive you as friends, not
as Delegates; for it is our Princess alone (added he, being carried by his
passion) that ought to give audience in what ever place she be. He after made a
thousand civilities to the Delegates, and did not send them back, till he had
first conferred on them very magnificent presents.

The next morning my Master went to visit the Prince of Celtiberia, whereas the
conversation came to fall concerning the Delegates of Castulon, Lucius said he
thought it fit the Princess should make the journey they came to beseech her
to. The people of Castulon (proceeded he) have of long time desired ardently to
see her; and although it were not so, yet we ought not to be averse in removing
the Princess from a place which cannot but appear to her very lamentable and
disconsolate. My Master was presently of this opinion, it seemed so just and
advantageous to the repose of Thomira; so that Lucius, Alcon, Nadalia, and the
Delegates of Castulon, made their proposal the same day, and obtained that of
the Princess which they demanded. Nevertheless it was not without many
entreaties and instances, because Thomira alleged she could not resolve to
forsake Saguntum, nor to go take pleasure in Castulon, at a time wherein she
knew not what was become of the Prince her Father. Lucius did not fail to
answer to every particular, and to press his fair Cousin so far, that she at
length promised to depart when ever it should seem good to him. My Master had
no sooner learnt from Lucius the resolution of the Princess, but he gave all
orders that were necessary, and caused all provisions to be so diligently
dispatched, that within two days all was in readiness for this departure. It
were impossible for me to describe all there was of splendid, agreeable, and
pompous in this journey: it suffices to say that Thomira, Nadalia, and ten or
twelve fair Ladies of Saguntum, composed this company, that Hannibal, Lucius,
Anno, Alorca, and several other great Carthaginian and Saguntine Lords, waited
upon these Ladies, whilst Maharb^l, Adherbal, and Magar, conducted the Troops.
But as it is impossible to describe exactly the gallantry and splendour of this
journey, so also must it not be tolerated to omit wholly this fair part of my
Narration in silence. Therefore I am bold to assure you, that never was any
thing seen so magnificent in Habil^ments, Chariots, Horses, and all kind of
accoutrements that might add luster to the Equipage. Anno and Nadalia were
very gallantly clothed, and the Princess who had refused all care that was
offered to adorn her, appeared notwithstanding very comely and admirably fair,
in a Gown of white silk, guarded with a little broydery of silver. Lucius was
very well adjusted, although he was absent from the Princess of the ^^ergetes,
and his aspect was so high and noble, that without question he would have born
the glory away from all men, if Hannibal had not been in the party. But without
exaggeration, I may say that my Illustrious Master appeared in this
re-encounter, although it were only a piece of Gallantry, something above that
which men seem to be; and his great and fierce mind was yet more advantaged by
the care he had permitted his attendants to use in dressing him magnificently
during his voyage. On the day of the departure he wore a st^tely Coat of Arms
of purple, which the Tyrians had presented him with, and which was all
embroidered with Pearls, and beset with a prodigious number of Stones of great
price, which cast a sparkling luster on all sides: his head was not covered but
with a small Helmet, garnished with the fairest plumes that were ever seen in
Africa: he bore a javelin in his right hand, and on his left side a sword
enamelled with Diamonds, on which he had not yet da^ed to put any Tokens of his
love to avoid the displeasure of his Princess. That which admirably set off all
these ornaments, was a brave white Steed whereon my Master was mounted for this
day, which was so goodly and proud, that the like had scarce ever been seen in
our Countries, where notwithstanding you know are bred the goodliest Horses in
the world. To all this must be added, that the Prince of whom I spoke, was a
young Conqueror, that had filled the whole earth with the fame of his Victories.

It would be also requisite to describe the aspect which animated all this
bravery and imprinted respect, and oftentimes fear in the breasts of those
which beheld it, were it not sufficient to say that I am speaking of the famous
Hannibal. Of whom having thus largely dilated, I should be unwilling to resolve
to describe the other persons who were of this company, were it not that I am
obliged thereunto, and that I conceive it necessary to inform you of some
particularities, for the better comprehending of some great passages which I
have to recount you. You may please therefore to know, my Lords, That Alorca,
after the departure of Attanes, commanded all the Auxiliary ^roops, and that
notwithstanding this employment, he was so wholly bent to be near the Princess
during all this voyage, that he left the conduct of his Troops to the inferior
Officers, and always marched with Hannibal, Lucius, and Anno, by the side of
the chariot of Thomira, in which also Nadalia was with a fair Virgin of
Saguntum, her Cousin. All the world believed at first, that this deportment of
Alorca proceeded only from his ambition; but there were some persons that
observed it so narrowly, that they soon suspected a piece of the truth, and saw
that ambition did not reign alone in his soul. For Alorca had somewhat of
melancholy, and musing at such times as all the world diverts themselves; and
it is certain that he was the only person that never spoke to Nadalia, against
whom all the world had engaged to endeavor the overthrow of a person who had
appeared redoubtable in the conversations which had been made at Sagunium.

The subject of them was likewise very agreeable, for Alcon who was one in this
journey, had given his word that the Marriage of Nadalia should be solemnized at
Castulon, so that this fair person looking upon Anno as a man designed to
espouse her, and also esteeming him a person commendable for many noble
qualifications; she sometimes gave testimonies of the favorable inclinations
she had toward him. Not that Anno had made very great progress in the heart of
Nadalia, the conquest of which was too difficult to cost so little time, and so
few serv^ces: but it may be conceived that the worth of this Carthaginian
joined with the commandment of a Father, had not acted without some success.

I shall not entertain you, my Lords (said Aspar) with other particularities of
this voyage, nor hold you in a relation of the commodious reception of the
whole company in all places, my Master having taken an admirable order for all
those concernments: only this you may please to understand, that on the sixth
day of our travail we arived at Castulon, where the people received the
Princess and her Illustrious Company with infinite rejoycings and acclamations:
five or six days were spent in Feastings and public sports, which the
Princess was constrained to permit, notwithstanding the absence of Edescon:
after which she took order for the affairs of Castulon, and all that depended
thereon. But before disposing of the charges she had to bestow, she made a
complement to my Master, and told him that she durst not entreat the great
Prince of Carthage to take into his hands the disposal of them: yet it is fit,
my Lord (added she with great civility) that I take the liberty to offer small
things unto you; for if I expected till I could present you with something
worthy of you, I should without doubt await unprofitably. My Master returned
the Princess thanks with much respect; and if you will not, Madam (proceeded
he) offer me things which you judge not worthy of me, give me, I beseech you,
divine Princess, such as I acknowledge my self unworthy of; that is, added he
sighing, some proof of your goodness, and some small testimony of your
inclinations. Hannibal pronounced these words with an ai^ so passionate, that
Thomira was a little touched with them. And as she was about to answer him, and
perhaps favorably too, the Prince of Celtiberia, Alcon, and Alorca,
interrupted her by entering her Chamber, where was made afterward no other
then a General conversation. In the mean time Anno, who was upon the point of
becoming happy, repaired to Alcon, whose apartment was in the Palace of
Thomira, to beseech the favor of him to delay his felicity no longer. But
as soon as he had communicated this design to Nadalia, that fair person opposed
it, and conjured Hanno in terms so powerful, that it was impossible for the
passionate Carthaginian to resist such prayers. You may well judge, Hanno (said
she to him) that it is not out of aversion that I oppose your design: If I have
yet any repugnance to become engaged for my whole life, it is not by reason of
any consideration of yours; and I do not apprehend your proposal terrible, but
only because it must necessarily separate me from the Princess, and because I
have a certain humor which is not yet disposed to an engagement of this kind.
Therefore give me two or three days if you please, to resolve my self
absolutely upon it, and I promise you that I will endeavor to serve the Prince
of Carthage; for in brief (added she) I shall labor for the advantage of the
Princess, when I shall endeavor to overcome a scruple in her breast, which is
opposite to the happiness of Hannibal, and I shall have the satisfaction to
contribute something to the contentment of a great Prince, to whom I am
importantly obliged: and to tell you the truth (proceeded she) I should be glad
that the Princess should become engaged first, to avoid the regret of having
began to separate myself from her. Nadalia pronounced these words with so much
grace, and a kind of pleasing freedom, that Hanno found himself closely
encountered; he was about to obey and rebel at the same time, and his
irresolution appeared to manifestly in his countenance, that Nadalia observed
it. In the name of the immortal Gods, Hanno, (replied this fair person) accord
me this -- Ah, cruel Nadalia (interrupted Hanno) do not do me the injury to
believe that I will disobey you. I have only one passion in my soul, which you
have given birth to there; so that the trouble which you observe is no
Rebellion. it proceeds from that passion alone which combats it self, and
which would deem it self weak, did it not act both for you in this occasion
and against you. It Is not that I am unresolved to do all you require of me: but
I might accuse you of having produced too many reasons, where there needed but
one command. I will obey you in all things, Nadalia, and you cannot doubt it,
since I obey you in this occasion.

As they were in these terms, they beheld Alcon enter, who came from Thomira,
who having saluted Hanno, It is fit (said he to him) that according to the
custom of the world, I impart you some news which will surprise you, and tell
you that the Princess has conferred the Government of Castulon upon Alorca.
But it must be confessed (pursued he with an air wholly serious) That this fair
Princess, as young as she is, is the most judicious person in the world. She
represented me a thousand reasons which obliged her to choose Alorca to fill
this charge: she gave me to understand, that there was jealousy between the
most noble Families of Castulon, which pretended to this employment; and that
so it was meet to entrust it with a stronger, to extinguish that jealousy; she
also made me know, that she was glad to have acquitted her self in any measure
toward the Prince of Carthage, in which regard she preferred Alo^ca, and that
even before the Carthaginians, because he had served Hannibal without being
obliged unto it; she choose him, by reason of his being a Spaniard, and
consequently could not but understand better then the Carthaginian, in what
sort a people of Spain ought to be governed: besides, that she believe'd Alorca
would not be deficient in point of fidelity, because, for some time, as you
know, he has bent himself toward her with an extraordinary zeal. Hanno
returned an answer approving yet more the choice which Thomira had made, and
added many reasons to those of Alcon, and so spent his visit in speaking of any
other thing then the subject which induced to go to the Father of Nadalia. But
the amiable Daughter of Alcon began immediately to act in favor of my Master;
she communicated her design to Lucius, who approved it extremely; and as he
conceived it advantageous to Thomira, he promised to concur on his part, and to
represent to his fair Cousin that she ought not to be obstinate in refusal of a
thing which a thousand reasons should cause her to accept. But that which was
yet more rare, was, that the same day also, the people of Castulon began to
talk that it was fit the Princess Thomira should mary the Prince Hannibal; and
there were some so bold as to go even into the Court of the Palace, and say
aloud, that the Princess, as judicious as she was, had no reason to refuse for
a Husband, the greatest Prince of the world. My Master himself imposed silence
to them, which spoke in this manner; and was so apprehensive, that the bruit
which was abroad, might distaste his Princess, that he made great liberalities
to cause all zealous persons to hold their peace, which without doubt many
other persons would have encouraged to speak out in the like conjuncture. It is
indeed true, that Thomira was troubled at this indiscreet zeal; that she was
through discontent retired into her Cabinet, and if the presence of Lucius and
Nadalia, who together came to wait upon her, had not been some consolation, she
would unquestionably have resented much greater disturbance.

Well, Lucius and Nadalia (said she) have you observed the levity of the people
of Castulon? and do you not remark that it seems they have not been so desirous
to see me, and forward to receive me with expressions of joy, but to render me
this day more nearly sensible of their insolence. It is certain (added she a
little moved) that Princes would be unhappy enough, if they were bound to
follow the humor of the people, and indeed more unhappy then their subjects;
for these have the satisfaction of being subject only to persons that act
usually according to reason, whereas Princes would be obliged to follow the
sentiments of the people, who ordinarily act only by caprichio^ and conceit.
Nevertheless, Madam (answered Lucius) this of Castulon believes they have acted
according to reason, and to your advantage; although to speak reasonably, it is
not fitting for people to attempt, even commendable things, in tumult; and I
believe their best intentions become criminal, when they are explicated in a
seditious manner. Wherefore we may conjecture that it is the manner of acting
that has provoked you, and not the subject, which makes the people of Castulon
murmur: for, Madam, this being no wise disadvantageous to you, I cannot
persuade my self that it ought to be disagreeable to you, I shall pass
further, Madam (said Nadalia) then the Prince of Celtiberia, and aver that you
ought to be glad of this tumult; and being you have a scrupulous virtue (which,
perhaps, you ought not to follow so severely) there is reason for you to be
satisfied, that there is occasion to believe that the prayers of your people
extort a consentment from you, which you otherwise dare not give, and which
besides will instate you in the regency of half the world. This is not all,
Madam (continued she) let us consider things in their true colors: Can you see
in the world a Prince more puissant, goodly, and that can bring you more
honor? And although the Illustrious Hannibal should not have done what he has
to gain your esteem, could you refuse it him after that which he has done to
day. For sincerely it is very admirable, that in your consideration, he has
silenced the people who spoke not but in his favor. How, Nadalia (interrupted
the Princess) is it possible that I should owe an obligation of this nature to
the Prince Hannibal? There is nothing more true then what I have said (replied
Nadalia) and it is certain, Madam, that the generous Prince of Carthage, in the
fear he had this bruit might disgust you, resolved to extinguish it: which
being a matter of difficulty to effect, and that he could not think of
ill-entreating persons that acted for his advantage, he has accomplished it by
so great liberalites, that one may say that the same time he caused a whole
people to hold their peace, he gave them a new subject to talk of. But, Madam
(continued he) if after a serious disourse. I might be permitted to resume a
kind of air, for which I have often been warred upon, I should only describe
to you the conduct of Alorca; he sudenly has appeared all pale and troubled;
he trembled even at his entrance into the Palace, at least I have been told
so, and said and did such things as I am not curious to relate unto you; for
did I know them really; Madam, I should know more then he does himself.

It must be acknowledged (replied the Princess, all surprised with this
discourse) that Hannibal is extremely generous, and that that Prince which was
formerly represented to me all fierce and violent, has transcendent civility
in his actions. But it must also be confessed that there is a kind of fallacity
which causes me to have these Obligations to that Prince, rather then to the
persons I might expect them from; for setting aside Hannibal's calming the
bruit we spoke of, does it not seem that Alorca who has both wit and courage,
loses the employment of both in this occasion, to the end Hannibal alone
should oblige me? In verity I do not comprehend the intrigue of this
management, but find something in it not conformable to the wonted order of
things; and in a word, I believe that Hannibal is destined to do nothing but
what is great and surprising. My Master entered about the end of these words,
and understanding by Lucius and Nadalia the subject of the conversation, he did
not afford the Princess time to thank him, but rendered her his own
remerciments for her singular goodness, and this with very much respect, and
yet with as great fear, as he should have had, if he had excited the tumult
which he appeased. Madam, said this passionate Prince, you have the goodness to
take notice of a thing of my doing, which a thousand others might have done,
and yet do not observe that which is far greater in me; and which Hannibal
alone is capable of doing: Yes, Madam, a thousand Princes may serve you,a
thousand adore you, and a thousand dye for Thomira; but, divine Princess (added
he with a transport) no person can adore you in the manner that Hannibal adores
you; he resents for you that which he alone is capable to resent; and has so
great respects for the Princess Thomira, that he could imagine nothing greater,
did not he attend uncessantly to the infinite merit which has given them
birth. The passionate discourse of my Master raised such a fresh vermilion in
the face of the fair Thomira, who daring not to behold Hannibal, nor Lucius,
nor Nadalia, remained as astonished instead of being able to answer. Speak,
Madam, speak (said the generous Celtiberian) but be pleased to speak in such
sort that the prince Hannibal have no cause to accuse you of ingratitude. How,
Madam? (added Nadalia) can you observe what the Illustrious Hannibal does for
you and yours, without doing for him that which even virtue obliges you to.
Alas (answered the fair Thomira (sighing) who could have thought that Lucius
and Nadalia should take the side of the prince of the Carthaginians, against
the prince of the Saguntines? We speak to the advantage of Edescon (returned
Lucius) and to take away all pretext of refusing that which we demand, we shall
agree that you act according to the sentiments of the Queen of Celtiberia: You
are not ignorant what an extraordinary tenderness she has for you: that she
has always been in place of a Mother to you; and that she will never be
induced to do any thing which the Prince her brother might disapprove; so that,
Madam, we shall send a dispatch this day to the King and the Queen of
Celtiberia, to let them know the pretensions of the prince Hannibal, and shall
afterward act according to their answer. Not (added he) but that Edescon may
come before we have news from Celtiberia; for although he were gone to Rome, or
some other potent Confederate to procure succor against Hannibal, he will
nevertheless not fail to come as soon as he shall know with what respects
Hannibal treats the Princess his Daughter, and to change his sentiments upon so
apparent evidences that his enemies have changed theirs, I proceed yet further,
and promise you to give you within eight days perfect intelligence of Edescon:
For Alcon, on whom Hannibal has charged this affair, demands no longer time to
discover a truth, whereof he has already great conjectures.

After these words Lucius and Nadalia further importuned Thomira, and at length
did it so succesfully, that she became mollified and compliant. My Master
immediately cast himself at her feet, and uttered so tender expressions, that
she was yet more affected therewith, then with all that she had heard. She
offered to raise up my Master, and stretching forth her hand for that purpose,
the passionate prince bowed himself to kiss it, and believed that for all his
pains and services he had now received a recompense too glorious. But Lucius
and Nadalia had more favorable judgments for him, and had no sooner appeased
the princess, who was disgusted with the freedom of Hannibal, but they told her
that she ought to give the Prince leave to hope to be happy. Thomira answered
nothing, but gave such testimony that she began to have some good will toward
my Master, that her silence was interpreted an probation, and Lucius and
Nadalia received extreme satisfaction therewith. It is not necessary to speak
of the joy my Master resented; and being I am not able to represent his excess,
I shall be contented to tell you; that the same day a Courrier was dispatched
to the Court of Celtiberia, a certain bruit was spread through the City of
Castulon, that the marriage of Thomira was concluded; and this rumor was the
cause that it was afterward published over all the world, that Hannibal was
married at Castulon, though none could ever tell the particulars of his
marriage. Upon which the whole City began most extraordinary revelling, so that
I should have enough to speak of the public Sports and Festivals, with the
matches of racing and gallantry made thereupon, were I not obliged to describe
to you in the sequel of my discourse, all the bravery and magnificence my
Master showed in Campania, where after the battle of Canna, he went to find the
Princess instead of going to Rome: for I shall let you see that the delights of
Cupua so much talked of, were altogether another thing from that which is
reported, and that they would have had nothing in them but Illustrious, had
they not arrested the conquests of my Illustrious Master. Nevertheless these
divertisements of Campania could never entirely satisfy Hannibal; The Prince
has sighed a thousand times in the delicious Capua; and this great person, in
what place soever he was, could never taste any contentments without mixture,
as you will soon see he was extremely unhappy at Castulon, at the same time he
believed himself raised to a supreme felicity. For as all things were in the
best posture he could wish, and on the same day the messenger of Lucius ariv'd,
according to the account made of the way, my Master went to wait upon the
Princess, where he was with such joy as could be resented by a young Prince,
who has very great Love and Hope. He found only Alorca in the Princes^s
Chamber, so that he repressed himself less then if he had been in a great
company (although Thomira alone was to him instead of all the world) and
permitted the effects of his spirit to act with liberty, impressing upon his
aspect all the tokens of an excessive joy.

Well, Madam, (said he, with some kind of quickness and life in his air) will
you have the goodness to follow the sentiments of the Queen your Aunt, and may
I hope to be happy, if they be favorable unto me? My Lord (answered the
Princess) I am obliged to oppose them, if they be such as you speak of. How,
Madam, (replied Hannibal immediately in much trouble) will you resist the
sentiments of the Queen of Celtiberia, if they be advantageous unto me? Have
you not consented to my happiness, but only to let me be ovewhelmed at once
with a loss the most dreadful and bitter in the world? I had many dispositions
(answered Thomira) not to oppose very rigorously the requests of Lucius and
Nadalia; but I do not conceive I positively consented to that which they
importuned me for. An express consent, Madam (replied my Master) ought not to
be expected from a Princess as you are; and I should be too happy to see you
disposed to accord me so much, although things were in a condition requisite to
advance me to this glory. But, Madam, (continued he) is it possible that you
should change so cruelly against me? and that a Princess, such as the divine
Thomira, can act in a manner which seems to me indeed strange and surprising.
Perhaps you will not be surprised with it (replied Thomira) if you knew the
reasons which oblige me to act in this sort. I shall answer your reasons, Madam
(interrupted he) and I engage my self to make it appear they cannot be
important.

You would change your mind, without doubt (said the Princess) if it were
expedient for me to discover them. Ah, Madam (interrupted he) will you not
discover them? My Lord (replied she) I must not do it. How, Madam (cried he,
permitting himself to his despair, and the violence of his humor) must you
not do it? you must do it, Madam; and moreover (added he fiercely) you ought to
consider who I am; you ought to consider that you have destroyed me, and that
to render ruin inevitable, you have the cruelty to suffer me to be ignorant of
the cause.

After these words, the Prince perceiving himself not master enough of his
passion, went forth of Thomira's Chamber, and retired to his own, where he was
during some time agitated with many contrary inquietudes. And, well, Thomira
(said he at last) as if the Princess had been in the Chamber where he walked)
well, cruel Thomira! unjust Thomira! do you not consider who I am? have you
forgot what I have done for you? and without respect to the Empire, I have over
diverse Nations, or to the adoration I bear you, having been ready to dye for*
you, you push me upon the precipice, and to enhance your cruelty yet more, you
add all inhumane circumstances to my inhappiness: yes, Thomira, you are cruel,
since you promise not, but to refu^e afterward, since you seem not to to raise
me to felicity, but to precipitate me in effect into the greatest of all
miseries, and employ this terrible afterclap as a new kind of punishm^^t to
torment me more sensibly. Are you not injust, O Thomira, that would have me
perish witho^t knowing for why? and are you not injust to keep me ignorant of
the cause of my unhappiness, to the end I may have no power to address it? The
grief of Hannibal spent it self in this complaint, so that the Prince came to
himself after a few moments, and demanded pardon of the princess, and uttered
with a calmer tone a hundred things contrary to the former; Fair Thomira (said
he) adoreable Thomira! I am culpable; and the reproaches alone which I have
raged against, render me worthy of a thousand deaths. I have dared to say that
you ought to have regard who I am, and did not consider that I am a monster
come from Africa to Spain, to the calamity of the fairest Princess of the
world: and though I had done all things for you, had I done more then I ought;
and should you have been obliged to me, since all I could have done, would have
but served to appease the sorrow I have caused you. It is true, Thomira, that
you have promised me all, and afterward denied me all; but, divine Princess,
when you promised me all, you did me an act of Grace, and I have therefore no
reason to complain when you grant me nothing, since you are not obliged to give
me the Treasure which I have demanded, and whereof I acknowledge my self
unworthy.

This is not all my crime, fair Thomira, I have carried it further, and
murmured at my condemnation, when you would not declare the reasons for which I
was condemned. Ought not I to consider, O Thomira, that you always act with
justice; and that being the Sovereign of my life, you are not obliged to render
me account of what you do, especially when you dispose of nothing but what is
your own: Wherefore, Thomira, I shall expiate my crime in your presence, and
wash it out it with my blood; if you refuse me the pardon, which I shall sue
for at your feet.

He was going forth after these words; but it was told him, that Alcon attended
to see him, to communicate to him an affair of great importance. Let him enter
(answered Hannibal) which he had scarcely done, but the Prince demanded of him,
if Thomira were inflexible. My Lord (answered the Saguntine) I am come to tell
you things that will surprise you, which I had from the relation of Nadalia,
while you were with the Princess, You know (continued he) that Attanes
passionately loves the Princess of Castulon; but you have not yet understood,
that that King caused Edescon to be carried away from Saguntum, that he retains
him at present, and pretends to give him protection against you. But, my Lord*
you ought not to be astonished if Attanes told you, he had a means (...) the
heart of Thomira, seeing he believed he had the disposal or that of Edescon.
Let us go then (interrupted Hannibal impatiently) let us go draw the Father of
my Princess out of the hands of Attanes. But Alcon (added he, addressing to the
Saguntine Senator) may I believe what you relate? There is nothing more certain
(answered Alcon) and I have engaged Attanes to confess it to me: And if I have
conferred with him concerning his departure from Saguntum, it was to no other
purpose, then to persuade him to remit the Prince Edescon into liberty: But
this amorous King could not be brought to resolve it, and required time to
deliberate upon a precise answer. If to that which I tell you, I may add my
conjecture; I shall dare to assure you, my Lord, that it must needs be, that
the King of the Turdetanes has some covert Agent about Thomira, who informs
him of all that concerns the Princess: For within the time that I undertook, we
should not only have the consentment of Edescon, but that we should have that
Prince himself at Castulon, within twenty fifteen days: Within that time, I
say, the Princess received this Letter, which in all likelihood Attanes has
caused to be written, and which I took from the hand of Nadalia, to show you.

Ending these words, he presented a Letter to the Prince Hannibal; which ran in
these expressions.

EDESCON to THOMIRA.
AFter the loss of Saguntum, there was nothing left me to lose, but my only
Daughter to be totally overwhelmed with misfortunes; and you would have me lose
her, ungrateful Thomira! unnatural Thomira! since you are determined to bestow
your self on my Enemies. I could never have believed, that a Princess bred with
so much care, ought to yield her self to the first that sought her, when the
remoteness of her Parents permitted her to act according to her own
inclination. But why should you have any regard to seemliness, if you violate
all the Laws that subject you to Edescon, and which absolutely prohibit you to
engage without his consent: Possibly you believe it to no purpose to desire a
consent, which you think I ought not to give. Ah, Thomira! if you are yet
capable of this thought, consider the justice of your proceeding; and whatever
happens, augment not your crime, by shortly informing me of a thing done, and
of such a thing as you never ought to have done, but by my order. But I would
to the Gods, O Thomira, that this Letter might affect you, and divert you, from
being drawn to so strange a resolution. But I fear this wish is improfitable,
after what you have already done. Have you not given the Government of
Castulon, to a man that served Carthage against your Father? What remains more
to be done for the Carthaginians? Alas, I see, it is consequent for the
crowning of your crime, to give them Thomira also, and that you effect my death
with sorrow,

EDESCON.


The Prince of Carthage was, as it were, Thunderstruck, at the reading of this
Letter. Ah cruel Destiny, unmerciful Fates! (cried he) must it be, that I
ardently desire to see Edescon, and that at the same time I know it possible to
see him, I must also know, that he is an Enemy to Hannibal? Alas, Alcon, all is
lost for me: But if Edescon and Thomira (added he, following the impetuousness
of his temper) are Enemies to Hannibal, then let Hannibal side with them, and
become an Enemy to himself. Yes, Alcon, I will be so, and when I shall have
destroyed the King of the Turdetanes, and established Edescon and Thomira in
Saguntum, I shall cause the unfortunate Hannibal to dye at the feet of the
adorable Princess of Castulon.

My Lord (answered Alcon) you shall permit me, if you please, to say, that I
conceive your complaint not extremely well grounded: Without doubt, Edescon
knows nothing of the Prince of Carthage's pretensions to his alliance; and he
would never have written this Letter which afflicts you, unless some body had
deguised the affair to provoke him. But, my Lord (continued he) let not this
discourse incense you against the King of the Turdetanes: if you regard his
crime, consider, I beseech you, that he is amorous, and leave me the care to
bring him to set Edescon at liberty, and so afterward dispose that Prince to
render you happy. How greatly should I be obliged to you (replied my Master) if
you would do all that you say! having so great cause to apprehend, lest the
effect answer not your promises, when I see you promise too much.

I believe notwithstanding, my Lord (replied the Senator) that I am easily
able to bring to pass all that I promise; for in short, my Lord, do you believe
that Attanes, to retain Edescon, will draw upon himself an Army of a hundred
thousand men, with the great Hannibal in the head of it? and although that
should not be, is he in a condition to be able to keep that Prince? So that is
it possible for him to stick at the giving of that, which he may soon be forced
to surrender? and can he imagine himself capable to withstand you? For Edescon
(pursued he) I shall have less difficulty to win upon his mind; and that
Prince, I am assured, will be so ravished with the proposal which I shall make
to him in your behalf, that he will easily forget all his losses; which to
speak truth, are gloriously repaired in such an illustrious Alliance. My Master
heard these words with an extreme satisfaction, and the passion which possessed
him, giving ordinarily more hope then fear, and above all, to persons of a high
spirit, he felt all his pensiveness and apprehension dissipated in a moment:
And embracing the Saguntine Senator, I shall owe all to you Alcon (said he to
him) and you may assuredly expect my acknowledgements. Go Alcon (continued he)
and that this day, I beseech you, that you leave me no longer in an impatience,
which is insupportable unto me. In the mean time, to follow and authorize your
counsel, I will put my self at the head of a part of my Army, and go by open
force to obtain that of Attanes, which perhaps he would refuse you, if you have
nothing but reasons to urge him with. My Lord (answered Alcon) I shall depart,
seeing it is your pleasure. Do so immediately (replied Hannibal) and to secure
against any notice to be given to the King of the Turdetanes, prejudicial to
us, our design must not be communicated to any person. And for my self (added
he) I shall discover it to none whatsoever, saving to the Prince of Celtiberia,
to whom I have very great obligations.

After these words, my Master expressed some impatience; and Alcon knowing that
this Prince willed nothing but with earnestness and passion, left him, and went
to provide conveniences for his journey. Hannibal repaired to Lucius, and
communicated this Design to him; and the generous Celtiberian having long since
protested that he would follow him, he was at length constrained to suffer this
obliging Prince to engage himself to join with him aftter the return of the
Courrier, which he had dispatched to the Queen his Mother.

At his departure from Lucius, my Master was minded to visit the Princess; but
he durst not do it, and therefore resolved to attend till the Prince Edescon
should present him: So that without longer delay at Castulon, we mounted horse,
and Alcon did not separate from us, till he had cause the Prince Hannibal to
promise to do no act of hostility, before he knew his negotiations was
unprofitable. The Saguntine Senator had not sooner put himself upon his way;
but Hannibal accompanied with Hanno, Magar, and three or four Officers, took
theirs toward the Villages which are upon the banks of Batis, between Castulon
and Hispalis, where were quartered a considerable number of Soldiers. My
Master soon summoned them, and gave such orders as he thought necessary for the
management of his design. He attended news from Alcon in these parts about six
days, and on the sixth day a paquet was brought him, when he was upon the point
of going to bed. It is easy to judge that the Prince instantly read what Alcon
had written to him, and that it was not without an extreme joy that he
understood this Senator had acted with success. He also learnt that the hatred
which Regulus had against the Carthaginians, had not been a less obstruction to
Alcon, then the love which Attanes had for Thomira had perplexed him; but that
at length Alcon had accomplished the thing, having been powerfully seconded by
the Turdetanes, whom the only name of Hannibal had i^mediately caused to
murmur both against Regulus and Attanes himself: so that my Master was assured
that Edescon was upon the point of coming to Castulon, that he was very glad to
have understood aright the things from Alcons mouth, which had been
misrepresented to him; and toward the end of the Letter. Hannibal was
entreated to expect more particular news within four days. Alcon came himself
to deliver them precisely at the time he was to send them, being accompanied
with a person of a most high and majestic aspect, whom we soon knew to be the
Prince of the Saguntines, My Master ran to receive Edescon, which he did with
so much respect and difference, that I should have difficultly believed what I
saw, had I not presently recollected that Edescon was Father of the princess
Thomira.

But, my Lords (said Aspar to the Princes who listened to him) you may please to
permit me to pass over in silence the particularities of this enterview, and
only to tell you that these two Princes made a thousand respectful
protestations to one another, and after that a thousand excuses for all they
had done against one another, before their mutual knowledge: and in a word,
Edescon rendered Hannibal that which he thought belonged to a Prince which
reigned over all Africa, and part of Europe, and who was yet more considerable
for his illustrious qualities, then for the extent of his Dominion.
Nevertheless all that Edescon rendered, did not equal that which he received of
Hannibal; for the respects which my Master had for the Prince of the
Saguntines, were not inferior to the passion he had for the Princess of
Castulon, by which I leave you to judge of their intenseness, and intimate to
you the impossiblity for me to be exact in this part of my Narration, if I
would particularze it. These first Civilities being ended (proceeded Aspar)
wherein esteem and ackowledgement supplied the office of ordinary Ceremonies,
the two Princes, with Alcon and Hanno, went to dinner, and each of them after
the repast, testified their extreme desire to return to Castulon, to see the
fair Princess of Thomira, and the amiable daughter of Alcon; wheref^re they all
took horse as soon as was possible, expressing great transports of joy in their
approaching near Castulon, that it would have been hard to have distinguished
the most satisfied person amongst them, excepting my Master. You will not
wonder, my Lord, (said the Prince of the Saguntines to him of Carthage) that I
appear very much contented, if you consider I am a Father, and that I am upon
the point of seeing a daughter, for whom I have an infinite tenderness. Ah, My
Lord, answered Hannibal) express, I beseech you, all that which contributes to
your satisfaction; confess that the Princess of Castulon is a person wholly
miraculous, and omitting the goodness to conceal what I have done against you,
declare that you are going to see that admirable princess, after three or four
apparent hazards of losing her. My Lord (replied Edescon) I shall never conceal
that which is glorious for you; and if I can forget any thing of your
Victories, it shall be only the circumstances which have been prejudicial to
me. Nevertheless I will think of those circumstances, that I may have the
satisfaction of considering with what generosity you have afterward obliged
us, and with what goodness you have treated Thomira.

These words of Edescon made my Master blush, as if they were meant to reproach
him that he had not done enough; and the name of Thomira pronounced by a man
who only could dispose of her, caused the Illustrious Hannibal almost to
tremble, as fierce and as haughty as he is: so great is the power of love above
that of nature. Yet the great Carthaginian answered him nobly enough; and this
conversation having dured for some time, and Alcon and Hanno also spoken of the
princess Thomira, the discourse fell afterward to be of the amiable Daughter
of Alcon, which lasted till the company all alighted at a Village within half a
days journey of Castulon, with intent to lodge there. The next morning putting
our selves again upon the way, Hannibal could not moderate the passions which
agitated him, and his love was accompanied with top great desires, too great
hope and joy, for him to be master of it. So that yielding himself to the bent
of his impatience, he made his excuses to the prince of Edescon, and separated
himself from the rest, to see his Princess sooner, and to give her the news,
which could not but be most agreeable unto her. At length, Aspar (said he, when
we were a little distant from Edescon) at length Hannibal is the most happy
person in the world; he shall soon see his Princess; but he shall see her with
the authority of Edescon, and in a small time, Aspar; yes, very suddenly he
shall be exalted to the greatest felicity the world is able to give him. Yes, I
shall immediately see my Princess (said he, a few moments after, with a
transport of joy) I shall see that fair and adorable person, and moreover I
shall see her without fear of becoming unhappy. I should never end, if I should
rehearse all the passionate Prince said to me; for he spoke so many things, and
with so little connection, that it is impossible for me to remember them. In the
mean time, we speeded with so much alacrity, that it was not long before we
discovered the Towers of Castulon, and that sight ravishing Hannibal with joy,
augmented the quickness of our pace. It is not fit to detain you long in this
part of my discourse, being I think my self rather obliged to tell you that we
are arrived at Castulon; and if we arrived two hours sooner there then I
believed we could have done, we did also find our joy more augmented thereby
then we thought it could have been. My Master hastened to the Palace, and
immediately demanded to see the Princess, but instead of an answer, there was
nothing returned him but sighs, and he perceived that no body dared to open
their mouths to speak. Hannibal remained confounded, and not venturing to ask
what he feared to know, he but too well understood that this silence spoke some
sad accident. Nevertheless he would attempt it at length, and demanded where
the princess was, if she were sick, or not; and so peremptorily commanded it to
be told him, that one of the most confident of the attendants gave him this
information; My Lord (said he to the Prince Hannibal) two days are passed
since we saw the Princess, and since we cannot learn what is become of Alorca,
who is probably with her. We have spent (continued he) these two days in
search, but we have sought unprofitably, having found only a veil of the
Illustrious princess Thomira. Hannibal, as desperate, as instructed by this
discourse: What? shall I not see Thomira (cried he, with a tone that fignified
the trouble of his spirit) How? is Thomira lost? and shall I never more see
that Princess, whose very insensibility has charms in it, and who can alone
render me happy? After which, as his fiery temperament rendered him disposed to
violent passions, he walked sometime without speaking a word, and looked up to
heaven, as if he accused it of his misfortune, or rather as the only thing
against which he thought he might discharge all his choler. Then recollecting
himself, Ah, Hannibal! (said he) Thomira flies thee, and without doubt it is
her hatred which causes this accident that kills thee. But rouse up, O Hannibal
(continued he with a higher tone, thou fallest upon Thomira, instead of
attaquing the author of thy unhappiness, and do not accuse the perfidious
Alorca for the carrying away of the Princess. Know thou not, that that
divine person had not fewer charms for Alorca then he had for Hannibal, and
that the difference of the proceedings comes not but from that between the
Spaniard and the prince of Carthage? Yes, ravisher of my bliss, yes, perfidious
Alorca (continued he) thou take away Thomira from me, thou losest the respect
thou owe her; and that which is yet more perplexing, is, that perhaps thou
enlargest thy crime further, and treatest a Prince with violence, who deserves
the adoration of all the Earth. But I will pursue thee in what ever corner of
the world thou shall hide thee: yes, I will go punish this thy attempt, and
with unheard of tortures, revenge an infidelity beyond example. The
impetuousness of choler wholly arrested his further speech, and the Prince
being driven by the most ardent of all passions, walked about some turns
without speaking a word; and when he did speak, there was nothing heard from
his entangled discourse but reproaches and menacings.

They which beheld this agitation of Hannibal, did not believe themselves
sufficiently assured of their innocence, they durst not open their mouths in
their own justification; and their silence, which was indeed the effect of
their fear and respect, seemed to my Master an evidence of their crime: Come
(cried he to them) you accomplices of Alorca; come you perfidious Traitors, let
us go seek my divine Princess, and be assured your offenses shall not escape
unpunished, if if I find not the adorable person it has bereaved me off. He
went forth at the end of these words; and causing himself to be conducted to
the place where Thomira's Veil was found, he went thither with so great
precipitance, that we judged his flame did not less carry him, then it devoured
him. When he arrived at the place, his transports were redoubled, and he became
perfectly furious, he went a little distance from us, and uttered a thousand
imprecations against Alorca.

I would not abandon the Prince in this deplorable estate, but continued with
him till we came to a little Wood, whither he went, that he might totally
permit himself to the violence of his passion, or perhaps to act something more
tragical. He sought, or perhaps casually found a covert place; where turning
his eye at random, or by some instinct, inspired by his choler, to find
something on which he might discharge it; he discovered an object that wholly
arrested his sight and progress, and rendered him almost immovable: it was a
man stretched along at the foot of a great Oak, but it was that man who could
only detain the Prince Hannibal, and give him an attention whereof he seemed
to be no more capable. My Master immediately knew him to be that Alorca whom he
sought; but he observed him in a condition, rather to move his compassion, then
the effects of his cholar: For he beheld Alorca, not as a Traitor, and a
Ravisher, but grievously wounded, and the Alorca whom he had heretofore
esteemed, pale, and covered with blood. Hannibal being surpised with this
commiserable object, found his choler to rebate some of its violence; and when
his reason was capable of acting with liberty: Alorca, said he, thou art dead
unquestionably in defense of Thomira; thou have fallen under the sword of her
ravishers, and she has been carried away by thy death: So that when thou have
lost thy life to preserve that which I love, I accused thee of of a dreadful
crime, and thou receivest this sort of recompense from the unjust Hannibal.

It is true, pursued he, that thou have been advantagiously recompensed, in
dying for a Divine Princess; and this Hannibal who accused thee of a crime,
thou undertookest to punish, even this Hannibal beholds thy glorious Destiny
with envy. Well Aspar, continued he, turning toward me, is it not fit I dye,
that I live not absent from my Princess? Dye, answered I: Alas, my Lord, you
ought to live, that you may go and recover the Princess of Castulon, out of the
hands of her Ravishers. But, my Master replied, if Thomira has consented to
her carrying away, and prefers her Ravishers before the unfortunate Hannibal,
is it not expedient for me to dye, who am so lostly amorous of her.

My Lord (replied I) if you love the Princess of Castulon in the measure you
profess, you ought not to dye, when she lives contentedly; and you would be
injurious, to despair in this occasion, if what I have learnt be true, that it
is meet for us to resent the same passions which the persons do we love. Alas,
Aspar (interrupted my Master) thou have either never loved, or never left the
person dear to thee in this manner, since thou art ignorant, that a Lover in
such a conjuncture, ought to resent contrary passions to those of the beloved
person, at such time as she is with his Rival.

Sccarce had my Master ended these words, but he beheld the Prince Edescon,
Alcon, Hanno, and Magar coming, with a great train following them. You see, my
Lord (said Hannibal presently to the Prince of the Saguntines) that Thomira is
taken away from you: I cannot suspect any other then Attanes capable of this
crime, but that Attanes shall soon know whether Hannibal may safely be
offended. Alas, my Lord (answered Edescon, in whom sorrow acted after another
sort) must I be eternally unhappy? Can it not be that I know Thomira is in
being, but to have her pass with me for a criminal? and must not I see my dear
Daughter, when I am satisfied of her innocence and virtue? Alas, my Lord,
answered my Master -- after which he was silent, not daring to continue his
discourse, out of a restraint not usual with him; and yet giving us to know by
his countenance, that he designed to show his unhappinesses incomparably
greater then those of Edescon.

These two Princes declared their grief a while, only by silent looks; so that
Alcon and Hanno were constrained to signify theirs also in the same fashion,
being surprised with the like loss; for Nadalia was also carried away with
Thomira. But it was at length esteemed meet to retire, and to cause the body of
Alorca to be carried to Castulon, to render him the duties of Sepulture.
Whereupon they which went to lift him up, perceived something glittering upon
the ground, and presently found that it was a small Table Book, the cover of
which was enriched with jewels: This they instantly presented to the Prince
Hannibal; but scarce had Edescon cast his eye upon it, but he cried, O Gods!
behold the Tablet of my dear Thomira! upon which Hannibal offered it to him
with great respect: And Edescon having opened it, read these words aloud, which
he found in the first leaf.

Thomira to the Prince Hannibal.
THe combat of Lucius against Alorca has very much troubled me; but, my Lord,
the disquiet in which I am, must not hinder me from giving you to know, that I
was inclined to satisfy you; and I might tell you, if it were fitting, that it
was with less repugnance, then a person of my Sex ought apparently to have:
Wherefore I have willingly left you this scrowl, to assure you, that I was
determined to attend you at Castulon, that I designed there to acquit me of
what I owe you; and that I should not separate my self from you, if Lucius and
Nadalia did not force me so to do.

Thomira.


The reading of this Letter, which contained things so little expected,
surprised all those that heard it; insomuch, that the two Princes seemed
astonished therewith; and silence would have possessed the place a long time, if
amongst the crowd that had followed the Prince of the Saguntines, there had not
been heard a certain humming of voices, wherein were confusedly mingled, the
names of Lucius and Alorca, with those of Thomira and Nadalia. This murmuring
noise, in some measure drew Edescon out of his astonishment; who lifting his
eyes toward Heaven, and testifying greater sorrow then admiration, O Gods,
cried he, is it not enough that Thomira is snatched from me, but she must needs
learn me her self, that she is unworthy the grief that I resent for her.

Here, my Lord, pursued he, turning toward my Master, receive I beseech you
this Tablet, I will keep nothing that may reproach me with the faults of
Thomira: Take this Ticket, which is addressed to you, and consider it as a
thing that must cure your passion, and cause you to contemn a woman that is
capable of making so free a declaration. Alas, my Lord, interrupted my Master,
how do you treat the Princess Thomira? is it because she is criminal, or for
that she has some goodness for a Prince that adores her? and can you believe
her too indulgent, having such goodness only in the time that I am remote from
her? He uttered many passionate things of this sort, to which Edescon gave
mitigating answers: And that which was most rare, was, that in returning to
Castulon, Hannibal on the one side rendered thanks to the Princess, and was
incensed against Lucius; while on the other side, Edescon showed himself in
wrath against Thomira, and perfectly satisfied with the Prince of Celtiberia.
Hannibal was not only enraged against Lucius, he did not altogether spare
Alcon in his affliction; but demanded of him, if ever any thing was more
unhandsome and offensive then the proceedings of Nadalia, who acted cruelly
against him, after she had made semblance to do him good offices with the
Princess of Castulon.

Alas, my Lord, answered Alcon, all surprised and afflicted, I do not apprehend
clearly in this affair; but in what manner soever it has been carried, I
cannot believe that Nadalia has acted against you. To know this, interrupted
Hannibal, you need only read the last words of my Princess, and there will be
no reason to doubt of it, after such express terms, I should not withdraw my
self from you, did not Lucius and Nadalia force me so to do.

If Alcon was by these last words too much perplexed to answer, my Master was
of a humor not to be easily silent in this occasion; insomuch, that he
complained and threatened, till he was arrived at Castulon. He was no sooner in
this City, but he immediately sent Discoverers into all places where his
Princess could be imagined to have past: Himself also took horse, to find
news of her, and learnt some the next morning of some persons who had seen
Lucius, Thomira, and Nadalia, and two unknown men.

My Master was informed, that the Prince of Celtiberia had embarked his fair
Cousin upon the River Boetis to gain the Sea, and go seek in Italy some place
of surety against the power of the Carthaginians. Upon which Love and Ambition
conspiring together in the breast of Hannibal, this Prince suddenly chased away
all his sadness, and expressed nothing but a noble impatience to go speedily
into Italy, where Thomira and Glory seemed to attend him: Nevertheless, before
he took orders for the affairs of Spain, he declared his design to the Prince
Edescon, and protested to him a thousand times, That whereas he intended to go
in search of the fair Princess of Castulon, it was not out of any hope to be
received favorably by her, but only to draw her out of the hands of Lucius,
and afterward to restore her into those of the Prince Edescon. The Father of
Thomira answered my Master, That he ought to have a design more glorious; and
then entreated him, not to desolate Celtiberia, as he had resolved: which
Hannibal accorded him, and had so great respect to him, that he restrained his
rage in his presence against the Prince of Celtiberia.

While these things past at Castulon, Asdrubal Barsa arrived there: My Master
embraced this Prince with very great tenderness; and when Asdrubal told him,
that four Roman Ambassadors had denounced war against Carthage. We will carry
it to Rome (interrupted he fiercely) and we shall see whether the Carthaginians
know not as well how to manage it, as the Romans do to declare it. He said no
more to this affair; but having presently ended the conversation, he went to
contrive and order expediences for his voyage into Italy.

T^^ great Pers^nage, who is as prudent a Captain, as he is a fierce and hardy
Soldier, determined with an admirable conduct, to provide for the safety of
Africa and Spain; and to that purpose, sent Thirty thousand Spaniards into
Africa, to defend the most considerable places, and left a like number of
Africans in Spain, to the end these two Countries might be better preserved by
two Nations; who at the same time in both the one and the other, served both
for Garrison and Hostage. Having ordered many other things, necessary for the
conservation of a Country which he was to forsake; and leaving Asdrubal at new
Carthage, he directed his course toward the Pyrenian Mountains, in the head of
an Army of a hundred thousand foot, and twenty thousand horse, and a train of
fifty Elephants.

But being all the world speaks the victories of the famous Hannibal, and I am
entered upon a story sufficiently well known; if you please, my Lords, to
dispense with me, I shall forbear to particularize the Battles which my Master
fought, and the Victories which he gained: Yet it is meet to tell you, that he
brought to his obedience the Ilergetes, the Bargusins, and the Ausetanes; and
having passed those high Mountains which separate Spain from the Gauls, he left
Hanno the charge of all that Country, and to guard the passage of the Pyrenean
Mountains, with twenty thousand foot, and four thousand horse. After which, he
made new levies, to recruit that diminishment of his Army, and was eager of
having such forces as might in appearance assure those Conquests he had made,
from which he was obliged to be far distant.

When we descended into the Country of the Gauls, my Master restrained all
acts of Hostility; and sent Ambassadors to inform the Gauls, that he intended
to march as a Traveller, and not as an Enemy; and that he was determined not to
draw his sword, till he were arrived in Italy. Upon which he obtained a free
passage; so that we marched as far as the Rhosne, in no other disturbance, then
if we had marched in the Territories of our own Empire: But we found a powerful
obstacle at the passage of this River; for Regulus not prevailing with the
Turdetanes to rise against us, had passed into Gaul, to effect the like design
there, hoping he should easily draw a Nation to take up Arms, who passionately
affected fighting.

The Volcae, the Cavarians, with this Roman in the head of them, put themselves
in a posture to dispute us the passage of the Rhosne: But Hannibal designed to
overcome by a slight, lest the courage of the Gauls might be a means to
withhold him from embarrassing Italy: Wherefore he made show that he would pass
the Rhosne; and accordingly prepared a good number of boats, but in the mean
time he sent Maharbal with five and twenty thousand men to foord it, at a
Village where the Soanes discharges it self into this River.

Ma^arbal having orders to come and charge the Gauls in the rear, performed
all his Commission so happily, that the Volcaes, who were in readiness to repel
us, finding themselves set upon by our boats, and charged by the Troops of
Maharbal at the same moment, were so astonished with the surprise, that they
betook themselves to flight, and left us masters of the field.

Scarce was our Army landed on the other side the Rhosne, but we understood,
that of the Romans was arrived at Marsilia, under the conduct of Publius
Scipio, who you know was Father of that Scipio who has done such glorious
exploits in Africa, while my Master was absent. Hannibal sent a Numidian called
Micipsa, with five hundred horse, to discover the Enemy, and continued his
march directly toward the Alps; having no other design then to arrive
speedily in Italy, both to see there his fair Princess, and to cast a greater
terror into the spirits of the Romans, by fighting them in their own Country.
But alas, toward the end of the day, we beheld a part of our Scouts coming, who
were re^ired in disorder, and seemed the most of them sorely battered and hurt.
My Master soon informed himself exactly of all that had past; and it was told,
that they were beaten back by the Scouts of the Romans, and that they were
retreated, after they had lost two hundred of their Companions, seen Micipsa
cut in pieces, and themselves reduced into that estate as they appeared. I sent
Micipsa (answered Hannibal) to discover the Enemy, not to fight him.

Ah, my Lord (replied the Carthaginian that spoke to him) when you fully know
this adventure, you will without doubt cease to accuse us, and perceive
something so surprising in it, that you will impute the success we have had,
rather to the good fortune of the Romans, then to any deficience or bad conduct
of ours: For as soon (continued he) as we had sight of the Enemies Scouts, we
made a stand on both sides, the better to observe one another; so that Micipsa
perceiving we had the advantage of number, and also judging that we were not
inferior in valor to the Romans, resolutely charged them, thinking either to
have the glory of carrying the first advantage in an important war; or to
prevent the Enemies, whom he saw already upon the point to come up to us. The
combat was at first furious and bloody, and when we had made our losses equal,
and our forces were not so, the Romans were upon the point of flying; but on a
sudden a cry was set up amongst them, O Gods! It Is the Son of the General! It Is
young Scipio! These words, which were produced by a loud joy, mixed with
admiration, were no sooner heard, but we beheld in the head of them a young
Prince, who peradventure had not yet attained his fifteenth year: He was
magnificently clothed, and advantagiously mounted, but had no other arms then
his sword and shield, so that we beheld and admired his countenance at the same
moment. But, my Lord, if the aspect of this young Roman appeared to us on
sudden marvellously noble, we soon felt that his arm was equally redoubtable:
He slew Micipsa with the first blow of his sword he gave him; after which he
broke upon us, with a valor so prodigious, that if I had never seen you
fighting, I should be hard of belief that it were possible for a man to do so
great actions of prowess. In a word, my Lord, we endeavored to make
resistance, but ineffectually; and the Romans so redoubled their vigours, that
after the slaughter of 200 of ours, they at length enforced us to secure our
selves by retreat. Hannibal was disgusted at this relation, and began to have
esteem of the young Scipio, although he expressed no tokens of it, that he might
not discourage his own Troops. From hence we marched onwards, always in a
posture to receive the Romans, till we arrived at the banks of Durantia; where
we had intelligence that Scipio was embarked. We past this River with great
difficulty, and as we were entering into the Frontiers of the Allobroges, two
Brethren. who were at contest for sovereignty, came to the famous Prince of
Carthage, whom they took for Judge of their difference. Hannibal heard all
their reasons, and having equitably balanced them, he adjudg'd the Kingdom to
the eldest, named Brancus; from whom he received all manner of assistance in
his passage over the Alps. Matales King of the Burgundian Gauls, came to join
his forces with my Masters; and these two Princes afforded us many supplies,
both of provision, ammunition and clothing, of which we stood in great need,
to defend us from the vehemence of the cold, which in these parts is in all
seasons insupportable: upon this supply, our Soldiers were not slow to
undertake the climing of the Alps; which notwithstanding they no sooner looked
upon, but they were surprised with terror, never any more frightful spectacle
having been seen by us* for if on one side the Alps seemed inaccessible, their
tops being covered with snow above the clouds, they appeared on the other as
impenetrable, by presenting to our view a thousand dreadful rocks, which broke
off the ways of our passage* and ended their course with precipices: yet this
was not the only inconvenience we were to combat with; for these mountains
were possessed by a savage and cruel people, who would dispute the way with us,
and who indeed pestred us so violently, that we were constrained to creep to
fight them. These Barbarians came in great troops, through by ways, to attaque
us unawares; sometimes they fought with us at handiblows, but most frequently
their use was, to roll great pieces of rock down, which overvvhelmed and
crushed our Soldiers, our horses, and our Elephants: nevertheless, our
invincible Prince surmounted all these obstacles; he always avoided the first
with covering himself with his shield, and causing his Soldiers to make a halt
every moment to recover breath, and to use their arms offensive. But, my Lord,
I beg your permission to omit this troublesome attempt; and come to tell you,
that we arrived at length at the top of the Alps, nine days after we had began
to mount them. Hannibal discovering from the highest of these mountains, a
plain of great extent; turned himself toward his Soldiers, and showed them
the towns, villages, meadows, and fruitful hills, with the pleasant rivers, and
in short, the most pleasant Country of the world: Behold Italy (cried he, with
an air of fierceness and joy) see it my dear friends, and consider, that it is
in these fair places where you shall soon find the end of your labors, and the
recompense of your travels. As soon as the Prince had pronounced these words,
the infinite multitude which composed his Army, shouted out cries of joy to
heaven, and we immediately remarked in the faces of our Soldiers something so
gallant and confident, that we judged they had forgot their weariness and
incombrances, and that they had heart enough to overcome those which were
behind, and they appeared worthy to march under the Grand Hannibal: wherefore
we began (...) descend with very much joy, which was notwithstanding
accompanied with extreme pains; for instead of finding any track to pass in, we
soon beheld a great icy precipice, and to speak all in few words, I assure you,
that during our passage of these mountains, we suffered much more in
descending, then we did in our ascent. I shall forbear to mention that
frightful Rock we met with, which was an obstacle apparently never to be
surmounted; for without doubt you heard, that Hannibal was enforced to make his
way through with fire and sword, and so making such places accessible, which
were far from being so, he seemed to triumph over Nature, and has left to
posterity, the eternal marks of his grandeur. It is enough to say, that after
six days spent in descending, at last we arrived in Cisalpine Gaul; and after
so many fights, so many rivers past, and so many mountains climbed over, we
began to breathe with some sweetness, and to recover the strength we had lost.
But having brought the Prince of Carthage to these so much desired places, I
think my self obliged to declare to you in the next place, the diligence he
employed to know where the Princess of Castulon might be, and what forces the
Romans led against him; yet I shall omit all but what concerns Hannibal and
Thomira, as believing it not necessary to recount you the particularities of
the War of Italy; since without doubt, the great Princes before whom I speak,
cannot be ignorant of things which all the world talks of with astonishment.
Ah, Aspar (interrupted the King of Syria) why should you break your order, to
pass in silence the great actions of your Master? And can you (added Nicomedes)
speak of Hannibal, withour rehearsing his victories? The sick King, and the
Prince Persens had the same desires, with Antiochus, and the Prince of
Bithynia, but they did not express them, because they perceived Aspar about to
resume his discourse, which he pursued in this manner.

The end of the Second Book.
The Grand SCIPIO.
The First Part.
BOOK III.
HAnnibal was so passionately desirous of getting intelligence of his Princess
Thomira, that to satisfy his ardency, he dispatched the most diligent persons
that were about him to the places wherein probability Lucius might have taken
sanctuary; himself in the mean time so succesfull, laboring to gain the amity
of the people from whom he might receive supplies, that the Insubrians and
Ligurians in a short time engaged to furnish their utmost. But he had not the
same facility in procuring Alliance with a certain people situate at the foot
of the Alps; so that after some fights, my Master resolved to lay siege to
Turin, which is the capital City of this Country. This place was of
considerable strength; but being it was Hannibal that was against it, it was
carried within a few days, and within a few more, when we advanced toward the
River Ticines, we learnt that Publius Scipio was arrived at Pisa, with an Army
which he had formed of the remnant of that of Manlius, which was beaten by the
Gauls. Our valiant Prince, who breathed after battle, was exreamly satisfied
with this tidings; and knowing that a happy beginning presages a glorious
continuance, he determined to speak to his Army, to excite them to acquit
themselves manfully in the occasion which presented it self. We had scarce
heard the news of Publius's making a Bridge over Ticines, to pass his Forces
over to come at us, but the fierce Hannibal would prevent him; and to the end
he might be courageously seconded, mounting upon a small hillock, from whence
he might be seen, and heard, he delivered his mind to his Soldiers that
encompassed him, in these words:

The Speech of HANNIBAL to his Soldiers.
MY Friends, your valor is so fully known to me, that I think I shall not
surprise you, when I tell you the state of the case is this, either to dye or
conquer. You observe how we are environed with the Alps, the Po, and the two
Seas: and I should say, we have no passage at all left us, did I not know that
we are owners of our Swords, that shall hew out our ways, and give us passage
over the bodies of those enemies that withstand it. It is necessary therefore
that we either dye or overcome: but why do I mention dying? there is nothing
else to be done but to conquer; we must do it, and I look upon you already as
Victors. Are not you those Troops which have won so many fields, taken so many
Cities, and who triumphant over several Nations, have traversed a hundred
Provinces, without being able to be stopped? If you are the same Legions, who
shall resist us? shall the refuse of an Army which the Gauls have beaten to
your hand? and can you believe this rallied crew have heart enough to stand
you? These, I say, who carry with them in all places the fatal Image of their
defeat, will they not tremble at your approach? Behold, my friends, the
difference there is between your selves, and the forces you are going to
engage; and I believe it sufficient to tell you, that you are going to charge
them, to affirm in the next place that you are going to vanquish them; since
strength and generosity are apparent in the attaque, as in the defense, nothing
can be seen but a feeble resistance, such a resistance as is not made of
course, but only because there is a constraint to to do it. Having thus shown
you the advantages you have over your enemies, I should come next to the
difference there is between the two Generals, but that I rather reserve this
particular to be determined in the encounter. Nevertheless I may confidently
say, that Scipio, how valiant soever he be, cannot infuse life and resolution
into Soldiers that yet know him not; as these Troops which are known to him
only by their defeat, cannot afford him any hope. But Hannibal, under whom you
march, has been a thousand times witness of your brave actions. He has beheld
you a hundred times at a breach, and has there seen you fight with such
valor, that you have carried all the Cities and Fortresses which you ever
attempted: and how many times has he seen you all covered with blood and dust,
bear down the whole Gross of your enemies, and gain most absolute battles? so
that, my friends, I know you well, because I know you most valiant; and I see
already upon your faces, that you will behave your selves as you have
accustomed to do, that is, that you will overcome. Besides, have you not the
same Hannibal in the head of you, under whom you have always come off
victorious; that Hannibal, who instead of being unknown to you, as Scipio is to
his Forces, has been bred up amongst you from the ninth year of his age, as
your companion, rather then as your Prince? that Hannibal, whom you have seen
fight under the great Amilcar; In a word, that Hannibal, whom you have beheld
perform things which without question have deserved your remembrance. Let us
then go Conquer, my friends; let us march on to Victory, and think not the
recompense which attends you is mean, because your enemies are but little
formidable; we shall recover Scicilia and Sardinia, which the Romans have
usurped from us; we shall gain Italy it self, and the conquest of Rome shall be
followed with that of the Universe. But though you should not expect a reward
of this importance, yet ought you not to go against your Tyrants, who have made
you pay Tribute during several years, who have usurped two fair Islands from
you, who have demanded your General to be delivered up to them as a criminal,
because he has been too valiant to put up their indignities? and, in a word,
ought you not to go against such enemies as treat you like slaves, who would
bound your Conquests in Spain, and forbid you to pass the River Iberus?
Moreover, were not revenge the most delicious thing in the world, yet ought not
you to act for glory? It glitters before your eyes, and you may behold how it
courts and invites you. Let us on then, my friends, let us go and receive the
Crowns which she has prepared us.

This speech produced the effect for which Hannibal intended it, and all the
Officers and Soldiers testified their resolvedness, either to overcome or dye;
and so eagerly expressed their desires to be at fight; that our valiant General
improving this noble heat, put himself in the head of them, and marched
directly against the enemy, who by this time had passed the River. But to
hinder least the people inhabiting there abouts, should take the side of
Scipio, my Master commanded out Maharbal with four thousand Horse to harrase
and wast the Country of his confederates; by which he struck a great terror
round about, and broke the design of diverse who had bethought of siding with
the enemy. But both parties being ardently desirous to engage, there was no
great delay before we met; so that the two Armies being within view, Hannibal
omitted nothing for the marshalling of his Legions, of all that lies upon an
experienced General to do. After which, he went from rank to rank, commending
some, and promising others, and so caressed the Officers, that he perceived
their ardour inflamed to the highest pitch of forwardness, and greatly ominous
to the event. But it must be acknowledged, that it was not to no purpose that
my Master used all this diligence, since he was to fight against Publius
Scipio, who in truth, had all the requisites of a great Captain. The fight
which was soon commenced, was a long time obstinate on both sides, and the
victory very dubious; but Maharbal on a sudden (according to the order he had
rereceived so to do) coming to charge the Legionaries in the flank, the
enemies were put into disorder, and my valiant Master made so good use of it,
that the Romans began to abate their vigor, and to make only a faint
resistance. Publius not being able to endure this change, rode up to the head
of his men, to animate them by his example; but he was soon forsaken; so that
after he had behaved himself with much gallantry and courage, he was at last
wounded and made prisoner. You know, without doubt, my Lords, in what manner he
was rescued out of our hands; and you cannot but have heard related of all that
the young Scipio performed in this engagement. I do not believe (said Antiochus
thereupon) that these Princes can be ignorant of it, since my self; being far
more remote from Italy, have understood the news of it, and afterward heard
that all the world talked of it with admiration. Aspar observing that his
Auditor by their silence approved that which the King of Syria had said,
resumed his discourse in this manner. Seeing you have known all the young
Scipio did at this time great and memorable, and in what sort he delivered his
Father, there remains nothing more for me to acquaint you with touching this
fight, but only that the Illustrious Hannibal sought along time for the
Scipio's and Regulus, whom he was informed was in the enemies Army, and so well
redoubled his efforts, that doing all that the most valiant man could do, he
became at length victorious. For the Romans not being able to sustain his
prowess, and no longer animated by the young Scipio, who was taken up in the
recovering of his Father, they resolved at length to retreat; which they did
within a little while, in order enough, although they had lost ten or twelve
thousand men, and left us complete Masters of the Field.

My Master wanted no reason to be extremely satisfied with this happy
beginning; but as there is something which never disposes events without the
mixture of good and evil; this Prince was enforced to sigh after his Victory,
and to think upon Thomira, instead of considering with delight the defeat of
his enemies. For, while the Romans were drawing out of the Field, those who
had been ordered to get information of the Princess of Castulon, returned with
no other tidings to Hannibal, then that they could hear none of her, although
they had inquired in the Ports of Liguria, of the Tyrrhene Sea, and Scicily,
and used all care and search at Pisa, Rome, and Capua. Alas, Lucius! (cried the
passionate Prince of Carthage) thou imployest that life and liberty which I
have given thee to tear forth my heart! Ah, Traitor, unworthy to wear the name
of a Prince, did thou promise me thy friendship for no other end but to have
means to betray me? and must I be rendered unhappy by thee, when I triumph over
all? And, you, fair Princess! adorable Thomira! consider, I beseech you, the
torment your absence causes the miserable Hannibal to suffer; and being Lucius
has had the presumption to act contrary to your sentiments, be pleased to be
incensed against him, divine Princess, that so he may be punished for his crime,
and Hannibal who adores you, receive this kind of consolation. The Prince
uttered a hundred passionate things more, and afterward made a hundred
demands; but recollecting all that he either said or did to be unprofitable.
Well, Thomira (said he at length) I cannot learn where you are, but I shall
extend my Conquests so far, that it shall be difficult for Lucius to find a
sanctuary: even all the Earth shall be employed to take you out of his hands,
when it shall know that Hannibal seeks the fairest person of the world, and
your divine aspect shall manifest you to be the person whom Hannibal seeks.

After these words, the Prince, to effect things according to the order he had
deliberated, went to provide for his advancing into the enemies Country; which
as he was doing, he received intelligence that Sempronius had left Scicily, and
was coming with his Army to supply the place of Scipio, who was obliged to
depart from Italy, to go and command in Spain. I need not tell you in what
manner Hannibal and Sempronius met, or how they encountered; only thus much,
that this valiant Roman was overthrown near Trebra, and that nevertheless by
his good conduct, he preserved ten thousand men of his Army. In the mean time
Servilius and Flaminius were created Consuls at Rome, and the Commission of
managing the War against Hannibal falling to Flaminius, and this fierce Consul
being hardy to temerity, he presently put himself in the head of his Army, and
without regard to a thousand prodigies which threatened him with the loss of
himself and his forces, he advanced in great precipitation to come and fight
us. My Master used extreme diligence to encounter him, and to draw near to
Rome; but being arrived at a certain passage, which is between the Lake of
Thrasymene and a Mountain; he possessed himself of all the advantageous
places, and encamping on this side the Straites, sent to waste the Country
about, to the end the cries of the people might speedily alarm Flaminius to
their succor, and cause him to come to the passage of the Lake.

Flaminius came thither in the same manner my Master had foreseen; where having
engaged his Army between the Lake and the Mountain, he saw himself charged at
an instant on so many sides, that all his Troops were defeated, and himself
lost his life for having fought with too much valor. Then it was that there
was a great consternation in Rome, and that sorrow produced there the strange
effects, of which you have without doubt been informed, and that in this
disorder they were constrained to create a Dictator, to the end he might
provide for the affairs of the Commonwealth, and undertake the sovereign
administration of it. During this while, Joy and Confidence were the only
passions which animated our Soldiers. Nevertheless my Master intending to
take Spoletta in his way to the siege of Rome, he met with so great resistance
from the place, that he deemed it more consequent to raise the siege, and go
and fight the Romans, who employed their utmost efforts to deliver their
Country from extreme desolation. Fabius, who was the person created Dictator,
took the Field with all the force that he could gather; and when we learnt that
the Scipioes made great progresses in Spain, and that Servilius and Regulus
(who had succeeded Flaminius) came to join their Troops to those of the
Dictator: my Master, to hinder this Union, advanced against Fabius with an
extreme diligence. But it must be confessed that the Romans found their
Hannibal in Fabius, as my Master himself acknowledged. For this prudent
Dictator fought us after a new rate; and being assured he had to do with a man
extremely valiant, a perpetual Victor, and one who drives at the end of the
War, he laid his design to overcome without fighting him. In effect the wise
Fabius saw himself environed with Romans, or confederates of the Romans,
while we were in the middle of our enemies, and could hope no assistance nor
supplies either in Money or Munitions, and that we were constrained to go forth
every day to forage for subsistence. Wherefore he seisd on all the fortresses
by which he might hinder our course, to the end hunger might in a short time do
that against Hannibal, which all the forces of Italy could not. My Master,
whose interest it was, as much to fight, as that of Fabius to detract it,
attempted all possible means to draw his enemy to battle. He carried himself
even to give out dishonorable speeches of Fabius, and put himself in the head
of ten thousand Horse to defy him several times: but the Dictator never
quitted his resolution to hold off, and gently admonisht Minutius who would
have engaged, that the Romans were as much concerned to avoid battle, as
Hannibal was obliged to give it. Whereby this conduct of Fabius reduced us to a
strange extremity; for Corn failing us, and our Camp being blocked up by the
Romans, Hannibal had the displeasure to hear his Soldiers murmur against him,
and then to consider that his whole Army was in danger to perish miserably. But
as this famous Captain was not less great i^prudence then in valor, he served
himself of a stratagem which posterity will hereafter admire, and which I
cannot wholly pass over in silence, although it has filled the whole Earth
with talk.

I doubt not, my Lords, but you have heard that Hannibal always used to cause
good store of Oxen to be kept continually in his Army, for its support, and so
you will not wonder when I tell you, that we had at this time two thousand in
our Camp; whereupon my Master caused branches of Trees extraordinarily dry, to
be fastened to the horns of these beasts in a very dark night, to which setting
fire, he made the Oxen be driven against the Corpse du Guard of the enemy. The
Romans were suddenly affrighted with the number of fires which they beheld
moving toward them, being ignorant what they might be; but they were by and by
far more terrified when the Oxen became enraged by the violence of the fire;
broke in upon them, and besides the prodigious outrages they made, filled the
hills with dreadful bellowings, Hannibal in the head of the most expedite of
his Troops, followed these formidable Van-couriers, as I may call them, and
accomplishing by his valor what his prudence had so fortunately began, he
opened a free passage to the rest of his Army. Fabius and Minutius about the
break of day recollecting themselves from their astonishment, attempted upon
our Rear, but they were soon constrained to retreat: for my Master, who was
not wanting in any place where his presence was necessary, immediately accurred
with a considerable re-enforcement. After this happy success, we carried the
Town of Grenia in Apulia, where we found Corn and all sort of refreshment, and
learnt there that Fabius and Minutius did not accord well together, and that
the first was accused of too much slowness. Hannibal to divide them yet more,
and to render this slowness suspected, sent to pillage all the brave Houses of
the Romans in Apulia, with prohibition from meddling with those of Fabius, to
beget belief in the enemies that they corresponded one with another secretly,
and that out of this only consideration, the Dictator had forborne to accept
battle.

This deportment of my Master so much confirmed the party of Minu^^us, that he
was by authority of the Senate equalled in power with Fabius; upon which this
impatient Roman came to attaque us with the Gross of his Army, which without
doubt would have been utterly defeated, had not Fabius hastened to his aid, to
secure his retreat. But, my Lords, being I have hitherto observed no difference
of time to avoid your trouble, it may be permitted me to relate to you, with
semblable liberty, the memorable and glorious day at Cannae* where the Romans
beheld all their Forces defeated, under the conduct of the unfortunate and
generous Aemilius, and that of the precipitous Varro. No^, but the enemies were
valiant* and likewise stronger in number; but it must be confessed, that the
great courage and excellent management of my Master out-ballanced the
inequality, and won us that renowned Victory. For one of our principal
Officers, named Giscon, understanding the prodigious numerousness of the Roman
Army that came to fight us, appeared wholly astonished at the conjuncture: But,
my Master, instead of abating his fierceness, was remarked to have more
alacrity and gaiety then he was wont to have, after the loss of his Princess:
wherefore he immediately went to Horse, and being followed by the greatest part
of his Officers, possessed himself of a little rising place, whence he
discovered the two Consul's Armies, which were lately united to come up against
him. Hannibal viewed all this conjoined multitude attentively; but all those
that were with him expressed some kind of real admiration and astonishment, so
that Giscon addressing to him: Well, my Lord (said he) do you not observe that
the number and strength of our enemies is as great as I represented it to you?
It is true (answered my Master) but I also observe a wonder, which you take no
notice of: It Is (proceeded he smiling) that in the great multitude of men which
we behold, there is not so much as one of your name of Giscon.

This answer caused all that heard it to take heart, and being afterward
spread abroad in the Army, it was hoped that Hannibal would be as invincible,
as he appeared immovable by sporting at the sight of so many enemies; and it
was believed impossible not to conquer under the leading of so grand a
personage. The success evinced that it was not without reason their hopes were
conceived. For Hannibal this day performed all that the greatest Captain could
do, and might be expected from the most valiant Soldier. Yet I shall omit to
describe to you the ordering of the Armies, since undoubtedly you know that
Hannibal marshalled his in such sort, that the Romans were inconvenienced by
the Sun, the Wind, and the Dust. I shall only tell you, that my Master would
this day himself command the main battalia, that he might be opposed to
Aemilius, whom he knew to be the most excellent Captain of the Romans; and
that this Illustrious Carthaginian was in great danger of perishing this day,
which was the most glorious of his life. For this fierce Prince being far
engaged in the Army of the enemies, to find out Aemilius or the young Scipio,
whom he knew to be returned from Spain, was on a sudden wholly abandoned by his
own; and Aemilius being wounded about this time, the Voluntaries that fought
near his person, alighted to succor him, and likewise many others doing so
too, my Master found himself plunged in the thickest rout of them, so that
after a thousand brave deeds, he was upon the point of ^ailing: but as he was
in the midst of danger, enclosed with abundance of enemies, Ducarion, who
commanded the Insubrians and the Ligurians of our Army, ran into his help with
a Cavalier which we did not then know, but whom we soon perceived to be one of
the most valiant men of the world. For he exploited so manful actions, that
notwithstanding two or three wounds falling on him, he got close up to my
Master, and there fought on with singular vigor and spirit. But instead of
reciting to you all that our valiant General did afterward, I conceive it not
requisite to speak of the particularitys of this battle, being it is enough to
acquaint you that we engaged in it at Cannae, to let you judge what importance
the victory was which Hannibal won, and how deplorably desperate the loss was
our enemies suffered there: for it is certain that they lost betvveen sixty and
eighty thousand men that Emilius and Servilius were slain, that Regulus was
mortally vvounded, and that there perished such a number of persons of quality,
that my Master sent the Senate of Carthage a large Vessel of pure Gold, filled
with the Rings drawn from the fingers of the Roman Knights, which we found
dead upon the place. Then it was that the pride of Rome was abated, and that
our enemies looked upon themselves as absolutely overthrown beyond recovery; and
that in our Army amongst a thousand cries of joy, our Soldiers were heard cry
out fiercely in the height of their Victory, Away, Let us to Rome, Rome is our
own. Hannibal was ravished with joy, when he heard his Soldiers of themselves
demanding to go whether he was minded to lead them. So that having resolved
upon the siege of Rome, he designed not to defer it long, and only to afford
his Forces a few days for their repose and refection; but being in need
himself of that, whereof he was careful in the behalf of others, he caused
his Armor to be unbraced, and two or three wounds he had received to be
dressed, which we had the contentment to see were but slight, and that this
Illustrious Prince had not purchased the memorable field of Cannae at too great
a price. Yet he was obliged to take his bed by order of the Chyrurgions, where
instead of taking the quiet they believed he should find, he caused me to be
called, to discourse to me of the state of his Affairs. And well, Aspar (said
he to me) with a fierceness mixed with somewhat of disturbance and melancholy)
you see me Master of Italy, and I shall within few days give Laws to the
Romans; you see me vanquisher of my enemies; but alas! Aspar, you also see me
absent from my Princess: what joy would mine be (continued he) if I could carry
Thomira triumphing to Rome? what could I imagine wanting to my felicity, were
it possible for me to establish the Throne of this Princess in the Capitol, and
from thence cause her to behold all the Nations of the Earth subject to their
Sovereignty. But the Traitor Lucius puts an obstacle to this felicity, which
the Romans could not do; he deprives me of Thomira, and that false man makes
me in a lost condition, when my Victories seem to present me with the
possession and rule of the whole world* It is true (added he with a transport)
that I shall find vengeance for him, and have the pleasure of punishing him for
his crime, without the displeasure of Thomira, since he has committed it
against the sentiments of that adorable Princess. For (continued he) did not
thou see, Aspar, the B^llet which Thomira left in the wood of Castulon? and
did thou not observe in it these obliging words? ( I was inclinable to
satisfy you; and I might even tell you, were it not boldness, that it was with
less repugnance then a person of my sex ought apparently to have in such a
case. If these words, Aspar, oblige me to render a thousand thanks to my
Princess; do not these other give me all manner of cause to hate Lucius, and to
pursue him to the utmost? ( I should not absent my self from you, if Lucius and
Nadalia did not force me so to do.) Yes perfidious Lucius (cried he) I will
hate thee, and pursue thee to the death; and this Hannibal, who has defeated
all the forces of Rome, shall soon dispatch a Traitor, and cause him to pay his
blood for the expiation of his crime.

I should never end, my Lords, if I should go about to repeat all the words of
this passionate Prince: It is enough that you know, that he rendered a thousand
thanks to Thomira, and as often broke forth into fury against the Prince of
Celtiberia. He likewise passed the night with inquietude, which followed the
most glorious day of his life; and while all the world rejoiced in his Army, he
did nothing but revolue in his mind, what means he might use to find Thomira,
so much was this Princes love at this time above his ambition.

The next morning Maharbal, Adherbal, Giscon, and diverse other considerable
Officers, came to his sent; where having discoursed of very many
particularities of the victory of the Carthaginians, they fell to speak of the
persons of condition which had been slain or wounded in the battle: The number
of them was found not to be great, and my Master being sufficiently informed
thereof, he demanded news of Magar, of whom he had a particular esteem, and
whom he had not seen since the fight.

Magar is safe (answered Maharbal) and I assure you, my Lord, that he came off
with you, and that he would have made one in the honor which we now receive,
if a Soldier had not come to tell him somewhat in private; which he did with
such eagerness, as gave us to think it is a thing of no small importance. But,
my Lord, besides the persons we have hitherto spoken of, there is yet a
Cavalier, whose name I could not exactly know, who is dangerously wounded, and
who, I am told, fought yesterday very valiantly with Ducarion, in the head of
the Insubrians. Alas, Maharbal (answered my Master) I beheld this Cavalier
fighting my self; I saw him do a hundred brav^ deeds, and without doubt he is
the same Cavalier, who contributed very much to disengage me from amongst the
Enemies: So that I am obliged (continued he) both out of acknowledgement and
esteem of his virtue, to go visit him, and offer him every thing that I shall
judge reasonable, when I know him.

After these words, Hannibal caused himself to be made ready, being impatient
of his bed, and conceiving he was in condition enough to leave his chamber,
went to the quarters of the Insubrians, whither Maharbal, Adherbal, and my self
attended him.

He did not find Ducarion in his Tent; but being entered into that of the
Cavalier he designed to visit, he was so strangely surpised as soon as he cast
his eye upon his countenance, that it is impossible for me to express this
rancounter: For he persisted a while, as it were, unmovable, and by and by
giving himself up wholy to his choler: Ah, Traitor (cried he) thou shall dye,
and thou shall never find pardon, notvvithstanding thou have served in my Army.

These words of my Master, joined with his amazement, increased our
curiosity; upon which, dravving near by degrees, we were astonished in our
turns also, to find that this vvounded Cavalier was the Prince of Celtiberia.
In the mean time, Hannibal was perplexed with a thousand tumultuous thoughts:
He threatened Lucius, he demanded of him where the Princess of Castulon was;
and uttered if I (may dare to say it) a thousand different things at the same
time. Perfidious man (said he to him, with a menacing tone) you are he that
has taken Thomira from me, but you shall either dye, or tell me where she is.

The names of Traitor and Perfidious much surprise me (answered Lucius)
although they are given by a man blinded with the violence of his passion: But
to pass by these words (added he, with a constancy that seemed to us very
fierce and noble) I shall tell thee, O Hannibal, that I have carried the
Princess of Castulon away from thee; and if it be so, that I must either dye,
or tell you where she is, I readily disclaim my life.

This answer touched my Master to the quick; but being unwilling to do any
thing ignoble, he endeavored to calm his passions: And then beholding Lucius
with a constraint upon himself; I know well (said he) that you understand to
bear your self generously, and I have already seen that you know how to seem
resolute; but I shall also soon learn, if when you are not in the condition I
now see you in, you will be able to retain this firmness of spirit.

He went forth upon these words, feeling his passion increase against the force
he used to repress it in his breast; and giving order to guard Lucius
carefully, took the way to his own quarters, and retired into his Tent; into
which he was no sooner entered, but he looked upon us with an air that spoke his
wonder: And turning on a sudden to Maharbal; Must you not confess (said he to
him) that you never saw any thing so surprising and intricate, as what we now
came from? For at such time as I accounted Lucius my Enemy, he fought for me;
and when I went to visit a Cavalier to whom I had an obligation, I found my
Enemy in the person of this Cavalier; but a cruel Enemy, an Enemy that speaks
with boldness to me of the crime which he has committed against me, and
outdares my choler, when it lightens but with justice. It is true (added he
fiercely) he has happened on the only means there is to brave Hannibal with
impunity; and Lucius unarmed, wounded, and in bed, may do the things the
greatest forces of Europe have not been able to do to this hour. But that
Lucius, who can do all this by his weakness, will not be always in the
condition I have left him in; and perhaps I may be allowed to revenge my self
not dishonourably, and fight with an Enemy, with whom notwithstanding, many
other persons would be revenged in another manner: Yes, Maharbal (continued he)
I will fight with Lucius, I will employ nothing but my own arm to the
punishment of this treacherous person; and methinks I have already overcome
him, and constrained him to tell me where the fair Princess of Castulon is.

I do not fully understand this adventure, my Lord (ansvvered Maharbal) yet I
believe, if Lucius ansvvered you in a manner which displeased you, it was
because you first treated him with the titles of Perfidious and Criminal; for
in that he has fought for you, it is an evidence to evince him not your Enemy.
Ah, Maharbal (interrupted he) its an evidence to evince the contrary: Has he
not carried away Thomira from me? and if chance has occasioned my seeing him
in my Army, did he not at first behold me with as great indignation, as he
could have shevvn, had I committed a crime more heinous then himself is guilty
of? So that I perceive, Maharbal, you did not at first observe the countenance
of Lucius, seeing you vvonder that I suffered my self to be so transported
against him.

It is true, he fought for me, but undoubtedly something we cannot conjecture,
engaged him in my Army: Nevertheless, I will grant that it was only for my
interests he fought, and moreover, that he preserved my life; yet do not you
understand, Maharbal, that he has done more against me in carrying away the
Princess of Castulon, then he could do for me in preserving the Prince of
Carthage; since ^ife is no other then a punishment to me, when I pass it
absent from that adorable Princess; and that I am obliged and offended far more
sensibly in the person of Thomira, then in that of Hannibal.

As this passionate Prince had ended these words, Magar entered into his Tent,
and that with a countenance so satisfied, that we presaged good tidings from
him. As soon as he had made his reverence to my Master, he presented the Guard
of a Svvord to him enriched with Diamonds, which we instantly knevv to be
the same I have formerly mentioned to you, and which I told you, was first
owned by the Prince of Carthage, and afterward by him of Celtiberia.
Hannibal beheld this rich Guard, without signifying any vvonder at it, because
he had already seen Lucius, who he believed had lost it. Upon which Magar
began to speak; I perceive, my Lord (said he) that because you come from seeing
Lucius, you regard not with joy that which I offer to you; but I think not but
you will be surpised, when you are informed where the Princess of Castulon is,
and learn -- Ah, Magar (interrupted Hannibal) tell me in what place that Divine
Princess may be found.

There are so many other things to tell you (replied he) that without giving me
time to hearken to them, that I defer not your satisfaction, I am come
immediately to conduct you to the Tent of a Gaul, where you will be told so
amazing passage, as you would unquestionably be backward to believe, if you
should understand them from any other mouth then his, that is most fit to
recount you them.

Let us go then, Magar (interrupted he further) let us go (said he) and without
word more, went presently out of his Tent, directly to the quarter of the
Gauls. Although Hannibal was wounded, yet we followed without presuming to tell
him, that he was negligent of himself, because this Prince was so passionately
bent to whatsoever he willed, that we should undoubtedly have spoken to no
purpose; besides that indeed, the quarters of the Gauls was not far distant
from the place where we were; and that my Master was then to receive such
intelligence as much imported the repose of his life. So we soon entered the
Tent to which Magar invited us; and the Master of it having done the ceremonies
of the greatest honor, conducted the Prince of Carthage toward a bed, wherein
a wounded person lay. As soon as the man saw my Master, he sighed, and then
addressing his speech to this Illustrious Prince Ah, my Lord, (said he) how can
you endure the sight of a man that: has betrayed you; that has labored to
render you unhappy, and in brief, done his utmost to deprive you of the
Princess of Castulon? I shall suffer your sight (interrupted Hannibal
impatiently) and shall pardon you also, provided that you confess ingeniously,
and tell me where I may go see the Princess Thomira. You do me too great a
favor, My Lord (replied the wounded man! and I protest to you, that I shall
immediately acknowledge it by my sincerity, and tell you without disguisement
who I am, and what I have done. Know then, my Lord, that people call me
Malarcon, that I was born in the City of Hispalis, and that I was possessed
with an unsatiable appetite of heaping up wealth, which I sought to obtain by
all means imaginable; so that I likewise practiced such as were most unlawful,
as often as I found they were most profitable. Wherefore, my Lord, you will not
wonder when I shall tell you all that I have done; and if it be true that the
passions find their excuse in their violence, you will even have the goodness
to forgive me, seeing I have been carried to them by an ardent desire of
Riches, but such a desire as was unsatiable and overswaied all other
considerations. I did not continue in long suspense what side to take during
the war of Spain, immediately betaking my self to your Army; and without
regarding that it was against the Spaniards you were to fight, I only
considered that it was the Spaniards that were to be plundered and pillaged. To
this end I would have a Protector, and chose Alorca for the person, to whom I
rendered so many little services and diligences, that I drew his amity
insensibly with his trust; so that Alorca being become desperately enamored of
the Princess of Cast^lon at Saguntum, he quickly communicated the secret to me,
with the regret he had of having the most redoubted Rival in the world.

How? (interrupted Hannibal in great wonder) was Alorca desperately amorous of
the Princess of Castulon at Saguntum? He was so most certainly, my Lord
(answered he) and I have been in great astonishment a hundred times, that you
never took notice of the flame, which very many began to observe. But, my Lord,
I crave the favor of your attention to the sequel of my discourse, and you
shall understand things that will surprise you much more.

Ah, Malarcon (interrupted my Master again) may I believe that Alorca dared
love in the same place with Hannibal? But proceed (added he) and that without
fear of my interrupting you. When the passion of Alorca increased his violence
every day (replied Malarcon) he declared it to me constantly, but in such terms
as was not possible for one to use, that is not possessed by the same passion
that suggested them to him. So that this passionate man beholding with a
strange despite all that you did at Sag^ntum for the Princess Thomira, he
endeavored to act for Attanes, and injure you, and considering that King as
your Rival rather then his own, he went to him and assured him of all manner of
assistance.

Attanes, who observed with what heat Alorca spoke to him, easily gave credit
to that which he said: he accepted his offers, and then making him a thousand
remerciments, discovered to him at length the secret of his passion. He told
him that he had caused Edescon to be carried away, but it was in so obliging a
manner, that he expected any thing from that Prince; upon which Alorca
departed from the King of the Turdetanes with almost as great regret as what
he had heard him say, as that which he savv you do every day. But, my Lord,
without particularizing all that Alorca told me, all that he did and suffered
at Saguntum, in the voyage from Saguntum to Castulon, and also after his
arrival in that City, which was afterward so fatal to him, it suffices to
let you know, that he almost lost all heart when the people of Castulon began
to repine against their Princess for not giving you her speedy consent, and
that his regrets redoubled when it was rumored abroad that she had given it
to you. This excited him to design a thousand ways to break off your Marriage;
which soon after rejecting as ineffectuall, he bethought himself at length of
employing the affection of Attanes against yours in this occasion. He therefore
took me into his Cabinet, and beholding me a while with unsettled looks, Ah,
Malarcon! (said he) I am lost; and I must either kill Hannibal this day, or
hinder him from marrying Thomira. I counsel you (answered I to him in great
amazement at his words) to effect your second resolution rather then to kill
the Prince of Carthage. It is requisite then (interrupted he instantly) that
you serve me in the business, and that without loss of time you depart from
Castulon, and speed away to the King of the Turdetanes.

Then, Malarcon (proceeded) Attanes shall no sooner have learnt the news that
I write him, and you relate him with all the circumstances, but he shall make
work with Edescon in such manner, that that Prince shall denounce to Thomira
that he in no wise consents that she marry with a Carthaginian; and the
Princess of Castulon being a Lady of very great virtue, will without doubt do
nothing contrary to the will of the Prince her Father. This discourse of Alorca
perplexed me very much, and I could not see at first how the affair could
possibly succeed. But, my Lord, I am constrained to confess to my shame, that a
Casket stored with Money and Jewels, persuaded me more powerfully then all the
beseechings of Alorca. Wherefore I left Castulon, and used the greatest
diligence I could; and, as if the presence of Alorca had opened my eyes and my
understanding, or rather being encouraged by it to hope another from the King
of the Turdetanes, I did much more then my instructions empowered me to do. Yet
it is not necessary, my Lord, to relate to you the effect of my negotiation,
being I know you saw the Letter at Castulon, which I brought thither from the
Prince of the Saguntines; but I now come to discover to you my great crime in
explicating that of Alorca. You remember, without question, my Lord, that the
last time you saw the Princess Thomira, you departed from her unsatisf^ed, and
left her after a manner not ordinary with you; upon which Alorca took hopes
that then was the time he might supplant you. But understanding the next
morning that you were gone from Castulon with design to take Edescon out of the
hands of Attanes, he conceived all his hopes ruined, and that he was no longer
able to obstruct your pretensions. Nevertheless, for all this, his love and his
jealousy grew to so great excess, that seeing all was lost for him, he
resolved to hazard all; and served himself of a means which was not less
violent then the passions which inspired it, and this without considering into
what strange extremities he rushed. He lead me forth to walk in a solitary
place, to discover me his design, and having prepared my mind by protesting the
violence of his love, and the greatness of the presents he would make me, he
told me he had devised a way to cause an immortal hatred in Thomira against
Hannibal, and to render Alorca inseparable from that fair Princess. But,
Malarcon (continued he) to show you that there will not be much difficulty in
bringing to pass this design, which at first will surprise you, you need but
consider that Hannibal is a Carthaginian, and consequently forward to love, but
inconstant to what he affects, and faithless in all things.

You must also consider that Hannibal is the most ambitious of men, and so you
will soon judge that its easy for his ambition to ruin his love, especially
in the absence of the person beloved: But, Malarcon, the Princess Thomira will
readily give credit to all that I shall tell her; and although all I shall tell
her of Hannibal, should not be sufficient to persuade her, yet how can she
imagine that Alorca intends at the same time to deceive both Hannibal and
Thomira? Alorca, I say, who has great obligations both to the one and the
other; and what appearance is there that Thomira, who knows not the passion I
have for her in my soul, should question the uprightness of my relation,
especially when I shall offer to quit the advancement I have in Spain to follow
her fortune: and, in a word, when she shall see all that I do for her service,
without imagining the aim of my actions. This discourse (continued the wounded
person) gave me suspicion that Alorca had plotted some treachery against you,
my Lord, and the Princess of Castulon. But I could not comprehend by what way
he designed to betray you, till, presenting me a Letter, Here (said he) see the
means to effect my design; and being the Character of Hannibal, is neither
known to Thomira or Lucius, behold that which must bestead me in drawing this
fair Princess out of the power of my Rival, and to cause the Prince of
Celtiberia to be arrested, who is the only person that can discover and
destroy my enterprise. Ending these words, he put the Letter I spoke of into my
hands, in which I found something so astonishing, that having in an instant
read it over more then once, I retained all the sense, and near upon the very
words, which were to this effect.

HANNIBAL to ALORCA.
YOu have beheld me sighing for Thomira; and you have also observed, that I
have neglected the design I took up of extending my Conquests every where, to
shut my self in one City of Spain, and therein to spend a life unworthy and
unconformable to the birth and heart of Hannibal. But know Alorca, that by
departing from Castulon, I have understood the weakness I committed there, and
thereupon have enforced my self to become absolutely disingaged from a
lowness, which without doubt all Posterity would have reproached me with.
Wherefore being willing to reassume a glorious life, and continue my Conquests,
I enjoin you, in order to that of Celtiberia, to secure the person of Lucius.
But this is not all, Alorca; I must carry my effort yet further, and resolve to
depend on no person alive. I will have no more obstacles to my Glory; and
seeing Thomira alone is capable of having dominion over Hannibal, and that she
only can break all my designs and enterprises, I appoint you to sacrifice her
to my glory, and to my quiet* Wonder not, Alorca, at the order which I give
you; for we oftentimes triumph not but with the loss of a hundred thousand
men; consider that Hannibal may be well allowed to purchase with the loss of
one Virgin, the most imporportant victory he can wish. But for that all the
world judges not of things in their true value, and few men's minds are elevated
above the sentiments of the vulgar, it is requisite that you act with prudence
and fairness instead of employing open force; and for these services you may
hereafter expect all manner of recompense from Hannibal. For in removing the
occasions of his weakness, you will confirm the foundations of his glory.

HANNIBAL*


Ah, Alorca! (cried my Master) perfidious Alorca! why is it that thou have put
off the condition which subjected thee to the sufferance of all the punishments
which thy crime deserves? After which the Prince turning toward Malarcon,
commanded him to go on with his discourse, which he did in these terms. This
pernicious Letter did but too well produce its effect, my Lord: for as soon as
Alorca had shown it to six men, whom he intended to use in this occasion, they
promised to obey him to the utmost. Wherefore this desperate Lover leading
Lucius out to walk toward the River Boetis, and inviting him into a house upon
the bank thereof, caused him to be arrested by the six men I spoke of, who
presently zeised his sword, and afterward performed all that had been
appointed them.

I staid in this house, to command in it what was fit, whilst Alorca went
to court Thomira to go and walk in the Wood of Castulon, vvhither she was
wont to resort, without other company then that of Nadalia, and a fevv
persons necessary to attend on her. At this time Alorca beseeching the Princess
to cause all her Attendants to proceed no further then the entrance of the
Wood, except Nadalia: He no sooner savv himself alone with these two fair
Ladies, but he cast himself at the feet of Thomira (as I was afterward told)
and having prepared the mind of that admirable Princess, by diverse changes of
his countenance, and a certain rapture which I cannot express: Alas, Madam
(said he to her) that I should ever be obliged to tell you the most detestable
Crime that can be imagined! I believe Alorca so little capable of commiting it
(answered the Princess, with a most charming sweetness) that I wonder at the
changes that appear in you. You have reason, Madam (replied he) to believe as
you do: But if you knew the crime I am commanded to perpetrate, you would yet
judge me more unfit for it then any other. At these words the Princess and
Nadalia were very much surpised, not being able to imagine who could command
Alorca to do any thing, especialy of the nature of that he spoke of. But Alorca
soon drew them from this surprise, to cast them into a greater: For addressing
to the Princess, I must therefore, Madam, speak more clearly to you, and
represent Hannibal to you such as he truly is.

Ah, Alorca (interrupted the Princess, being provoked by this discourse) how do
you speak of a great Prince, and of a Prince which has none but illustrious
qualities, and to whom we have so great obligations? You will soon see, Madam
(replied he) how Hannibal defaces all these obligations, with the Order he has
lately sent me; and if that Cathaginian has treated you civilly, it has been
with reluctance and violence to his own fierce and cruel disposition; and being
separated from you at a time he was dissatisfied, and never seen you since, his
nature has become more powerful then all your charms: So that his ambition
having regained its accustomed place, this proud Affrican has resolved to bow
no more under your Empire; and has chosen to that purpose, the most horrible
precaution that can be conceived. But Madam (added he) I beseech you spare me
the pain of telling you the business exactly, and read this Letter, which will
instruct you in it; and be assured, that Alorca will quit all, and hazard all
to follow you.

After these words, he presented to Thomira the Letter which I told you of,
wherein the fair Princess read near the same words I repeated to you. In truth,
my Lords (said Aspar to the Princes his Auditors) it is most difficult to
represent to you in what estate my Master found himself, when Malarcon told him
that Thomira had read the Letter of Alorca: it is enough to tell you, that this
Prince having quietly attended to the recital of all the Treacheries that had
been done against him, could not contain from trembling and agitation of mind,
when he fancied this pernicious Letter in the hands of his Princess. But being
the various transports of this Prince, did not interrupt the course of
Malarcons story; I shall tell you, that he continued it in this manner: As soon
as this generous Princess had ended reading the Letter, she beheld Nadalia with
very great amazement: And then turning toward Alorca, I am perfectly obliged
to you (said she to him, with a perfectly-charming sweetness) for that you have
had reluctance to follow the Orders of the Prince Hannibal; but Alorca, expect
not any entreaties from me, which would be unworthy of the spirit of Thomira: I
am prepared for all sorts of events, and it is possible you may see that I am
not guilty of much weakness.

Alas, Madam, what is it you say (cried Nadalia) how? would you dye? and can
you believe Alorca capable of following your sentiments? or must you follow
his, Madam? Yes, Madam, you must; and moreover, you must immediately bethink
you of quitting Spain, to go and secure in some unknown place the person of the
fairest Princess of the World. How, Nadalia? (answered the Princess) would you
have Thomira resolve to fly? and instead of awaiting a glorious death at
Castulon, go and carry her misery from one Country to another? No, no,
Nadalia, Thomira will never resolve on this; and you shall see, that she --
Ah, Madam (interrupted Alorca) can you still deliberate on what you have to do?
and will you not at length follow the sentiment of Nadalia? Can you imagine I
expect to be prayed to do that which ^ought?

But my Lord (pursued Malarcon) in the mean while that in the Wood of Castulon,
Thomira is preferring death before flight; and that Nadalia and Alorca
endeavor to overcome this generous Princess, Lucius by little and little
recovered himself from the amazement, an adventure so extraordinary had caused
to him; for this Prince seemed at first so surprised, that he could scarce
believe what he saw: He could not imagine what cause could move Thomira to have
him arrested, and yet believing that it was not but by order from that fair
Princess that Alorca acted, he suffered this rude treatment without
complaining. But no sooner had he learnt what was the Commission, we told him
Alorca had received, but he was extremely perplexed, in consideration of
Thomira, and bethought of attempting his utmost to escape out of our hands, and
go take care for the preservation of his fair Cousin the Princess: But again
considering, that a man unarmed cannot without miracle, presume to master seven
others with weapons, he intended to act after another manner, and to compass
that by entreaties, which his valor would without doubt, never have obtained.
He addressed himself therefore to me, as to him of all the rest that guarded
him, of greatest advantage to serve him; and promised me so many things above
my hopes, that assaulting me on that weak side I told you of, I was soon
inclinable to do all things for a Prince, from whom I might expect any thing;
besides that, I was easily brought to a belief, that I was not obliged to be
faithful to a Traitor.

It is not much needful to tell you, my Lord, that after Lucius had gained me,
I restored him the rich Sword which was taken from him; or what means I used to
free the Prince out of the house in which he was detained; for you may judge,
that since I gave all orders there, this last business was not of so great
difficulty to me as the first. But I shall only tell you, that I would not
discover to him the treason of Alorca, least I should thereby diminish the
importance of my service, and that I went to attend Lucius to the Bank of
Boetis, at a place where I had provided a vessel for Alorca, which I then
destined to the Prince of Celtiberia. In the mean time that I took my way along
the Boetis, Lucius took his directly to the wood of Castulon, where he was no
sooner arrived (as I understood afterward) but he terribly surprised Alorca.

For this Spaniard, believing himself betrayed, and that Lucius was informed
of the whole business, was instantly become desperate, but far more, when the
Prince of Celtiberia told him that he had understood all, and that he came
either to break his pernicious design, or to take away his life. So that Alorca
being carried by his despair, drew his sword, and ran forcibly toward Lucius
to kill him, or to dye instantly by his hand, fearing death less, then that the
Princess should come to know all that he had contrived against her. But as the
Prince of Celtiberia was upon the point of showing the difference between his
own valor and that of Alorca; Thomira and Nadalia hastily told him that Alorca
was no^ culpable, and by that means arrested (as I may so speak) a part of his
valor. Nevertheless the moderation of this Prince was unprofitable; for
Alorca, either driven by his unhappy destiny, or rather blinded with his own
rage, cast himself upon Lucius's Sword, and extorted the punishment of his
crime by running to his death, which he received by full thrust that pierced
his body. The generous Prince of Celtiberia lamented the fate of Alorca,
especially when he beheld tears falling from the fair eyes of Thomira and
Nadalia. But soon beth^nking himself of the safe^y of the Princess, he
entreated her to go into his Chariot, which was attended by a man fifty paces
from the place where they were, with intent to go and embarke upon the Boetis,
and reach the Sea in search of a Sanctuary against the e^^ambition of Hannibal.

Thomira a long time opposed the motion of Lucius and Nadalia; but at length
the prayers of these two dear persons were so powerful, that this fair
Princess consented to depart, which notwithstanding she did not, till she had
first left the Tablet wherein she writ part of her thoughts. Oh Gods! (cried
Hannibal then) how have I flattered my self, and what misinterpretation have I
put upon the words of Thomira? But there was the most appearance (added he) to
induce me to think so, being ingnorant of all that is now discovered to me, and
the words of that adorable Princess being these. ( I was inclinable to satisfy
you, and I might tell you (were it not boldness) that it was with less
repugnance, then a person of my Sex ought apparently to have* Hannibal was
silent after these words, and whilst he was revolving in his mind a thousand
different thoughts, Malarcon told him that Lucius, Thomira, Nadalia, and the
Man that had charge of the Princess's Chariot, being arrived at the Banks of
Boetis, they quickly imbarqued in the Vessel that awaited them. Into which
Nadalia was no sooner entered, but she said aloud in the hearing of a man whom
we left on shore, that we would go into Italy, to the end he might inform you
so. Therefore we plied our course toward the mouth of Boetis, which by
reason of our unreadiness for a speedy riddance, and the winding of the River,
we recovered with some difficulty; but we the rather chose to do so, that we
might amuse the search of those that might pursue us.

But being this outlet of Boetis is not far distant from the Pillars of
Hercules, we soon gained the Mediterranean in another Vessel in which we
embarked at Gades: for, my Lord, I forgot to tell you that Alorca had given me
good store of moneo, which he prevailed with the Princess to be put in her
Chariot, whereby we were in a condition of accomplishing any thing. It pleased
Lucius to command our course to be steared toward the Baleares Islands, that
we might pass from thence into Celtiberia, which was resolutely refused by
Thomira, who protested she would in no wise contribute to the ruin of that
Country. It is true (added Nadalia) that whatsoever the passions of Hannibal
be, he will fend to all places imaginable to give us sanctuary, to enquire news
of the Princess; and whereas his nature is fierce, and his Army very
formidable, it is to be feared he will destroy the Country we shall secure our
selves in, to fetch us out of it. We must then go to Celtiberia (replied
Lucius) for besides that I should be guilty of great weakness, if I sought any
other protection then that of the King my Father, I should be unjust if I
should bring ruin to any other Country for the preservation of Celtiberia.

To avoid all you speak of (answed the Princess) it is best we go to some
place, where in all likelihood he will not seek us. Ah, Madam (replied Lucius)
it would be very difficult to know what place that is. To know it (replied
Nadalia) I must tell you, Carthage is it; and I am assured Hannibal will never
think of inquiring after us thither; besides the other reasons that oblige us
to follow this Council. For being the Arms of Carthage are very redoubtable,
there is so little fear in that City, that in probability, There is no notice
taken of strangers that pass in and out of it every day. So that we may enter
it without being known to any who we are; and the vastness of the place gives
us the same security of continuance for some time, we shall afterward follow
new courses according as events shall direct us. Although this opinion of
Nadalia was grounded on good reason, yet Lucius could not resolve to close with
it, judging it unbeseeming a Prince to use such an obscure low means for his
safety: But Thomira and Nadalia effected with their entreaties, that at length
he consented the Pilate should steer the Vessel to Carthage. Accordingly we
arrived happily at that proud City, and continued there a longer time then we
at first intended; till the inquietudes of Lucius obliged Thomira to depart
from thence, and repass into Spain; the Prince telling his fair Cousin, that
seeing Hannibal was in Italy (for by that time you were arrived there) affairs
without doubt would have a new face in Spain, and so she might go and reside
with the Queen of Celtiberia.

These reasons of Lucius, joined with the regret he had to be absent from the
Princess of the Ilargetes, induced Thomira to consent readily to the Princes
desires; whereupon we embarked, with design to follow that of the Prince of
Celtiberia. But, my Lord, the time did not favor our intention, and the wind
had not befriended us above a few hours, but we were overtaken with a furious
Tempest which drove us between Scicilie and Sardinia, and at length into the
Tyrrhene Sea. This was not all our danger, my Lord; for as if one unhappiness
waited upon another, the storm had no sooner ceased, but we saw our selves set
upon by two Pirates Ships. The valor of Lucius did, indeed, appear prodigious
in this occasion, although it would at length have failed, if three Ligurian
Ships, that suddenly came in sight, had not sided with us and given us succor.
But, my Lord (continued Malarcon) that I may shorten my story as much as I can,
I shall content my self with telling you, that after we had given chase some
while to the Pirates, Lucius with much civility returned thanks to him that
commanded the Ligurians, who was a man of a seemly aspect, named Ducarion; and
that this generous assistant having admired the goodly Port and valor of
Lucius, treated him so obligingly, that he charmed us near as much with his
civility, as he had pleased us with the succous he brought. Ducarion was in a
little time after presented to the Princess of Thomira, to whom he spoke in a
very gallant strain, and made all the offers that might be in the like
occasions; It is most fit, Madam (said he) that you take a little repose, after
your having endured much; and being all Italy is in Arms, I humbly conceive you
cannot be any where so agreeably as at Capua; for besides that that City is a
yet exempt from troubles, it is accounted the most lovely habitation in the
world. Lucius and Thomira consented to the following of this advice; upon which
the generous Ducarion having conducted us to the delicous Capua, bad us adieu,
and betook himself to serve your interests, my Lord, which he told us he had
embraced against those of Rome. It is not necessary to particularize the manner
of our living in the fair Capua, but only to tell you, that we could not leave
it when we had made our resolution to that purpose; for the War of Scicily was
on a sudden enkindled at that time, by reason whereof the continual scouring
about of warlike Ships, made all free passage impossible. Lucius therefore was
constrained to abide in Campania, (...) avoid exposing the fair Princess of
Castulon to new dangers. But, my Lord, this Illustrious Celtiberian found
himself so perplexed when he understood preparations were made to bid you a
decisive battle, that Aemilius, Vano, Servilius and Regulus, were united
together to encounter you, and that all the world siding with your Army or the
Roman, the greatest battle was expected to be given that had ever been yet
seen in Italy* that Lucius not being able to hold himself in a delicious City,
while all the world was in Arms, he requested the Princess Thomira, to permit
his absence from her for a few days, and not to retain him shut up in Capua on
such a brave occasion. For sincerely, Madam (added he) I cannot continue with
you, without dishonor, at a time when I am so little necessary to you; and
perhaps, I may otherwise be not unserviceable; besides, that to speak all out,
if you oblige me to continue in Capua, I shall dye with sorrow, when I shall
hear the fame of those that signalize themselves in a memorable battle, while
Lucius is making conversation with the Ladies in some Garden, or upon the
Vulturnus. I know well, Madam, that its possible I may perish in the occasion
I speak of: but although that should happen, you have about you persons
faithful to you, and who will render you the same service which you can expect
from me. Ah, Lucius (interrupted the Princess) why have you the cruelty to
speak to me in this sort? is it not enough that you make a proposition to me,
which I hear with grief, without proceeding to a thing that affrights me? and
do you account it meet such a Prince as you should fall in a crowd of persons,
who are wont to perish in the gross, without being known who they are? No, no,
Lucius, this must not be approved, with your favor; you ought to have a more
glorious destiny, and instead of receiving orders from a Roman or a
Carthaginian, the command of several Nations await you. That I may be worthy to
command them (replied Lucius) it is requisite that I do all that you forbid me,
and go and serve in the Army of the Carthaginians. In the Army of the
Carthaginians? (interrupted Thomira) Ah, Lucius! consider I beseech you what
you say, That of the Romans (replied he) is so strong, that my heart would
perpetually reproach me with the choice I should make of it; besides, that
Ducarion being in the other, it is fit that I go and discharge a part of my
obligation to him. But, Madam (pursued he, perceiving Thomira about to
interrupt him) you need not fear my being known there, for I shall be in the
auxiliary forces commanded by Ducarion; I will not appear but at the battle,
and will return the soonest I can with honor; and in short, I shall for that
end serve my self of all imaginable precautions.

At length, my Lord (continued Malarcon) the enforcement of Lucius's reasons
and entreaties overcame the generous Thomira; so that the Celtiberian Prince
leaving me with his illustrious Cousin, and delivering me this fair sword,
which, by reason it was once yours, was liable to be known, left the pleasant
Capua, accompanied only with two or three Horsemen. But if this separation
caused sadness in Thomira, it almost made me desperate; I presently fancied
that Lucius would perish in this occasion, and thence believing all my hopes
lost (...) with him, I repented me a thousand times of what I had done for him;
and then considering the little solidity there was in what I had done for my
self, I abandoned thenceforth all my pretensions, and bethought my self only
of making some small establishment to support a quiet retreat. Wherefore soon
casting my eyes upon the rich sword which was left in my hands, and considering
there was on it the value of more then thirty Talents in Jewels, and that I
thought I had some kind of right to wear it; I carried it away indeed, and
departed from Capua, without advertising the Princess of my going. But as I
judged I might not find a better Sanctuary against you, my Lord, and against
the Prince Lucius, then an enemies Army very numerous, I put my self into that
of the Romans, where I thought I could sell the fair Sword I had with better
advantage and security then in any other place of the world.

Nevertheless I succeeded not in my designs, and being I arrived not at the
Camp of Aemilius, but when they were in readiness to issue forth of it to give
you battle, I was obliged to bethink my self of preserving my prize, instead of
selling it: Wherefore I repaired yesterday to a little field, about five or six
furlongs from Cannae; where making a small hole under a great tree, which I
especially observed, I put my rich Sword into it, apprehending it might
occasion my slaughter in the rout, even by the Soldiers of our own party.

But, my Lord, I was constrained for my cure, and for my ransom, to send to
seek this Sword, which I intended to have fetched my self after the battle: I
am notwithstanding, rather glad then troubled it fell out so; for he that
brought it by order of the Gaul Captain, here in presence, showed it to Magar,
whose servant he sometimes was, either to invite him to buy it, or to be
informed by him of its true value. Upon which, this Carthaginian knowing it,
came immediately to see me, and he was since the cause of your coming, my Lord,
and that I have occasion to discharge my breast of a thing which began
strangely to molest me: For although I have cleansed my soul as much as
possibly hitherto from all scrupulosity, yet am I at present of another temper,
and frame to my self a thousand fears, when I begin to think of death, and to
think of it, as the thing of all the world the most terrible: And this has
affrighted me so, as to be capable of giving you nothing but a true relation of
all I have done and seen; and if my sincerity deserves not forgiveness of my
crimes, be pleased to remember, my Lord, as a persuasive to it, that it is from
me you are informed, that the Princess of Castulon is at Capua, and that the
Prince of Celtiberia is in your Army.

When Malarcon had done speaking (pursued Aspar) my Master looked upon him a
while, unresolved whether he should return him thanks or reproaches; but as
this Prince considered that Malarcon was in bed dangerously wounded, and
moreover, that he had told him of Thomira's being at Capua: Live (said he to
him) but live to do actions contrary to those of your former life. Upon which,
the Prince being carried by his impetuous humor, went forth without speaking
more; and instead of going to his own Tent, went directly to that of Ducarion;
whereto he no sooner came, but he betook himself to embrace Lucius, and did it
with so much tenderness, that the Prince was amazed at the change.

Be not surprised, Lucius (said he to him) at the alteration you apprehend in
me; it is Hannibal whom you see, and not that Monster who would destroy the
adorable Thomira; it is the true Hannibal whom you behold, and the Hannibal
that loves you, and esteems you injust that you have been able to believe him
capable of the most abominable crime that ever was committed: Yes, Lucius, I
love and esteem you, because you are generous, as you are allied to Thomira,
and have always faithfully served that Divine Princess.

These words of my Master augmented the astonishment of Lucius in such sort,
that this Prince was amused what to answer; so that Hannibal embracing him
again, without heeding that they were either of them wounded, told him, That he
came from seeing Malarcon, and then re-Peated to him in few words, all that he
had been informed: To which Lucius, having always had esteem and admiration for
Hannibal, readily gave credit, and returned all his tendernesses and
civilities; he confessed himself blameable, that he could believe Hannibal
guilty, and then declared many circumstances which might induce that belief,
and excuse it. But when he came to consider in his mind the treacheries and
death of Alorca, and by what contingencies Hannibal had been cleared, ^e could
not contain from lifting his eyes up to Heaven, to admire the providence and
justice of the Gods, who had caused the ruin of a Traitor, and afterward made
the innocence of an illustrious Prince bright and resplendent.

You may please to know, that after this, my Master having known by the
Physicians that it might be done without danger, caused Lucius to be carried to
his own Tent; where using all possible care and tenderness over him, he
proposed to him to have Malarcon brought to his presence, to which Lucius would
not consent; either out of aversion to see a man that had forsaken Thomira, or
to signify to my Master, that he would not hear that confirmed from Malarcon,
which he had learnt from the mouth of the illustrious Hannibal.

Since therefore, Lucius (said my Master to him) it is most certain that
Thomira is at Capua, as it also is most sure that I adore that fair Princess, I
will defer the siege of Rome, and go strait to Capua, and cast my self at the
feet of my Princess, and let her know the difference there is between the true
Hannibal, and the Hannibal of the perfidious Alorca. But I am ignorant,
continued he, in what manner to go, being I must not go thither as an Enemy,
and it is possible they will not admit me as a Friend.

But I hope (answered Lucius) to effect that you be received as such; for,
besides that your victories put you in an estate of finding all things easy, I
have friends in Capua, who will without doubt act for your interests, Ah,
Lucius, replied my Master, how should I be obliged to you? and what is it I can
do to recompense so great a favor? But, Lucius, continued he) I do injury to
your generosity, I know you will act for me, although I am not in a condition
to return you the like office, and that you will employ your friends for my
interests; in the mean time, I am contriving to moderate the ardour of my
Troops to go and besiege Rome, and to persuade them, that the alliance of the
Capuans is of absolute necessity to our success in that siege.

My Master immediately fell to execution of all he had projected, and prepared
himself to go to Capua; and although he foresaw all the world would be
astonished at his so doing, and that he should be charged with want of skill to
use his last victory; yet he chose rather to satisfy his love then his
ambition; and to go and see the fair Princess Thomira, then possess the
proudest City of the World. But, my Lords, it is superfluous to particularize
to you the negotiations and successes of Lucius in this affair, being
sufficient to show you in the sequel of my discourse, Hannibal at Capua, and to
relate you many other things, which it is most likely you never yet heard.

Aspar held his peace in this place of his Narration; and being it was already
late, the Princes that heard him, did not demand the continuation of it: Upon
which he making a profound reverence, withdrew to an aportment of the Tent, and
le^t his illustrious Auditors in admiration of the wonders he had recounted
them: Antiochus admired the valor of the Prince of Carthage, the sick King was
very much affected with the greatness of his Love, Perseus preferred his
conduct above all his other qualities, and the young Nicomedes, not being able
sufficiently to esteem the fierceness and noble haughtiness of this Prince,
concluded, that it ought to be granted, That Great men were, as it were,
Masterpieces of Nature, made by her at several times; and that after the same
manner that she produces Lions amongst Animals, she brings into the World
amongst Men, Alexanders and Hannibals, who show themselves even in their
infancy naturally Grand persons. But I believe, answered Perseus, that the
Valor which gives the title of Great, cannot be natural; for seeing it is a
virtue, is it not requisite we be taught wherein it consists, lest we continue
in pusillanimity, or fall into the contrary vice? I incline to the opinion of
the Prince of Macedon, said the wounded King, and I believe it is impossible we
should be naturally valiant; for Nature gives us knowledge of the danger, to
the end we might avoid it, and valor makes us know and contemn it. The Prince
Nicomedes, replied the King of Syria, could have brought so conclusive reasons,
that I should willing side with him; but seeing the prince Hannibal is entering,
added he, perceiving him at the portal, we have nothing to do but to beseech
him to determine the question.

I beg your pardon, answered Hannibal, with a very sad air, and desire not to
decide the controversy by my sentence. But you must pass your judgment in the
case, replied Antiochus, and let us know whether we be valiant by Nature, or by
Education. I conceive then, said Hannibal, that both the one and the other
contributes thereunto, that Nature gives us dispositions, and those are
perfected by Education; for if Nature alone made us valiant, then pusillanimity
would be a natural defect, and consequently unblameable; and if on the other
side, institution only made us so, all such as were brought up in the same
manner, would be equally valiant: So that I may say the same of Valor, which
is said of almost all things in the world, in which it is requisite that both
Art and Nature conjoyn, to exhibit an excellent piece.

After these words, the conversation was broke off; and it being very late by
this time, Hannibal, Antiochus, Perseus, and Nicomedes, saluting the wounded
King very civilly, passed to a Tent, where there was a very magnificent repast
provided for them; but as Hannibal appeared very melancholy during supper, he
was obliged by the requests of Antiochus, to discover the cause of his sadness:
Upon which he recounted to them in few words all that he had learnt from the
Messenger of the Prince of Vermina. He told them, That Masonissa had at length
married Sophonisba, of whom he was desperately amorous, and that that saithless
man, unworthy to bear the title of King, had afterward poisoned his fair
Queen, to please Scipio and the Romans, who did not approve this alliance.

This fatal news moved pity in the three Princes, for the Destiny of the Queen
of Numidia, and abhorrence of the King of the Massessitians: But that which was
most surprising, was, that Antiochus, Nicomedes, and Perseus, being retired
into their Tent, after a conversation very sorrowful, news was brought to the
Cathaginian Prince, that the wounded King was at the point of death, and that
he was in the last despair, which would undoubtedly conclude him, if he were
not timely succored.

Hereupon Hannibal hastened to the Tent of this desolate Prince, and was
strangely surprised, when he heard all his exclamations and complaints. How! is
Sophonisba dead! (cried he) why have you suffered this, O ye great Gods! Yes,
as great as you are, you have been envious of the happiness of the Earth, you
have taken thence a Queen, which merited our adorations, and who might have
blessed us in this world with a felicity equal to yours.

Ah, my Lord, continued he, addressing to the Prince Hannibal as soon as he was
entered, I will live no longer, since the adorable Saphonisba does not: I am
still devoted to that fair Queen, I will dye to follow her, I will no longer
continue in the world, being I shall never more behold that Divine person in
it. Hannibal was extremely surprised with the strangers words, and the deep
interest he took in the death of the Queen of Numidia: but he was much more
astonished, when he beheld the afflicted King reaching his hand to his wound,
and that there was no other appearances but of an urter despair, and such as
would soon terminate in death. Hannabal seized upon his arm, and endeavoring
to encourage him, used such language to him, as he conceived serviceable to his
consolation.

My Lord, said he to him, attend a while the sequel of my discourse, and you
will understand what you have to do: The loss of Sophonisba determines me
sufficiently in that particular, interrupted the King somewhat hastily, and her
death has too assuredly concluded mine, to leave you any place to oblige me to
live. But when you shall know that the King Masanissa has caused her to be
poisoned, within a few days after he had espoused her, answered Hannibal; and
that to please the Romans, he deprived himself of that incomparable treasure,
of which he ought to have known the value by the possession of it, I believe
you will be forward to revenge the fair Sophonisba, and not resolve to dye till
you have taken away the li^e of a person that has rendered yours hateful. It Is
no^, added he, that I would incense you against the Romans and their allies, I
do not fear them, so much as to practice the withdrawing of their generous
Friends, by an Artifice mean and low, and I esteem you too much, to gain you
that way. This fallacy, continued he, perceiving the King answered nothing,
would be a means more proper to invite your scorn, then win your esteem: I do
not therefore speak for my own interest, when I speak against Masanissa; nor do
I set forth his crime to you, but as an unheard of cruel circumstance of that
mish^p, wherein you partake more then both the Carthaginians and the Numidians;
otherwise you could not be ignorant of the particularities which are already
published throughout all Africa, and you might have understood from a thousand
tongues, what mine had not told you.

Hannibal was silent after these words, in attendance of the Kings answer, who
began to behold him with less disquiet, though not with less surprise; and at
length answered, Ah, my Lord, what is it you tell me of Masanissa! that he has
murdered the adorable Sophonisba, Ah, my Lord, how unhappy is my lot, that that
fair Queen should be deprived of life by the hands of that wretched King? and
that among so many illustrious qualities, which rendered Sophonisba Divine, she
had not also that of immortal, which was only wanting to a person so
accomplished. No, no, my Lord, what you have told men's not possible; but
without question you have been misinformed, and the Queen of Numidia is still
alive, if she has not ended her days by some other accident.

My Lord, replied Hannibal, I have always so highly esteemed Masanissa, that I
have had great repugnance to entertain the belief of his being capable of so
black a guilt; and I am glad, continued ^e, to cheer up the wounded King, that
I find my hopes any thing confirmed, that that news is erroneous* Masanissa
never merited your esteem, replied the King; but at least, he was never capable
of an ignoble thought: For, my Lord, seeing it is requisite you know the King
whom you have treated so generously, I must declare to you, that he is the
Masanissa of whom you speak: Yes, my Lord, I am that Masanissa, whose life has
been attended with accidents so strange, that they have filled the world with
wonder: I am that Prince who has lost and recovered Kingdoms, who have
confederated both with the Carthaginians and the Romans, and who have adored
Sophonisba from the time I first had the honor to know her; and at last that
Masanissa, who has been overcome by the great Hannibal, who has been treated
by him with civility altogether extraordinary; and that Masanissa, who
regulating his life only by that of Sophonisba, expects with extreme
impatience to know the condition in which that adorable Queen is.

The Carthaginian Prince was infinitely amazed to behold Masanissa in his Tent,
and that Masanissa who was fallen off from the Cathaginians; but presently
reflecting upon the great adventures which Love and Honor had drawn that King
into to break with Carthage; and also considering him in a state of pity, he
increased his civilities, instead of diminishing them. Masanissa constrained
himself to answer the caresses of the Prince of Carthage; but he acquitted
himself in so forced a manner, that Hannibal easily knew that he was still
strangely disquieted: Ah, my Lord, answered Masanissa, it is hard to be
composed of spirit, when there is hourly apprehension of hearing the most cruel
and fatal news confirmed, that I am capable of receiving: For what can be
imagined more cruel then this accident? I have been afflicted for the loss of a
Kingdom, but I have been also comforted with a belief, as it effectively
happened, that the Romans could re-instate me in that which the Caathaginians had
assisted King Syphax my Enemy and my Rival to gain from me. I have lost all my
relations, yet conceived nothing of surprising or extraordinary in these
misfortunes.

But, my Lord, I find my condition far more unhappy, when I consider my self
bereaved of the fair Princess Sophonisba, to put her into the arms of my enemy,
at the same time that the Prince Asdrubal her Father had promised her to me,
and that adorable person had given me many testimonies of her esteem and good
inclination. Nevertheless, being I loved Sophonisba more for her self then
for my own sake, I found some contentment when I considered that I alone was
miserabe, and Sophonisba, Queen of two Realms. Then indeed I did not resolve to
dye, because I lived more in the great Queen of Numidia, then in the
unfortunate King of the Massessilians. But the thought of that illustrious
Queens death, of this cruel separation. Ah! this is it, my Lord, that breaks
the greatest constancy, and subdues it to the violence of the calamity; here
the strongest soul finds it self too weak to resist the stroke of fate. Yet
there may be unfortunate persons of this kind, but none comparable to me, if
these tidings be true; and the Gods, yea, the Gods themselves can add nothing
to my punishment.

For, my Lord, as if it were not enough to lose all that I love, I am like to
pass for a wretched prisoner, and that of the most fair and sweet person that
ever eye beheld; and my innocence will only serve to redouble my torment, when
I shall consider it buried in the same Tomb with me, and so never being
published, my memory become odious to all Posterity. Can you therefore imagine
a misfortune more great and strange? Bethink your selves of circumstances that
may augment it, if there be any such; or confess that I am upon the point of
being the most unhappy of men. I confess (answered Hannibal) that your case
would be such in the extremity, although you would at least dye with the
satisfaction of being innocent; and I judge that the true Author of this
impiety would be far more miserable.

How say you? (interrupted Masanissa) Can you believe that a man who should be
so wretched as to commit this crime, would be capable to resent the loss of his
reputation to the quick? Can you believe he would be sensibly afflicted for the
death of a person whom himself had murdered? And do you not consider that he
would have even some contentment, although unworthy and malicious, to have
effected that which he judged he ought to do, or which he had designed? The
Prince Hannibal was willing to put off this conversation, which served only to
redouble the grief of Masanissa; and not being able to give him any hope after
the intelligence he had received, he would not be an occasion to continue his
despair. But Masanissa prevented him, and beholding him a few moments with an
air wholly submissive; My Lord (said he to him) I hope the illustrious
Hannibal will grant that to Masanissa, which a valiant Carthaginian promised
some days since to a Cavalier whom he vanquished. You know that ^he promised to
procure him license to depart from the Camp of the Carthaginians when he
pleased. Perform that engagement now, my Lord, seeing it is impossible for me
to live in the condition I am in, and permit me to depart to morrow morning
before daylight to go to Zama, where I may receive intelligence from Cyrtha.
If the King Masanissa remembers that promise (answered Hannibal) perhaps he
has not forgot the principal condition of it, which was the unknown Cavalier
might depart from the Army of the Carthaginians, when it was requisite for
him to serve against it. We will attend therefore, if you please, till you are
perfectly cured, and not suffer you to undertake a journey in the condition
your are in; and albeit you are a friend of Scipio, and one of the bravest
courages in the world, yet I had more regard to the preservation of a
formidable enemy, then to hazard the life of a generous Prince, by a consent
which I cannot give but to his prejudice. If you expose my life to danger
(replied Masanissa) by permitting me to undertake a journey in the condition
wherein I am, you will infallibly cause the loss of it by detaining me longer
in your Army. I shall then do all that your pleasure requires (answered
Hannibal) but it shall be with condition that you suffer me to conduct you,
without parting from you till you be in a place where your cure may be
perfected. Ah, too generous Prince! ( Masanissa answered) what thanks can I
render you that may be proportional to the obligations which I have to you: you
use too great solicitousness toward a miserable person, whom I shall never
admit your trouble to accompany; besides that, I have no necessity of being
conducted; for apprehending nothing from the Rousanes, a Pass^ port from the
Prince Hannibal will be sufficient to carry me through all places possessed by
the Carthaginians, without giving that illustrious Prince the disturbance of
leaving his Army for my consideration. But I am resolved to do it (replied
Hannibal) and take no more followers with me then will be necessary to serve
you, without drawing so many Troops after me, as would only serve to blaze
abroad my departure, of which some spies might advertise the Romans to cause
me to be surprised; although I know there is no indangering ones safety in
this case, in the company of the King Masanissa. I am not ignorant of the power
you have with the Romans, and I know what generosity you would have for
Hannibal. But I confess I would not be in a condition to employ it, or to exact
favors of this nature from your goodness. Not that my humor which cannot
suffer Hannibal to be obliged, would give me repugnance to be so to Masanissa;
but I have too much esteem for the King of the Massessilians, to suffer
without extreme regreat, that he should demand the liberty of Hannibal from
the Romans, and be pat to request a thing from his Allies which would be
greatly to their prejudice. These are the inducements (said the Cathaginian
Prince) which oblige me to go without noise. But in the mean time it is
requisite for me to leave you, being it is very late, and to conjure you with
all my soul to moderate the inquietudes of your mind, and consider, that
Masanissa, whose great spirit has resisted the rudest assaults of fortune,
ought not to be seized with so violent a sorrovv upon the naked relation of
bad news.

After these words, Hannibal would not permit Masanissa time to make him his
remerciments; but saluting him with very much civility, went forth of his
Tent to return to his own, where before his going to rest, he ordered Aspar
to take care that no person spoke to the vvounded King. If this generous Prince
was sensible of the passion of Masanissa for the fair Sophonisba, he was not
ignorant of the injustice of the Carthaginians, who had disposed of this
Princess in favor of King Syphax, whilst Masanissa was fighting for their
interests in Spain under the Prince Asdrubal, in which regard he was forvvard
in this occasion for the consolation of this unfortunate King; so that knowing
the relation he had received was in part but too true (although never
believing that Masanissa was really culpable) he would not that any person
should speak to this afflicted Prince for fear of disturbing the little calm he
had procured him by qualifying the relation of the business toward the end of
it. He had designed to accompany him for no other end but to secure him from
being ascertained of the Tragedy; not daring therefore to send any considerable
company to attend him, because he foresavv that either that multitude would be
too talkative, or engage him to speak too much, by laying some proposition upon
them, which might give ground, to suspect the importance of the prisoner whom
he remitted, and cause some dissatisfaction in the minds of the Carthaginians.
He determined therefore to depart the next morning, and not to forsake
Masanissa till he were in the hands of persons to whom he might discover in
what manner it was fit for them to comport themselves for the preservation of
his life. After which he considered the death of the fair Queen of Numidia
with tender resentments; and this sad thought would have long time afflicted
him, had it not at length given place to those which may be called ruling and
predominant in Hannibal.

This Prince was too amorous of the fair Princess of Castulon, and of glory, to
have any long meditations of other things, but of the means to overcome the
insensibility of Thomira, and the Army of Scipio. For he ruminated in his mind
of all possibilities to accomplish these two great designs; in which thoughts
he was insensibly seized on by sleep, and passed the night with sufficient
quiet. The next morning he was no sooner accoutred, but he was surprised at the
sight of the King Masanissa entering into his Tent, who was supported by Aspar,
and would at first express some kind of gaiety, and lay aside his regret to be
compleasant in some measure with the generous Prince who had taken care of
his repose. Hannibal went toward him very civilly and presently seating him,
endeavored yet further to represent to him the danger to which he was going
to expose himself in the journey he undertook; he moreover added his
entreaties to his reasons; but could not vvin any thing upon the mind of
Masanissa, who was resolute for departing to go to Zama, and to understand
the nevvs of Cyrtha from a person who was informed of all that could concern
the Queen of Numidia, and to know exactly the state of affairs there from the
mouth of one of his most faithful servants who it was possible might be
returned thither already. Wherefore the Prince (...) gave command that every
thing should be in readiness (...) this departure immediately; and then making
his excuses to Masanissa, he went to the Tent of Maharbal, to whom he gave
Orders necessary for the Army, and desired him to make a complement in his
behalf to the King of Syria, with the Princes of Macedonia and Bithinia, and
to assure them that his return should be within seven or eight hours. This
done, he came back again to Masanissa, where notwithstanding any resistance the
King could make, Hannibal would not he diverted from accompanying him to a
great Town, which was about forty furlongs from his own Camp: for this obliging
Prince intended to inform himself punctually of the names of Masanissa's
Confidents, and to stay a while at that place to write to Zama, to the friends
of the King of the Massessilians, that they might be advertised in what manner
the news was fit to be communicated to him, which he was going to learn.
Wherefore these two great personages went from the Army, soon after followed
only with ten or twelve Cavaliers. Upon the way Hannibal understood by
circumstances in discourse with Masanissa, what his Inclinations were, and
endeavored to employ that knowledge to the benefit of his quiet: and after
that they continued there way, without proceeding in the conversation which was
begun at their first coming forth of the Camp. The King of the Massessilians
employed his thoughts of nothing but on the Queen of Numidia; in which he had
notwithstanding some contenting moments, when he considered that the report of
fame publishing Masanissa for the poysoner of Sophanisba, and that without any
likelihood of truth, there might be no more reality in that of the fair Queens
death. But his affliction soon chased away these thoughts as to beguiling, and
becoming ingenious to torment himself with more violence, he represented to
his fancy Sophonisba in all her beauties, gallantry, and goodness toward
Masanissa; and then that same Sophonisba dead, and that by violence and
cruelty. These last reflections were so importune to this illustrious
Unfortunate, that his despair was increased by them; and if he had so much
restraint as not to evidence it before Hannibal, he may be thought to be so
much the more miserable since by including so painful a passion in his heart,
the anguish became more bitter and insupportable. But if dead Sophonisba
possessed the imagination of he poor King of the Massessilians, Thomira
insensible did not less ^ill that of the passionate Prince of Carthage, who
after a few instants that were not altogether unpleasing, he was taken up with
long musings, which inquieted him extraordinarily. They at length arived before
they were aware at one of those public houses, which are by custom appointed
for the reception of strangers, upon the great way distant a few furlongs from
Capsa, there Hannibal lighted, with purpose to cause Masanissa to take a little
rest, and to use the interim for the dispatch he had resolved upon, in orde^
whereunto choosing a commodious Chamber for the King, himself re^^^ into
another to write a Letter, which he sent away immediately to Zama; the Master
of the Hostelrie, who was unfurnished of provisions in a house too much exposed
to the passage of men of Arms, sent to Capsa to purvey for such as he deemed
convenient for the entertainment of his guests, whom he judged to be of great
quality; after which he came to do reverence to the great Hannibal, and told
him that the Princesses were not to pass by till within two days. Hannibal did
not apprehend what this man meant; but the name of Princess exciting his
curiosity, he demanded what Princesses they were which were to pass by within
two days. I know not their names (answered the Host) but I have heard at
Capsa, that there are two of them the fairest persons of the world; and it may
be added, the most happy too, notwithstanding I am told they seemed
sufficiently melancholy. For, my Lord (continued he) consider I beseech you
their good fortune; they are magnificently received in all Towns through which
they pass, all Princes, and the most powerful Kings endeavor to gain their
favor; and I believe if they were so minded, we should soon have a general
peace; for to declare the outside of the business. I have been assured that our
Prince Hannibal is amorous of one of these Princesses, and the other is the
Mistress of Soipio. If so, you may please to judge whether they deserve not to
be honored universal; and that it may not be concluded with verity, that the
end of this War will establish one of these Ladies the surpreme Princess of the
World.

But I demand your pardon, my Lord, if I have told you things which in
likelihood you know better then I have recounted them; being probable that,
such persons as you are not ignorant of news of this Nature. It is true,
(added he) you were pleased to command me to relate them unto you; and that
injunction has drawn me into the same fault I was guilty of yesterday before a
young stranger, who caused me to tell him the same matters, which
notwithstanding himself knew better then I, as far a I conjecture. Hannibal
answered, that he knew nothing of this news, and that he was glad to learn it;
upon which, to get a further account, he inquired concerning this young
stranger, and demanded of Host, if he knew who he was. I know him not (answered
he) but this I can affirm, that a man of more comely aspect was never seen; and
that it was the late sight of his gallant person, that hinders me from being
absolutely surprised with yours. Notwithstanding I am much astonished at the
unusual coming of two persons at the same time to my house, whose goodly
presences sufficiently speak them to be very considerable. At the same time
(interrupted the Prince Hannibal) is that stranger here at the present then? He
is not here at this instant (replied the host) but he is not far distant,
and I believe he is gone to repose himself under the Trees, which are about
two hundred paces from the highway, and that he will continue there all the
day, to avoid being known by returning to the house which is open to all the
world; at least this is my conjecture, being he has also caused his Horses to
be led thither. I shall not molest him then (answered Hannibal) and if his
goodly aspect gave me desires to know him, the design he has not to be seen,
has destroyed them; and I will not retain a curiosity which might displease a
man whom you have described so advantageously to me. Scarce had Hannibal ended
these words, when Aspar entered his Chamber, with a hastiness more then
ordinarily; and told him that he had seen five and twenty or thirty Cavaliers
appear whom he judged to be either Romans, or of those sort of roving
Soldiers, who in times of War, without being friends to either party, are
always enemies to such as are not in a capacity to resist them. For riding
about all the Avenues to discover if any party passed that way toward the War,
he perceived this Troop, which according to all appearances were no
Carthaginians. It will be no bad counsel then (answered Hannibal) to put our
selves in a posture not to be surprised. Go therefore, Aspar (added the Prince)
and give order for all to be in a readiness, and tell them that I am going to
Horse. This order was as soon executed as given; and the Prince Hannibal
perceiving that Aspar had reason to give him this intelligence, and that these
Cavaliers were coming directtly toward him, having learnt by him whom the
host had sent to Capsa, that there were people of quality at his Masters
house; he went forth to them with nine others, casting from his countenance a
kind of noble fierceness, which never abandoned this great man in contingencies
of this nature. Let us on, my friends, said this illustrious Carthaginian to
the Cavaliers which followed him, and let us show that Hannibal is neither to
be killed nor taken with ease. The wife of the host, who ran in a fright to
the Gate of her House to get into it, hearing these words, and not finding the
passage free at first, fled toward a shade of Trees which was not far
distant from thence, where the handsome stranger was seated upon a ^u^t of
green Grass. Ah, my Lord (cried he instantly) there are about thirty Cavaliers
come to assail and kill the great Hannibal, who has not above seven or eight
persons with him. The young stranger had no sooner heard these words, but a
noble ardor animating his countenance, he leapt upon his, Horse, and commanded
his Armor-bearer to do the same, and to speed with him to the defense of
Hannibal. To defend Hannibal? (cried the Squire) Alas, my Lord, I beseech you
pardon me if I tell you, you are in a mistake, and unquestionably mean some
other person then him you named. It is enough that I have told you what I
intend to do (answered the generous Stranger) Ah, my Lord (said the Squire
again) will you fight for your Enemy? No, no, you must not do it,
notwithstanding your magnanimity; but be pleased to remember that the Hannibal
you are going to defend, is he who has ruined your Country, who has caused
all the losses of Rome, and in a word, whom you ought to fight against as the
most irreconcilable of your enemies. I have considered all, that you tell me
(replied the magnanimous Stranger, marching toward the place where he was to
join with the Prince of Carthage) but besides I have considered, that Hannibal
is over powered by great inequality. The Stranger so hasted in speaking these
words, that he soon reached the place where the fight was beginning, when the
Squire endeavoring again to divert his Master from his design; My Lord (said
he to him) behold your enemy! what course will you take? Dye, or save Hannibal
(ansvvered the Stranger) Great Gods! (cried the Squire, notwithstanding his
being accustomed to the Heroic actions of his illustrious Master) is it
possible that -- He could not continue out his examination; for beholding his
Master rush with an extraordinry impetuosity upon the enemies of Hannibal, he
seconded him to fight near his person. The valiant Stranger began to distribute
death as soon as he began to strike; and the first (whose unhappy fall guided
him to utter a blow at him) lost his life at the very instant that he attaqued
that of the courageous Stranger.

Hannibal for his part fought like himself: but how great soever the valor of
this Illustrious Carthaginian was, yet it cannot be denied but that of the
unknown assistant caused admiration in this Prince by actions wholly
miraculous. These two brave persons redoubled their efforts, and either of them
strived to call up all their strength and prowess to the view of an emulous
valor; and these two Heroes being infinitely ardent of glory by the bent of
their minds, they beheld one another as rivals, and performed things so
prodigious as do almost surpass belief. That which was yet more rare in this
conjuncture, was, that they highly valued each the other without any
disposition to love mutually, and fought with an intention so strange, and yet
so generous, that the stranger exposed his life only to preserve that of
Hannibal, and this Prince also fought not but for the safety of the stranger;
so that being thus accorded, they beat down as many enemies, as they dealt
blows, and within few moments of the thirty Cavaliers at the beginning of the
combat, they overthrew four and twenty, and put the rest to flight. But if
these two Warriors appeared extremely redoubtable, yet they accused themselves
in their own breasts that they had not done enough, and in the noble ardor
which quickened them, they believed, they had too few enemies to encounter, and
oftentimes wished there had been a greater number, as a more ample subject of
manifesting their prowess in all its extent. Nevertheless there was some
difference remarkable in the manner of fighting between these two great men,
for choler animated the courage of Hannibal; but that of the Stranger was a
valor purely generous: and if the Prince of Carthage seemed furious and
terrible, the magnanimous unknown by a deportment much heroical did not
overcome more then was necessary to do, to be the defender of the Prince of
Carthage. Wherefore he restrained himself from pursuing the six Cavaliers which
fled; and perceiving Hannibal making after them; Stay Hannibal, stay (cried he)
after which turning toward his Squire, Let us on then (said the generous
Unknown) and either perish or dispatch Hannibal, since we may now do it without
ignominy.

This design is worthy of your self (answered the Squire) but my Lord,
although you are the most valiant man in the world, yet you ought to take
notice that the match is not equal; for Hannibal has five Cavaliers with him
still. Those five Cavaliers (interrupted the unknown) do not hinder Hannibal
from being my enemy. They do not without question (replied the Squire) but they
make your enemy a little too powerful; And it is because he is so (said the
stranger) that I intend to fight him, and that my heart prompts me to attaque
him. He said no more, being he savv Hannibal at a little distance off him;
Hannibal (cried he to him presently) you must now turn your svvord against me;
it is I that am left for you to fight with, your greatest enemy, who has
already ^ought to preserve you, that he might afterward cause you to perish in
a way that will not be dishonorable unto me. You speak so surprisingly
(ansvvered Hannibal) that I am wholly unresolved what I ought to do; But I
shall no longer debate upon it (pursued he fiercely) since I am no more obliged
to you after the Declaration you have made me; and that I understand you too
valiant, not to fight you with very great satisfaction and glory. Hannibal upon
these words turned toward those that were with him, and commanded them not
to stir, what success soever he had in the combat he was going to engage in;
and then put himself in a posture to encounter his illustrious enemy. But this
Prince was strangely surprised when he beheld the King Masanissa speak to the
valiant unknown. Whoever you are (said he to him, who seem to be a Roman by
the enmity you have against the Prince Hannibal, do not attempt upon a life
which you have so generously preserved; but if you have no regard to the
preservation of a Prince to whom you declare your self an enemy; yet at least
allow something to the req^est of Masanissa, whom without doubt you know, and
who beseeches you not to begin a combat, wherein he is likely to interest
himself so far, that he will be the first that perishes, and that in such a
manner as cannot satisfy you. And you, my Lord (continued he, addressing to
the Prince of Carthage) have you drawn me on hitherto unprofitably all
indisposed as I am? and will you refuse Masanissa the favor which he entreats
of you, to consider this generous Unknown as a person that has fought for you,
rathe^ as one that desires to fight against you? These words of the sick King
made some impression in the minds of these two Warriers; but as soon as they
turned their eyes from Massanissa, they beheld each other so fiercely, and
their gestures seemed so ^aughty and scornful, that they were yet more eagerly
animated. So that they settled themselves in their Saddles, and lift up their
Swords to begin the fight: upon which Masanissa observing their intent, that he
might yet break off the combat, cast himsel^e between these two Illustrious
Gallants, and told them all which might calm and moderate their ardour. Fight
then (cried he at length) and have the inhumanity to pass through the breast of
Masanissa, before you meet. Yes (continued he) you must trample a King under
the feet of your horses if you resolve to fight, and moreover a King
indisposed, and a suppliant, and one that intreates you nothing but to preserve
each other. If these words were powerful, the air of Masanissa was not less
affecting, so that the two Warriers were persuaded, and beheld one another with
less animosity; after which casting their eyes upon Masanissa, they seemed to
express by their silence, that the King of the Massessilians was an obstacle
whom they would not violate. At length the Prince of Carthage broke off the
silence, and speaking to his generous enemy. Valiant Sir (said he to him) I am
sorry this opportunity must pass without fighing; but we shall have some more
favorable within a few days, if you will make your self known. You shall know
me sufficiently, answered the f^erce Unknown, and perhaps it shall be at the
head of your Army, that I will attaque you, and make my self known* after these
words, this Illustrious stranger took the way of Capsa, and left the Prince of
Carthage, and the King of the Massessilians in admiration of what he had done;
It is true, the fierce Hannibal had as much regret in his mind as he had esteem
for his generous Enemy: the fierce Hannibal, I say, who had never been de^ied,
without fighting upon it and overcoming, insomuch that he had great vexation
for the constraint which hindered him from fighting in the re-encounter, and he
would without doubt have passed over all considerations whatever to go after
this valiant Stranger, to overtake and fight him, if Masanissa had not
powerfully opposed him therein; and the fierce Carthaginan had not also
comforted himself with the hopes that this generous person would really acquit
his promise to make himself known. Not that the haughty humor of Hannibal was
very capable to afford him satisfaction out of a naked hope, but for that the
Prince perceived he could not otherwise be satisfied, because Masanissa opposed
his purpose more peremptor^ly then before, having known the stranger by the
tone of his voice, and more by reflecting upon his heroical proceeding. By
which this King no longer doubted but that this magnanimous stranger was the
Illustrious Scipio. For it is the action of an Illustrious person to expose his
own life for the preservation of that of a brave enemy; but it is the action of
Scipio alone to attaque the famous Hannibal in the manner which he did. So
that I may say, Scipio comported himself like Scipio; and that there is no
place to mistake this gallant Hero: I must therefore abandon all to follow him.

The End of the First Part.
The Grand SCIPIO.
PART II.
BOOK I.
THe Illustrious Scipio (whom we must no longer term by the name of Stranger,
after his lately achieved heroic actions) continued his way toward Capsa,
though with resolution not to enter into that City, notwithstanding it had
declared it self neuter a little while before, and also contributed toward the
support of the Roman Army. For being desirous not to be known, he would not put
himself into a City where such a world of eyes would have been upon him,
judging it impossible to escape meeting with some there that had seen him
before, or heard of him enough by fame to know him. Wherefore he determined to
go and spend the night in a house not far from Capsa; and as he was yet in the
grand Road, before he came to turn off into a less, which led to that House, he
began to reflect upon the late adventure, which seemed so surprising to him,
that he could not but testify as much to his Attendant. Ah! Flavius (said he
to him) is it possible that my eyes have not deluded me, but really seen
Masanissa with the most inveterate of my enemies? that Masanissa, whom I have
loved with so great ardor, and given a place to in my friendship, little
different from that which L^lius possesses. But it is undoubtedly true, I have
seen and heard him speak; and if I have not seen that Masanissa, whose soul
owned none but generous sentiments, I have seen that Masanissa whom men report
to have poisoned Sophonisba, and who after the commission of a crime of that
nature, may make no scruple of abandoning his best friends. It Is true, Flavius,
I feel some kind of reluctant thoughts in my breast in favor of the King of
the Massessilians; and though all the world publishes already that he sent
poison to the Queen of Numidia, and my self have seen him with my enemies; yet
there are a kind of contrary motions in my mind, which check the passions the
former inducements might raise in me. Yes, Flavius, I feel some Favorable
inclinations which will not permit me to condemn Masanissa without being better
informed, and without unriddling those things, which perhaps will serve to
satisfy me, that this King is rather unfortunate then criminal. For in truth,
hitherto I have found no cause to repent me of having placed my friendship upon
any I have given it to; but contrarily I have had the happiness to see the
Elections I have made of what nature soever, generally approved* Scipio stopped
suddenly after these words, and changed color when he considered what he had
last said; and then soon after turning toward Flavius: But alas (said he to
him) if I have had this happiness, I have withal had the happiness of seeing
the election which is most glorious unto me, become that which renders me the
most miserable of men. Yes, Flavius, continued he, the passion I have in my
soul for the adorable Aemilia, causes me to suffer that which certainly never
any other did: and since the obstacles which are met with in the course of a
passion like to mine (if yet it is possible to find any like it) since, I say,
these obstacles first were capable to make men unfortunate, they never made any
so deeply miserable as they have me. The amorous Scipio proceeded no further,
but bestowing his silence in musing, found a sort of great satisfaction in
repassing over in mind all the sweetnesses he had tasted in the conversation of
the Illustrious Aemilia, and afterward in surveying all the invincible
obstacles which had hindered him from being completely happy. But while these
thoughts possessed his mind, he beheld a slave coming toward him, whom he
presently knew to belong to Laelius. Scipio did not omit instantly to demand
news of his friend, nor the slave to satisfy him respectively in these terms:
My Lord, My Master being unassured in what place he might find you, by reason
he chose two or three to change according to occasion, is gone to a house not
far from Capsa, where he thinks to meet you, and sent me to that which stands
upon this way, to deliver you a Letter if I should happen to find you there.
Upon which words the slave accordingly presented a Letter to Scipio from
Laelius, which contains as follows.

LAELIUS to SCIPIO
LEave the stand which you have taken up to behold Aemilia pass by, and rather
come to Capsa, there to behold that admirable person more fully and
delightfully. The Prince of Capsa, in whose Palace Aemilia is to be
entertained, is desirous to have you received into the same also, and his
excellent Daughter the Princess of Hippona promises to be your confident, and
do you service with the Illustrious person whom you love. Therefore I beseech
you moderate your discontentments, and come receive of that generous friend the
assurance I tell you of.


This Letter, no question, gave Scipio much satisfaction; and though this
Illustrious Lover did not believe the Princess of Hippona could effect much in
the obliging offer she made, yet he resented some gladness from it, and speeded
forward more expeditiously. He next inquired in what place Laelius was, of
which the slave having satisfied, and assured him he should find his Master at
a place not above five or six furlongs from Capsa; he quickened his pace so
diligently, that he soon reached the place where the slave told him Laelius
attended him. These two Illustrious friends had no sooner expressed and
performed all the ceremonies which a real and noble affection mutually incited
them to; but they continued on their passage, during which Laelius told Scipio,
that he should that very evening have the happiness of seeing the incomparable
Aemilia. For she always departs (added he) unexpectedly from the places where
she is, to avoid the expense which would be made in all Cities where she would
be expected. So that you will not be surprised if you see her two days sooner
then you believed. But I know not whether you will not wonder when you see the
fair Princess of Castulon with her, and the excellent Nadalia, for whom Thomira
has a great tenderness, and who will without doubt inform you of what ever you
are desirous. But since we draw near to Capsa, continued Laelius, I conceive it
not unfit to let you know the persons by whom you are to be entertained. Be
pleased therefore to understand, that Magasba Prince of Capsa is a man of good
years, and of a very high stature; that he is endued with virtue, integrity and
wit, but has such a formal and regular way of civility, that it is something
troublesome to dispense with his Complements. Palmira his admirable Daughter,
whom the Prince of Hippo married a few months since, as you know without
doubt, is but seventeen years of age. Her stature is not extremely tall, her
complexion very fair, her eyes black, glittering and sprightly, her mouth has
a great loveliness in it, and her wit so lively and gallant, that it may be
said the house of Magasba is as well provided of a remedy, as a disease in
conversation. Laelius had scarce spoke these words, but himself and his
Illustrious friend perceived themselves in sight of the Gate of Capsa, which
lies on that side the City; but they were astonished when they beheld a great
multitude attending them at the Gate to see them enter, and afterward observed
the Prince of Capsa, who undoubtedly had been advertised by some belonging to
Laelius, advancing with some of prime note in the City, to receive the
Illustrious Scipio, who at that time filled the world with the fame of his
Victories and Virtues; and to do civility to Laelius, who was really a worthy
friend of the Illustrious Scipio. But if this reception troubled Scipio, whose
moderation was averse from all pomp, this Illustrious Roman was much more
perplexed when he heard the Complement of the Prince of Capsa. For Magasba, who
never would conform to the mode of Gallantry which was then in fashion, began
immediately to make the Elogium of Scipio; He did not fail to tell him that he
was surprised with his goodly aspect, what ever excellent Idea he had fancied
of him to himself before; he extolled the Illustrious House of Cornelii, from
which Scipio is descended; and then he fell to relate the principal actions
which this famous Roman had done in Italy, and to admire the Victories which he
had gained in Spain and in Africa; and in brief, told him all that could be
devised to perplex him. But when Scipio was going to divert the conversation he
saw himself driven into another perplexity not less inconvenient, since he
found himself obliged to make great remerciments to Magasba, for so are they
constrained to do who have to act with persons of this humor: But as he was
ready to return thanks to the Prince of Capsa for persecuting his friends, he
was happy enough to behold himself at the Gate of his Palace, where the fair
Princess of Hippo received him after a manner far different from that of her
Father. For whilst Magasba was gone to give some orders, he had bethought
himself of (for persons of this humor have always something to do) his
amiable daughter entertained Scipio so admirably, that what ever she said was
far from affectation, or being too much studied and fetched about, but was
accompanied with a noble obliging and lovely air. My Lord, said she to him
smiling, I know not whether or no the Prince have told you that his house is
not handsome enough to be offered to the Illustrious Scipio, but I know I shall
make you no complement of that kind, but on the contrary promise to show you in
a little time the handsomest things in the world. What I have seen already,
Madam, answered he, are so handsome, that I am ravished with the sight: But I
shall be more too, Madam (added he) if you have the goodness to honor me with a
friendship of which Laelius has given me hopes. Yes, Madam, said Laelius, I
have told Scipio.

Alas, Laelius (interposed she pleasingly) do not believe peace is so soon made
between us, but know I will not easily forget the injury you have done me. How?
Madam, answered Scipio, has Laelius disobliged you? Yes, My Lord, replied she,
and moreover he has disobliged you. And moreover, interposed Laelius smiling,
I am glad I have disobliged you both, nor shall I readily repent of it. Alas! I
beseech you Laelius, said Scipio agreeably, be not so fierce, and know I
embrace the interests of the fair Princess of Hippo against you. But, Madam,
added he, be not so fierce, addressing to this amiable person, it is requisite
I know of what nature the offense is you speak of, since I am interested in it;
and though I were not so, I should notwithstanding be as sensible of it as a
true friend ought to be of what concerns another so fair and generous. You must
know then, replied she, that Laelius made a discourse to me wherein he used all
the reasons he could invent to persuade me to act in your favor, with the
illustrious Aemila; but he did it with so much ardour, that I was in truth
wholly incensed with it; for I account to entreat me with urgency to act for
you, is in a manner to take pains to make me to act reasonably. Be pleased
therefore to judge, My Lord, if there be not something offensive in the
discourse of Laelius. I find something so much obliging in yours, interrupted
Scipio, that I am rather inclined to render you thanks, then to be in choler
against Lelius; besides, that what is in your opinion an offense, being an
offense of a true friend.

Alas, My Lord, cried she, do not deceive your self, but believe the offenses
of a true friend ought to be more highly resented. But, Madam, answered Laelius
pleasingly, do you deceive your self as little in this matter, and believe I
have done that which I ought to do. For according to your own censure, I have
only failed, in that I entreated you urgently for such a person as Scipio, and
so it seems I did injury to his merit and your generosity. However, proceeded
he smiling, I must advertise you, Madam, who are yet but a new friend, that a
zealous and active friendship sometimes makes us do things which seem
unprofitable, for fear lest coming frequently to act with too great
circumspection, we let slip some important occasion of doing a service to a
friend; or else lest our friendship by becoming too nice, do not also become
lukewarm and languishing. So that, Madam, added he agreeably, if you have the
happiness of not being more offended in what you have further to say, you will
not cause me very many enemies. Scarce had Laelius ended these words, but the
Prince of Capsa came to wait upon and conduct Scipio to his Chamber. Scipio
refused his ceremony as much as he could; but Magasba believing he did it out
of complement, persisted so inflexibly in his resolution, that Scipio was at
length enforced to suffer himself to be conducted, what repugnance soever he
had, to leave the amiable Princess of Hippo. It Is true, this illustrious Roman
had the satisfaction of hoping he might discourse with Laelius in his Chamber
concerning the divine Aemilia; but he was much perplexed, when being come
thither, Magasba desired also to conduct Laelius to another which was prepared
for him. Scipio and Laelius both deprecated his civility, and believed he would
not be so obstinate to separate them. But it fell out otherwise; for this
Prince whose ceremonies were unalterable bent to perplex them, would needs have
Laelius leave Scipio's Chamber, alleging it was unfit two persons of such high
condition should be lodged incommodiously. The two illustrious friends
answered, that their friendship and their affairs would not permit them to be
separated. But Magasba replied smiling, and shaking his head a little, that it
was hard to deceive a man of his age, that he perceived well what they
pretended was but a fictious civility, and that they desired to be together,
only that they might take up less lodging in a house wherein a great number of
other guests were expected. But they needed not trouble themselves in that
respect; His Palace was larger and more commodious then it seemed to be; and in
a word, if there were a necessity for any to be badly lodged, it ought not to
be either Scipio or Laelius.

These illustrious Romans endeavored further to oppose the will of Magasba;
they pressed him with reasons, and importuned him with entreaties: but all
their instances were unprofitable, and Magasba retained so obstinately,
whatsoever he set upon, that Scipio and Laelius, after a silent beholding of
one another, as to testify how disgustful ceremonies are, at length were
separated; and Laelius suffered himself to be conducted. Indeed afterward
Magasba was pleased to let them breathe and come together; for after having
made a great complement also to Laelius* he left him, and gave him liberty to
go to the Chamber of his illustrious Friend, though not without a fear
continually of meeting or being followed by Magasba: so true it is, that
persons of this humor, are troublesome even in places where they are not.

Laelius was no sooner in Scipio's Chamber, but they began to speak of the
persecution of Magasba, though without much insisting on it, having many more
pleasing and important matters to discourse of. For Laelius, to moderate the
grief of his illustrious friend, told him all he conceived pertinent to appease
his discontents, and endeavored to persuade him he was not so unhappy as he
believed himself to be. For are not you assured after all, said he to him,
that Aemilia loves no person to your prejudice; and when you were upon the
point of marrying that adorable Lady, did you not observe as many tokens of joy
in her fair eyes as you could wish? and did not you behold in those very eyes
as many tokens of discontent as you did before of joy, when a surprising and
dreadful obstacle intervened to oppose your happiness? And therefore I conceive
you have no cause to afflict your self as you do. For if the gods seem to
intend that Hannibal should marry Aemilia -- Ah! Laelius (interrupted Scipio)
rather say the gods intend it absolutely, and that they have made it
sufficiently evident. This evidence which frightens you, answered Laelius,
confirms me; besides, that we see no appearance that Hannibal who is ardently
amorous of Thomira, should marry Aemilia whom he never saw.

Alas! Laelius (replied Scipio) you argue ill in the matter, since you know not
that the Gods when they intend to make themselves remarked for the agents, are
wont to make things come to pass contrary to all appearance, to amaze humane
wisdom, and to make it appear it is a supernatural conduct which acts and
makes use of means which are remote from, and very often contrary to their end.
But, Laelius (added he) should what you say be true, and should there needed
only commodious disposition of affairs; yet do we not already perceive an
accomplishment to my unhappiness? For in b^ief, if I have transferred the War
into Africa, it has been rather for reason of love, as I may so say, then for
reason of state: And indeed Fabius, who thought meet I should fight Hannibal in
Italy, had not fewer reasons to make good his opinion, then I had to maintain
mine, which was, that it was best to carry the War into the Country of the
Enemy, But the Interest of my love being concerned in the business, I spoke
above my ordinary force, and at length carried it from Fabius in that famous
contest. But observe, Laelius, how the Gods delude our conduct, and how they
punish us when we in any manner oppose what they have designed. For we have
seen, since I brought the War into Africa, to draw Hannibal thither, and by
that means to deprive him of all occasions of seeing the divine person which I
adore, it is come to pass by a strange adventure, that Aemilia is come into
Africa, and Hannibal is arrived there also soon after, as well it seems to
behold that adorable person as to defend Carthage. And what can you say to this
Laelius? What have you to say to the request made to me by Aemilia not to see
her? which was the cause, as you know, that I waited for her upon the way, to
the end she might think it was chance that gave me the happiness of seeing her?
Alas! My Lord (replied Laelius) I beseech you consider the matter well, and you
will perceive that the request of Aemilia is perfectly obliging, and even
advantageous unto you. For since that fair person has much inclination for
you, and gives you no cause to fear your Rivals can make any benefit by your
absence, it must be believed she made the request which afflicts you, only
because she believed, that being at present you cannot see one another but
unfortunate, you would live in less inquietude by being remote asunder. And to
testify to you (added he) that this judicious person acts with great
circumspection, I need only tell you, that amongst all the Romans of quality,
who offered themselves to guard her, she made choice of Cato and Regulus, who
as you know, have less inclination to become her Lovers, then all the rest she
might have chosen. For you are not ignorant, that Cato, (as young as he is)
makes profession of a wisdom which holds something of insensibility, and that
Regulus bears so violent a hatred in his heart against the Carthaginians, that
I am unapt to believe a contrary passion can easily find room in it. Thus you
see, My Lord, you are not so unhappy as you believe your self, in the passion
which you have for the admirable Aemilia, since that fair person acts both
prudently and to your advantage. And if you are not unhappy in the passion
which you have for Aemilia, are not you happy in that which you have for glory?
For without going about to give you my applauses, and exciting you to interrupt
me immedately; Is it not true, that you have not seen in History any man that
has done what you have already? and if you come to vanquish Hannibal in one
decessive battlel, will not yours outshine the glory of all those that have
preceded you? Alas, Laelius, answered Scipio, I have yet done nothing that
intitles me to a great name; but for what you say of Hannibal, added he
fiercely, I will either overcome him, or I will not be in a condition after the
battle of hearing that he has overcome me. All the beginnings (replied Laelius)
are favorable to you; for we see the Carthaginians are not confirmed by the
powerful alliances which they have made, nor even by the arrival of the great
Captain who has overcome us so often in Italy, when you were not our General.
And therefore they are instant, as you know, about that brave deputation they
prepare in order to treat a Peace with you, or at least a truce, which may
dispose matters to some accommodement. For in truth, added he smiling, they
will have no more to do with you, who are always so obstinate to carry the
advantage; and they are certainly in greater fear, when it is told them Scipio
is coming to see them, then our women sometimes had, when it was told them
Hannibal was at the Gates. Besides this (continued he seriously) you have
gallant Forces well disciplined: You have several Romans under you, who
deserve to be Generals wherever you are not; and you have this advantage to
be as much in quiet at Capsa; as to what concerns the Army, as if you were in
the middle of your own Camp. You have also left your Lieutenants, Aemilius,
Marcellus, and Flaminius, to command there, whose prudence and courage is
beyond all exception, who are all good Soldiers, and great Captains, each of
which bears revenge in his heart for the death of an illustrious Father. As for
what regards the Auxiliary forces, if Hannibal has for his Allies Antiochus,
King of Syria, Philip King of Macedonia, and Prusias, King of Bithynia; you
have Ptolomy King of Egypt, Attalus King of Asia, and our brave and dear
Masanissa, whom I cannot believe to have committed the crime report accused him
of. Ah! Laelius (interrupt- Scipio) I have seen Masanissa with Hannibal. With
Hannibal! cried Laelius, and you seen him there? Yes, replied Scipio, and
thereupon he related to him part of what had befallen him upon the way to
Capsa. But though he recounted the adventure with very much reservation, yet
Laelius discerned cause enough to admire the heroical comportment of his
illustrious friend, when he considered with what generosity he had fought for
Hannibal, and with what generosity he afterward undertook the combat against
him. But having expressed some Tokens of Admiration for these two actions of
Scipio, he told him he could give some light to the adventure of Masanissa.
The King of the Massessilians and my self, proceeded he, were at the head of
four thousand men which you had given me to lead to Tacapa, that they might
re-enforce the Garrison of a place whither Hannibal perhaps might come in a few
days. When we were not far from Tacapa, Masanissa, who had always a strong
passion for Sophonisba, and was always telling me of the charms of that fair
Queen, desired to go to a little Temple of the Sun, which is not much distant
from Leptis, that he might there learn something by the answer of the god,
which might give him some light in reference to what he either desired or
feared. But for that he carried with him only four or five Cavaliers; it is
likely the Scouts of Hannibal's Army might have set upon him and taken him
prisoner, And therefore you ought not to wonder, added he, that Hannibal and
Masanissa were seen together. Since in all probability the Carthaginian craft
may have treated the King of the Massessilians obligingly, to draw him to his
party, or perhaps Hannibal and Masanissa, being both generous, generosity may
have induced them to act in the same manner, as if they were really friends.
But, however it be, I believe Masanissa will never withdraw himself from the
interests of Rome; so that we have nothing to consider of but how to draw him
out of the hands of our Enemies, either by ransom or exchange, that we may
afterward know the circumstances of Sophonisba's death, of which I cannot
believe him culpable. Now you see, added he, what resolution you are to take in
relation to the King of the Massessilians; but for what concerns the interest
of your passion, the Princess of Hippo and my self will be no unactive
instruments.

As for your Army, I conceive you must expect to make a new resolution till
after the Treaty of the Carthaginians, and in the mean time you may well enough
repose your self upon the cares of Aemilius, Marcellus, and Flaminius; scarce
had Laelius finished these words, but a great noise was heard in the Court of
the Palace, and soon after a slave of the Princess of Hippo entered into
Scipio's Chamber to advertise the two illustrious friends that Aemilia, who was
not look for till two hours after was arrived, being attended with a
sufficient train of Horsemen. Upon this summons Scipio and Laelius descended
down into a low Hall, where it was told them the Princess of Hippo was. As soon
as Palmira perceived them, she testified the joy to them which she had for the
arrival of Aemilia. And as Scipio and Laelius gave her the hand to go meet that
illustrious Roman Lady, and were come into the fore-Court of the Palace, they
beheld a number of Horsemen, who being already lighted, had ranked themselves
on two sides, and holding the point of their Javelius downwards, seemed to
testify by that respectfull action that some very considerable person was to
pass by. And accordingly, immediately after, Palmira, Scipio, and Laelius, were
come forth of the Palace, they beheld the incomparable Aemilia, and that with
admiration, notwithstanding they had been accustomed to see her. For it must be
confessed, the beauty of this illustrious person had a surprising brightness,
that immedeately and perpetually charmed the spectators. Her stature was very
hand some and portly; her carriage had something of facility and Majesty mixed
together, which might be easily observed at that time. For this admirable Lady
came forth from her Chariot as soon as ever she beheld Magasba, who did not
fail to go meet her. But neither the stature nor the carriage of Aemilia were
the greatest charms she had. For this admirable person had the purest,
liveliest, and radiant complexion that can be imagined. Her eyes were bluish,
well opened and very sweet; her mouth was the most lovely thing that could be
looked upon; her Hair was fair and admirably graceful; and of all these
perfections joined together arose a surprising luster, as I said before, or
rather certain beams irradiated forth which penetrated hearts, and exciting
love and pleasure in them, whilst they filled the mind with respect and
admiration: Aemilia then, being such as I have described her, and a thousand
times fairer, immediately stirred up a thousand inquietudes in the breast of
Scipio, which did not cease to be violent by being pleasing. So that this
illustrious Roman was every moment upon the point to cast himself at the feet
of that adorable person, and to testify the greatness of his passion to her by
his extraordinary transports. But having a great soul and an infinite respect
for Aemilia, and time to repress his impetuous inclinations, he composed
himself and subdued the violence of his passion. He resummon'd up part of his
reason, during the time Palmira was performing the civilities to Aemilia, which
esteem and affection suggested to her, which she accompanied notwithstanding
with a submissiveness, which the greatest Princesses at that time owed to
persons of Aemilia's condition; And whilst Aemilia on the other side, according
to her obliging humor, returned to Palmira all the expressions of goodness
which she ought to a Princess of great merit, and a person whom she loved with
tenderness. Not but that Aemilia also resented some trouble at the sight of
Scipio; for it was impossible to behold that illustrious Lover so amiable,
passionate and fruitful, with insenfiblility. But this incomparable Lady having
a firm soul, did not appear any thing at all disturbed at it; and if she gave
any tokens of that little commotion which she resented, 'twas only by a little
more color which arose in her countenance, and served only to render it more
graceful and lovely. After having performed the civilities which this trouble
did not hinder her from doing, she presented a fair young Lady to Palmira, who
by her open and gallant air, and an agreeable and sprightly aspect, was
immediately known to be that lovely Nadalia, so dearly beloved by the Princess
of Castulon. After which Palmira beginning to speak; In truth, Madam, said she
to Aemilia, with an air perfectly agreeable, I do not wonder you have taken
this fair young Lady from the Princess Thomira; and I should have no means of
acknowledging the favor you do me in making her known to me: If I had not two
illustrious Friends to present to you (continued she, presenting Scipio and
Laelius to her) but two illustrious friends, added she smiling, whom perhaps
you know already. Though I were not my self a Roman, answered Aemilia, yet I
should not be ignorant of two Romans, whose valor has extended their
reputation throughout the whole world. Ah! Madam, answered the passionate
Scipio, I should be happy if you knew me by a quality which is more glorious
unto me, and which I esteem much more then the most excellent I can have
besides. You have so excellent (replied she blushing a little) that you have no
cause to complain, though you should be known by them without any distinction.
But, Scipio (proceeded she, to divert the discourse) if you please to point me,
I shall present to you Palmira, two friends of mine. In saying which, she
presented two young Romans to the Princess of Hippo, of which the first, who
seemed to have some slowness in his deportment, and a kind of coldness in his
countenance, besides something of gravity and severity, was presently known to
be that famous Porcius, who was not long before styled by the surname of Cato.
And the other, whose aspect was more facile and gallant, though he had
something of fierceness in his countenance, was Regulus, Son of that
unfortunate Attilius Regulus, whose death is so rumored in the world. After
these two Romans had made their reverence to Palmira, they did the like to
Scipio, and were likewise embraced by Laelius; and then all this illustrious
Company entered into the Palace of Nagasba. This Prince gave the hand of
Aemilia, Scipio and Laelius ^ead Palmira; Cato and Regulus, Nadalia; and the
Ladies that attended these three fair persons followed altogether with some
Roman Officers, and some of the most considerable inhabitants of Capsa. In
which manner they accompanied Aemilia to the door of her Chamber, when being
come, all the men made a profound reverence to that admirable person, and
retired. Palmira and Nadalia only entered in with that illustrious Roman; Yet
they continued not long there, for after some gallant and obliging discourse,
wherein Palmira did not omit to accuse her self of procuring the happiness to
Scipio which he lately received; they went forth of the Chamber, having first
called those of Aemilia's attendants, whose service might be necessary unto
her. After which, Palmira offered to conduct the fair Nadalia into a Chamber:
but this young Lady having no need of reposing her self, and only rectifying
something about her head-tire, they descended into a low Hall, where they found
Laelius, Cato, and Regulus, who were walking there, whilst Magasba lead Scipio
into a Garden, to show him the handsomness of the Alleys, Statues, Grottoes,
and Fountains. The conversation which was then made between Palmira, Nadalia,
Laelius, Cato and Regulus, was absolutely pleasing and gallant; for these five
persons were of rare address capacities, and politeness. And what rendered this
conversation more agreeable was, that the greatest part of their wits were
different, and had their particular excellencies. Those of Palmira and Laelius
were gallant and Noble; that of Nadalia sprightly and mirthfull; that of
Regulus partaking of both; and Cato had in his something so cold and severe,
that it was great pleasure to see him in contestation with Nadalia, with whom
he did not not very often agree. But it being upon the Princess of Hippo to
pass the first honors, she conceived her self also obliged to begin the
discourse, which she did in these words, addressing to the three Romans which
were with her: If you are deprived of the happiness of being with the
illustrious Aemilia, the beauty and wit of Nadalia will cause you to induce
that loss with less regret. Alas! Madam, interrupted that admirable Lady, I
beseech you cause not these persons eyes to be turned upon me, where you are
present; and be pleased not to attribute those blandishments to me which I do
not deserve. Hindering me from speaking out what I intended (replied Pallmira)
you prevented me from comforting you for the same loss, by making you hope very
much satisfaction from the conversation of three illustrious Romans, who have
rare qualifications of ingenuity. Speak of your self, if you please, Madam,
(answered Laelius) and you will speak with justice. And you will give less
offense to Nadalia (added Cato) who loves not to hear the Romans commended, of
whom she has conceived so strange an opinion, that she takes them all for
Catoes. Alas! Cato (interrupted this admirable Lady) I do not that favor to
all the Romans; and if I have sometimes had an unkind opinion of them, you
ought to forget what I ever said out of that prejudice, since from the time I
knew the Romans, I have infinitely esteemed them. And moreover, added she
smiling, I may say I am now perfectly reconciled to Rome, and am extremely glad
of being so: for in truth my imagination was tired out with contending every
day against that powerful City. But it would be known (said Palmira, after
having laughed at this speech of Nadalia) how you could do otherwise then
esteem a people who in the judgment of all others is endued with virtue, wit
and valor.

To tell you the truth, answered Nadalia, and according to the liberty
permitted me every where to speak of things according to the apprehension I
have of them; I conceived indeed the Romans had virtue really, but that their
virtue was nothing at all lovely: on the contrary: I believed it was so rigid
and severe, that it never beheld joy and divertisements without discontent and
inquietude. If I believed the Romans valiant (proceeded she) I thought they
were so by wit rather then greatness of courage; that they adventured upon
dangers, because they were constrained to it; and if they lost their lives
rather then commit an ignoble act or a cowardice, it was only because they
looked upon infamy as something more terrible then death.

And in a word, added she smiling, I imagined the glory the Romans fought for,
not to be a beautiful Virgin, lovely and resplendant, but a Woman of a good
age, severe and Majestical. As for wit, I believed none of the Romans
destitute, and that their wit was cultivated and pollisht, but not well
contrived; that it was a dry wit, (if I may so speak) and averse from all
jollity and gallantry. And in fine, added she smiling, I imagined the Romans so
enamored on their Country, that in their conversations they never uttered
other pleasantnesses but political Maxims.

But, fair Nadalia, said Regulus to her, the first Roman whom you knew, was
not, I conceive of that severe humor. That was your self, Regulus (answered
she) who convinced me of my prejudice at Saguntum. Not but that before I ever
see you (continued she smiling) I violently dreaded your conversation, and that
more then I should have feared that of Cato or Fabritius. I beseech you
earnestly (said Regulus agreeably) tell me what it was that so terribly
affrighted you. 'Twas because (answered she) I believed you a greater lover of
Rome, then all the other Romans, and consequently more severe and political.
You pronounce very confidently in favor of Regulus (said Palmira) without
declaring your reason. It Is easy to render it (answered Nadalia) for if it be
reasonable (added she smiling) to measure the love of a man by the hatred he
bears his Rivals; may not I conclude that Regulus loves Rome more then all the
Romans besides, since he hates Carthage more then then they all do, which I
have heard a hundred times termed the Rival of Rome? But Nadalia, take care
what you say, (interposed Cato, smiling a little) for according to what you
asserted first, it will follow that Carthage should be the Rival of Regulus,
and not of Rome.

You have suffered me to proceed a long time without reproving me, answered
Nadalia with her accustomed pleasantness, but take heed your self (continued
she with the same air) and know, that what would not be exact speaking in the
mouth of Cato, is very tolerable in that of Nadalia; and after all, it suffices
that Regulus hates Carthage more then you do, to give me ground to infer that
he loves Rome more then you do, as much Cato as you are. Nadalia pronounced
these last words so agreeably, having uttered them with a little pleasing
commotion, that all the company smiled thereat. After which Laelius beginning
to speak, I perceive Nadalia (said he to her) you have need of my friendship,
because you agree but ill with Cato, and not exceeding well with Regulus. For
which reasons I offer it to you, without expecting till you desire it of me,
and I will use all means to make it acceptable unto you. For I will renounce in
your presence all sort of affairs. And since the hatred of Regulus (added he
smiling) has not made a good impression in your mind, to give you better for my
humor, I shall never speak to you but of love. In truth, answered she smiling,
you will perhaps do me a greater pleasure then you believe, provided this last
but two or three days; for during that time a quite contrary conversation
becomes vehemently fastidious to me: and I dare affirm, the illustrious Aemilia
has made me despair. For when I went about to speak to her concerning Scipio,
she in treated me to forbear, but it was with such a touching sweetness as
would have constrained the most rebellious heart in the world to obey her: so
that I was deprived of the satisfaction I should have had of performing a good
office in some measure to a person, who being so young a Conqueror, is
nevertheless extremely virtuous, and infinitely amiable. But Laelius (continued
she smiling) since you have begun to make me obliging proposals in public, it
is fit you speak of Love in General, though it were only to do displeasure to
the persons with whom you give me notice, I am not upon good terms. Forbearing
to speak in particular (answered he, I shall do all that you please, and
maintain against all your Enemies, that there is nothing more powerful, nothing
more noble and advantageous then love. And I shall prove (interposed Regulus
pleasantly) that what you say of Love, may be with more justice attributed to
hatred. But to make the conversation more handsome (answered Nadalia) it is
requisite that you speak seriously, as also that Cato declare himself, and take
his turn; and when you have all three given your opinions, the judgment of the
difference shall be referred to the Princess. I consent to the conditions, said
Laelius; and I do the same, added Regulus; my submission then to the proposal
shall follow, agreed Cato. But it must be known (said Nadalia to him) whether
you will defend Love or Hatred? I shall speak against both (answered he) But
Nadalia (said the Princess of Hippo) I will not decide this debate, or at
least, not without your judgment. It is necessary that you do it, Madam,
answered she, for not to make the Elogium of your wit, I can only say for my
self, that I am suspected in this matter. Well then, Nadalia, replied the
Princess, to avoid a new dispute which would arise betwixt you and me: I will
do what you desire, though on condition that after I shall have declared my
judgment, you tell your own without dissimulation or compliance. I shall obey
your pleasure, (answered she.)

To begin therefore to speak of Love, said Laelius, I shall assert, that we
have nothing more powerful, nothing more advantageous or noble, then the
excellent passion I speak of. We see Love is a God, and a God so powerful, that
he has subdued all the rest to his Empire, and who, that he might triumph
generally over all, has overcome himself, and sometimes sighed after the fair
Psyche. And if it be true, proceeded he, that Division of what nature soever,
is a thing absolutely destructive; is it not just to affirm that we have
nothing more advantageous then Love, which is a passion that preserves all
things while it unites them? And indeed, was it not Love that established civil
society amongst the first men? Was it not love that afterward incited them to
elegancy of life, and teaches us every day to live as much for others as for
our selves? But these are not all the effects of love; for if virtue makes it
self to be beloved, it must be love that inspires it, since love seeks always
to extend it self in the heart of the beloved person. Moreover we see every day
this excellent passion gives courage to the Pufillanimous, moderates the
fierceness of Conquerors, opens the Purse of the Covetous, and daily inspires
us with such excellent sentiments, that we may in a manner say, that Nature by
giving us Being only, makes us living Creatures; but it is love which
afterward renders us reasonable. In truth (said Regulus, when he perceived
Laelius had no more to say) I am in a strange perplexity, being obliged to
answer a person of a transcendent wit. It lies upon me to speak in commendation
of hatred before the beautiful persons who ought extremely to abhor it, since
they look upon the contrary passion every day as an effect of their beauty; and
in brief, I must be the Patron and Protector of a thing whose only name seems
presently odious.

But since it cannot be evident, continued he agreeably, I shall maintain that
Hatred is more powerful, more advantageous, and more noble then Love. And in
effect, Is it not true, that there is more evil then good in the world? that
Grief acts more vigorously then Joy? and that Poisons deprive us of a life,
which remedies are unable to restore?

If this be true, as is not to be doubted; Is it not also true, that the
passion which with-drawes from all these things I mentioned, ought to be more
powerful and advantageous then that which leads us to good, which is usually
found more weak then evil, as I said before? I might hereunto add a hundred
other particulars to the advantage of Hatred; but I shall content my self with
answering what Laelius has spoken in the commendation of Love. I observe then,
that he said Love is a God, and a God that has subdued all the other Deities
to his Empire. Nevertheless also I observe it may be answered, that that very
God may as well bear the name of the God of Hatred. And indeed, does he not
shoot as many Arrows headed with lead, which produce hatred in the breasts they
touch, as he does of those which are pointed with Gold, which inflames the
hearts which they wound; and consequently causing as much hatred as love, he
might assume the name of the former of these Passions, if perhaps the people
had not been at first dazzled with the effects of the richer metal, or at least
if they had not conceived some greater pleasure in naming them, then in naming
Hatred, which was produced by a metal not esteemed of. For in truth, one of
these Passions does not satisfy more then the other; and I believe a person
that hates, pleases himself as much in his aversion, as a person that Love
finds satisfaction in reflecting on his affection. Therefore let Laelius change
his opinion, and let him no longer say, That it is Love rather then Hatred which
established civil society by uniting our forefathers together; that love has
induced us to politeness of manners, and taught us liberality, and the way to
act for the interest of others. For, as for my part, I believe Hatred produced
these excellent effects, and think it not difficult to be proved. For be
pleased, Ladies, to imagine the world without society and civil manners; you
will soon apprehend how men continuing in Deserts without union and order,
would kill one another like Tigers and Leopards; but you will also see that
coming by degrees to conceive a hatred against such disorder, they will unite
to preserve themselves, they will build Cities to secure themselves from the
attempts of strangers, and constitute punishments against those that shall
cause disturbance amongst them. Thus you see, Hatred will establish civil
Society. And let it not be objected to me, that this proceeds rather from the
love we bear our selves, which causes to unite for our own conversation, since
on the contrary 'twas that self-love which caused all the former disorder: for
the strong would never go about to oppress the weak, if he were not desirous to
ravish from him what he sees him possess; so that it may be said, it is that
self-love which caused division and hatred that has afterward established civil
society. But this is not all the advantage which we receive from Hatred. For
after having established society, it has also taught us the means to preserve
it: for (that as in the primitive confusion) men hurt and killed one another;
it behooved them in society to act one for another, whereby they have made a
kind of act of doing good offices, and obliging generously.

Moreover, I affirm, that Nature has made us more rational by giving us Hatred,
then by giving us Love, since we have more evil to encounter with (as I said)
then good to pursue; and it is necessary first to overcome the evil that we may
afterward attain the good; as no question, it behooves first to conquer our
Enemies, before we can enjoy the sweetnesses of the victory. Thus you have
(added Regulus) what I had to plead in defense of a passion, which has not so
many Patrons as it ought, and whose very name oftentimes affrightens persons
who knows not the nature of it. In truth (said Laelius) I am highly pleased it
fell to me to speak first, for having heard Regulus, how much better soever my
cause be, I should be strangely perplexed, if I were in the place of Cato. You
would not be so, answered Cato, if you were really in my place; since you would
not resent the troubles which the passions excite, or at least you would not be
obliged to speak in their commendation, and extol the source of all mischiefs,
and the cause of all irregularities. For in brief, it is reason which ought to
guide a man, and it is the violence of passions which clouds his reason, and
causes a man not to deport himself as a man. Cato held his peace after these
words: but because 'twas known he was naturally inclined to silence, it was the
custom to ask questions, or propose Objections to him to draw him to speak.
Wherefore Lelius taking this course: How, Cato? (said he to him) do you content
your self with speaking those few words against the passions? Have not I said
enough (answered he) when I told you 'twas they which hindered a man from
acting like a man, and termed them the source of all irregularities?

But we may say also (replied Lelius) that they are the source of very many
virtues: For we see daily, Fear renders us prudent, by making us foresee the
Evils which threatens us, and boldness makes Conquerors. I know well (answered
Cato) that the Passions sometimes conduce to the purposes you speak of: but it
falls out so seldom, that they lead us to Virtue, and so often, that they carry
us to Vice, that in truth I should be loath to make use of their assistance. As
in case I were to sight a battle (added he) I should not be very glad to serve
my self of Soldiers whom I saw inclinable to revolt against me, and readier to
tear me in pieces, then to make me carry the victory. But yet it must be
confessed (said Regulus) that the virtues which serve to govern the Passions,
would be no longer in the world, if you should banish thence the motions which
they ought to regulate. I acknowledge it, answered Cato, but you must also
grant me, that in this case we should suffer no damage. For since the Virtues
you speak of, serve only to govern the Passions, they would become
uuprofitable in the world after there were no longer any Passion in it: so that
we should in a manner be satisfied for the loss of them on this condition, as
we should be assuredly ravished with joy for having no physical remedies in the
world, provided there were also no diseases. what you say, is unquestionably
ingenious (said Regulus) but I find an impossibility in the thing; for I do not
believe it possible to root up the Passions out the heart of man.

If we cannot wholly pull them up by the roots (answered Cato) we may at least
pull up all that germinates from thence, provided it be done speedily, and they
be not permitted to grow vigorous and gather too great strength. Cato spoke no
further; and Lelius and Regulus knowing his humor, did not attempt to oblige
him to speak more, so that it now came to the Princess Palmira (notwithstanding
all her refusals) to give her judgment concerning these contrary sentiments
which she had heard delivered. She endeavored indeed, before she would
pronounce to draw forth the opinion of Nadalia; but this amiable Virgin opposed
it so resolutely, though withal very civilly, that Palmira was constrained to
pronounce without it, which yet was not tell she had first engaged Nadalia to
declare her own sentiments afterward, without dissimulation or compliance.
This little contestation being ended, silence was made, during which, the fair
Princess of Hippo looked upon the three Romans, who expected to be judged by
her, and then told them that Lelius had spoken extreme gallantly, that Regulus
had contrived his reasons in a very ingenious manner, but that there was more
wisdom and safety in following the sentiments of Cato. Palmira had no sooner
ended these few words, but Laelius and Regulus were satisfied with them, and
returned her thanks.

But that which seemed extraordinary and unexpected in this occasion, was, that
Cato, who was the most obliged to Palmira, continued in his wonted coldness,
without making any remorciment at all to the fair Princess. Upon which,
Laelius, who was of an open and gallant address, could not suffer Cato to use
this severity; but being they were familiar and intimate, it is strange to me
(said he to him) that you have not thanked the Princess Palmira for preferring
your sentiments before ours. And I find it more strange (answered Cato, without
being moved) that you give the Princess of Hippo thanks for speaking what she
thinks. We give her thanks (replied Laelius) because she thinks and speaks
things to our advantage. The Princess Palmira (answered Cato) being a just
person, thinks and speaks so only, because she believes you deserve she
should; so that her sentiments not giving you any merit, and only declaring,
to speak the truth, that you are deserving, you are more obliged (if I may so
speak) to your own merit, since it is that which produces those advantageous
sentiments in Palmira of you. We know well, said Regulus to Cato, that you do
not want reasons to maintain your severe humor. But, believe me, Cato, it is
always a severe humor, and consequently not so lovely as the pleasantness of
Nadalia, who is engaged to speak after the Princess of Hippo. Fair Nadalia
(added Laelius, turning toward this lovely Virgin) tell us with freedom and
sincerity, as you promised, whether your judgment be conformable to that of the
Princess Palmira. To speak in the manner required of me (answered she with an
air perfectly pleasing, and addressing to the company in general) I shall tell
you, that Laelius and Regulus have spoken very rationally, and that according
to what I have heard, their sentiments are not so contrary as they seem. As for
those of Cato, it is impossible that I should approve them. For indeed, one,
but the least cause of our contrary opinions, is the diversity of our humors;
but besides, added she smiling, if only insensibility were required to wisdom,
I believe a Rock would be a great Philospher, and a Tree wiser then Cato.

At these words of Nadalia, the company expressed a smile of approbation; and
some of them telling Cato, they wondered a person so ingenious should not
approve these opinions; I had rather, answered he, it should be wondered why
witty persons appove not my sentiments, then why they do. As Cato was speaking
these words, Scipio and Magasba entered into the Hall, and changed the
conversation; where after they had spoken of diverse matters, and Palmira was
told by one of her Attendants, that they might go up to Aemilia's Chamber
without disturbing her; all this illustrious company went up thither; saving
Maga^ba, who by good fortune was drawn otherwhere to take care for something
which he conceived wanting to that exact and troublesome civility of which he
made profession. But Aemilia being recovered of her weakness, and beholding
Magasba's Garden from her Chamber window, she declared her desire to go and
walk there, upon which all this noble company readily accompanied this
admirable Lady thither. Cato gave the hand to Aemilia, which Scipio presumed
not to do out of respect, but lead Palmira, as Laelius and Regulus did Nadalia,
to whom they told a thousand divertising things although very contrary. For
Laelius always* spoke to her as a friend, and Regulus as an enemy, to render
the conversation more agreeable, founding that enmity upon the opinion which
Nadalia sometimes had of him before she knew him. Aemilia and Cato had without
doubt an excellent Discourse, but after a prudent and serious manner; and the
illustrious Scipio entertained the amiable Palmira only with the violent
passion he had for the adorable Lady which he saw walk before him. The Princess
of Hippo was really affected with the expressions of Scipio, and therefore
being willing to do a service to that illustrious Lover, she insensibly drew
Aemilia into an Alley which ended in a fair Grotto, on both sides of which were
two little Arbors of Jasmine. Nadalia, Laelius, and Regulus amused themselves
in beholding the Grotto; and when Aemilia, Palmira, Scipio, and Cato, were
entered into one of those Arbors, Laelius began to dispute very loud against
Nadalia, upon the first thing she spoke, and then went into the A^bor where
Aemilia was, to cause Cato to come forth. In truth (said he, as hs was
entering) I think we are to day designed to nothing but dispute; and therefore,
Ladies, it is necessary that you give us Cato to judge of our differences,
since it cannot be objected that he is a passionate Judge; and moreover, added
he agreeably, our company has more need of wisdom then yours. The fair
Aemilia, who nothing doubted the little treason intended against her, and
beheld her self with the Princess of Hippo, did not oppose Laelius's desire;
but answered pleasingly, that if she had known of their being already so high
in contest, she would have contributed all her endeavors to the composing of
their differences. And I wonder, Madam, (added she pleasingly, turning toward
Palmira) that you have not put an end to their debates which you caused to
arise rise amongst them.

I know not very well (answered she) whether I have wanted power, or a will to
do it. For power, replied Aemilia, I will not do that injury to the persons
amongst whom the dispute is we speak of, to believe they will not submit to
your sentiments; nor on the other side, will I accuse you of not having bin
willing to bring matters to an accommodement. Alas, Madam (replied Palmira) I
was not much solicitous of doing what you speak of; for, besides that I was
willing to hear handsome Discouses, I had an accommodement to make which was of
greater importance. Palmira in speaking these words, looked upon Aemilia in such
a manner, that this Roman understood what she intended to intimate; so that she
would not answer to a Discourse, the continuance of which she did not desire.

But the passionate Scipio not being able to moderate his transports at the
sight of so many charms, cast himself at Aemilia's feet, and told that
Admirable person without her being able to interrupt him, all that a violent
and respectfull passion could inspire him with to move her. No, no, Madam (said
he to her) you must not persist in this cruel inflexibleness which causes all
my torment; but you ought at least to listen to a Princess who would intercede
in my favor with you. I beseech you, Scipio (answered this fair person)
moderate your passions, or rather augment that which you have, for glory, to
the end you may weaken that which serves only to trouble your quiet, and
accuse not of your unhappiness a person who is her self in danger of becoming
the most unhappy in the world. Therefore (continued she, rising up) you ought
only to think of overcoming the fierce enemy of the Romans: And in the mean
time Scipio, (added she, offering to go forth) believe I shall not perhaps have
more zeal to pray the Gods in behalf of my Country, and my Brother, then I
shall have to make vows for your preservation and your glory. She was going
out as she ended these words; but Scipio retained her, and then beholding her
with eyes which spoke sufficiently both his love and his discontent. How? Madam
(said he to her) have you the cruelty to forsake the Princess of Hippo, without
hearing what she has to say to you. In the name of the Gods, Scipio (answered
she, with a suppliant action and infinitely affecting) do not oppose what I am
desirous of. And you, Madam (added she, turning toward Palmira) be pleased to
have the goodness to pardon me the incivility which I am enforced to commit;
and believe, I beseech you, that you would not accuse me of injustice, if you
knew the reasons for which I act in this manner. You must then, if you please,
Madam (answered Palmira) do me the favor to let me know them, and to permit
Laelius to recount me the History of his Illustrious friend (which he dares not
do without your consentment) to the end I may afterward act equitably both for
you and Scipio. I consent to it (replied she going forth) and I am glad you
will by that means learn that I have done for Scipio whatever gratitude obliged
me to, or virtue permitted me.

After these words, all the Company joined together again, and Palmira failed
not to acquaint Laelius with the consent she had obtained of Aemilia; so that
(added she) I shall not suffer you in quiet till you have satisfied my
curiosity. I shall satisfy it when you please (answered he to her) and shall
be glad to let you know two Illustrious persons who are not known to you now
but imperfectly.

As she ended these words, the Prince of Capsa came among this fair company,
and continued with them till he judged it time for supper. Their repast was
completely magnificent; and after a short conversation, Aemilia was accompanied
to her Chamber, and Nadalia to hers by Palmira, into which the Princess
entered, and caused Laelius to enter too. Who knowing the intentions of these
two fait persons, and Aemilia's pleasure that Nadalia should hear the
particularities of her life, seated himself down by them. And though this
famous Roman was termed among others by the names of the wise and knowing, yet
he understood so well how to accommode his knowledge and wisdom, that he did
not appear less gallant and debonair among the Ladies, then he was othervvhere
a Warrier, politic and virtuous. He began his relation in these words,
addressing it to Palmira only, as Nadalia had entreated him to do.

The History of SCIPIO and AEMILIA.
EXpect not, Madam, to hear in the beginning of my Discourse, that kind of
Proem which they generally use who are to recount a History. They are wont to
promise great matters to gain the attention of those that hear them; they pick
out high words to show their excellent wit, and never fail to excuse themselves
that their eloquence is short of the subject they are to treat of. For my part,
Madam, I account it not material for me to make use of these Artifices; for
besides that, I believe that the names of Scipio and Aemilia, promise at first
all that can be imagined great, I conceive it would be needless for me to take
pains to win the attention of a Princess, who without doubt would not have
commanded me to speak, if she intended not to listen to what I have to say. As
for high language, Madam, I presume you will readily dispense with me; for
besides that, it shows some violence and enforcement in him that uses it, yet
it too much takes up the hearers, who oftentimes heedlesly let important
matters pass by, and even some which being necessary to the body of the
History, it is impossible afterward to dis-intricate adventures. But, Madam, I
shall yet less serve my self of the excuses which I now condemned: for to tell
you things as I apprehend them, if I were eloquent, I should be so far from
being sorry that my eloquence were short of the subject that I speak of, that I
would repress it in case it offered to lift up it self, and keep it under, as I
may so speak, to the end there might be nothing in my discourse that might
divert part of an attention which I would have wholly bestowed on the things I
should speak, and not on the words I made use of to express them. For what can
be heard more satisfactory to the mind, and capable to fill it with excellent
Idea's, then the relation I am going to make, whether you consider that
greatness of birth in the persons I am to speak of, or admire the rare
qualities of their bodies and minds, or be affected with the sentiments of an
heroic soul; or lastly, desire to hear surprising events related, which seem
destinated only to cause revolutions in the lives of extraordinary persons?
But, Madam, lest you should apprehend me guilty of the fault I decry, it
behooves me to enter upon the matter, and to let you know that Scipio is of the
Illustrious race of the Cornelii, which has always bin so fruitful in great
men, that it is not without cause the surname of Scipio has bin given them,
which signifies in our language a Prop, or stay, since assuredly the Cornelii
has ever supported our Republic, and defended it courageously against all the
enemies that have attaqued it. Nevertheless I may say, since all the world
believes and publishes it, that the Illustrious Scipio has yet a higher
descent, and is Son of the great Gods. For you have heard, I imagine, that
Jupiter was seen under the form of a great Dragon in the Chamber of the Mother
of this Illustrious Roman, as it is reported he was sometimes seen in that of
Olympias the mother of Alexander. And that which may in some measure persuade
us, that Scipio is the son of Jupiter, or at least as worthy to be so as the
famous King of Macedonia is; that Scipio is extremely pious, endued with all
virtues, and blemished with no defect; that being not born upon the Throne, he
is risen by his virtue to the supreme authority which he possesses, that he has
already done things in Europe and Africa which will astonish posterity; and
that if he happens to defeat Hannibal in a decisive battle, he will have done
more then ever Alexander did.

There is yet a difference between these two great men, which is, that the King
of Macedonia would peremptorily have had the whole world treated him as the Son
of Jupiter, and on the contrary the whole world would have treated Scipio in
that manner, if himself had not opposed it.

It is true, this famous Roman has taken no extreme care to root this belief
absolutely out of the minds of people, but it has only bin out of respect to
the glory of Rome; for he believed the Soldiers would fight with a higher
confidence, if they conceived they fought under a Son of Jupiter, and would
take themselves to be invincible when they beheld a Demy-God in the head of
them. But, Madam, intending only to speak of Scipio as of a great man, and the
Son of Publius. Scipio, who lost his life gloriously in Spain at the winning of
a great field, I shall omit to tell you of the prodigies that were seen at Rome
on the day of his birth, which caused us to presage good fortune to our
Commonwealth, and of those that were also observed at Carthage, which had a
contrary effect. For it is reported that the day on which Scipio was born,
according to the supputation that has bin made of it, the Tongue of Land on
which Carthage is built was perceived to tremble, and that Eagles were seen
entering into the houses of the Suffetii, who as you know, have the same
authority in Carthage that the Consuls have in Rome. But for that all these
Prodigies, which are nothing but extraordinary signs of things not common,
would not much divert you; I shall prefer to tell you things more essential to
Scipio, and which will certainly be more agreeable and pleasing to you.

After having spoken of the house of the Cornelii, it may seem convenient
before further proceeding in my relation, to say something of that of the
Aemilii, being as well to recount to you the life of the Illustrious Aemilia,
as that of the Grand Scipio. The first therefore that bore the name of
Aemilius, was according to an opinion sufficiently authentic, a Son of the
famous Pythagoras, named Marcus, to whom the name of Aemilius was given by
reason of his eloquence. This Marcus after the death of his Illustrious Father,
who, as all the world knows, came out of Greece into Italy, went to inhabitate
at Rome, where he established the Aemilis. But, Madam, there is yet something
more of Grandeur in the Original of this Illustrious House: for according to
several inquisitive Antiquaries, the Aemilii is descended from that famous
Aemilia, daughter of Aenaeas and Lavinia, who was of such admirable beauty,
that Mars himself became amorous of her. And the Hero that was the issue of
that affection, was not Romulus, as some would have it, but the first of the
Aemilii, who having no father upon earth, bore the name of his Illustrious
Mother, and caused these words to be engraven on the Gate of his Palace in our
language, which signify, We are from Mars.

Behold therefore, Madam, what are the Houses of the Cornelii and the Aemilii,
which have given us the Illustrious Scipio, and the admirable Aemilia. As for
the education of the fair person I named last, I shall not insist upon the
particularities of it, but content my self to tell you, that Publius, who was
undoubtedly an excellent person, omitted not to breed up Scipio nobly. For
himself trained him up in all his exercises at home; and then caused him to be
taught the Sciences, and also sent him to Greece to perfect and polish his mind.

It was my happiness that my Father sent me hither too at the same time; so
that it was at Athens where I began to contract that friendship with Scipio
which is so taken notice of in the world, and will unquestionably be the sole
advantage that will make me known to posterity. But if the Romans admired the
wit of Scipio, I may say the Greeks were astonished at it: all the excellent
persons that were at that time at Athens, resorted to Scipio's lodgings, either
to make conversation with him, or to take his sentiments for the works which
were then writ in Greece. And to show you that Scipio's mind is none of those
narrow ones, who cannot addict themselves but to one science, or to one kind of
writing: I have only one thing to tell you that all the world knows already.
You may please then to know, Madam, that Ermius, who was at that time at
Athens, and who began there to write Latin Verses in imitation of the Greeks,
and to bring our Poetry into the world which our Fathers never before
attempted; began also to ingratiate himself with Scipio, and to show him his
Works before he durst publish them to the world. But if Scipio were admirably
accurate in judging the Works of Ermius, which have a style majestical and
rough, he did not judge with less exquisiteness of the ageeable Comedies which
Terence began to compose at that time, and used to bring to him himself, and
which had a certain air so easy, natural, and gallant, that all the ingenious
love them with an extreme passion. But this was not all the attraction of
Scipio's wit, to draw persons of different humors and contrary Nations to him,
as I told you; for he allured even the Greeks themselves, who lived not at
Athens. Polybius quitted Megalopolis, being charmed by the reputation of this
Illustrious Roman, to come and be near him, and has since begun (as no
question you have heard) to write of the War which we have at Carthage. But,
Madam, I should not have spoken thus largely of Scipio's wit, but only because
he shows it at full view but to few persons, and shows to very few of his
friends whatsoever he writes in Verse or Prose. I will not be so prolix in
commending his courage, since in the recital of his life, you will see a
thousand evidences of a prodigious valor; and I shall also forbear to tell you
of two or three single fights he had at Athens, in defending the interests of
his Nation and his friends. Not but that there is something extraordinary and
surprising in that which I pass over in silence; for though Scipio had not
reached his sixteenth year, yet he got the better in three combats which he
fought with so much advantage and glory, that all the Swordmen began to make
their resort and familiarity with him, as the wits had done already. But he
might have drawn more pleasant advantages from those which he gained in his
fightings if he had pleased: for his reputation joined with his noble aspect,
caused all the handsome persons whom we saw both at Athens and the other Cities
of Greece, where we came to have a high esteem for him, and so great a
complacency, that I have wondered a hundred and a hundred times, how Scipio
could live in Greece without being entangled, and that he had no more but a
generous and respectful civility for so many amiable persons. For nothing is
more true then that he never resented those agreeable agitations which they
call Love all that time, during which he lived after a most perfectly pleasing
manner. But it was requisite for him in a short space after to forsake that
calm manner of living; for news came into Greece, that Asdrubal having bin
slain, his brother in law Hannibal was put in the head of the Army of the
Carthaginians; that he had already overrun a part of Spain; that he ever since
won all the places that he attempted; and that after such good success he
prepared to besiege the strong City of Saguntum, confederated with the people
of Rome.

We also heard at the time, that Regulus was gone to put himself into Saguntum,
and that the Romans had sent Ambassadors to Carthage, to complain of the
proceedings of Hannibal there, who contrary to the League made by his Father
Amilcar, and renewed by Asdrubal his Brother in law, led his Army against the
confederates of Rome.

Scipio no sooner understood what I have rehearsed to you, but he felt himself
inflamed with a desire of glory, and an ardor wholly generous. So that the same
day having taken order for all accommodations for his journey, he departed the
next morning to go into Italy. My self being a Roman of no bad inclinations,
and a friend to Scipio, departed with him, and we went to the Isle of Zocynthus
to ship our selves, because we were informed there was a Vessel of Lilybaeum
there in readiness to hoise sail and return for Sicily. But, alas! fair
Nadalia, we were no sooner arrived at Zacynthus, (whose Inhabitants, without
doubt you know, went in former times into Spain to found Saguntum) but we
beheld all the world in sorrow, and learnt that Hannibal had entered that
miserable City by assault.

They went yet further, and as people are wont not to intermix in lamentable
news any thing that may mitigate them, they told us nothing of the passages of
Hannibal and Thomira, but contrarily informed us; all were destroyed by fire
and sword, and that they had not spared the Prince Edescon, nor Lucius, nor
Regulus. At this news Scipio lost all moderation, expressing a thousand regrets
for this miserable City, and in his agitations threatened Carthage, and blamed
Rome for not having succored her Allies. But as soon as we were imbarqu'd, the
wind became so favorable to us, that we soon arrived in Sicily, where chance
caused us to meet with a man who expected an opportunity to go into Greece, to
bring us Letters from Publius, and my Father, who commanded us to go to Pisa.
Wherefore we continued on our voyage, and the wind also still favoring us, we
arrived in a short time at Pisa, where Publius gathered together all the ships
he could, both upon the Tyrrhene Sea, and that of Liguria, to pass afterward
to Marsilia, and give Hannibal battle amongst the Gauls.

It would be difficult to represent to you the caresses that Publius made to
Scipio, though he endeavored to restrain part of his tenderness, and to
express to you the joy which he resented when he beheld his dear son exceeding
the relations of fame in the goodliness of his person. I shall content my self
with telling you, that after Publius had received his Son in this manner, he
gave him some reproofs. Scipio (said he to him) if you have showed your self
generous by coming into Italy, when you knew it convenient to serve Rome, you
are to be commended; but you give me no cause to be pleased with you in coming
without my order. For you ought to know, I have the sentiments of a true Roman,
and a heart firm enough to be able to sacrifice you to your Country; and that
if you are generous enough to desire to deserve it, before you have attained
your seventeenth year, I am so to have you serve it, and to command you to do
it.

Publius pronounced these words with such Majesty, that Scipio blushed out of
respect, and afterward beginning to speak; My Lord (answered he, with a
profound submission) having an assured belief that you would send order for me
to come away; I did so without expecting it, and was willing to arrive the
sooner with you, to deliver you from the care of sending into Greece. Scipio
had scarce ended these words, but the young Fabius, the young Flaminius, Cato,
Servilius, Lentulus, and seven or eight other young Romans of quality, came to
do reverence to Publius, and to testify to him the satisfaction which they had
in beginning to serve under him. Publius received them with all the civility
that they could desire; after which having commanded Scipio to salute them, we
all saluted one another with very much joy and affection. All these young
Romans were so ravished with beholding the goodly aspect of Scipio, and
observing a certain gracefulness in all his actions and words, that they began
forthwith to esteem him infinitely, and accompanied the caresses they made him
with a certain respect, which their age, which was something more advanced then
that of Scipio, might have in a manner dispensed with. But, Madam, not to
detain you with relating the cares Publius took to form an Army; I shall only
tell you, that this Illustrious Roman having suddenly and strangely gathered
one together, we departed from Pisa, and arrived happily at Marsilia. There we
soon understood from Regulus who was come thither, that Hannibal had beaten the
Gauls, which attempted to dispute the passage of the Rhosne with him, and that
he was preparing to pass over the Alps with an Army of an hundred thousand
foot, and twenty thousand horse. Upon which Publius sent Regulus with three
hundred horse both to observe the march of the Carthaginians, and to discover
in what places the Roman Army might most advantageously encampe. But for that
Scipio had learnt that Hannibal was wont to sent forth parties, either to
pillage or to discover the passages; he came into my Chamber the same morning
that Regulus departed, and embracing me presently with a gladsome kind of
fierceness upon his countenance; Come, my dear Laelius, (said he to me) let us
go to horse, and not slip the first occasion of drawing our swords, without
putting our selves into a condition of drawing them.

I had no sooner consented to what he propounded, and we had no soo^er taken
our Horses, but we speeded after Regulus with such happy diligence, that our
arrival was serviceable to him; for when we overtook him, we found him engaged
with five hundred Horse of Hannibal's Army, who notwithstanding his valor, had
totally de^eated him, if Scipio had not came opportunely to his relief.

But this Illustrious Roman whom I endeavored to second, was no sooner came up
to Regulus in the head of his men, but he presently slew a valiant Numidian,
who commanded the party of the Enemies; and being afterward engaged in the
midst of those Africans, he carried death and terror where ever his dreadful
sword was seen. At length we dispatched or put to flight the Enemy, and Regulus
testified that he owed all the advantage to him which he had gained; and all
the Romans beheld this young Hero with a veneration more then men use to resent
in beholding persons like themselves.

Publius, and all the Romans of quality, received us at Marsilia with much joy,
and very many demonstrations of esteem; but amongst all the testimonies of both
they gave us, it was easily discerned what an extraordinary admiration they had
of the young Scipio. The Illustrious Publius was he alone that endeavored to
constrain himself, and not to show fully how much he esteemed his dear Scipio;
but his eyes oftentimes betrayed that severe prudence, in which there was
observed now and then such joy, and so many tokens of tenderness, that we well
perceived that he who testified by his words that he resented only a moderate
satisfaction, really resented an extraordinary gladness. But how highly will he
augment this esteem and admiration? Publius no sooner understood that Hannibal
marched directly toward the Alps to pass over them, and bring the War into
Italy, but he set sail, and as soon as he was landed, bestowed all diligence to
give check to the Carthaginians. He reinforced his Army with the remains of
that of Manlius, who had been beaten by the Gauls; and having also received
some new Troops from Rome, in which was the young Aemilius, brother of Aemilia,
he only took care to provide for a battle. Accordingly he passed the Po, and
the Tesino in the head of his Army: and being he marched toward Hannibal, and
Hannibal also was coming toward him, it was not long before they met and
encountered. At first the good order and fierce appearance of our enemies,
struck some terror into our Forces; But Publius confirmed them, and made them
go on with confidence enough against an Enemy more potent in number, and made
proud by several victories, sacks of Cities, and the presence of Hannibal. Our
Illustrious General found his courage increased the nearer he approacht such
an enemy; and passing from rank to rank, embracing some, and encouraging
others, after all necessary preparation; My friends (said he) we are to fight
to day not only for our lives and liberties, but also in defense of our Wives,
our Children, our Temples, and in a word, in defense of the walls of Rome: for,
you see, our Enemies are now in Italy, the Pyrenean Mountains and the Alps are
no longer between us, and they have no more Spaniards and Gauls to fight with.
But to put you in mind, (added he, addressing to those whom he believed to be
timorous) that you are Romans, and that you are going to charge the
Carthaginians, is sufficient to make you see that you are running to Victory.
For have we not always beaten the enemies which we go to attaque? Have we not
imposed tributes upon them? And have we not enforced them to seek our alliance?
What have we therefore to fear? Is it for that they have passed the Pyrenaean
Hills and the Alps. Alas! my friends, this is it which assuredly promises us
victory, since we are going to charge forces, whom weariness and the Ice of the
Alps have half overcome already, and we are without question going to finish
the conquest.

While Publius was speaking in this manner, his generous Son upon sight of the
Enemies, began to appear more admirable then he ever had yet done; his heart
(if I may so speak) seemed to quit its ordinary place, and make it self seen in
his eyes, in his countenance, in his action, and in his words; his aspect
became more firm and fierce, and his air suddenly high and imperious. Let us
on (said he to fifteen or twenty Volunteers who were to fight together) let us
go show Hannibal the difference there is between the Romans and the Nations
which he has overcome; and let us only remember that Romans, and such Romans
as we, ought to die in the arms of glory, or take from thence the Crowns which
are never attained but by generous attempts.

He had scarce ended these words, but he fell in amongst the Enemies with an
unparalled impetuosity; so that Maharbal, who commanded the wing which we
charged, was much put to it to bear up against this furious shock. But being a
man of unquestionable valor, he quickly rallied his men which we had at first
disordered. And soon after meeting with Scipio, they singled one another out
and fought, till they were parted by the throng that fell in upon them. Scipio
was then desirous to find Hannibal, and so opening his passage on every side
with his sword, he encountered with Magar, whom he wounded and cast to the
ground; killing afterward and over throwing all that stood in his way. At
length he came to a place where he thought he might find the fierce Enemy he
sought for: But, alas! it was in that place that we beheld Publius forsaken by
his own men, and encompassed with above two hundred of the enemies Horse, and
only endeavoring to dye gloriously. We beheld him all covered over with blood
and dust; he defended himself with his shield, and kept off his enemies with
his sword, and being still seconded by seven or eight men, disputed his life
generously. But this resistance would have been nnprofitable, had not we come
up immediately to him; and yet we were not there timely enough to hinder him
from receiving a wound with a Javelin in the right arm. This enraged Scipio,
who suffering himself to be transported by the violence of his resentment, and
cleaving the crowd with more vehemence: Ha! Caitives (cried he) Ha Barbarians!
and without saying more, he ran upon him that had wounded Publius, passed his
sword through his body, dis-engag'd his Father, saved his life, as all the
world knows, and performed those gallant actions which have been so much
celebrated since, though he had not yet attained to the age of seventeen years.

But when he caused Publius to be carried into his Tent, the Romans whose
courage was upheld by the presence of the Scipio's, were contented only to
bear up against the enemies, and made so weak resistance, that they fought no
longer but in their retreat. Scipio, who was but slightly wounded, betook
himself again to his charge; but he could not get himself followed; whereupon
turning toward me, and some other volunteers that were with us: Ah! Laelius
(said he to me) is it possible that we have not overcome? Let us go, Laelius,
let us renew the fight, and at least be the last to retreat from it.

He said no more, but beholding Fabius, Flaminius and Cato coming, all three
slightly wounded, who were retyring themselves, he showed them a body of Horse
still fighting; wherefore all of them speeding up to see who they were, we
beheld about forty or fifty Horse with Aemilius, Regulus, and Servilius, who
defended themselves courageously against above three hundred of the enemies.
Our succor presently rendered our friends the stronger; so that Aemilius,
Regulus, and Servilius being disengaged, we all drew off in good order with the
rest of the Army. But because the Enemies had lost a great number of men, and
so were not in a condition to attempt any thing upon us; most part of the
Volunteers left the Camp to go to Rome, and likewise a few days after Scipio
and my self went thither, with Publius who was carried in his Litter, leaving
the Conduct of his Forces to his Lieutenant Generals, till Sempronius came to
demand them in his place. The day we arrived at Rome, I found my father at
Publius's house with an infinite number of Romans who were met to await for
Publius, and to see Scipio, whose reputation had filled the mouths of the
City. Aemilius, Fabius, and Marcellus, were there with their Illustrious
Fathers. We also found there Flaminius, Cato, Regulus, Minutius, and Varro, who
was but of obscure extraction, but by the favor of the people, and a pride
sufficiently fortunate was grown up to some consideration. In brief, all the
Romans of quality excepting Sulpitius, were this day at Publius's house, as
well they which had lately served under him, as they which had served in Sicily
under Sempronius. Pyneas King of Illyria, a young and goodly person, Perseus
Prince of Macedonia, and some others of like quality who were then at Rome,
repaired thither also, so that the conversation was perfectly handsome: for if
on the one side the Romans of elder years spoke of the affairs of the
Commonwealth, the younger sort who made a company apart, entertained
themselves only with the several interests of love and gallantry, which were
occasioned by the beauties of Rome. At which time one of Servius's friends made
a complement to Publius and Scipio in the name of his friend, who was
constrained to defer his visiting them; and as he was going about to tell the
reason where we were, Pyneas began to speak, and addressing to Scipio; I find
(said he to him) something very extraordinary in the reputation which you have
gained, since the fairest persons of Rome have not only a great desire to see
you, but an infinite esteem for you already, and are deeply obliged to you. For
not to mention the fair Fnlvia, whom Servilius, whose life you saved, is to
marry to morrow; you have obliged the Illustrious Aemilia, and the amiable
Attilia, by rescuing their dear brethen, Aemilius and Regulus. And the charming
Popyria (added Flaminius) has perhaps not a less obligation to you for the
safety of Aemilius.

We continued this conversation for some time, by which Scipio and I came to
know the eminentest beauties in Rome, by the relations made of them: after
which, being it was already very late, all the company retired. The next
morning when we intended to visit our friends, it was told us we should find
none of them at home, for that they were all at Servilius's house, or those
adjoining to his to see Fulvia pass by, who was to be lead home to him.
Wherefore having never seen the like ceremony; we went to see it at a house
whose windows opened directly upon the Gate of that of Servilius. But because,
Madam, it is possible you are ignorant in what manner they lead Brides home at
Rome; I shall describe to you in few words how we saw Fulvia brought to
Servilius at Rome.

There were six men attyr'd in a silken habit of Carnation, and blew, because
these were the colors of Servilius and Fulvia. These six men carried this fair
Virgin, who had on her head a Garland of Vervain and flowers, which she ought
to have gathered her self. The Chair in which she was carried, was adorned
with a thousand knots of carnation and blew, which tied together little
vvreaths of flowers. On the corners of the Chair hung large bunches of Myrrh
and Vervain, stuck with all sorts of flovvers; there was also seen a great
Portal at the entry of Servilius's house, adorned with an Arch and Pillars of
flovvers, which was extremely handsome. But, Madam, perhaps you vvonder that
they carry the Bride to her Husbands house at Rome, and no where else. It is
easy to satisfy the curiosity you may have to know why this custom has bin
established at Rome.

Yet I shall not give you the account most of the world do concerning it;
which is, that it is not seemly for Virgins to enter of themselves into the
house of their Husbands. For, Madam, I shall not do the injury to the Ladies of
other Nations, as to say, that the modesty. I speak of is peculiar to those of
Rome, and does not produce the same effect in the hearts of the Africa and
Spanish. But, Madam, to tell you the verity of the thing, this custom was
established at Rome, only to renew in all marriages the memory of the first
that were made there, as you know without doubt, by the carrying away of
the Sabine women. But to return to the rest of the Ceremonies that were
observed, when Fulvia went home to her happy Lover, you must know that
Servilius being accompanied by all his kindred, and excellent music sounding
before him, received his lovely Bride, and divided her hair with the point of
a Dart.

This Ceremony is done, to show that the cares of Marriage ought to be
divided; and whereas they make use of the point of a Dart, it is only in
remembrance of the Sabines, and to testify that the Romans when they wanted
women, knew how to get them by the dint of Arms. After Servilius had divided
the hair of Fulvia, as I said, he presented her the keys of his house, he
wished that she were as virtuous as Tanaquil, and afterward took her by the
hand to conduct her into a great Hall where the Ceremonies were to be
completed.

All these passages I have related to you pleased me so highly, that I fixed my
eyes unmoveably upon them, and gave them my whole attention, so that I took no
notice that there was a fair and Illustrious Company in the windows opposite to
ours.

For the divine Aemilia was there, with the charming Papyria, the fair
Attilio, and several other Ladies of other quality; of the men that were seen
together with these fair persons, was Aemilius, the King of Illyria, the Prince
of Macedonia, and Varro.

But it is moreover remarkable, that though my eyes were otherwhere employed
too much to behold the fair company I have mentioned, yet Scipio's were
contrarily so fixed in beholding them, that he saw nothing at all of the
Ceremonies that were done before us. Indeed it must be confessed, I was dazzled
my self when I beheld Aemilia; for you may well judge, Madam, that the luster
of her beauty hindered all the Ladies that were with her, from diverting any
part of that admiration which we gave entirely to this divine person. Aemilia,
therefore, being so transcendent as you have seen her, and beyond the power of
my Rhetoric to describe, retained the eyes of Scipio in such manner, that this
Illustrious Lover (for so I may already term him) did not understand the
Ceremony was ended, but by seeing that fair person withdraw from the window,
and a servant take away a Cushion of Cloth of Gold, upon which she had leaned:
All the spectators did the same both on Aemilia's side and ours, so that we
necessarily were engaged by being seen, to salute her, and the noble personages
with her, who returned our civility at the same time. Yet I believe, Scipio
would not have begun the salutation, (his mind was so employed) but when
Aemilia beheld him, she saluted him; and afterward Pineas, Perseus, and Varro,
with the Ladies, did the like. Scipio was indeed very ready to collect himself
and re-salute them; but he did it with an action so facile and agreeable, that
all the Ladies turned toward the men that we with them, to tell them (as we
understood afterward) that they knew Scipio both by his graceful aspect, and
that gallant air which they observed in him when he saluted them; and then
added also, that if all the qualities of this young Roman answered to those
they already remarked, he had with justice obtained an universal esteem.

While these Ladies were speaking thus, they departed from their Windows, and
went into a Hall, where we lost the sight of them; upon which, Scipio stayed
some time at the window, if peradventure he might have another sight of them;
but he saw them otherwise then he expected, for within a few moments after, he
perceived at the Gate of the house Aemilia's Mother, who was coming out of it
to go to that of Servilius, with Varro who led her; and presently after when he
had seen her divine daughter appear, he would stay no longer, but went hastily
out of the Chamber wherein we were, without calling me. As Soon as I perceived
his action, I ran after him, and asking him whither he was going, to
Servilius's house (answered he.) You are very exact (said I to him smiling) to
make your visits so speedily. And you little obliging (replied he) not to make
yours, till after all people else. I would not defer it so long (said I) nor
yet am I desirous there should be so great a crowding thither. Were it not time
at this instant (answered he) to make a complement to Servilius, undoubtedly
there would not be that crowding thither, which you fear so much. But (said I
again to him) hear at least what I have to say. But cannot you speak
(interrupted he) as we are going. Pardon me (answered I) and I wish to the
Gods, that what you will see at Servilius's house, may as little hinder you
from speaking aright, as I am troubled to speak in going. But (continued I)
it is possible you will not have all your mind about you there; for according to
what I have observed, handsome things which you never saw, affect you very
sensibly when you first see them. I mean (added I smiling) the brave Ceremonies
which we beheld now. And I very well understand your subtilty (answered he,
endeavoring also to smile) but to show you that I am capable of doing a great
violence upon my self: I will resume also the liberty of my mind, and chase out
of it in a manner the fair Idea, where with the gallant Ceremony you mean, has
unquestionably filled my imagination

You shall do very well (replied I) if you intend to preserve the esteem which
the persons we are going to see have already conceived of you. Well, Laelius,
(said he, as he was entering into the house of Servilius) observe what power I
have over my self. And in ending these words, he indeed resumed that freedom of
Action and spirit, which he was unpossess'd of a few moments before; and I may
with truth affirm, that notwithstanding the great multitude in the Hall of
Servilius; Scipio at his entrance drew the eyes of every one upon himself, and
perhaps the esteem and admiration. He went immediately to make his Complement
to Servilius, and to Fulvia, and the principal of her kindred, and having
acquitted himself with great gallantry, went to that place of the Hall where
the Ladies were; but he was amazed to behold Aemilia yet more transcendently
beautiful then she seemed to him before. For you must know, Madam, in these
sort of Feasts, they use to shut up all the avenues of daylight, into the
place where the Assembly is, and then light up five Torches in honor of the
five principal Deities which are invoked in Marriages, and an infinite number
of Lamps in honor of the lesser Deities, so that this kind of light being
ordinarily favorable to beauty, and moreover Aemilia having a certain engaging
sweetness which is not discernable at distance; and all this joined with the
goodliness of her stature, and the gentle air of her carriage, almost made
Scipio lose the resolution which he had taken; besides that he fancied this
fair person, who seeing him approach rise presently up, as all the rest also
did, had saluted him after a more civil and more obliging manner. But he
renewed his resolutions, both because I was present, and he had engaged to me
to keep his mind free, or rather because Aemilia was present, before whom he
would not appear perplexed, especially in this first conversation.

So that after some agreeable discourses concerning the Ceremonies of Marriage,
which was a subject that at that time offered it self, Emilia told Scipio, that
he was arrived at Rome at a very good time to see this Festival, and then
demanded of him whether he accounted to not very handsome. I protest to you,
madam (answered he) I never saw any thing so handsome, as what I have seen in
this Festival. But for that there are different sorts of handsomness, and
different humors, (said Papyria to him) you must tell us with what you were
best pleased, whether with the comeliness of the persons, or the music, or the
gallantry of attire, to the end we may know whether you have had the same
gust with Emilia, or Attilia, or my self. Scipio being a perfectly honorable
personage (said Emilia) will not be loath to confess that he judged Fulvia the
handsomest thing which he beheld. Pardon me, Madam, (ansvvered he) if presume
to contradict you, and assure you, that Fulvia was not the handsomest thing
which I beheld. Scipio has reason (said Attilia) not to be much affected with
the beauty of a Lady, (because he sees fair ones every day) as with the pomp
of a Festival which he never savv before. But that is not it, Madam,
(ansvvered he) which most affected me. It must needs be then (said Papyria)
that I have gained the cause, since there remains no other part to take but
that of the Music. Verily, Madam, (answered he) you have as little gained the
cause; for that which pleased me most, was neither the Music, nor the
Ornaments, nor Fulvia, but something infinitely above them all. It is easy
then to conjecture it (said Aemilia) for since it was neither of those three
things, and there was nothing surprisingly handsome besides, it must be a
certain pleasingness that arises from them altogether, which charms more then
any one of them is able to do severally. But, Madam, (answered he) as I was not
very intent to behold them severally, it is difficult I should have bin able to
gust that united pleasingness you speak of.

Scipio being very ingenious (said Aemilia) it is not to be wondered, if he
does not declare himself; for in so doing, he would disoblige two Ladies, and
oblige but one. But, Aemilia, (answered he) be pleased not to make me so
ingenious; and believe, I would have ingeniously confessed the thing, if it had
been mentioned what really most pleased me. For my part, (said Aemilia) I am in
despair to conjecture it. I believe you would be much troubled to do it
(answered he) for I am confident, Madam (added he subtly) you could not see
what I beheld most handsome. I was the only person that well understood the
sense of these last words of Scipio: for Pineas began to speak at this time,
and Persens and my self being afterward mixed in the conversation, it became
in a manner general, and yet very agreeable and pleasant. In the mean while,
Varro was speaking to Aemilia's Mother with very much heat, so that we were a
long time at Servilius's house; though these kind of visits use to be generally
of no great length, by reason of the throng which always happens in such
occasions.

But at length, after Claudia had conferred some time with Varro, she arose to
go forth, being followed by all our fair company; but as I happened to be
sufficiently near her, I observed Varro retained her by the Robe as she was
rising, and heard him say these words to her with passion: Alas! I beseech you,
Madam, answer me precisely before you go.

The matter being very important (answered she, bowing down to him) you must
give me leave to consult about it with the persons concerned: after which she
arose and went forth, as I told you. The amorous Scipio would certainly have
gone forth with her incomparable daughter, if I had not withheld him and
constain'd him to content himself with making a profound to Claudia, and the
persons that went with her, and only to follow the divine Aemilia with his
eyes. Scipio could not continue there a moment after this fair person was gone,
but was absolutely bent to go away too, and told me with some seeming trouble
our visit had continued long enough, and we might well go forth now, since all
the world had done so already. Yet, I see (answered I) the company is still
good; nevertheless I will do what ever you please, and I will go (added I
smiling) whither you will command me, since the most lovely person of the world
is no longer here. I will not tell you a thing which all the world knows
(replied he, as we were going forth). I shall then go learn (said I, smiling
again) which no person knows yet, which is unquestionably that you love Aemilia
more then all the persons that ever you have seen before. Alas! Laelius
(answered he) I beseech you do not smile when you speak of such matters. I
shall do what you please (replied I) provided you do not require me to sigh;
for I should be much troubled to obey you.

And is there any cause of sadness in what I have seen (answered I, taking my
way toward the Tybor, on whose banks we were going to walk) and ought not I to
be ravished with joy, that Scipio, who without flattery, is the goodliest person
of all our Romans, is become amorous of Aemilia, who unquestionably transcends
all the beauties of Rome? What then do you find your self, Scipio, that can
give you discontent! Is there not an equality between you in point of
greatness, of birth and riches? and if Aemilia has beauty, wit and virtue; does
not all the world speak of your rare accomplishment? and in fine, is there any
reasonable person in Rome, that would not make vows to see Scipio and Aemilia
conjoined together, and the powerful Houses of Cornelii, and the Aemilii allied?

Alas, Laelius (answered he sighing) you consider not what you say, or else
little understand the divine Aemilia. How can you think, Laelius (continued he
with the same air) that a reasonable man ought to pretend to Emilia? Alas!
Laelius, all is below this divine person; and you would certainly be of my
opinion, if you had well considered what she is, if you had taken notice of her
dazzling beauty, if you had observed her wit which is both gallant and modest;
and lastly, if you had remarked a certain charm in her above all I have
mentioned, which I observed my self, but am unable to express. Yes, Laelius, if
you had admired all these things as I did, you would acknowledge that Aemilia,
the adorable Aemilia, ought to look upon the pretensions of the most worthy
person in the world as an insufferable insolence. You are transported too far
(said I to him) for how Illustrious and fair soever Aemilia be, she will one
day render some man happy; and you never yet saw any person so absutely
elevated above all others, but there has bin found a match for her in the
world. And you have also never seen (in^errupted he passionately) any person
comparable to Aemilia; so that you cannot here infer, as they do ordinarily in
the like cases, where you are speaking of a divine person who is so far above
all that is handsome besides in the world.

Scipio pronounced these words inspired to him by his passion, with such
violence, that I was strangely amazed his passion should be so strong in its
beginning; wherefore desiring to moderate his transports, I endeavored to give
him hope, conceiving no other passion so proper as that to calm the violence of
love. But as I was representing to him, that I saw no reason he had to frame
occasions of trouble and inquietude to himself, and that I could not discern
what obstacles could intervene to his happiness, and was by several arguments
endeavoring to compose his mind in quiet; we beheld some young persons of
quality approaching toward us, which were, Fabius, Flaminius, Marcellus, and
Regulus. Being united, the conversation amongst us was at first very agreeable,
but it was incomparably more a few moments after; for having met Cato, who was
walking alone upon the banck of Tyber, we employed our rallery against him upon
a hundred occasions at once to puzzle him; and he having a very stiff and
impetuous wit, the conversation became exreamly divertising.

But for that our discourse at that time is of no necessity to the sequel of my
story, I conceive it not material to detain you with the several subjects of
our conversation. But, to proceed, I must tell you, that all being parted at
convenient time, Scipio and I went to the Palace of Publius, his Father, where
I was constrained to Sup. Which we had scarce done, but a slave of Publius's
came to whisper me in the ear, desiring me to take the pains to descend down
into the low Hall where Minutius attended to speak with me concerning an affair
of importance. Being I lived in an absolute liberty in Publius's house, I
descended forthwith without being obliged to any Ceremony; and there I found
Minutius, who approaching toward me, desired my pardon for his coming to
incommodate me at such an hour.

But since it is for a friend (proceeded he) that I am come to beseech a favor,
I conceive I may do it with the more confidence, and especially from Laelius,
who so well understands all the dearness of friendship. But not to lose time
(added he;) I must tell you in few words that Varro is infinitely amorous of
Aemilia, and that I newly received this Ticket from him which you may please to
read. At which words he presented me one, in which I was much surpised to read
these words.

Varro to Minutius.
THis day at Servilius's house, I discovered new charms in Aemilia, which have
redoubled the violence of my passions; yet Claudia, with whom I was very
instant, would promise me nothing. Judge therefore in what a condition I am;
but to contribute toward one more happy, I beseech you strengthen our party on
your side with as many friends as you can engage in it, the end Lucius and
Claudia may grant that to the mediations of a great part of Rome, which they
would certainly refuse to the requests of Varro, and indeed which Varro himself
can never obtain from the condescension of Aemilia.


If I was surpised at the beginning of Minutius's discourse, I was extremely
astonished when I had read this Ticket; so that Minutius taking this time to
tell me what he had designed to communicate to me, he entreated me to embrace
the party of Varro, and to engage Scipio in it too. For though I have not
hitherto done Scipio or you any service (continued he) and there be no great
intimacie between us; yet I hope you will not refuse what I request of you,
since no exception can be taken against a Caball, the design of which is only
to bring about a marriage. I have so little inclination for all sorts of Cabals
in general (answered I) that you may please to excuse me if I engage not in
yours: besides, that the end you design, is so different from the means you
would use to attain it, that I think your project will be unsuccessful.
Moreover, all that shall contribute toward bringing to pass this affair by the
way you would take, will not only highly disoblige the whole family of the
Aemilii, but they will also contribute to the unhappiness of Varro; for indeed
he would be in eternal punishment to have always a fair person in his eyes,
whom himself had rendered unhappy, and gained by force (as I may so speak) in
stead of endeavoring to affect her heart by his submissions, respects and
services. But since it is your desire I should mention it to Scipio, (added I) I
promise you to acquaint my friend this night with what I understand from you,
and to let you know in the morning our last resolution. In the mean time,
Minutius, be confident I shall not reveal your secret to any whatsoever but
Scipio. Because it is unmeet (answered he) to go about to force the sentiments
of others, I cannot take it ill that you disapprove ours; and provided, you
religiously observe the promise you have made me, beyond which you are not
obliged, I have no right to pretend to more. Nevertheless (added he craftily)
one of these two things must be effected; either that you gain Scipio, and be
both of you of our Cabal; or that I prevail upon the mind of Varro, so as to
quit his enterprise. The last of the two (answered I) is assuredly more easy
and equitable then that which you desire of me; but however, I keep my self to
my promise, which is to speak of your affair to Scipio, and to none else. I had
no sooner ended these words, but Miuntius, who apparently intended to go to
other Houses, took his leave of me, and immediately after his departure, I went
to Scipio, and lead him to his Chamber; where as soon as we were entered, I
began to tell him of this new adventure, but without the least sign of
wondering at it, to the end he might not apprehend it as a matter of any great
moment. But it did not fall out accordingly; for I had no sooner related to him
the discourse I had had with Minutius, and the substance of Varro's Letter; but
he testified an extreme trouble and amazement at it.

Alas! Laelius (cried he) how much were you deceived, when you conceived there
were no obstacles to my happiness. And I am unhappy (added he) since in the
same day that I am become amorous, the dearest of my friends must come and tell
me I have a Rival, and that a formidable Rival too, since he designs to engage
a part of Rome to act for his interests. If your passion permitted you to
reason aright (answered I) you would not apprehend the matter as you do, nor
look upon Varro as a formidable Rival, who takes so unpromising a course to
advantage his pretensions. What know you* Laelius (interrupted he) but some
strange fate may make Varro conquer by a way not ordinary, a person who is so
little so? Just Gods! (cried I) what preposterous thoughts are these of yours!
Why do not you instead of reasoning so perversely, reflect rather upon Varro's
Letter, which will unquestionably compose your mind?

And in truth (continued I) do not you see Claudia would promise your Rival
nothing, and that Varro has no hopes from the favorable inclinations of
Aemilia? But you do not say (answered he) that Claudia has not refused my Rival
any thing, and in such occasions as these, who so refuses nothing, seems to
promise all. If you were not strangely prejudiced (replied I) you would say
that in these occasions, who so promises nothing, seems to refuse all. And it
was never seen that a man was roughly rejected, and his alliance but weakly
refused. But on the contrary, there is always some temperament used in the
matter; as sometimes they tell you, the person you desire is too young:
othertimes, they speak of an other match from which she is not yet wholly
dis-engag'd; and in brief, they find out a hundred pretexts which are not
disobliging to refuse you what you desire. But you cannot say (answered he)
that Claudia has used any such like pretext. No more can you (interrupted I)
that she has not, or that she has bin favorable to a man who sees himself
constrained to have recourse to the last remedies; and after all, you see your
Rival declares expressly, he can hope nothing from the favor of his Mistress;
what reason therefore have you to afflict your self? This indeed makes not much
to my torment (answered he) but yet I apprehend not so much sweetness therein
as you do; for since Varro, who is infinitely ingenious, and has made a
thousand conversations with Aemilia, judges nothing to be expected from her
favor, what can Scipio hope? How? (interrupted I) would you that Varro should
have made any impression upon the heart of Aemilia? or would you have me make
your Panegyric, and say that Scipio may obtain that which Varro has failed of?

Ah! cruel friend, (cried he) why do you use such perplexing expressions?
Because (answered I) you employ your wit only to frame torments to your self,
and complain that 'twas your friend who advertised you that you had a Rival,
instead of rendering thanks to the Gods for the discovery made to you of a
contrivance against your Mistress. Quiet your mind therefore, I beseech you,
and instead of busying your self about fancies to increase your trouble, let us
consider what answer we must give Minutius. These will be no difficulty in
giving him an answer (said Scipio.) For we have nothing to do but to break his
design, which equally strikes both at virtue and Aemimila. But that which I
find a little perplexing is, that I am unresolved whether I ought to advertise
Emilia of it, or whether, without engaging for in the affair, I ought to
endeavor to persuade Varro to desist from his enterprise; or in case he
resolve to prosecute it, to oppose him with my friends, and either to be-break
it, or or dye generously.

But I believe, (added he) this last course will be that I must follow; for I
conceive we ought not to divulge a thing told us in secret, before having
endeavored to redressed it, and moreover, I believe it were better to serve
Emilia without bringing her parents into danger, whether we serve her by hidden
means, or by using open force. I am of your opinion (answered I) although I
know if we should chance to perish in our enterprise, we should be blamed for
not having rendered our party stronger, by discovering the matter to the persons
concerned. But for that the persons who would blame us in such manner, are
certainly only such people as never judge of things but by the events; we
ought as little to stand upon the gaining of their esteem, as the foreseeing
what may happen. For after all, great prudence ought not in my jugdment to be
the grand virtue of young persons. Wherefore without further debate, let us
expect to take the best expedients we can to morrow morning, when we come to
confer with Minutius, and learn his utmost resolutions. In the mean time (added
he) it is requisite for us to betake our selves to our lodgings; and I would
have you consider when you are at your rest, whether, if you have a Rival, you
ought to fear the power of his birth and his virtue; and ending these words, I
went forth out of his Chamber without expecting his answer, and retired into my
own, where I passed the night with more quiet then Scipio. The next morning
as soon as it was day, he came into my Chamber, and being seated upon my
Bedside, would not at first speak concerning Aemilia, but began to set upon me
for my sloathfulness.

I apprehended the matter so pleasantly, that indeed it inspired me with
cheerfulness; so that looking toward him, you believe without doubt (said I)
it is very late, because perhaps it is a long time you waked. But do not deceive
your self, and think not it is the Sun which causes you to rise so early, that
makes it day to us. Alas! I beseech you (answered he) let us discourse
seriously. I do so (replied I, affecting to seem serious) and for confirmation
of what I say, I will prove that in good Morality, you are injurious in waking
me, and that a friend ought not like a Mistress, disturb the rest of a person
that loves him.

You are so little serious this morning, Laelius (said he) that I know not well
what to say to to you. And you so much (answered I) that I know not well what
course to take to make you lay aside your serious humor. Provided (replied he)
you do not require me to discard that which you think makes me serious; I find
my self incli^nable to satisfy you, and to regulate my sentiments as you
desire. But, Laelius, require nothing further; and not imagine as people
ordinarily do, that you ought to oppose a passion that is growing in the breast
of a friend, and that to encourage it, would be like giving weapons to one that
is frantic. For, in brief, Laelius, I declare to you, that Aemilia, the
adorable Aemilia, shall always reign absolutely in my heart, and that I will
wear during my life, the bonds of hers which I find upon me; for they seem to
me so lovely, so charming and precious, that I esteem them above all the Crowns
in the world. Ah! dear friend (added he) I little understand, and you are still
ignorant, wherein consists a true and lively pleasure; since you have not yet
resented those motions of tenderness which a fair person excites in our hearts
when she subdues them to her dominion; since you have not resented that lively
joy, nor those sweet fears which acompanie the love and respect of a passionte
heart; and in brief, since you know not that that which is called inquietude,
melancholy and musing in a Lover, has a thousand charms above those which men
at liberty style solid pleasures.

This subject, Madam, seemed so pleasing and copious to Scipio, that he would
further have pursued his discourse, had not one com^ to give us notice that
Minutius desired to see us. As soon as he was come into our Chamber, and the
civilities were passed on all sides; he at first beheld us as if he intended to
read our resolutions in our countenances; and presently after; what may I
expect you will do, Scipio, and Laelius (said he) in this affair? We will do
all (answered Scipio, that virtue requires us to do; that is, neither Laelius
nor Scipio will engage in a party against one of the most illustrious Houses
of Rome; and you must either persuade Varro to make use of his for the benefit
of the Commonwealth, or unloose your self from his interests, to join with
persons of none but honorable intententions. For, Minutius (continued he) you
were a Roman before you were Varro's friend, and so you are obliged to prefer
the interests of Rome before those of your friend, and even to oppose any
wha^soever that goes about to disturb the public Peace and commit violences
in the City. What you say, is so rational (answered Minutius) that it would be
injustice not to follow your sentiments, and therefore I engage my word to you,
that Varro shall serve himself of other means to attain the happiness he
aspires too. These last words caused Scipio to blush, which yet was not
observed by Minutius; for at the same time he was bethinking handsomely to
change the matter of the conversation, and to speak no more of a business which
was not very advantageous to his friend. And consequently, he fell to speak of
many persons of quality whose humors he described to us; he also informed us
of the interests of gallantry which he had observed in several parts of the
City, and all this with so much wit and freedom of mind, that we believed he
was no longer in suspense and unsatisfi'd. After which Minutius left us to go
to Publius, and I prepared my self to go to my father, though Scipio very
urgently opposed it, and would not permit me till I had promised to attend for
him there, to go and pass the afternoon with Aemilia, to whose house
accordingly we went, where the conversation was indeed very agreeable.

It Is true, Scipio spoke lesser then he was accustomed; for he fixed his eyes
so constanly in beholding Aemilia, and his countenance represented so many
tokens of an inward joy which he resented, that though I had not known the
secret of his heart, yet I should have possibly suspected something
extraordinary by his aspect. Besides, he appeared so satisfied, that I have
since wondered it was not then observed he was amorous; for I believe, nothing
but the presence of the person beloved could cause so lively a joy. Not but
that his attention and his joy was often intterrupted by a hundred things
spoken to his advantage, and of which he was desirous to break off the
continuance, which was a displeasure that befell him at several times; for
though Aemilia and the persons that were with her, understood the world
perfectly, and were not ignorant, that it is something troublesome in a
company, when great praises are given to a person that is present; yet they
thought themselves powerfully constain'd to extol Scipio, both for that his
brave actions were extremely celebrated every where, and because they had bin
very advantageous to most part of the persons of quality in Rome. Indeed
Scipio was not so much perplexed, as he would have bin, if Aemilia, Fabius,
Cato and Regulus, had bin that day with Aemilia, they having bin witnesses of
his glory, and importunately obliged to him. But for that they were gone into
the Country, to a House of Papyrius's. Scipio was without doubt delivered from
a part of his trouble; and that which hindered him from resenting greater
disgust, at what he heard was the civility of Aemilia, and some gentle and
obliging words which that fair person expressed concerning him, in mentioning
his preserving and rescuing Aemilius: So true is it, that the joy which the
person beloved excites, is pure and extremely sensible.

At our departure from thence, I was also constain'd to accompany Scipio this
night to the house of his father Publius, that I might here the reflections upon
the fore-past afternoon: But our conversation was interrupted by the arrival of
his young brother, whom Publius had sent for from Greece; so that we could not
have time then to speak of Aemilia. But, Madam, admire I beseech you, the
capriciousness of fortune. The young Scipio seeming a lovely and sprightly
youth, I began to set upon him, and told him the Ladies and the Carthaginians
would have no great cause to be glad of his arrival. For if I be not deceived,
(continued I) you have an aspect that promises you will be undoubtedly both in
Love and and War. As for War (answered he) I shall betake my self to that
as soon as I can; for I conceive at first, there is no more required then to
obey: But for Love, I shall defend my self from it a long time; for besides
that, it is a troublesome thing to be entangled in, I think I am yet to seek how
to manage it. The matter is not so hard as you believe (replied I) smiling) for
love has a Torch to give light to those that acknowledge his Empire. That Torch
(answered he) gives light to few persons; for I have seen this day in the house
of Papyrius by which I passed, two friends of yours, who have great endowments
of wit and capacity, and yet have need of the light you speak of; they were
Fabius and Cato, of which the first is in love, and the other is his Confident,
But it was reported Fabius was so wise a Lover, that he never appeared
passionate, and yet he was charged this morning for having suffered the secret
of his heart to be known at Papyrius's house, without ever having given the
least intimation of it to Aemilia, who is the person he loves

And as for Cato, he was sufficiently played upon with rallery, for being the
confident of a passion which he condemns, and intermedling in the carrying on
of an affair of which he understands not the perplexities and the pleasure; and
that kind of address which is only learnt by experience. And indeed he declared
that he had no genius for things of this nature; but he believed he might
promote the success by mediating with Lucius, to accord the marriage of Fabius
and Aemilia. For marriage (added he) being an affair, and that very important,
I conceive I should have done no dis-service by intermedling in it. Thus,
Laelius (proceeded he) you see in what manner this Torch gives light, or rather
how love oftener lends lovers his fillet to bind them, then the light you speak
of to direct them.

Whilst the young Scipio was speaking thus, his Ilustrious Brother turned away
his head, that he might not discover the commotion of his countenance. But at
length, desirous to understand the matter more fully: How? brother (said he) is
Fabius amorous of Aemilia? Yes, brother (answered he) and if you have any
interest in the case, you may direct your course accordingly. As Scipio was
going to reply, Publius entered the Chamber, so that the discourse was wholly
broken off; and Publius began to express himself in much tenderness to his
young Son, who did the same with testimony of respect and reverence to his
father. A little time after, my father came to see the brother of my
illustrious friend, and taking me away home with him, Scipio was deprived of
the hope he had to tell me his sentiments upon what his brother had related of
Fabius's love.

The next day indeed he came to me after dinner, when the Ceremony of an
Alliance made between our Republic and Pineas, King of Illyria, was to be seen
in the Capitol that day; yet we must omit that to go see Aemilia. But going at
night to Publius's house, whither Scipio made me to accompany him, we learnt
but too many particularities; for Publius told us with a satisfied and smiling
countenance, that Illyria was become tributary to Rome. And I wish (continued
he) you had seen the Ceremony of the Alliance we have made with Pineas. It is
to be wondered (said I to him) that a Prince of such accomplishments and
courage should do what you have told us. Lucius has so great a power over his
mind (answered he) that he could have made him do other things then this. How?
My Lord (said Scipio) has Pyneas made this Alliance so advantageous to Rome
only by the influence of Lucius? There is nothing more certain (answered he)
and I shall amaze you more when I have recounted you what passed in the Capitol
not above an hour a go. Know then (continued he) that after the ceremonies were
ended, Pyneas desired Lucius and me to stay till all the crowd was gone; where
being without Witnesses, Pyneas walked some time with us without speaking, and
at length stopping to consider that admirable stature of Romulus, which stands
at the end of the great Hall of the Capitol, he read the Inscription upon the
Pedestal, upon which he blushed and sighed, and then beholding us, with an air
sufficiently sad; My Lords, (said he to us) do not believe I have done what you
have seen out of weakness or timerousness; it is a more noble inducement that
makes me to act so, and have not made this transaction but only because -- he
stopped after these few words; and then resuming his discourse. Ah, My Lords
(pursued he) I know not well what I say, but my hand more bold then my tongue,
shall better express to you the sentiments of Pyneas, and let you know for what
reason he makes himself tributary to the Romans. And you shall see with this
illustrious witness (proceeded he, addressing to Lucius, and pointing to me)
whether the manner in which I have acted, be unworthy either of Lucius or
Pyneas. Ending these words, he drew a Pastil out of his sleeve, and returning
again to the stature of Romulus, writ something under that which he had read;
after which again addressing to Lucius, Read, My Lord (said he to him) read,
and you you will see that Pyneas is more capable of elevation then of lowness.

After these words, he intimated to us, that he could no longer be there with
us; so that after he was gone forth, we approacht the Statue, and read with
surpize what the King of Illyria had written. You know there are under that
admirable statue four Verses, which several Nations judge too haughty; yet
their loftiness is in some measure pardonable, being grounded upon certain
predictions which have been made to the advantage of Rome. But the better to
make you comprehend how ingenious the manner was wherewith Pyneas expressed his
sentiments, in which are altogether remarkable the handsomness of his wit, the
greatness of his courage, and the violence of his love, I must put you in mind
that the four Verses I speak of, and which seem to be spoken by Romulus, are
conceived in these terms: My City shall rule over Land and Sea,
And fill all parts with awe;
And all the Cities of the world one day
Shall hence receive their law.


The King of Illyria, to show that he had only done that in reference to his
love which we had lately seen transacted, and that so haughty an Inscription
had not daunted him, writ these four Verses under those that I now repeat.

Although it should rule over Land or Sea,
And fill all parts with awe,
Saw I not there the fairest eyes in the world,
I Would not receive her law.
You may well judge that Pyneas understands here only the fair Aemilia, for he
daily resorts to her, as Lucius told me since; and in brief, it is out of
respect to Lucius, that he has made this Alliance so highly to the advantage of
the Commonwealth; so that Lucius testified to me that he had a great obligation
to the King of Illyria, and that he found some inclination in himself to give
him his daughter, provided he would bring a powerful succor into Italy. How?
My Lord (answered I) is it possible Lucius can resolve to marry so fair a
person out of Rome? It appears, Laelius (interrupted he) that you are still a
young Roman; that is, that you have courage indeed, but not yet a complete
soul, since you are capable of wondering a man should marry a fair and dear
daughter into a foreign Country, and sacrifice her to the interest of his
Country.

As he ended these words, and it was already late, we all retired, and Scipio
was delivered from the trouble of hearing the continuation of so cruel a
discourse. And after having sup, he made a reverence to Publius, and ascended
up to his Chamber, pretending to have some business to do there. You may judge,
Madam, that I did not desert him, and that he did not fail immediately to tell
me all his sentiments. Alas! Laelius (said he to me) I knew I should meet with
more obstacles then you imagined. But (added he with very great sadness) I
could never have believed it possible, things should conspire so strangely to
render me the unhappiest man of the world. Was ever any thing heard or seen
more cruel in the beginning of a passion? It Is but three days (proceeded he)
since I saw the adorable Aemilia, three days since I began to adore her: but
in these three days, the dearest of my friends has informed me that Varro is my
Rival, Varro, who is the favorite of the people, and who by some fortunate
rashness may cause an obstacle to my happiness. Yesterday I was with Aemilia,
and I beheld that divine person more fair and charming, then she had before
appeared to me; my passion received new vigor, and I fastened my chains my
self; but upon my leaving that admirable person, it fell out that my dear
brother advertised me Fabius was my Rival* Fabius, whose birth and merit place
him above Varro. But this is not all; my father, who has an infinite tenderness
for me, being yet nearer then a brother, and dearer then a friend, tells me to
day I have a Rival more to be feared then Varro and Fabius; as if fate had
ordered the persons that are dearest to me, should bring me the adventures
which are most troublesome and tormenting. For in truth, Laelius, I see Pyneas
is a goodly personage, I know he is endued with wit, and I have heard say, he
has very much courage too, and a soul full of high and noble sentiments; But
yet I see above all that I have mentioned, that he makes all things submit to
his passion, and gives a fair proof of it, such as can be given only by Kings,
and those very amorous. But, Scipio (said I to him) do you know that the King
of Illyria loves Aemilia, and that it is she possitively that he meams in his
Verses? Can you doubt it? Laelius (interrupted he) and could Pyneus better
express himself then by mentioning the fairest eyes in the world? besides,
could he have given for any person but Aemilia so important a proof of his
love? Would he have addressed to Lucius in doing all the passages we have heard
my father relate? No, no, Laelius, it must not be doubted, and I see clearly
enough, my hard fate raises me up new Rivals every day, and new obstacles. Not
that these Rivals and obstacles can make me renounce the love I have; but on
the contrary, I feel it augments in my heart, and presages I shall do things
which perhaps my Rivals will not. In the mean time, to neglect nothing, it is
requisite we retire, and either of us seek ou^ means which may make me
prosperous in that which I design; to the end to morrow morning, according to
your sentiments, or my own, I may resolve what course to take to surmount
whatever shall oppose it self to my happiness.

The End of the First Book.
The Grand SCIPIO.
PART II.
BOOK II.
UPon the point of daybreak, Scipio entered into my Chamber, and having waked
me, Well, Laelius (said he to me) I have Rivals, but I resolve these Rivals
shall serve to augment my glory; I will comport my self with an air that
perhaps shall surpass theirs, and leaving them to their ordinary methods of
Courtship, I will do things which assuredly shall not be unworthy the esteem of
the Illustrious Aemilia. You will do well (answered I) in doing the rare things
you speak of, but perhaps you will not do ill in serving your self of those
ordinary methods of acting with a Mistress, which you leave to your Rivals.
How? Laelius (interrupted he) should I serve the adorable Aemilia as they
ordinarily serve Ladies? Ah! Laelius -- Ah! Scipio (interrupted I) you have not
all your soul about you this morning; for should Aemilia be more adorable then
she is, were it fit to be less diligent, or less complacential? Would you court
her with fewer blandishments? would you offer her less incense? In a word,
would you take less care to please her? You know, Laelius (answered he) I would
not fail in any particular whatsoever: But yet I am desirous to render Aemilia
some important service, before I take all those little cares you speak of* I am
not of your opinion (said I to him;) and if I were a Lover, I should choose
rather to begin with those little diligences, then your grand services. For
those assiduous conversations, those blandishments and complacencies; and in
brief, all those little diligences insinuate much more, and enter insensibly
into the memory, and likewise the heart of the person beloved. And in case she
should become so wary as to stand upon her guard, yet she will soon despond to
make a continual resistance. Besides, we hourly find occasions to render these
small offices I speak of, whereas the opportunities of glorious actions be
rarely offered, there is not the like advantage of insinuating into the
affections.

And moreover, the luster of them serves as an excitement to a Lady to put her
self in a posture to resist an invasion; yea, I pass further, and think a Lady
has ground to suspect that a man who exploits a grand action, acts more for his
own glory then for the interest of the person loved. So that, Scipio, if you
will believe me, you shall take all occasions whatsoever to render service to
Aemilia, without affecting only to do great and glorious things; the
observance of which may be heavy and incommodious to a fair person, upon whose
heart you have yet made no impression, and who perhaps may have some kind of
discontent to see her self on a sudden little over-oblig'd. You have reason,
Laelius (answered he) and if I reasoned at first in such manner, it was only a
certain ardor I am sensible of which transports me; and for that I considered
my Rivals as so many obstacles to my heaviness, I proposed to my self at first
only generous attempts to surpass theirs, and filled my mind with glorious
enterprises. But, Laelius (added he) I shall follow your sentiment, and always
act with Aemilia according to the best advantages to win upon her mind, not
daring yet to pretend (continued he, embracing me) to have effected her
illustrious heart. And indeed, Madam, Scipio afterward acted in such a manner,
that he surpassed his Rivals in all respects.

He was more magnificent then the King of Illyria, in Attire, Attendants, and
Horses, and all parts of gallantry at Rome; he appeared before Aemilia more
prudent then Fabius, and even with this difference, that it seemed the wisdom
of Scipio was an effect of the respect he had for that fair person, whereas
that of Fabius appeared rather an effect of his temper. But besides all his
gallantry and wisdom, he was more fierce then Varro, when it behoov'd him to be
so; and with this difference also, that the fierceness of Varro appeared
something insolent, but that of the Illustrious Scipio had nothing in it but
what was lovely and heroical. So that these accomplishments together, joined
with the goodliness of his person, and the handsomness of his wit, made Scipio
esteemed above all other honorable persons at Rome, and Aemilia her self
inclined to treat him in a more civil and obliging manner then all the rest
that usually conversed with her.

Scipio enjoyed these contentments with an extreme pleasure, though sometimes
he resented strange inquietudes; for the same beauty which filled him with joy,
a few moments after gave him an extreme sadness, because he looked upon it as a
thing so much above the pretensions of men, that he not only da^'d not to
mention his passion to her, but scarce dared to think he ought to love her with
hope of being endured, when she came to discover the motions of his soul. So
that this mixture of joy and inquietude which he resen^^ted every moment, began
to alter his health, in which all the world so much concerned themselves, that
some came to me every day to inquire the cause of it. Even Aemilia, who about
this time was pleased to honor me with some place in her friendship, very
obligingly demanded of me concerning it, grounding her particular interest upon
the general, and upon the obligation she had to Scipio, as the sister of
Aemilius.

But however, Madam, this admirable person had so great a goodness, and seemed
to me oft-times more satisfied and fair in the presence of Scipio, yet neither
presumed he to mention his passion to her nor I, as much friend as I was to
him, to open my mouth to discover it to her; such a profound respect did she,
though young and fair, strike upon all that approacht her. And this respect
enclosing in Scipio's heart all the flames that Aemilia's beauty had excited
there, this Illustrious love became much more passionate, and was afterward
^eis'd with a kind of languishing, that made me apprehend much fear and
trouble. Yet he had some consolation in this indisposedness; for Aemilia
happened on a sudden to treat Varro with such contempt, that Scipio had the
satisfaction of seeing one of his* Rivals ill treated, and he of them who had
apparently discovered to Aemilia the inclinations of his soul, it not being
possibly one of Varro's humor; that is, fierce, turbulent, and impatient,
should have concealed violent passion in his breast out of respect, and as
little to be thought Aemilia, who never acts but very judiciously, should begin
to treat Varro unfavourably, without leaving new cause to do so. It is true,
she had one afterward very notorious and remarkable, as you shall instantly
hear. For intelligence coming to Rome, that Sempronius would soon be in a
posture to march with his Forces against Hannibal, Pyneas, who had long before
sent to make levies in Illyria, departed from Rome, with Lucius and Aemilius,
to see in what condition the forces were that were raised, which they
understood were upon the Frontiers. Upon which those of the King of Illyria's
Rivals that knew his design, were extramly perplexed at it. And the next day
after their going, Scipio, Servilius, Varro, Minutius, and my self, were at
Aemilia's house, with Fulvia and Attilia also, where we began to speak
concerning Marriages and Alliances, the presence of Servilius and Fulvia, and
the departure of Pyneas, furnishing us the occasion. Yet I conceive (said I,
after some other discourse) Servilius ought to speak with pleasure of such
matters as these.

I am of your opinion (answered Varro) since having married a person whom he
loves, the subject we are speaking of, ought to be matter of joy to him. You
ought also add (replied I) that he is beloved by her, for his amiable bride
does not disown it. Fulvia blushed a little at these words, and as she was going
to speak something, Varro prevented her, and said, he did not add that
expression of mine, because he judged it needless. For in my judgment
(continued he) a man is happy when he marries a fair person whom he loves,
though he be not beloved by her again. Can you think, Varro, (cried Scipio) a
man can receive contentment in marrying a person by whom he is not beloved?
Change your mind, I beseech you, and be not peremptory in maintaining an
opinion which cannot be admitted.

I know not whether it will be received by a great part of the world (answered
he) but I know well, that such as are capable of a certain delicacy of pleasure
which I apprehend, will not only be of my opinion, but will find more
satisfaction in not being loved by a fair person whom they marry, then if they
were affected by her with the highest ardor. This concerns you, Ladies, more
then us (said Servilius) therefore I beseech you answer for your selves. I
conceive then, said Emilia, with a scornful accent) that Varro speaks very
well; for in expressing his sentiments thus, he handsomely ingages the world
not to bring him in danger of the unhappiness to be beloved. Provided I may be
so by you, Madam, (answered Varro, much perplexed for having spoken in that
manner, and thinking to repair his fault by some kind of blandishment) I should
not desire to be affected by any other whatsoever. No, Varro (replied she with
the same contempt) the delicacy of pleasure you speak of, must be secured, and
you need not fear I shall disturb it.

Varro, as fierce and sprightly as he is, was extremely dejected with these
last words of Emilia; so that endeavoring to compose his countenance the best
he could, and beholding that charming person with a forced smile, as if to
intimate to her, that what he had said was only in jest. But, Madam (said he)
you mistake the matter; for you may understand my sentiments are wholly pure
and unconcerned, if I pretend to marry a fair person whom I love, and by whom I
dare not hope to be beloved again. That term, dare, was wrong placed (answered
she with the same air) but, Varro, since I am not in the humor to examine
whether your sentiments are pure and unconcerned, you will do me a great
pleasure to speak no more of these matters. But, Madam, (said I to Emilia) it is
unjust to impose silence to Varro; for since his opinion ought not to be
followed, it is requisite that he change it forthwith; or after having said
his utmost to confirm it, be convinced of his error by contrary reasons.

If Varro should not change his opinion (said Attilia) there would be no danger
of drawing much of the world to be of his judgment. The sentiments of the
multitude are not always the best (answered Minutius) and the greatest part of
mankind is not perpetually the wisest. Should what you say be true (replied
Fulvia) yet there would at least be in the kind of sentiments, the satisfaction
of not erring but in good company. Besides (added I) an error ceases to be such
when it is generally received. And what will become of our priority, if the
sentiment opposite to that of Varro be perfectly good and generally received?
We may examine the goodness of it (answered Minutius) but as for being
generally received, I shall not agree to that; for in the Chamber where we are,
the opinion of Varro ought to find many defenders, since the Ladies who are
present, ought either to approve it, or confess that they take pleasure in
being beloved.

For my part, (said Attilia) I should take none inbeing hated. But, Madam
(proceeded she, addressing to Aemilia, whose countenance spoke her
unwillingness to declare her self) you shall tell us your sentiment also, if
you please. To tell it you ingeniously, since you desire it (answered she) I
shall acknowledge that I conceive the friendship, or the indifference of
persons that are worthy of both, ought to be desired; as they say, it is a
pleasure to be commended by a person that is commendable himself. But, Madam
(said Varro) if an amiable person should not love you, would you be less
satisfied, when you considered that you did what you ought, in loving a lovely
person, and especially that does not love you, since you would act without
interest? There would be more generosity in that which you say (answered
Scipio) but I do not conceive there would be more satisfaction. That generosity
(replied Varro) would cause the pleasure I speak of: but since you require I
should speak of a pleasure that is more essential to the thing, I have only to
tell you, that if you come to marry a person that loves you passionately, you
act as well for her as for your self; so that this satisfaction being divided,
is weakened on your side; whereas if you act only for your own interests, you
have the pleasure of seeing that all you do is done for your self, and that you
triumph over the passions of a fair person.

Besides, when you act in this manner, you resemble Conquerors, who gloriously
win a place that resists; whereas they who get themselves to be affected by
their little diligences, attendances and complacencies, are like those Captains
that take Cities only by intelligence, or some other secret means. Moreover
(added Minutius) in the deportment of a person that loves, you observe
something so obliging, that seems to disparage modesty, whereby you are not so
lively affected with it; besides, that such a person requires at several times
you should perform certain duties to her, and certain services which she
overcomes according to the capriciousness of her passion; and so taking them as
tributes which you owe her, it is impossible you should render them without
regret, because you do with constraint. But upon the countenance of a person
that loves you not, you always see such a coldness and reservedness which
increases modesty, and ravishes you with a joy beyond my ability to express.

I shall go further (replied Varro) and say, that there is something more noble
in this sentiment of mine. For either the person we love, has wit, or she has
not; if not, you may easily judge there is no great advantage in being loved by
her; if she has, and does not love us, we have the glory of doing what we ought
in loving (as I said before) and surmounting the greatest obstacles in the
course of our passion, which unquestionably are the insensibility, and the
ingratitude of the person beloved. And to show you (proceeded Varro) that what
I say is beyond all doubt; let us examine friendship, which nearest approaches
love, and the name of which having nothing in it but sweetness, will not
affright the Ladies, who entertain it oftentimes under the name of the passion
I mentioned, which they conceive something too untameable and tumultuous. Let
us speak, I say, of friendship; and suppose, Madam (continued he, with a hidden
design, addressing to Aemilia) that Attilia loved you passionatly, and you did
not love her; it would without doubt come to pass, that Attilia would take a
thousand and a thousand cares to please you, whilst you paid her with
ingratitude, and return her cruel and severe words in acknowledgment of her
blandishments; so that it would also happen, that all the world would commend
the generous procedure of Attilia, and blame yours. For friendship, which is an
union not being possible to be built but upon two foundations, and that which
is between two persons extremely accomplished, not possible to be other then
commendable and illustrious. You will be blamed, Madam, for not supporting it
on your part, and your indifference will augment the luster of Attilia's
sincere and generous affection. You will I hope permit me to leave you (added
he smiling) to make the application of what I have said, and at least in
conversation to make you pass from friendship to love; for if you judge a
friend to be so much the more generous in that his affection is not
countenanced; why will you not judge the same of a lover, whose passion being
more ardent, merits more acknowledgment? Confess therefore, I beseech you, that
my opinion is not absurd as you believed it, which is, that there is much
sweetness and generosity in marrying a fair person whom we love without being
loved; for if I love, I act, and act with choice, yea with liberty too; since
at the beginning of my passion, I have power to determine to love or not to
love; whereas, if I am loved, I am without action, I only lend a dead presence
(as I may so speak) and in sum, only receive the tokens of an affection which I
cannot destroy. I believe (said Scipio) it is possible to find either effectual
or apparent reasons for all the things in the world; but this does not hinder
but there may be found others contrary, of more or less prevalence, according
to the justice or injustice of the subject they concern. Wherefore you must not
wonder, Varro, if you are told you are mistaken in your reasonings.

For did not you say, the satisfaction of a man that acted for his own
interests, was much greater then when he acts also for those of the person
loved? It follows therefore, that you must confess you love your self only;
for it would be a strange contradiction to pretend that you love a fair person
at the same time that you condemn acting for her.

You also said afterward, as I remember, that your satisfaction being shared
by the person you loved, would be much weakened on your side. Alas! Varro, you
understand little of the nature of love, since you are ignorant that this
passion is so far from dividing, that it unites all things, and instead of
sharing satisfaction, makes you enjoy that of the person loved too, and so
gives you a double one. Then would be the time, Varro (said Servilius) that you
might abandon your self to the ravishment of joy that was spoken of, when you
should see your own passions excite the like in a fair person, when you beheld
your joy glitter in her eyes; and her fair mouth sigh for your griefs. This,
Varro (proceeded he) is that delicacy of pleasure you ought to wish to re^ent;
for we may say, that he that is not capable of it, is incapable of the highest
satisfaction. These words of Servilius caused Scipio to blush; upon which I
immediately began to speak, and that with some heat, to the end no notice might
be taken of the alteration in the countenance of this illustrious-Lover: and
addressing to Varro: If you surprised me (said I to him) when you termed that a
divided satisfaction of two persons, whom you confess to be united, because
they love one another; I was not less amazed when you compared the heart of a
fair Lady to a City besieged; for I can fancy nothing more discrepant.

If we see (continued I) that the force of battering Rams, and other warlike
Engines, make breaches by which the Victor enters the place besieged; we see,
on the contrary, a generous heart is never gained upon but by complacencie,
submissions, respects, and a thousand little acts which cannot be taught, but
are daily inspired by love. We see, I say, a generous heart, that noble and
independent place which is able to breath an air of liberty amidst chains, is
so far from giving entrance to any whatsoever by violence, that it never
receives a conqueror but by the gate which it self freely opens. Nevertheless,
though I should have approved your comparison, yet you would be obliged to
confess, that a man that raigns by violence cannot reign long, that he must
stand in fear of all the world, since all the world does so of him, that he is
ready every day to see his very Guards turn their Arms against him, and his
subjects weary of being such, shake off his tyrannical yoke; and therefore I
believe it will easily be judged better to enter and reign by gentleness in a
place, and to be the lawful possessor, then a severe usurper of it.

As for the sentiment of Minutius (said Scipio) it will not perhaps be better
entertained, because himself followed that of Varro. You asserted (continued
he, addressing to Minutius) that we see in the countenance of a fair person
that loves us, such a kind of obligingness that disparages modesty. But do not
you know, that love is always accompanied with respect, fear and languor: I
mean those respects which do not torture the mind, and those sweet fears that
delight the persons who cause them, and those languors which embellish the
countenance, and give it an air infinitely affecting: And not of those -- which
you spoke of, which can have nothing lovely in them, because it is aversion
which produces them. As for the services and duties you mentioned, which you
imagine a person that loves us exacts imperiously, your self destroy what you
establish; for in saying such a person loves us, do not you also imply, that
she desires nothing but what pleases us? and when you suppose we love such a
person, do not you also grant that we do nothing for her with constraint? In
the distinction which Varro made afterward (continued Scipio) it may be said
he has not stood to his first sentiments; for I conceive, at the beginning of
his discourse he designs to act only for himself, and in the place I speak of,
he remembers that he ought to be generous, and that he ought not to act but for
the interest of the person loved.

But to omit this kind of discussion, is it not to be thought an unhappiness to
love, and not be loved again, whethersoever the person loved be ingenious or
otherwise? For if we love a person without wit and worth, we may without much
arguing conclude, that our engagement alone renders us unhappy. But we are much
more to be pitied, when a Lady of a sprightly and judicious wit, is averse
from loving us; for all the world will have ground to conclude us undeserving to
receive that which a Lady that judges prudently of matters, refuses to grant
us: Besides (added I) for accomplishment of the misery, such a Lady should
refuse that which she were in some measure obliged to grant, namely to love him
that loves her. For indeed (continued I) for the Interest of my friend, it is a
peculiar grandeur of love, that all the Treasures and Empires of the World
cannot satisfy it, but it must suffice it self, and the inflamed heart
communicate its flame.

As I was pronouncing these words, I looked upon Aemilia, though without
unseemliness, and that fair person began to speak after a smile infinitely
charming, addressing to Aemilia, at the venture of saying nothing considerable
(said she) it is requisite for me to answer to what has bin said concerning me,
and to declare that the supposition is impossible that was made of my not
esteeming and loving you. But though you had not that goodness for me (answered
Attilia) and should happen not to love me, the reasoning of Varro, would not, I
conceive, be the stronger, for in truth, I should esteem my self infinitely
unhappy. But so far would your proceeding be (replied Aemilia) from being noble
and generous, as they say it would be, that you would be accused of stupidity,
if you could persist in loving a person, who in not loving you would assuredly
be highly unjust. For my part (said Fulvia agreeably, blushing a little) since
it is lawful for me to confess there is sweetness in loving, it will be also
lawful for me to say, that there is infinite in being loved, and I wish I had
sufficient eloquence to prove it. You have, Madam, (answered Scipio) to prove
things much more difficult, and Varro has not served himself of reasons strong
enough to perplex so excellent a capacity as yours. For Varro affirmed
(continued he) that it is more noble to love then to be loved; because when when
we love, we act, and that with choice and liberty, having in our power to
determine to love, or not the first moment we engage our selves.

But to be loved, said he, is, to speak properly, to do nothing, but lend a
dead pretense, and receive testimonies of a passion that is not to be
destroyed, which is not difficult to be refuted. For if the person that loves,
acts; and the person loved, does not; the forbearance of the latter is much
more noble then the action of the other, since the inducement to act proceeds
from, as well as the end of the action terminates, in the person loved: As it
is the grandeur of a King to cause a thousand persons to act without taking the
pains to act himself, and doing that for his subjects which they are obliged to
do for him. But I have wondered more at that which Varro dared to affirm, that
it is in our power to determine our selves to love, or not; and that to be
loved, is to do nothing but receive the tokens of an affection which we cannot
extinguish: I will not insist in finding out a contradiction in these words,
though it would be no difficult search. But if a man can love, or not love, a
Lady that desires not to be loved by him, might easily give him powerful
inducements to resolve not to love her; so that, contrary to the sentiments of
Varro, it will be in her power to extinguish the passion that such persons has
for her.

But Varro is excusable for having spoken in this manner; for he knows not very
well what love is, since according to his sentiment, a man is able to determine
to love, or not to love; and since he is ignorant that our hearts are on a
sudden engaged, before our reason deliberates the matter, and we take the
chains upon us without knowing whether we ought to wear or break them. But in
my judgment, Varro is yet more unjust, when he says with a kind of contempt,
that to be loved, is to do nothing, but only receive the testimonies of an
affection that cannot be extinguished. For indeed, what can be more glorious
then that desirable impatience, of not being able to hinder our selves from
being beloved? What can we say more magnificent of our Gods, then that it is
impossible to know them without loving and adoring them?

Thus you see, Ladies, how much Varro has mistaken the matter, and whether he
has done well in going about to maintain an opinion, which he ought never to
have thought worthy to defend. After these words, Aemilia, Fulvia, Attilia,
Servilius, and my self, spoke something to intimate, that the discourse of Varro
had made no impression upon our minds, or at least none that was very
advantageous to him. And it now growing late, it fell out by chance that
Scipio, Varro, Minutius, and I went forth together; when beholding one another
with looks that spoke no great kindness, as you may well judge, Madam, we
silently and unadvertingly went along till we came upon the bank of Tyber,
where we walked some moments all in silence; till at length Varro, whose nature
is sufficiently violent, regretting what had passed at Aemilia's house, looked
steadfastly upon Scipio, after having blushed two or three times. You have had
more assistants (said he to him) then I at Aemilia's; but I do not despair,
having an other party which perhaps will render me happy in the manner I wish.
For, I believe not (continued he) a Lady of extraordinary merit, and whom I
should honor infinitely, as I do Aemilia, ought to think her self injured, if
I take all manner of courses to marry her. But on the contrary, as there is
nothing better evidences the greatness of a passion, then the extraordinary
means which are used to satisfy it; I conceive, a Lady, how averse soever she
seem, would be glad to have great projects and contrivances employed to conquer
her; and indeed they bring more glory to him, that serves himself of them, and
to the person for whom they are undertaken, then those kind of little
diligences, slight complacencies and secret insinuations, which being
ordinarily without luster, are also ordinarily without glory. You deceive your
self, Varro (answered Scipio) if you believe a Lady that were of Aemilia's
humor, could approve such violent proceeding, which you term extraordinary
courses.

On the contrary (pursued he) you must know that Virtue and seemliness have
constituted certain ways, beyond which all passes for rudeness and
irregularitie; and therefore a virtuous person would be so far from being
wrought upon by those great projects and contrivances you speak of; or to speak
more clearly, those boisterous attempts and violences, that she would perfectly
hate a man, who in order to marry, should take your great courses, employ your
grand projects, and make choice of your extraordinary means. You ill apprehend
my sentiments, Scipio (replied Varro) when you speak of boisterous attempts;
for what power soever I have in Rome, I will never make use of it to do
violence to Aemilia. You would have done very well, Varro, (said Scipio
disdainfully) to have said before that fair person what you say now, though it
had bin only to have settled her mind. For the house of the Aemilii have great
reason to fear the power of Varro in Rome. But, Varro, (continued he with a
fierce air) you would do yet better not to speak so high of the party you have
in Rome, but believe your self not capable of using it against a house so
illustrious as that of the Aemilii. For when all is done, Varro, Aemilius will
spoil your plots at his return; and if in his absence you offer to execute any
design not consistent with virtue, I will do the same that he would do if he
were at Rome.

It belongs not to you (answered Varro, blushing) to examine of nature the
designs I am framing, are; and I conceive you have not yet bin long enough at
Rome, either to make plots there, or to be able to break them. And it is so
little a while (replied Scipio with a scornful air) that your name has been
known there, that my name alone would break the party that you have formed;
and if this means be too weak, I shall find others that will do it both more
powerful and more infallible.

Those other means you intimate (answered Varro fiercely) will as little daunt
me, as the pronouncing of a name, which seems to me to have nothing mysterious
enough in it to do great exploits.

These words of Varro made Scipio lose the patience which he had till then
preserved, so that suddenly wresting a sword which was carried by a slave; Let
us try, Varro (cried he) whether I can well make use of those means I
intimated. Ending these words he drew the sword, and as Varro, Minutius, and my
self had seized others which were carried by our slaves, we had all four began
a combat which in all probability would soon have been fatal, if by chance
Flaminius, Lentulus, and several other Romans had not at the same moment
arrived in that place by a street which opened just upon it, so that they were
immediately upon us, and parted us. But for that Scipio and Varro, feared lest
the ground of their quarrel should be known, they presently were provided with
pretexts, and alleged their difference was occasioned by a discourse
concerning the affairs of the Army. And accordingly said Varro (who was more
capable then Scipio, to speak a thing confidently that was not true) I was
defending, that Sempronius did very well to prepare himself for a battle, and
that he would do better if he engaged as soon as possible. Scipio immediately
contradicted me for the interest of his Father, and endeavored to persuade us
that Sempronius was unjust, if he gave battle before Publius was perfectly
cured, that he might be in a condition to bear part of the pains and glory with
Sempronius. So that having answered Scipio, and Scipio replied to me, we were
easily exasperated; and Laelius being of Scipio's opinion, as Minutius was of
mine, they became involved in our quarrel, instead of being inclinable to
reconcile it.

This pretext of Varro seeming to carry some color of truth, because the
general discourse of Rome was much after this rate, Flaminius who was something
more aged then Lentulus, desired to take up the business upon the place,
imagining we had no other grounds of quarrelling; so that entreating us to
speak no more concerning the interests of Publius and Sempronius, he caused us
to promise him we would not, thinking by that means to avoid all mischievous
consequences, and so we retired severally. In the mean time Varro considering
with what ardor Scipio had sided with the interests of Aemilia, did not doubt
but that he was enamored of her; and therefore perceiving he had to do with a
Rival so considerable, and moreover with a Rival that was conscious to his
secret, he determined to bestir himself to execute his design before Scipio
should discover his love, or Pyneas return with Lucius to accomplish his. My
Illustrious friend, on his part, resolved to neglect nothing; he engaged seven
or eight of his friends to be in readiness to serve him in an important affair,
in case he should have need of them, and chose out ten or a dozen of his
Domestics, whom he believed to be men of courage, not daring to make a
stronger party, least the business should be discovered. For being not
certainly assured that Varro durst attempt in the City of Rome to carry by
force a Lady of great quality, he feared that if his great preparation to
oppose a pretended Ravisher, should be known, it would be believed about the
City, either that he was sufficiently amorous of her to have lost his reason,
or was seized with a pannick terror: Besides, conceiving that if Varro
intended any such thing, it would be only by night, he thought he should be
strong enough to resist him with eighten or twenty men in whom he might
confide. But for that it was impossible for him exactly to know the day in
which Varro would enterprise what he had projected, he was minded also to make
himself sure of a noble relation of his named Appius, who lodged near Lucius's
Palace, to the end if the encounter should happen to be in that quarter, and
the noise of it heard at Appius's house, he might take from thence what succor
should be necessary. Thither therefore he went to acquaint him with the
business; but finding him not at home, and unwilling to stay he left a Note
conceived in these terms, with order to be delivered to his own hands.

Scipio to Appius.
I Came to your house to impart to you an affair of very great importance, but
not finding you within, and it being probable I shall need you this night, I
left this note to entreat you to be in a posture of issuing forth well
accompanied, if you hear a bustle near the Palace of Lucius, and to come to my
aid, if I find too great resistance there, which yet in all appearance I shall
not do.


Scipio having written and showed me this Note, went from thence, and
afterward as soon as night began to appear, sent one of his slaves, and
commanded him to pass to and fro time after time before Aemilia's Gate, till an
hour which he set him to retire, designing to send others thither successively,
and continue this vigilance all the night to observe if any appeared there in a
readiness to attempt any thing. But when it was told Scipio, that there was no
person seen there besides some Domestics of Lucius, he slept quietly till the
break of day; when he arose to go to Appius's house, where he understood his
Note had been delivered to him, and that he was gone an hour before into the
Country. Scipio was something troubled that he could not speak with him; but
when at his going out of the house he beheld the stately Palace where the
adorable Aemilia lived; this fight not only dispelled his trouble, but
inspired him with a very sensible joy. But the aspect of the person loved,
causing one incomparably greater and livelier, Scipio awaited impatiently the
hour in which he might see the fair person he adored, and accordingly went to
her house to pass the afternoon with her; but he was surprised when the Porter
of Lucius told him Aemilia was gone forth with Claudia, and that by all
conjecture they would not return home till night.

The amorous Scipio heard not these words without regret, and being not able to
remain longer without seeing Aemilia, he presently resolved to go seek her in
all places whither he judged she might be gone. But this transport being over
within a few moments, he conceived it not consistent with decency for him
either to go or send to seek Aemilia, and therefore he bethought himself to
send to inquire for me in all these houses, commanding the slaves which he sent
into diverse quarters to have tidings the sooner of what he desired, that they
should pretend I was with Claudia. This was rationally enough contrived; for it
was very usual for Scipio to cause me to be sought out, and not strange it
should be said I was with Claudia, at whose house I was almost every day, as I
have already told you; so that by saying confidently I was with her, it might
be confidently demanded whether she were in the places at which I was sought
for. Nevertheless, all this diligence proved unsuccessful; and which was more
perplexing, Scipio understood that not only Claudia and Aemilia were not gone
abroad at all that day, but also that Minutius had passed the afternoon with
them at their house: for a slave whom he caused to watch about the Gate till
they should return home, to the end he might come presently and give him notice
of it, told him that he did not see them enter into the house, but beheld
Minutius come forth from thence toward night. We mused a long time concerning
this adventure; but all we could imagine thereupon, served only to perplex
Scipio, who came at length to believe that Varro had devised some means to win
the mind of Claudia, and that Minutius perhaps went thither to treat of an
affair on which this passionate Lover could not think without being enraged.
Yet he did not cease his former course of sending slaves from time to time
toward Lucius's Palace; but he only learnt that at several times, many came
forth to look them in the faces and observe them.

But Scipio made no great reflection upon this last circumstance, both because
he believed it was the custom to take notice of such persons who in the night
time pass and repass several times before the same house: but when he
considered that Lucius's Porter had assuredly spoken by Claudia's order, and
that in all appearance, it was only for Varro's interest, he resented a
greater passion then I am able to give a name to, much less to describe. He
passed the night without sleeping, and the languishment which had seized on him
sometime before through excess of love, being now accompanied with so deep a
discontent and so many inquietudes, caused him the next morning to seem as if
he had bin a long time sick. As Soon as he thought it fit time to see the
Ladies, he resolved to go to Claudia's house, which I absolutely opposed, and
represented to him so undeniably, that he was too passionate to be able to make
this visit without giving evident suspicions of the violence of his passion,
that at length he suffered himself to be persuaded, and permitted me to go
alone and visit that admirable Lady which he adored. I found at Claudia's house
five or six fair persons, whom I have not hitherto mentioned to you, Madam,
because I conceived it not necessary in the relation I am making, to inform you
of all the fair Ladies in Rome: Fabius, Cato, Regulus, and Marcellus, were
there also, whose presence with the rest made this day extremely agreeable.
Aemilia appeared to me even more charming, although amidst the sweetness
wherewith she was accustomed to receive all the world that came to her; I
observed methought, a little melancholy, which from time to time she could not
well dissemble. I had an extraordinary desire to go fit near this adorable
person; but I staid a good time to do it with convenience, which I could not do
till a happy change fell out for my intention. For three or four Ladies of
great quality, and something advanced in years, entered into Claudia's
Chamber, who led them apart to her own Couch, and so left us to make a
conversation which was afterward something more gallant and divertising. I did
not omit then to take my opportunity to speak to Aemilia, as soon as I could,
without being overheard by any person; wherefore turning my self toward her,
Well, Madam (said I to her) since Scipio and I were yesterday unhappy, may we
know to day to cause of our unhappiness? In truth, Laelius (answered she) you
would be a very strange person if you should require me to answer your
question? Yet it is requisite you do it, (replied I) for I am not in the humor
(added I smiling) to believe it lawful for you to do us mischief, without being
at least obliged to inform us why you do it. You are so little prudent to day (
Laelius replied she agreeably) that I know not very well whether or no I ought
to discourse with you; Its very easy for you to be so, Madam (answered I) who
know not what an unhappiness it is to seek every where for the Illustrious
Aemilia, without being able to find her. You have reason (replied she smiling)
to bemoan your self, if that be the unhappiness you mean; for I look upon it as
very great and insupportable. Ah! Madam (interrupted I) speak seriously, I
beseech you, and be pleased to tell me whether Scipio and Laelius were
concerned in the order that was yesterday given to your Porter, to say you were
gone abroad. To speak to you after the manner you desire (answered she
seriously) I believe Claudia commanded the Porter that he should give the same
answer indifferently to all that came to see her. Your Porter then is not very
punctually (replied I) for I know all the world was not so unhappy as we were.
Minutius (answered she) whom without question you intimate, was here before
that order was given, and this did not hinder its being afterward given to all
the world. It Is not, Laelius (added she blushing) but that I have understood
Claudia has some great cause to complain of your friend. How? Madam
(interrupted I) can Claudia believe she has cause of complaint against Scipio?
surely, Madam (proceeded I) you can no sooner have told me upon what she
grounds her complaint, but I shall let you see she can have no just foundation
for it. It Is something which I cannot tell you (answered she) for Claudia has
not informed me of it; and to testify to you that I know nothing of it, you
see I admit a conversation with you, who perhaps would not pass for very
innocent, if I knew your friends crime. It Is true (replied I) I am criminal, if
he be culpable. But it is more true, that I am perfectly innocent. As I had
spoke these words, Aemilia was drawn aside to answer to something that was
proposed to her; after which we engaged our selves in a promiscuous
conversation. In the mean time I was desirous to stay till all the company was
gone to justify Scipio with Claudia; but it was so late before they all
retired, that I had not much time to speak with Claudia, though I had too much
to hear a thing that seemed to me terribly surprising. For, Madam, you must
know, Claudia after some other discourse, told me with an air extremely severe,
that she wondered, a person for whom Lucius and her self had an infinite esteem
and kindness, one of so noble and glorious accomplishment, could be capable of
contriving a design very strange and unjust. For, in brief, Laelius (proceeded
she) I understand Scipio has too much interess'd himself in our domestic
affairs; I am told he has engaged some of his friends to make great
preparations, aiming at the interruption of a marriage of Aemilia; but I
conceived he would have done better not to have meddled with any of these
matters. Believe me, Laelius, Reason is not always the Mistress of persons of
your and your friends age, and perhaps, (added she, shaking her head a little)
you have given us in a testimony that however discreet and virtuous you are
esteemed, you are yet short of that perfect wisdom, which is elevated above all
passions, and have not absolutely renounced all temerities of youth. I beseech
you, Madam, (answered I, when I was recovered from the astonishment, into which
her first words had cast me) let us examine the matter, and you will see. --
There Is no great necessity of that (interrupted she) and I conceive it ought to
be sufficient to you, that I understand it exactly enough already. You know it
exactly! (cried I) No, no, Madam, it is impossible; you have without question
bin ill informed, since you know not that Scipio has rather obliged then
offended you. You deceive your self, Laelius (replied she) for though Scipio
should have believed he acted for my advantage in this affair, I conceive I
were not concerned to thank him for doing so; since it does not belong to
Scipio to make or break a marriage of Aemilia, nor to examine whether the
Matches propounded to her be advantage or not. But as to satisfying you how I
have bin informed, I desire to be excused; to morrow you shall see whether I
deport my self with as much discretion and moderation as is requisite in a
person of my age and sex. Besides, to tell you some of my sentiments, I take no
pleasure in speaking of a thing which I shall endeavor to forget, as well for
that I still acknowledge my self obliged to Scipio in the person of Aemilia, as
well for that I am still sensible of much esteem and kindness toward him. But
Laelius (added she, as she was going from me) content your self with what I
have said, and be pleased to require no more from me.

Leaving me these words, I was constrained to go away from her house, which I
did, so surprised and sad with what I heard, that Scipio, who expected me with
an extreme impatience, cried, as soon as he saw me. Ah! Laelius, your aspect
speaks some great unhappiness, but in the name of the Gods (added he) declare
the matter without concealment, to the end I may appease Aemilia's mind, if she
be incensed against me for any cause I am ignorant of, or that I may dye if
that adorable person forbid me evermore to seek her. Aemilia is not at all
incensed against you (answered I) but I know not whether it would not be better
she were so, and I had not that to tell you which I am going to relate. Speak
it out then, Laelius, (interrupted he) speak it confidently; and since the
adorable Aemilia is not incensed against me, you shall see I will suffer with
sufficient moderation whatever you have to tell me. I wish it prove so
(answered I) but I have not much hopes of it. For, to tell you the matter
really as it is, that having a true knowledge of the mischief, you may seek the
necessary remedy; I have only to recount to you the discourse I lately had
with the Mother of the Illustrious Aemilia. And accordingly after this, I
recounted to Scipio in full I had heard from Claudia; whereupon this passionate
lover suddenly interrupting me. Ah! Laelius (cried he sorrowfully) Varro is
then agreed with Claudia: you had indeed reason to say, that it were better
Aemilia were incensed against me, provided Claudia were not in the manner she
is. For my innocence would have soon appeased that fair person, whereas the too
great severity of Claudia would listen to what you had to say in my
justification. Oh Gods! who could have believed the best intentions should have
been followed with the worst success. Alas! (continued he with the same air)
who could have believed that Scipio, wholly possessed with zeal and respect,
should come to see himself the most unhappy person in the world, because he had
the best intentions? and that a violent and unjust man should come to the point
of seeing his crimes Crowned, and receiving a recompense for them so glorious,
that the most ambitious of men would not dare to claim after the most important
services and heroical actions? But on what do I amuse my self (continued he,
after a reflection of some moments, upon what he had said) I content my self
with making complaints, whilst perhaps Varro is within a small step of being
happy? O Gods! this thought pierces my soul, this thought kills me. How? let us
rather go turn that fate upon my rival, and afterward do things worthy of
Scipio, of my love, and of Aemilia. He was going forth at these words, but it
being already very late, I retained him, and so well represented to him, that
his case was not yet arrived to that extremity which requires the last
remedies, that I forced him to await till we had understood the matter more
perfectly. I will expect then, since you will have it so (answered he roughly)
Yes, cruel friend, I will expect; but know at least, that what you cause me to
do is something more insupportable then the extremest misery, Yes, Laelius
(continued he) the incertainty and suspense in which you detain me, has
something more cruel in it then absolute despair; for if you would leave me to
act like a man that hopes for nothing, I should keep no measure, I should
observe no punctilio's of seemliness, I should destroy my unworthy rival; and
abandoning my self afterward to my destiny, either soon enjoy Aemilia, or soon
have recourse to death. I beseech you, Scipio (said I to him) suffer not your
self to be transported in this manner, consider whether you have reason to say
what you do, and to take up such violent resolutions. I am not in a condition
(answered he) to examine all these matters; I only consider that I adore
Aemilia, that I lose that divine person, and that by the most horrid injustice
that can be imagined. But you know not (replied I) whether Aemilia be lost to
you; you cannot so much as know who could have discovered your designs, and who
has committed the injustice that troubles you, and occasions your complaints.
Ah! Laelius (answered he) the matter is not to be doubted of, none but Varro
and Minutius could have known my design; it is beyond question, they believed
that to oppose their detestable resolution, I would employ the assistance of my
friends; and not to seek further, it appears they are sufficiently gracious
with Claudia, to have told her part of it; so that, Laelius, my misfortune
will have it so, that Claudia is become incensed against me, for going about to
oppose a marriage which assuredly she approves, since she so ill interprets the
attempt to break it. And without intimating to her in what manner the marriage
was intended to be effected; it is certain she has only bin informed of as much
as was necessary to incense her against a person that would oppose it. But I
shall soon make her understand by what fraud she is induced to commit an
extreme injustice, in absolutely ruining a person who never had other designs
then such as the greatest severity would account virtuous, and gratifying one
who contrived a horrid insolence against her house. Yes, Laelius, I will open
Claudia's eyes, and afterward let Varro see, that though I make not use of
wiles, yet I know how to discover them when they are used against me, and shall
hinder the employers of them from using them with impunity. I should never end,
Madam, if I should go about to relate to you all the expressions of this
Illustrious Lover. I could not wholly gain his mind; he was strangely
inquieted, and found no intervals of being so: but when he judged it convenient
time to go to Aemilia; Let us go, Laelius (said he to me, let us go justify
our selves, and make it manifest, that if our innocence be persecuted, at least
it deserves not to be unhappy. But, Scipio (answered I, observing his
countenance extremely altered) I conceive you are not in a condition to go and
reason with Claudia. How? Laelius (interrupted he) can you be so unjust, as to
hinder me from going to Claudia? No, no, Laelius, I must go; for I conceive an
accused person gives no great testimonies of his innocence, when he avoids the
presence of the person that accuses him. But, Scipio (replied I) if you cannot
contain your self from going to Claudia, consider, I beseech you, that you
ought not in the condition you are in, to expose your self to the danger of
being seen by Aemilia; for the air of your countenance is apparently changed,
and the effects of love, jealousy, grief and choler, are easily legible in
it. It matters not Laelius (answered he) I must see Aemilia, and I conceive it
not necessary to show her a calm and serene mind, provided I make her see an
innocent heart. But, believe me, Scipio, (replied I) methinks it is a pleasure
to appear before a fair person whom we love, with a gallant and amiable air,
and I conceive it not very advantageous, to show her a countenance wherein
appears nothing but inquietude and fierceness, but the first wholly sullen and
sad, and the latter gloomie and clouded. But, Laelius (answered he) I am
capable of all things when I am to see Aemilia; I will enforce my self, I will
compose my aspect; and if you discern inquietude and fierceness in it, you
shall at least perceive nothing of sadness and discontent.

At length, Madam, whatever I could urge more to this passionate lover, he was
resolved to go to Claudia's house, and see the fair person he adored,
evidencing to me that no attraction is more powerful then that of a person whom
we love. But when we arrived there, we found all we had unprofitable; for
instead of finding either Claudia or Aemilia, it was told us they were gone
into the Country in the morning; but whether, or when to return, we could not
be informed. Scipio received this answer like a stroke of Thunder; and
beginning to think Aemilia was no longer in Rome, that great City suddenly
seemed to him turned into a vast desert, and he be came infinitely more
perplexed and afflicted then he had bin ever before. He then was minded to go
and walk upon the Rampants, imagining (as I apprehend) there was some
satisfaction in beholding the campaign, and some pleasingness in breathing the
air of the Country, whilst Aemilia did so too. But this contentment lasted but
a little space, for he no sooner considered that perhaps himself was the cause,
however innocent of Aemilia's departure, but he became exteamly afflicted: upon
which addressing to me, in relation to his thoughts: Ah, Laelius (said he to
me, sighing) this last unhappiness would have had something more insupportable
in it then the other, if I had contributed to it, although I have done nothing
but what I ought to do. For, let Scipio suffer the injustice which is done him,
let him sigh and be miserable; this is capable of making me complain, and even
of making me lose part of my reason; nevertheless my grief is in some manner
comforted, when I consider it is for the adorable Aemilia I suffer these
miseries. But my torment is incomparably greater, when I behold that divine
person her self suffer, when I see her enforced to leave this fairest City of
the world to go into solitude, and consider, that perhaps Scipio is the cause
of it. Did Aemilia suffer what you mention, as an unhappiness (answered I) you
would have cause to afflict your self; But perhaps you are injurious to your
self, and at the same time you sigh, Aemilia is amongst divertisements, enjoyes
the delights of the Country, breathes the air with sweetness, hears the birds
with pleasure, admires the enamel of the Meadows, and perhaps also pleases her
self in observing the innocence and simplicity of the persons that make their
usual abode there; so that instead of lamenting her self, she is perhaps
ravished with having left Rome for a time. Ah! Laelius (cried he) to what end do
you tell me all these fancies? How? (interrupted I) can you blame me for
telling you the person you love is not unhappy? You ill construe my zeal; you
ought at least to consider that what I spoke was only to satisfy, since I
represented to you that Emilia was already tasting the pleasure which she is
not yet in a condition capable of what would you have me do. Laelius (said he,
sighing) I am unjust in blaming you, and desiring Aemilia were not perfectly
happy at this hour: but, Laelius, I am amorous, and therefore you ought not to
wonder at the extravangance of my sentiments; but you may know, that though I
am not loved by Aemilia, and dare not hope to be so, yet it is some pleasure to
me to think she is afflicted by leaving a City in which I am; and I should
certainly resent great torment in imagining she were now enjoying all the
pleasures you have mentioned. In sincerity, Scipio (answered I) your sentiments
are admirable well regulated, since in the beginning of our discourse, the
affliction alone of Emilia caused yours, and now you tell me you should not be
satisfied if Emilia were not afflicted, and that your self would be sensibly
afflicted if she enjoyed contentments.

Have I not already told you, Laelius (replied he) that I am amorous? Why
therefore do you, (who are not) require reasons, where in the jugdement of men
that are free, there is nothing to be found but fancies. Nevertheless (added
he) you would easily see that I have reason to apprehend things so differently,
if you would consider the diversity of grounds I have to do so; and you would
also better perceive that you ought not to wonder, if in the deplorable
condition I am in, I afflict my self with all things. I had rather see
(answered I) your mind a little more at quiet, and that to intermit afflicting
your self in thinking on Emilia; you would pass the rest of the day with a fair
person to whom I shall lead you. Ah! Laelius (replied he) my afflictions too
much preferable to the divertisement which you propose to me.

Consider, I beseech you (answered I) that even for the interest of your love,
you ought to go to some meetings, least your absence from thence during that of
Aemilia, give cause of suspicion to conjecture the passion you are possessed
with. I should give more cause (replied he) if I resorted thither; since I
should begin to do it only after Aemilia's departure; that is, when I can no
longer see that fair person at her own house. But (said I to him) the City
being extreme great, I would lead you into a quarter, where it is not known
that you have bin a constant frequenter of Aemilia. Then it is unprofitable for
me to go thither to hide my passion (answered he.) Wherefore, Laelius, you
ought not to urge me upon the pretext you allege, but rather be so
complacential to take the air here with me a while, and talk a moment longer
concerning the adorable Aemilia.

Thus, Madam, I was constrained to walk still with Scipio, and entertain my
self with him about the charms of Aemilia. But at length it growing late, and
time for us to retire, we beheld two very handsome Horses passing into the City
at the Gate Capena, which were lead by a servant. Scipio had no sooner cast his
eyes upon the first which was a dapple Gray, and had a very rich and remarkable
Saddle on his back; but he knew to whom it belonged; so that looking upon me
and changing color; That Is Minutius's Horse (said he) himself cannot be far
of; surely he accompanied Aemilia; and that which yet more troubles me, is,
that Minutius would not ride in on horseback, which circumstance undoubtedly
conceals some mystery.

As he was speaking these words, we perceived Minutius indeed, who was with one
of his relations, named Metellus, and was in truth very much troubled to meet
us when he so little expected it. Which Scipio observing, you must acknowledge,
Minutius, that you are much surprised in meeing us, where in probability we
were not to be looked for. Yet I am not at all (answered he, affecting not to
seem so) and certainly I know few things that are able to surprise me. I know
some (replied Scipio) that will not surprise you, and particularly the
departure of Aemilia; for I conceive no man is surprised with a thing he is not
ignorant of, but on the contrary knows even to the least circumstances. True
(answered Minutius, very much more perplexed then before, believing Scipio
better informed then indeed he was) Emilia's departure has not surpised me,
because I knew of it, and moreover accompanied that fair person. You declare
this last circumstance very ingenuously (replied Scipio) for one that intended
to conceal it by entering a foot into the City, and who having accompanied so
fair a person, ought rather to have entered as triumphant. But after all,
Minutius (added he) you are too much Varro's friend to be Emilia's lover;
wherefore love, that affects mysteries, having no share in what we see you do,
you must needs be too something too much Varro's friend, as I said, and perhaps
you come from doing things for him which you would not willingly give way to be
inquired into. You may inquire what you please (answered Minutius roughly)
provided I serve my friend, I shall little trouble my self with what you judge
of it. Perhaps, Minutius (replied Scipio) it would be well for you I had not at
all examined the matter, for you would not then (added he fiercely) have bin
brought to make the experiment that Scipio is as little capable of suffering,
as doing an injustice. Your self shall experience (answered Minutius) that if I
know how to render a service to my friends, I better know how to maintain what
I do for them. Let us by that f^rthwith (interrupted Scipio impatiently) since
I am with my friend, and Metellus with you, and there is yet day enough left to
do it.

Scipio had no sooner spoke these few words, but Minutius, Metellus, and my
self, seemed ravished with joy; so that all four going some distance from the
City, and having found a place that was secret enough, and very fit for our
purpose, we presently drew our swords and began to close: I shall not
particularlize this Combat, but; but I cannot omit to tell you, that I never
beheld any man more sprightly, fierce and amiable then Scipio seemed to me,
when he approached Minutius with his sword in his hand. I could not observe
what he did afterward, because Metellus and I were presently engaged. But some
moments after, having bin more fortunate then Metellus, whom I wounded in two
places, and passing upon him seized the gards of his Sword, without receiving
more then one slight hurt from him; Scipio came up to us to separate us. I
looked upon him to see in what condition he was, and beholding the blood flow
from his Arms; You are wounded (said I to him) yes, Laelius (answered he) with
a cheerful, yet something fierce aspect; but withal, losing time (added he) let
us go succor Minutius who has bin more unfortunate then I. We immediately
therefore went to Minutius whom we found lying on the ground, and dangerously
wounded by a thrust through the body, and two others not so dangerous.

Metellut, who well knew the valor of his kinsman, was strangely surprised to
see him wounded in this manner; so that beholding him attentively, he
considered his overcome with admiration.

Thus this victory was not without glory to Scipio, for Minutius is one of the
most valiant men in the world; and had he then had that prudence he afterward
learnt under the great Fabius, after that occasion of his fighting. Hannibal
contrary to the advice of that Dictator, he would have bin a very gallant man;
but he was then of an humor too violent, and because he and Varro were by
their intrigues, and a certain fortunate fierceness raised to the most
important charges; they believed they should have the same success in all sorts
o^ enterpises, Yet matters did not always fall out as they expected, neither in
their little affairs, nor in their grand attempts, as without question you have
heard, Madam; for all the world knows, Hannibal would have totally defeated
Minutius's Army, if the great Fabius had not come timely to his relief; as
likewise all posterity will reproach the memory of the rash Varro, with the
dreadful loss we sustained at Canna, and the deplorable death of the
Illustrious Paulus Aemilius. But, Madam, not to leave Minutius without succor,
I must tell you, that though we were all three wounded, yet we raised him up,
and according to our best skill and conveniences, endeavored to stanch his
blood. Which when we had done, and what for our selves we could in such
occasions, I went to call our slaves, whom we had commanded to wait out of the
field where we fought, and causing Minutius and Scipio to be lead by them, and
Metellus and my self slowly following them, we all four entered into a house
near the Gate, the Master of which we knew was a very honest person.
Immediately Chyrurgions were sent for, all things that were necessary provided,
and our combat made known to our relations, who came secretly to visit us, and
having reasoned about it, counseled us absolutely to leave the City as soon as
we could. Wherefore about break of day, Minutius was carried to one of his
relation's houses in the Country, whither Metellus accompanied him, and Scipio
and I went to Ostia. As Soon as we were arrived there, my only care was to
provide for our cure, for Scipio's thoughts were wholly upon Aemilia, and he
gave himself again to be excruciated by his inquietudes, which his late
encounter had suspended only for some moments. But our wounds being neither
very great nor dangerous, we kept the chamber but a few days, and soon began to
walk in the Garden belonging to the house where we were lodged, not daring as
yet to appear in Ostia, till we had first learnt how our affair stood at Rome.
If the rumor of our quarrel did not spread abroad there much at first, that of
our retreat was soon confusedly dispersed in Ostia; so that this also caused
some prejudice to the affairs of Scipio, as you shall now understand. Receiving
news from Rome time after time, and that ordinarily by night, one evening
amongst the rest, we beheld a slave of Scipio's enter our chamber, who brought
us a packet, and by the trouble of his countenance, testified he had some
extraordinary matter to relate. He was no sooner entered, but addressing to
Scipio, My Lord, (said he) I have something to tell you which I presume will
because of no small surprise to you. Speak it then (answered Scipio) and do not
amuse your self to tell me superfluous matters. As I drew near toward Ostia
(said he) and it was yet not late enough to enter into the Town, I purposed to
hide my self behind one of those great hedg-rows that border upon the Road that
leads from Rome; where having expected night, when I was going to re-enter
into the way and finish my journey, I heard the noise of Horses which were
coming to Ostia, and wondered when I beheld five or six Horsemen alight from
their Horses, directly against the place where I was hid. Nothing being
betvveen them and me but some bushes, I was easily able to observe their
actions, and hear all they said. Now, I beheld amongst them, a man very richly
clothed, but to speak more concisely, I beheld Varro there, who advanced
himself two or three steps toward a man that came from Ostia, and addressed
to him in great have: Well, Titus (said Varro to him first) what says Claudia?
What says Aemilia? All that you can wish they should (answered the man, whom I
presently knew, having seen him a hundred times at Lucius's house) and I assure
you, my Lord, (continued he) that Minutius could not have acted more handsomely
for your interests. For when you went into the Country, and took Appius along
with you; Minutius, who is not amorous of Aemilia, and consequently seemed
wholly unsuspected in what he said, carried the Letter you know of; he named
also two or three of Scipio's friends* and for my part, I added that his slaves
passed to and fro before the house every night to observe us; and in short,
Minutius so well managed the matter, and I endeavored so well to second him,
that we succeeded admirably, and Claudia, who had not much thought of you, who
were not then at Rome, believed, and does still that Scipio could not endu^^ to
hear speak of the marriage between, Pyneas and Emilia, and had resolved to
steal her away for one of his Kinsmen. But, My Lord, you will without question
be surpised as well as I was, when you hear Scipio and Laelius are by all
conjecture at Ostia, at least Claudia suspects so from a description made to
her of two goodly young persons that keep themselves concealed in a house
there. Upon which Claudia and Emilia, who is informed of all by her Mother
since our departure from Rome, are extremely exasperated against them, and
assuredly confirmed in a sentiment which will no question prove to your
advantage. Nevertheless, My Lord, the residence of Scipio and Laelius there
seems to me very suspicious, And I cannot comprehend, wherefore -- I know upon
what pretenses they are there (interrupted Varro suddenly) I come from Rome, as
you know, where I have learnt the passages of a fray of theirs; but I wish to
the Gods that what I hear from you, prove not true in relation to Scipio's and
Laelius's being at Ostia. However (continued he, after a little reflecting upon
what he had sad) advantage ought to be drawn from all things, and even the
retirement of Scipio to Ostia, must be rendered serviceable to my design. Go
therefore, Titus, begin anew to serve me, account that for nothing which I have
already given you, and be assured your reward shall be proportionable to the
greatness of your desert. Go show Claudia and her divine daughter a terrified
countenance, assure them that Scipio lies hid in Ostia; say, it is to execute
his design, and that a great multitude is to come to him from Rome this night;
in a word, Titus, omit nothing that may serve me, and expect all things from my
gratitude. In the mean time I will go give some other orders, and then offer my
person to Claudia, with five or six of my friends with me, in reference to
the News which I will pretend to have received concerning Scipio's design. If
she favorably accept what I offer her, I shall be gloriously recompensed for
it, with the possession of the charming Aemilia: for as soon as ever I have
drawn a consent that will make me happy, I will challenge Scipio, to which
honor indeed will seem to oblige me, but it is my love which will really
constrain me more powerfully, to the end I may either rid my self of Scipio,
who certainly will soon discover my Artifice and ruin me utterly, or perish my
self to avoid seeing it discovered. But if, on the contrary, I be badly
received, and my complement be paid with signs of aversion and contempt, I
shall have a fair pretext to betake my self to violence. I will speak it aloud,
that I am resolved to serve Aemilia, even against her own will; and since she
is wiling to be taken away violently, I will become the ravisher, and sooner
die then forsake so amiable a person to any whatsoever: and in this case
especially, Titus, your assistance will be necessary to me. As Titus seemed
going to answer, a Horseman, whom Varro mistook for one of his own party, but
was one that came alone to this City, passed by; upon which Varro fearing he
might be perceived by others, dismissed Titus back again, and going aside into
a little path, and followed by his a^^ndants, gave me liberty to bring you
with all speed the intelligence I have related. Scipio's slave had scarce done
speaking, but his Illustrious Master, who had bin a thousand and a thousand
times upon the point to interrupt him, was beginning to express his sentiments
upon what he had heard; which he was not able to do at first, they were so
tumultuous. It must be confessed he resented a sensible joy in understanding
Aemilia was in Ostia, and having discovered in what manner he was betrayed;
(for, Madam, he learnt nothing from the mouth of Minutius, who was obstinate
not to make the lest discovery) but with all coming at the same time to think
on the perfidiousness of Minutius and Varro, and on the adorable person who
was to be carried away by that treachery, his choler became extremely violent;
and this last passion having something more impetuosity then the other, seemed
alone to possess him. Ah, Traitor! (cried he) ah perfidious! is it thus that
thou betrayest me? Is this the course thou take to attain the possession of
the fairest person in the world? No, no. Traitor, thou shall never have the
success thou promisest thy self, and the Gods who have lately by mine arm
punished thy complice, do not now discover thy crime to leave it with
impunitie. But, let us not lose time (added he in an impetuous manner) let us
go; or rather fly, to punish the Traitor, since the concernment is to serve
Aemilia.

Ending these words, he took his sword, and without remembering that he was not
absolutely cured of his wound, caused one to conduct him to Claudia's house, at
the Gate of which we found seven or eight men with arms: Who, indeed, were
Varro and his accomplices, and, as we were informed afterward, stood there
expecting Titus's answer, who was gone to advertise Claudia of their arrival,
and of the cause that brought them; This infamous wretch having already spoken
against Scipio all that the blackest perfidiousness could inspire him with, my
illustrious friend did not stay to deliberate when he beheld those people at
the Gate, but drew his sword and courageously set upon them. Are you here,
traitor Varro (cried he with a fierce and menacing tone) are you run upon the
punishment of your crime? Yes, I am here (answered Varro insolently) to your
unhappiness, who come to punish your self for the attempt you were preparing to
commit. These words so augmented Scipio's choler, that he cast himself upon his
enemy with such violence, that he wounded him the first pass he made at him.
Varro, who was so far from being pusillanimous, that he has bin alvvaies
accused of rashness, was not dismayed at this onset; but on the contrary, being
of a violent temper, grew enraged, and omitting the necessary care of guarding
himself, sought to dispatch Scipio with one violent thrust; So that Scipio was
also wounded. But his heart being perfectly the heart of a Hero, and that of
Varro the heart of a Lion; Scipio wounded him deeply in three or four places,
and was only slightly hurt himself in two: for though he fought with more
love, more impetuosity and choler, yet he fought too with more judgment; so
true it is that the valor of Scipio cannot be proportionably described, having
something in it too great, and too extraordinary to suffer it self to be
comprehended. In the mean time, Madam, our enemies being well armed, and
stronger in number, we had perhaps at length bin worsted, although Varro was
already withdrawn from the combat, because our Host, who had guided us
thither was wounded, and so was Scipio's slave, and I had received one wound in
the body, and another in the arm. We had bin worsted, I say, if an inhabitant
of Ostia, who came to the beginning of the fray, had not called a great
multitude together to his assistance to separate us. But, Madam, I still
tremble when I think that at this time the perfidious Titus came forth from
Claudia's house, and seeing Varro all covered with blood, who made no longer
resistance; and withal, perceiving by the light of the Torches that were
brought, Scipio's sword glittering in his hand, which carried death or dread on
all sides; this villain, either to revenge Varro, or not to be discovered,
resolved to kill this great person; and accordingly went behind him to run him
through the body, if the Inhabitants of Ostia I mentioned, had not bin near
enough the Traitor to stop him. But he could not so well withold his arm, but
that notwithstanding that obstacle, the enraged wretch run him with a deep
wound into the back.

Now when the Inhabitants of Ostia had wholly separated us, and Scipio's slave,
who beheld that action of Titus, had requited the traitor with a great wound
too, our Host, who was not dangerously wounded, took care of us, and caused us
to be carried to his house, where he sent to seek the Chyrurgions who attended
on us before, Scipio and I were desirous to be in the same chamber where this
Illustrious Roman, in the first place demanded news concerning our Host, and
seemed very well satisfied when he understood he had received only a slight
wound in the left arm. Then the Chyrurgions searched our hurts, and told us
they were not mortal, though we judged by their countenances that they were
very dangerous. After which having given them the first dressing, they caused
our Host to enter into the chamber, who presently approacht toward Scipio very
respectively, and thanked him for his goodness in remembering him. It Is I am to
thank you (answered the Illustrious Scipio) for your assistance; but since it
has pleased the Gods (added he) that you have not bin considerably wounded; I
must desire you to do me an other service, in which there is neither danger nor
difficulty, and which nevertheless is of no small importance to me. Go
therefore (continued he, observing the man expected only his commands) go to
Claudia's house, tell her she is abused, and that Varro is culpable, and I
innocent. Moreover, tell her, that -- But, no, (recollected he suddenly) I
should lose too much time in recounting to you Varro's treachery; go, tell her
only what I have said to you, and assure her that I am ready to justify both
the one and the other.

After Scipio had given this Commission, he commanded the slave I told you of,
should come to him, having resolved to send him at the same instant to
Claudia's house, there to convince Titus, and wholly discover the
perfidiousness of Varro. After which, this Illustrious lover addressing to me;
Well, Laelius, I am satisfied (said hetome with an air that spoke him really to
be so, notwithstanding the great wounds he had received.) I am satisfied (said
he) since the adorable Aemilia is now ready to understand the difference there
is between the procedure of Scipio, and the perfidiousness of the Traitor that
would destroy me and carry her away. So that Laelius, whether I die or be
cured, I shall receive either fate without excess of sorrow or satisfaction.
For when I consider I am upon the point to ap^ear in Aemilia's mind such as I
am, I resent a joy so sensible, that it effaces all other thoughts of whatever
importance. Scipio pronouncing these words something loud, by reason of his
passionate expressions, the Chyurgions who were retired a while to leave us to
our rest, heard his voice; wherefore they returned presently, and entreated him
with many reasons and importunities to forbear speaking, which Scipio promised
them, because he had then no cause to neglect his life, or rather because he
thought to find more sweetness in thinking on Aemilia, especially at the same
time he conceived she was receiving the information of his innocence. As he was
musing upon this with extreme satisfaction, our Host entered into our Chamber
with a countenance which showed sufficiently he had not succeeded well in the
Commission enjoined him. Scipio was at first so surprised at it, that he seemed
struck dumb with amazement; but he was very sensibly afflicted when he was told
Claudia would receive no message nor hear any thing from him, and that she was
gone to offer Varro both her house and all kind of assistance. How? (cried he)
is it possible that Claudia would hear nothing that Scipio sent to tell her,
and that she is gone to offer both her house and all sort of assistance to
Varro, who betrays hers to Varro, who at the same time that he receives her
civilities, has designed to carry away her adorable daughter? But, Varro, thy
falsehood shall soon be discovered (continued he) as if Varro had bin present)
and things shall soon be told Claudia in thy presence, which shall prove thy
attempt and Titus's infidelity. Yes, Varro (added he) thy crime shall soon be
known, thy accuser shall be a witness that both saw and heard thee, and who
shall so exactly lay open the circumstances of thy perfidiousness, that thou
shall not dare to disown it, though thou see thy self accused by a slave, and
a slave of thine enemy, and thy rival.

As Scipio ended these words, he that he had sent to call the slave he was
speaking of, entered our Chamber, and told him he could not find that slave,
nor so much as hear any tidings of him. Scipio had no sooner heard these words,
but lifting up his eyes to heaven, complete my destruction, cruel destiny
(cried he) and seek not out such terrible and extraordinary means to increase
the greatness of my misery.

He had no time to proceed further, for the Chyrurgions hastened to represent to
him the danger into which this agitation would cast him. I have no more rules
to observe (interrupted he impatiently) your assistance is no longer necessary
to me, and the wounds you endeavor to cure, afford the least part of the pains
that I resent. But Scipio (said I to him, not to suffer him to abandon himself
to despair) the injustice of Claudia will not injure for ever, and we shall
without doubt find means to make her -- Ah! Laelius (interrupted he, speak not,
I beseech you) as you do; accuse not Claudia, I conjure you: if you see your
friend die, yet at least add not to all his torments, that of hearing you term
the Mother of the adorable Aemilia unjust. I am not capable of your virtue
(replied I roughly) if I esteem it heroical, I also esteem it inhumane; and I
conceive there is nothing more lawful for a miserable person then complaint.
Well, Laelius (answered he sadly) let us pity our selves; but I beseech you
let us impute all we suffer to my unhappiness, and not accuse a person to whom
we owe an infinite respect. I shall have as much respect as you please (replied
I) yet at least suffer me to tell you, that after the esteem you have acquired,
and the gallant actions you have achieved; Claudia has too lightly given
credit to what was suggested to her to your prejudice. Alas! Laelius (answered
he sighing) it must be believed, that the esteem you mention is ill grounded,
if yet it be true that I have gained any; and that what I have done hitherto is
little considerable, since a person who cannot be deceived in her judgment,
has not bin sufficiently prepossessed in favor of me, to be able to resist the
first assaults of calumny. I might have a thousand things to allege (replied
I) for you, and against Claudia, but I will not continue a discourse which I
see is prejudicial to your health. Let us speak, I beseech you, Laelius (said
he) let us speak of my unhappiness, without accusing Claudia of it, and without
taking heed to a health which deserves no longer to be cared for. I answered
nothing to whatever he spoke afterward. But he was transported to call me
cruel friend, and to press me with the most affecting language he could use; in
which nevertheless I resisted him, and refused to the most illustrious friend
that ever was, the sole thing I ought not to have granted him. Yet my silence
caused not his agitations to cease absolutely* he still complained against that
strange medley of infelicities that befell him; he set his thoughts a thousand
and a thousand times upon the glorious beauty of Aemilia, to render himself
more unhappy, in thinking afterward on the injustice which had injured him in
the mind of that divine person.

Thus, Madam, this illustrious Lover would neither listen to the Chyrurgions
entreaties nor mine, and was tormented the rest of the night with such violent
troubles, that the next morning the Chyrurgions began to affirm there would be
no hope of his recovery, if the violence of his inquietudes dured some hours
longer. But while he was in this deplorable condition, and no body was
permitted to enter into our Chamber, one came to whisper me in the ear, that
Claudia desired to see him, if it might be without disturbance. Claudia desires
to see Scipio? (answered I) Alas! tell me whither or no you know her so well,
as not be deceived, before you speak further. It Is she (answered the messenger)
and I know her so well, that I can assure you of it, and tell you moreover that
an Inhabitant of Ostia leads her, and that she is followed by Aemilia, and two
or three of her attendants. Go then (said I to him) and cause her to come
hither; and in the mean time addressing to Scipio, whom I would prepare for the
joy he was to receive, lest being suddenly surprised, he might undergo some
more vehement agitation by a contrast in his heart, surprising between a joy
that would offer to enter into it, and a deep sorrow that would dispute its
admission. But, Madam, all I could do was unprofitable: For, besides that, I
had not time, to speak much, Scipio was so little disposed to believe he was
upon the point to receive the visit I speak of, that Claudia entered before he
believed it really. It would be difficult indeed, Madam, to express to you the
condition this Illustrious sick person then was in: for he had no sooner cast
his eyes on the fair person that followed Claudia, but he seemed like a man
that were on a sudden brought into the rays of the Sun, after a long
continuance in the obscurity of a Dungeon. He began to behold Aemilia with so
much intentness, that he forgot, as I knew afterward, both the treasons of
Varro, and your honor which he received from Claudia. He did not so much as
remember the wounds he had upon him, and the condition they had brought him to;
in short, he looked only upon Aemilia, he thought of nothing but Aemilia, and
remembered not any thing but this adorable Lady, with which object his mind and
heart were wholly taken up. Yet this did not hinder him from being extremely
weak and faint, as you may easily judge; so that when Claudia came near him,
and bowed down her head to make him a complement, he would have enforced
himself to return her the civilities which sick persons that receive visits are
usually able to perform, but his strength failed him, and all he could do was
to behold Claudia, with a certain attention that sufficiently showed he thought
he saw that in a dream which he really beheld. I beseech you, Scipio (said she
to him) consult your generosity before you hear what I have to say to you; and
believe, I conjure you, that if I have done an injustice, I have done it
innocently, and in a manner by force. For in truth (contniued she) Minutius,
who seemed to me neither your enemy, nor Varro's intimate friend, told me
several times, that your resorting to our house was only to find out some
means how you might bring to pass a marriage of Aemilia with the Son of
Manilius who is your Kinsman. He afterward came to tell me of certain Verses
which the King of Illyria had written, which testified sufficiently that he
pretended to our Alliance, as which Lucius himself confirmed to me not long
after. This deceit came to my knowledge, as I remember, two or three days
after the departure of Lucius and Pyneas; and as I was wondering before him,
that some persons belonging to had bin seen passing too and fro a hundred times
before our Gate the night before, he took his time to tell me that the
pretensions of Pyneas having interrupted your purpose, you designed to take
some shorter course, although violent, to bring your intention to pass.
Accordingly, Madam, (continued he) I know that Scipio has engaged five or six
of his relations or friends, which I shall name to you, to assist him in what
he designs.

I know also that he has endeavored to gain one of your Domestics, named
Titus; and for an evident proof of what I tell you, behold, Madam (said he to
me) a Note that is fallen into my hands, which Scipio writ to Appius, who
dwelling near your Palace, might apparently more conveniently serve him then
all his other relations. After these words he presented me a Note indeed, which
I knew presently to have bin written by you, having seen your Letters many
times showed me by Publius while you were in Greece; at which being greatly
amazed, I read it over often enough to be able to remember the very words of
it; which were these,

I came to you to your house to speak with you, concerning a very inportant
affair, but finding you not there, and perhaps my occasion requiring your
assistance this night, I have left this Note for you, to entreat you to be in a
readiness to issue forth well accompanied, in case you hear any tumult near
Lucius's Palace, and to come to my aid if I meet with resistance there, which
yet in all appearance I shall not.

Now Scipio, Does not your Note speak very precisely? Does it not fully enough
confirm what Minutius had before told me? Withal, this assured me at the same
time, that you caused it to be told him that you would give him an excessive
recompense, provided he would serve you in a very important affair you had to
communicate to him: And thus I became at length fully persuaded of the truth of
their suggestions; for besides what I have told you, I was also assured by
some, that the night following, several persons belonging to you, were seen
coming to observe what was doing at our house; this, Scipio, caused me to
resolve to forsake Rome for some time, without so much as declaring to any
whether I went, because notwithstanding your pretended crime, I could neither
hate you, nor forget the obligations I had to you; but I was glad to deprive
you of the means of executing the design I believed you intended, and also to
avoid, least our houses should fall into an open feud: I communicated my
purpose to Minutius, to whom I took my self to be very much obliged; he
presently approved it, and having offered me all services in his power, he told
me afterward, that believing himself obliged to make the discovery to me he
had done, he was engaged to embrace my interests in this affair, whether soever
it came to break forth, or -- Alas! Minutius (interrupted I) how do you treat
me? Can you believe I would embroil you with your friends, and so ill
acknowledge the favor you have but now done me so generously? But Madam (said
he) what will you say to Scipio when he comes to clear himself upon the change
which he will observe in your comportment toward him? I will say nothing
(answered I) But Madam (replied he) who so says nothing in these conjunctures,
says all things in effect; so that it will be better for you to tell him one
of the reasons you have, not to treat him as formerly, then to say nothing at
all to him: And since you will not have the matter published (added he) do not
mention that which would most sensibly incense him, do not treat him as the
Ravisher of Aemilia, but only tell him, you do not take it well, that he
intermeddles in the breaking of a marriage that is propounded for her, without
expressing what marriage you mean. Upon these reasons I was induced to speak in
that manner to your Friend Scipio, as without question you have understood, and
I after that left Rome for the causes I have told you: But for that you already
know all that is passed since, as a Slave of yours lately assured me, it
remains only to tell you that Fabius is here (continued she, pointing at the
Inhabitant of Ostia who had lead her) to whom we have great obligations, and
whose prudence alone has discovered all these matters I have related to you, as
himself can testify. The Gods, My Lord (said Flavius) and not my prudence,
have cleared up the luster of your virtue, and dissipated the cloud wherewith
black calumny endavoured to envelop it. But to let you know in few words, in
what manner they have served themselves of me, to lay open so detestable a
treachery, I am to tell you that I was the person who coming from Rome last
night, beheld the conference of Varro, upon the way which the circumstance of
time presently rendered suspicious to me. So that being arrived at home, as I
was considering on what I had seen, I heard a noise about the Gate of this
Ladies house, which is but a few steps from mine, which caused me to run to see
what the matter was, and afterward call my Neighbors to my aid, to part the
fray. At which time I perceived a man whom I called to mind I had seen in the
conference upon the way to Ostia, going behind you to kill you; I opposed his
purpose immediately, and seized upon his arm; but my zeal proving less powerful
then his rage, I could not wholly stop the blow which yet did not pass
unpunished: for at the same time, a man whom we since understood belongs to
you, rewarded him with a great wound through the body. Whereby judging by his
stroke, that the villain I had seized was one of Varro's party, since he that
wounded him was in all probability of yours (for, My Lord, I had learned your
name, and that of Varro confusedly pronounced in the tumult.) I also caused
this man to be seized whom I believed belonged to you. And so causing them both
to be put in a place of surety, I hoped to draw from their mouths some
discovery of your quarrel, that I might afterward acquaint this Lady with it,
or send to Rome to advertise some person of eminent quality, who might come and
acommode it. My design has very well succeeded; for having brought your slave
to give me information, he repeated to me all the relation which he the last
night made to you.

After which examining, Titus, concerning the same, he saw himself pressed by
so many particular circumstances which I laid before him, that being passed
hope of enjoying reward of his treason, by reason he has but few days longer to
live, he ingenuously confessed the truth to me, and excited as great admiration
in me of your detestation of the crime of Varro and Minutius. You may judge, My
Lord, I lost no time; but hastened forthwith to the house of this Lady, and
declared to her the matter as I had understood it; upon which she desired to
come hither to you, as soon as the astonishment raised by my discourse permitted
her. Great Gods! (cried Scipio then) I render you thanks; after which casting
his eyes upon Claudia with as much joy and respect as he was able to express in
this condition; I crave your pardon, Madam, (said he to her) for having
contributed, though innocently, to the causing of your inquietude. But, Madam
(added he) some moments after) wherefore have you taken the trouble to come
your self? could you not have sent some one of your attendants to come -- Alas!
Scipio (answered she) how do you treat me? I came with an extreme tenderness to
desire your pardon my self, for the injustice I have done you, to request you
to forget it, and to cause you and your friend to be brought to my lodgings, to
the end I may have the greater care of you. Believe not that Varro has bin
there (added she) for he would not accept of the offer I made him to acquit my
self of the obligation I conceived I had to him; but as soon as he learnt that
you were not dead, he caused himself to be carried out of Ostia, tormented, no
question with the remorse of his detestable intentions. But, Scipio, there is
great difference between you and Varro, for, besides diverse great obligations
which I really have to you, there has always bin a very friendly correspondence
between our families, and I have ever entertained a great dearness and esteem
for you; and therefore I have resolved to cause you to be carried to my house;
or if that cannot be done without danger, to come my self hither every day, to
see that you be healed with the greatest care and diligence possible. Ah! Madam
(said Scipio) -- do not not enforce your self to reply (interrupted she) for
your condition disables you from resisting me, and from speaking too. In the
mean while I leave you to compose your mind to quiet, which, no doubt, has bin
agitated with a thousand different thoughts during the relation we have made
you; and I go to your friend to justify my self with him, and impart to him
what I have already told you. In speaking which words, she came to me, with
Fabius also, because she perceived Scipio was offering to make her a
remerciment, which might have injured his health: and as I perceived Aemilia
only making a reverence to Scipio as she passed before him, and so following
her Mother. How? Madam (said I as vehemently as my weakness would permit, and
addressing to Claudia) will you suffer a person whose interests Scipio has
engaged in, to pass before him without speaking so much as one word to him?
Aemilia is not accustomed to speak much where I am in presence (answered
Claudia) and I conceive she accounts it unmeet to begin to violate that decorum
to the prejudice of Scipio's health. Provided Scipio speak not (replied I) you
have nothing to fear; besides, I apprehend there is some kind of power in the
aspect of a very fair person to dissipate the sadness of a sick person. Speak
to Scipio then (said Claudia, turning toward Aemilia) though I refer not to
the reason which Laelius alleges of your beauty; but suffer him not to answer
you. Accordingly, Madam, Aemilia went and sat down near Scipio's bed, and
whilst Claudia, Fabius, and I were in discourse apart; this Illustrious Lover
(as he after told me) took this opportunity to mention his passion to the
adorable person who gave it birth. For Aemilia having at first beheld Scipio
with a little blushing, she began to speak to him with so great a sweetness,
that the most insensible persons in the world would have bin affected with it.
I did not conceive my self (said she to him) obliged to make you a complement;
for having done you no injustice, saving in my submission to the sentiments of
Claudia, I believed my self obliged to nothing more then to yield with greater
pleasure to the sentiments contrary to those whereof you might accuse us as of
a great crime. Ah! Madam, (interrupted our passionate infirm) how good and how
generous you are, in being pleased I should die the most contented of men, by
informing me then that the only person of the world; for whom -- Scipio
(interrupted she likewise) I am forbidden to suffer you to speak, lest it be
prejudicial to your health. If you prohibit me to speak (answered he) only
for the preserving of my life, I shall lose it through joy, Madam, provided,
that without losing respect, I may tell you that I die yours. Scipio (replied
she) Why will you give me more causes then one not to hear you? is it, that you
would be unjust toward me, because you believe I have done you an injustice?
Alas! Madam (answered he) why will you not hear the most respectful of all
Lovers, who never dared to mention his passion to you, but when he is dying?
And why do you term a man unjust, who adores the only person that best deserves
the adorations of all the earth? Well, Scipio (said she) I return to Claudia,
since you will have it so. Go, Madam (answered he) while this unfortunate
person betakes himself to dye, since you will have it so: yet he will not die
(added he with a weak and dying voice, though he enforced himself to speak) but
after having declared before the fairest person that ever lived, that he dies
less by reason of the wounds he has received, then of love -- He could not
finish what he intended to say; love was the last word he pronounced, which I
believe he could not have reached to, if there had not been infinite sweetness
in pronouncing it before the person beloved.

In brief, Madam, my illustrious friend fell into a swound by having spoken
after a too passionate manner; for the pitiful condition into which he was
reduced by a great loss of blood, followed with a thousand violent agitations;
and the denial of Aemilia to hear him; though it was after a manner extremely
civil, did not a little contribute thereunto. That fair person was so affected
with this accident, that she immediately made a great shreek, and testified as
much sorrow as amazement. After which turning toward us, as Claudia was
hastening to see what the matter was; Ah! Madam (said she to her) Scipio is
dead. Scipio dead! cried Claudia and I together) O Gods (continued I, casting
up mine eyes to heaven with the greatest sorrow that ever I resented) can you
suffer Scipio to perish in so unjust a quarrel? Will you suffer so admirable a
life to be extinguished in its beginning? and can you think it enough to show
to the earth but transiently a Haro, whom it seemed you had destinated for the
most memorable exploits, by the grand qualities you so liberally favored him
with? I continued thus to bewail the infelicity of my friend, and beseech the
Gods for his preservation, not being then able to assist him saving by vows and
prayers. And indeed the Gods in a short space restored him to us, whether it
were that they would not, a work which they had so excusably framed, should be
of so little continuance; or would not withdraw so great a prop from the City
of Rome, which they protect with a goodness, of which all the world has seen
indubitable testimonies during the war which Hannibal brought into Italy. So
the Chyrurgions recovered this Illustrious person, though with extreme
difficulty, who opened his eyes at last after several cordials, and began to
give us some hope. But when he became capable of well discerning the objects
that were about his bed, he assumed new vigor, by perceiving the lovely eyes
of Aemilia were wet, and that apparently some tears had dropped from them. And
indeed Claudia and Aemilia could not without weeping behold such a person as
Scipio in so great a danger, and even dying for their quarrel, to whom they had
so great obligations, and as yet given him no tokens of the gratitude they
pretended to testify to him. Wherefore they went not forth of our Chamber till
they had seen Scipio in as good a condition as he was in at their coming to
him; though Claudia insisted no more to have us carried to her house, because
the Chyrurgions judged it unfitting.

As Soon as they were gone, Madam, Scipio related to me the discourse he had
with Aemilia, and then told me he believed the remedies applied to him would be
unprofitable, since it did not please Aemilia he fhould live. I cannot, Scipio
(interrupted I) suffer this your injustice, and without doubt you would not
speak in this manner, if you had seen the grief of that fair person. I oberved
well (answered he) that by all appearance she had shed some tears. But,
Laelius, this does not fully satisfy me, because most certainly she believed
she bestowed them on my death. Should what you say be true (replied I) have you
any reason to conclude she would not have you live, since your seeming death
caused her to weep? Ah! Laelius (answered he) do not deceive your self, but
believe there is a great difference between these two respects, for it is usual
enough to be effected with the death of any whatsoever. But it does not often
happen that any persons interess themselves to contribute toward the contented
life of others who are indifferent to them. So that, Laelius (added he, though
he saw I could not approve his speaking) Aemilia forbidding me to speak to her
of my passion, forbids me also to live; for to tell you in a word what I think,
since I know you desire I should not speak much, it is an undoubted truth that
it is impossible I should live without loving Aemilia, or that I should live
without speaking to her of it; and if she has not the goodness to suffer me to
do so, then take your measures accordingly (added he) either to preserve my
life, or to prepare your self to see me separated from you by a death, which
will without doubt be cruel to me for more then one cause. The Gods will
preserve us from that unhappiness (replied I) and I believe moreover Aemilia
will never consent to the loss of an Illustrious Roman, whose crime consists
only in declaring to her, that one of the most worthy persons of the world
dies for love of her, but for a love so respectful, that he presumes not to
discover it but tremblingly, and when he is upon the point to dye of the wounds
which he has lately received for her, having embraced her interests in the most
generous manner that can be imagined. No, no, Scipio, she is too reasonable to
carry her cruelty so far as you apprehend; and I pass higher, and believe she
is not displeased that you love her; but for that she make profession of a
scrupulous virtue, she judges it not becoming to listen to a Declaration of
love without endeavoring to impose you silence out of decency. But according
to the knowledge I have of her, I believe she would have strangely ill-heated
any other besides you. For Ladies of great quality and eminent virtue, are very
difficult in admitting such discourse as we are speaking of, for that they will
not their hearts should be attaqued by any, being determined to dispose of them
only according to the pleasure of the persons to whom nature has made them
subject. Nevertheless I despair not of success for you with Aemilia; and if you
will promise me to yield to all things for the promoting of your cure, I
promise you I will act not unprosperously with the person you love. Ah!
Laelius, if you would -- I have done Scipio (interrupted I) and I cannot suffer
you to speak longer. These last words caused my dear friend to be silent, who
was more apprehensive of displeasing me then injuring his own health, and
afterward suffered any course to be taken for his cure.

Not long after, Madam, an occasion of serving my friend with Aemilia presented
it self. For Claudia her self visited us, and daily came to see in what
condition we were, though she had sent twice or thrice before for the same
cause. So that as she was pleased from time to time to give such orders
concerning us as were necessary, her adorable daughter often remained near my
bed, not venturing to approach that of Scipio alone. Whereby it was easy for
me to take my time to speak to that fair person, and to let her know that she
had really the power of life and death over my Illustrious friend. You speak
not seriously, Laelius (answered she blushing, and I think you doubt not, but
your friend would soon be in perfect health, if my cares could effect any
thing; for in your choosing me for your friend (continued she) you ought so to
know, I am any of sufficient goodness, as to believe that these kind of
reproaches cannot be cast upon me but with injustice. What I have spoken,
Madam, (replied I) was in the greatest seriousness possible, and the accident
you beheld here, not long since leaves no room for the doubt of it. But, Madam
(proceeded I) the sequel of it will be much more lamentable, and unless you
give Scipio some testimonies of that goodness you say you make profession of,
you will see him die infallibly within a few days, and you will also assuredly
see grief will cause me to follow him. So that, Madam, you must either prepare
your self to behold that misery, or admit the declaration of the most
respectful passion that ever was resented. Aemilia perceiving I spoke with an
air that sufficiently intimated the correspondence of my words and thoughts,
and remembering likewise the extreme danger wherein she had seen Scipio,
appeared a little mollifi'd; but she did not wholly yield, and would not
promise me to permit Scipio to speak of his passion to her. For, I wonder,
Laelius (said she) you should be so instant with me as you are, since a friend
is much more obliged to cure his friend of a weakness he observed in him, then
a Virgin is to hearken to things which seemliness forbids her to suffer.
Neither does seemliness prohibit you to suffer the passion of my friend
(answered I) nor is that passion a weakness, since you, Madam, are the person
that have excited it, and given it birth in a heart perfectly illustrious. But,
Madam (continued I) not to lose time, answer me, but in the name of the Gods
answer favorably; Will you suffer Scipio to love you, or will you suffer him
to die? Alas! Laelius (replied she) why do you please your self in afflicting
me? and wherefore do you porpound things to me which I ought not to hear, much
less consider which to choose? But, Laelius (continued she) perceiving her
answer, deeply affected me, to show you that I am good, I will my self go offer
my friendship to Scipio, I will withal desire his, and entreat him to chase
away all other sentiments that he pretends to have for me. And accordingly
after these words, this fair person without expecting any answer, went to
Scipio, and having a while beheld him with blushing and silence, because she
immediately observed a thousand tokens of his passion in his countenance; I
come (said she to him) to desire a favor of you, Scipio; but in the name of
the Gods do not refuse it to me. Ah! Madam (answered the passionate Scipio) why
do you not forthwith command the person, that of all the world owes you the
most implicit and perfect obedience? Nevertheless, I will not tell you
(replied she) what I desire to obtain of you, unless you first promise to grant
it.

These words gave Scipio some suspicions, so that he mused upon them a little;
after which suddenly resolving, speak it, Madam, (said she) and if you command
me not to cease loving you, without doubt you shall be obeyed. Well, Scipio
(answered she) if I desire you should love me, would you do that which -- Ah!
Madam (interrupted he impatiently) why do you make a question so cruel to me of
such matters? Command, Madam, command (added he transported with his love) and
if the business be about serving you, I will do things, as infirm as I am, that
shall astonish all the earth. I require none of those great things of you,
(answered she) I come only to request you to act with moderation, and to cause
you to change the tumultuous sentiments you have for me, into those of
friendship. In a word, Scipio, I come my self to desire your friendship, and to
offer you mine. I will none of your friendship (interrupted he roughly) no,
Madam, I will none of your friendship; I had rather die the unhappiest of all
men, and die your lover, then live with a general esteem, then live with all
the honor and glory that can be wished, and live no more but your friend. Yes,
Madam, I shall love you during my life with the same ardency I do; I should
even increase the violence of my passion if it were possibly to be augmented;
and I consider all that love you not in the same measure, as stupid people,
without pleasure, without honor, and without life. Yes, Madam (added he again)
I esteem them such as I have said; and if friendship could subsist between two
rivalls, I should have already wished a thousand and a thousand times, that
Laelius loved you as I do; for me thinks he spends a languishing and shameful
life, because he lives without love for you. These passionate words extremely
confused the fair person that heard them (as she told me afterward) for she
considered that the Illustrious Lover who uttered them, was the person of the
world that best merited her esteem. For, besides youth, goodliness of person,
greatness of courage, charms of wit and generosity of mind which she observed
in Scipio, she considered also that this Hero had not been reduced to the
extremity wherein she beheld him, but only by having showed her; and that if he
was upon the point to expire, it was only through the violence of his love to
her, which he had not declared but in the most respectfull manner that can be
imagined. But this severe Lady retaining still some remainder of scruple in her
heart, which prohibited entry to a certain tenderness, which she felt was
seizing on it, she answered her Illustrious Lover, that she could no longer
suffer such discourse. Alas Madam, (replied he sadly) add also that it is their
pleasure that I should not live. In sincerity, Scipio (said she to him,
perceiving his grief would make an end of that little strength was left him,
after the agitations I told you of) you have no reason to afflict your self as
you do, and I conceive you would be injust, if you would oblige me to suffer
the passion you say you have, after having taken the liberty to refuse a
friendship, I offered you my self, which perhaps no other would have refused.
I do not pretend, Madam (answered he with a lower and weaker voice) to oblige
you to any thing whatsoever, not so much as to have any regret for my death,
which you are about to be the cause of. Yes, Madam, I betake my self to die,
since you will have it so; and did I not fear to loose the respect I owe you,
by making you see fatal objects, I would at this moment, leave of what is
applied to my wounds in order to preserving my life. Scipio ened these last
words with so familiar accent, and in so languishing a manner, that Aemylia
perceived he was again falling into a sound. Upon which rising up suddenly and
being thoroughly mollified, Live (said she to him) live Scipio, I beseech you, I
conjure you. But Madam, (answered he with a weak and trembling voice) you know
well what you must suffer, in order to preserve my life. Well, Scipio (replied
she, letting fall a few tears from her lovely eyes) I will suffer it, to avoid
consenting to your death; my constancy yields at length to your
importunateness; I esteem you sufficiently, and have obligations to you great
enough to conform me to resolve to suffer this kind of persecution from you,
when I cannot avoid it. But, Oh admirable change! Aemylia had no sooner done
speaking, but Scipio resumed new strength; such power have the words of the
person loved to penetrate even to the heart, and fortify it against the
attaques of excruciating passions. Scipio, I say, assumed new vigor, and
amorously beholding the fair person that began to be favorable to him; I will
live, Madam, since it is your pleasure (said he with a stronger voice) and
moreover I will live happy, since it is your pleasure I should live.

As Scipio ended these words, Claudia entered into our Chamber, accompanied
with Publius and my father, whom she had sent to Rome, to advertise of all that
had passed, they were also followed by seven or eight of our relation, who came
to testify their obliging sentiments of our unhappiness. But for that they
spoke but little, and that too after a manner sufficiently sad. I shall not
repeat their discourse to you. But I shall content my self with intimating to
you, that our ordinary Chyrurgions, with those our friends brought from Rome,
having entreated the company to withdraw, they all did so, and left us to our
repose; of which then Scipio began first to be capable. But, Madam, I am
desirous to leave him to take it, as also to give you liberty to go to yours;
for I believe it is extremely late, and that extraordinary watchings are
neither agreeable nor advantageous to fair persons.

Laelius here broke off his discourse, and the fair Auditory beheld one another
as if they expected whether or no they should desire him to continue it. But
for that they judged, that besides the unseasonable lateness of the night, it
might be incommodious to Laelius to speak yet longer, the referred they sequel
of Scipio's adventures to the next morning: After which they gave Laelius very
obliging thanks, and to show him some proofs of their attention, reflected a
little on the most remarkable passages of the History he had related to them.
Which done, the fair Princess of Hippo gave the goodnight to Nadalia, and
having embraced and kissed that amiable Virgin, retired to her own Chamber,
being accompanied thither by Lelius. The next morning Palmira and Nadalia were
more early then their ordinary custom; and Nadalia being ready sooner then
Palmira, went to the Chamber of that fair Prinncess, whither they afterward
sent to call Lelius, as soon as they were in a condition to be seen by him. This
Illustrious Roman repaired thither immediately, and knowing with what
impatience Palmira and Nadalia expected the continuation of Scipio's History,
without losing time he seated himself near these two fair persons, and resumed
his discourse in these terms, addressing it again to Palmira.

The relation of our sickness being not that which you desire, Madam, if you
please I shall pass over in silence all the particular circumstances of it, and
proceed to tell you, that when we were out of our danger, Claudia, Aemilia, and
all our relations departed from Ostia, where they notwithstanding left us,
either for that they accounted the air of that City better then that of Rome,
or believed the numerous visits we should be forced to receive immediately at
Rome, would be incommodious to us. But before their departure, Scipio had a
time of speaking of his passion once more to Aemilia, and I had the happiness
to confirm in to two or three conversations the friendship that fair person was
pleased to honor me with. By which means I heard some days after her
departure from Ostia, that she gave many advantageous testimonies of me at
Rome, commending both my wit and my nature upon all occasions, and daily
inquiring tidings concerning me; which caused me to think my self obliged to
testify my acknowledgments of her civilities in a Letter, to which she had the
goodness to answer. How? Lelius (interrupted Nadalia) will you receive Letters
in our presence without letting us partake of the gallantries in them, being
apparently not written in the serious style of those Letters of business which
you recited to us before? You have reason, Nadalia, (answered Lelius) there is
without question some peasingness in them; and since you desire to hear them,
perhaps I may be able to satisfy you. That which I writ to Aemilia, was, as I
remember, conceived in these terms.

Laelius to Aemilia.
YOu seem ignorant, Madam, that you do me the greatest displeasure in the
world, by endeavoring to make me pass for a wit. For I imagine, that at such
times you think not aright of me, but forget I am sick. For, is there any
thing, Madam, more contrary to such a person, then one that keeps his bed? then
one, I say, that suffers only with regret what he ought most of all to seek,
whose taste is almost continually depraved, and cannot sleep when all the world
is at rest; and to express his unhappiness in few words, who is unable to come
to you? Pity me therefore, Madam, if you please, for this last infelicity, and
I shall be undoubtedly more satisfied then with your Elegies with me; and for
accomplishment of my joy, if you wish me health, wish it me I beseech you, to
the end I may speedily be in a condition to visit frequently the most fair,
most Illustrious and generous friend in the world.


I will never pardon you, Laelius (said Nadalia) for going to deprive us of the
satisfaction which your Letter has given us; for I find something in it
perfectly handsome and ingenious. Well, Nadalia (answered Laelius) to deserve
my pardon, I will endeavor to call to mind a Letter which Scipio sent at the
same time, and was written as you may judge after a different manner, being of
a passionate strain, though not without sweetness and pleasantness; it was
almost in this manner.

Scipio to Aemilia.
HOw happy, Madam, should I be, were I but owner of Laelius's wit? for then you
would have the goodness to speak of me, and continually enquire news concerning
me; and perhaps you would wish I should write to you often, or not be so remote
from you. But now, Madam, I have none of all these advantages: yet if you
refuse me them only because I love you, I am extremely joyful to be deprived
of them; for I had rather have all the passion which enflames me for you, then
possess all the wit of Laelius.


This Letter begins to appease us (said the Princess of Hippo) and think there
wants only Aemilia's answer to conclude our reconciliation. We shall not be
long enemies, Madam (answered Laelius) for if my memory fails me not, Aemilia
answered me in these terms.

Aemilia to Laelius.
MOst certainly, Laelius, you understand not the consequence of what you do,
when you write me such agreeable Letters concerning your sickness; for you
expose your self to the danger of making your recovery feared; if you must
always write in ^his manner, or at least you constrain your friend to read a
letter with delight, which contains only the miseries, which you endure. Write
not therefore, I beseech you, in this strain* since it is not just you should
afford me contentment while you enjoy none your self; friendship does not allow
it, Laelius, but is so far from suffering that difference between us, that it
always endeavors to render those equal whom it binds. Wherefore as you have
too much goodness to wish I were sick too, so you are concerned in point of
friendship to labor to obtain a health speedily equal to mine: which I wish
you, Laelius, and acknowledge freely to you, that I prefer your conversation
before your handsome Letters.


You see in what obliging terms Aemilia had the goodness to answer me, and this
was the Postscript which she writ for Scipio.

I wish your Illustrious friend a speedy cure. But, Laelius, I wish with all my
heart, that that cure be perfect. I had not no sooner broken open the seal, but
Scipio looked with extreme impatience whether there were an answer in my Letter
for him; but he was sensibly afflicted when he beheld there was none. Indeed he
believed at first Aemylia would speak of him in that of mine, but he soon
perceived she did not: upon which his grief would have been insupportable, if
the sight of the Characters traced by the fair hand of Aemylia had not given
him some contentment, and he had not receivd'd a little more by the Postscript
she had written for him. I perceived he was really ravished with joy, when he
observed the delicacy of wit which appeared in Aemylias Letter. But Madam, as a
lover sometimes fancies pleasures to himself from all things, so it often falls
out, that he makes every thing poison, and frames torments to himself, where
he might really find satisfaction* Thus Madam, was it with my Illustrious
Friend; for on a sudden he became extremely sad, and the wit which was
replendent in Aemylia's Letter, and that dearness which might be observed in
her Postscript became to him matter of discontent, which I presently took
notice of by the alteration of his countenance. For he beheld me with an air,
wholly different from that wherewith he had read Aemylia's Letter; after which
he expressed to me certain sentiments which came into his mind at that time,
with which I was extremely surprised. Ah! Laelius (said he to me) this Letter
of Aemylia and her Postscript deeply afflict me. Yet they ought to produce a
contrary effect in you, (answered I) and I conceive a Letter written by the
hand of a fair person, and that in a very pleasant strain, ought to inspire
joy into the heart of a lover that reads it; besides the Postscript you speak
of, seems to me to contain something of sweetnss and obligingness, which ought
rather to satisfy then afflict you. Ah! Laelius, you are not a lover (replied
he) since you speak in this manner; for I know nothing could be more serene for
me, then this writing of Aemylia: for it is impossible that that ungentle
person could write to you without thinking of me, especially in this
conjuncture; For in that she indulges her wit, notwithstanding that thought, it
is easy to judge she is insensible for Scipio, since the remembrance of that
unhappy lover excites no trouble in her heart, which might hinder her from
writing with such exactness and pleasantness: But, Laelius (added he, taking
the Letter from me, and reading again the Postscript written in it) this it is
that speaks much cruelty to me, that Aemylia wishes I were insensible for her,
and seems in a manner to make slight of reigning in my heart; for the latter
words of her Postscript leave me all possible grounds to imagine so? But,
Laelius, says this insensible person to you, I wish with all my heart that his
cure be perfect. What can you imagine, Laelius, more cruel for me then these
words: But Aemylia (continued he, as if that fair person had been present) I
will never be cured in the manner you wish, and I will adore you all my life,
though you have the rigor to wish me a kind of recovery which I dread much
beyond the most terrible death. I will not accuse you Scipio at this time (said
I to him) for having too much wit, as you did but now Aemylia; but whereas you
told me I did not comprehend things, because I am not a Lover, I shall tell you
that your self do less, because you are. For do not you know (continued I,)
that it is a part of decency and modesty, for a Virgin to make wishes of this
nature, which you complain of; and moreover that they are many times very glad
to make unprofitable wishes? Therefore, Scipio you are unjust to afflict your
self as you do, and more so in desiring Aemylia should write to me without
debonarity and pleasantness of wit; for since you are not prohibited to turn
matters to their advantage, is it not more reasonable you should imagine
Aemylia is willing to write galantly, when she knows you are to read what she
writes, and presumes not to do those things uningeniously, which must come to
your sight. Those thoughts, Laelius (interrupted he) are too flattering, and if
I were capable of them, I should not only be ignorant of Aemilia's humor, but
believe my self unworthy of her esteem. Wherefore I am of a contrary persuasion
to yours, and I imagine Aemylia's wit displayes it self, without he intending
it, and that she is so far from affecting the winning, and retaining hearts,
that she takes all imaginable care to acquit them, when she is forced to see
they have been engaged by her charms. And indeed, Laelius, her deportment
toward me, and the Postscript she has writ to you are sufficient proofs of
my opinion; besides, that her great modesty ought to convince us, that
apparently that admirable Lady cannot favor that kind of conduct, where
secrecy and address make all the pleasure of a Lover, and that she would not
be less offended at those more public gallantries which love every day,
incites to make for a fair person. So that, Laelius, Aemylia being of this
humor, did not without doubt think of preserving my heart and esteem when she
writ to you; and this is it which infinitely troubles me, that she has written
so gallantly, and had no design to do so. In brief, Madam, Scipio spoke much
more to this purpose, complaining of Aemylia, and presently after infinitely
extolling her: but that which seemed to me most surprising was, that he accused
her of insensibility, while I sided with her and commended her procedure; and
certainly defended her when I ventured to term her infensible. So true it is,
that Love is never without extravigance, even in the most illustrious and
intelligent hearts. But to proceed, Madam, I am by this time come to tell you,
that we began to quit the chamber, and within two or three days after, we were
in a condition of attempting to take horse to go to Rome. For the news we
received thence, obliged us to hasten our departure from Ostia, being informed
by a slave who brought us a packet that Lucius and Aemylius were arrived at
Rome, that Claudia was gone from thence, and had left her charming daughter
there, who in all appearance would be married to the King of Illyria within a
few days. He added that there was a rumor spread abroad in Rome, that Lucius
was engaged to it, and that Pyneas was shortly to arrive there for that
purpo^e; besides that Publius and my Father writ to us, not only that we might
come to Rome, but that they should be extremely glad to see us there, as soon as
we could give them that satisfaction without prejudicing our healths not yet
perfectly confirmed. Wherefore we did not deliberate what we had to do, but
immediately took horse, being extremely satisfied that the orders we received
were exactly consentaneous to the desire we had to go, and obstruct the
happiness of the King of Illyria. This sati^faction indeed did not last long;
for Scipio could not reflect on the unwelcome intelaligence brought us without
being enraged at it, and testifying his despair to me. At length, Laelius
(said he to me, as we were speeding along) see the last stroke of misfortune;
we may now say, I am upon the point to experience, that which is the most
cruel and fatal in love. But I will not experience it (added he suddenly
with a transport, and redoubling his diligence, as if himself had been at that
instant about breaking the marriage which he feared) No, no, I will not
experience it (added he again) and I believe it is not a matter of too great
facility to marry the adorable Aemylia, before the unfortunate Scipio be sent
out of the world. These words made me observe that Lovers have more torments to
fear, then pleasures to hope for; and excited also an aversion in me from
engagements, which bring us every moment into a condition of mistrusting all
things. Nevertheless I desired to repress my Friend's fear; and therefore
having beheld him something attentively, and observed that he was deeply
afflicted, I endeavored to represent to him that his trouble was weakly
grounded, and that I extremely wondered he should so soon give credit to an
information brought him by a slave. It Is because a slave brought it (answered
he sighing that my misery is indubitable: for it is not very usual for a
marriage to be openly spoken of, before the treaty of it be concluded; and
less, for a slave to know such matters as these before they be published, and
consequently before they be concluded. But Scipio (replied I) you know people
usually speak of persons of quality, according to their fancies, and so it is
not to be wondered if marriages be spoken of, which are so far from being
concluded, that they were never propounded. Wherefore (added I) your
apprehension is not justifiable upon reasonable grounds, since a flying rumor
renders the matter at most but dubious. Ah! Laelius (interrupted he) there are
foundations for it solid enough to my unhappiness! since I ground it only upon
the inclinations of Lucius, and the departure of Claudia. For I know Lucius
well enough to judge easily that he would sacrifice all his family, for the
good of the Commonwealth, and consequence that he has promised his adorable
daughter to Pyneas, to gratify him for what he has already done, and likewise
the better to retain him by that alliance, to the interests of Rome. And you
will not doubt of the truth of this (added he) if you consider that Claudia is
gone from Rome in this conjuncture; for wherefore should she leave Lucius upon
his return, were it not that she ha^s reasons to do so, and had not the
goodness to be unwilling, to be present at the conclusion of an affair which
must perfectly destroy me. Since it was not difficult for Claudia to know, that
Generosity alone did not incite me to act in the quarrels, I have had against
Minulius and Varro; there is no question but she has understood the passion I
have for her adorable daughter, and assuredly compassionates me, perhaps not
without some esteem and tenderness, as she told me her self: upon which she is
unwilling to be present at a treaty, which she knows will be fatal to me, that
she may be able hereafter to excuse her self of it, if I should make my
complaints to her, by alleging all was done during her absence, and that she
knew not of the business till it was past remedy. Scipio added other reasons to
these: Madam, but how strong soever his conjectures were, I never ceased to
lighten and qualify them during our journey. I shall omit filling you with
what joy Publius received us, when we arrived at his house, and how he was
surprised to see us sooner then he expected. But I shall only intimate to you,
in what manner we our selves were surprised. Having received caresses of
Publius, with the affectionate testimonies of young Scipio, and rested a while,
during which we had a handsome entertainment set before us; Publius heheld us
with an open and serene aspect, and told us we must go to Lucius's house
concerning an important affair, and such as would without doubt be very
agreeable unto us. After which we will go to yours, Laelius, (added he looking
toward me) He pronounced these words with such satisfaction, that He did not
take notice that they caused Scipio to blush; so that instead of requiring the
cause of the alteration of his countenance, he turned about to go forth, and
took his way toward Lucius's Palace. Scipio, as great and as much here as he
was, was nevertheless perfectly submiss and obedient to the pleasure of
Publius, and went after him, without opening his mouth to complain, and
afterward beholding me, with sighs went to Lucius's house like victimes, who
go of themselves to the Temples where they are to be sacrificed. I will
perceive (said he to me some moments after) this important affair is the
marriage of Pyneas, and Aemylia. I see, Laelius, that is the affair, which a
cruel state-inclination makes persons of the humor of my father and Publius
term agreeable; but, Laelius (added he, sighing again) I will not speak of
Publius, nor the father of the divine Aemylia: for as I ought not to mention
them but with respect, so I fear the troubles which I resent will hinder me
from an exact observance of my duty. He was silent after these words, and
continued to follow his father; yet with such dejectedness, that when we were
arrived at the gate of Lucius's Palace, Publius ea^ily perceived it. Upon
which, beholding him with an air, in which appeared a mixture of fear and
contentment, In the name of the Gods, Scipio (said he to him) dispell those
tokens of sadness that appear in you countenance, and give not Lucius and
Aemylia occasion to find fault with you; for to tell you the business more
clearly, it is in reference to that fair person if we come hither, and to make
an alliance which ought to fill us with joy. I knew before, my Lord (answered
Scipio sighing) that your coming to Lucius's house, was in order to the
treating of that marriage. But I beseech their pardon, if I cannot find the
satisfaction in it, you would unquestionably have me resent. How? Scipio
(interrupted Publius) are not you so highly satisfied with this marriage as I
wish you were? It cannot be; you have not so soon altered the mind, and I
conceive you will find satisfaction wherein I do, and where without doubt it
ought to be found. Ending these words he began to ascend, partly for that he
believed (as he told us after) Scipio would change his sentiment out of that
entire submission which he bare toward his relations, and partly that the
presence of a fair person, would soon dissipate the discontent he had
perceived. But his conjectures failed him; for the perplexities of Scipio
augmented proportionably as he ascended, because he was going to see an
adorable person, whom he was in an apparent fear of loosing. So that beholding
me with eyes manifesting both his grief and his despair, Assuredly Pyneas is
arrived (said he) since the friends of Lucius assemble hither to his house.
But, Laelius (added he in a very violent manner) neither Lucius, nor Publius,
nor the whole world shall ever cause him to possess the adorable Aemylia. Some
moments after he had spoken these few words, we entered into a Hall where
Lucius was walking, who no sooner beheld us but he came toward us, and having
saluted Publius according to the familiarity that was between them, he embraced
Scipio with an extreme tenderness. After which he commanded Aemylia to be
called; but of a sudden taking notice of the deep sadness that appeared upon
Scipio's countenance, he was much surprised and troubled at it, and believing
it in probability an effect of his sickness, he said to him with the same
sweetness, How? Scipio, will you give me more then one cause to complain of
you? and that after having put me in danger of loosing the alliance, by
concealing from me the sentiments you have for Aemylia, I see you have
endangered the loss of that little health that is left you, by adventuring your
self to travel, before you were in a condition for it, without hazard of your
life. Ah! my Lord (answered Scipio) fince you know the sentiments I have for
the adorable daughter, can you believe it possible for me to preserve my life,
while I loose the hope of obtaining the Illustrious alliance you speak of. That
hope of yours would have been lost (replied Lucius) if Pyneas had declared his
mind; but while I believe he expected to be at Rome, to declare his pretensions
more openly unto me, it is happily arrived for our house that Claudia tells me
since my return, she conceived you had some affection for Aemylia, which was
confirmed to me by a Letter writ by you not long since, which by chance fell
into my hands. Upon which being extremely joyful, I went to Publius's house,
and without sticking at the punctilio's which Parents of Virgin's endeavor to
observe, I presently told him of the passion you had, and then offered him
Aemylia: Publius really testified a joy as great as mine; so that after some
discourse concerning the happiness of allying our two houses together, I
returned home and commanded Aemylia to treat you as the person designed to be
her husband, that is, as one whom she ought to love and honor, and on whom she
ought to depend. Thus you see, Scipio, there wants nothing but your consent to
the conclusion of a business, which as I apprehend, you ardently desire the
accomplishment. Whilst Lucius was speaking thus, Scipio beheld him with an
astonishment transcending my expression. Then he looked upon his father in the
same manner; after which his eyes seemed to ask me, whether I beheld the same
that he did; in a word, Maddam, Scipio for some moments appeared like a man,
who thinks he sees what he passionately desires, and nevertheless believes not
that he sees it really. But he was not long before he was convinced of the
reality of his happiness. For reflecting upon the manner of Lucius's speaking,
and perceiving also that Publius approved of it by his silence, he moreover
observed an air of joy in my countenance that seemed to confirm the matter:
so that seeing himself on a sudden raised from extreme unhappiness to supreme
felicity, Is it possible, my Lord, (said he to Lucius) that your goodness
advances me to the greatest glory that can be aspired unto? Is it possible
(continued he, casting himself at his feet) that I am upon the point to marry
the divine Aemylia, and to possess the fairest, and most adorable person that
ever lived? As he pronounced these words, and some other abrupt expressions,
which his ravishment suggested to him, and as Lucius was offering to lift him
up, the fair Aemylia entered into the Hall where we were, and with her a
glorious splendour, and a thousand charms and graces. Yes, Madam, such was the
entrance of that admirable person, who no sooner saw the most amiable, and
illustrious of her Lovers at her fathers feet, and moreover an amiable and
illustrious Lover, who she knew was upon the point of being happy, but she
presently blushed, and made us judge that in such occasions a like effect of
modesty, is the most agreeable thing in the world. But when she approached near
us by Lucius's command, Scipio appeared so transported, that we easily
perceived the presence of this fair Virgin caused too excessive joy in him, and
that he received new wounds from the sight of so numerous charms, which by
being pleasing did nevertheless not cease to be troublesome. For there was so
great a dilatation of his spirits, that his heart being the most sick part
about him, becoming the weakest by that expansion, this Illustrious Lover had
almost fallen down at Aemylia's feet; and indeed he began to tremble, and an
excess of joy appeared painted on his countenance, and his eyes were half
closed. Which I observing, and knowing what a sudden joy might effect,
presently stepped to him, and Lucius taking notice of it commanded Aemylia to
retire; upon which, Madam, Scipio being still capable to discern objects,
perceived the admirable person he loved was gone, which instantly made him
resent a kind of regret, that served to moderate his joy, and contributed not a
like to his speedy recovery from his fainting. And when he came to be something
composed, he returned thanks to Lucius in terms that expressed much better his
contentment, then his gratitude, whilst the admirable Aemylia retired into her
chamber, after having seen that joy did no less testify Scipio's affection,
then grief had done some days before, and both passions get even proofs of it
as certain as dangerous.

There was also another thing that helped to allay the excessive joy of our
Illustrious Lover, which was, that Lucius and Publius told him, that for the
good of Rome, they had resolved not only to defer his marriage, but to keep
the matter secret. For I believe (said Lucius) if you should marry Aemilia to
day, we should lose the forces of Pynaeas to morrow* but you ought not to be
troubled at the deferring of a thing you are certain of, which is done only to
retain a considerable assistance to the State. Scipio was suprised at these
words; but love, joy and hope, suddenly transporting him, he was upon the point
(as he told me afterward) to declare to Lucius, that himself would perform
actions that should repair the loss of the Illyrians. Nevertheless, for that
virtue always guided that Illustrious Roman, and regulated as well his words as
action, he suppressed his sentiments, and only requested Lucius to permit that
the marriage might be accomplished privately.

Do you think me capable, Scipio (interrupted the father of Emilia) to transact
in the manner you speak of, an action of luster and rejoicing; and in which
privacy always seems to hide some considerable defect? No, no, Scipio, do not
except it; I will never act in that manner; and I would not give Pyneas so just
an occasion to complain of me, when the business should come to be discovered.
For the King of Illyria might say I had abused him by such a secret carriage of
it; but he cannot accuse me of any thing whatsoever, when after he has served
us, I cause him to be rewarded by the people of Rome, and afterward prepare
his mind to suffer your marriage with moderation, by telling him, (as it is
time) that Claudia propounded it to me before himself declared to me openly
that he pretended to my alliance.

Thus you see, Scipio, by this course I act as I ought; and is it not enough
for you that I promise you Aemilia, since a word passed by a person of my
humor, is sacred and inviolable. You see also that I intend to take my time to
temper the mind of a Lover before whom I prefer his Rival, and that I act for
the advantage of the Commonwealth, by not depriving it of a powerful aid; for
indeed, though Pyneas has rendered Illyria tributary to Rome, yet he is not
obliged to supply us with forces, and we have no right to exact any thing of
him beyond the Tribute which is imposed upon his Kingdom. But, My Lord (replied
Scipio) can you consider the violence of my passion without -- But, Scipio
(interrupted Lucius) can you consider what I have said without yielding to it?
and would you direct persons who have very much reason for what they design,
because you have very much love for what you aspire to? These words pronounced
with an aspect Majestical, though not severe, and that by the person who alone
had right to dispose of Aemilia, made Scipio reflect seriously on the matter;
so that revolving in his mind for a few minutes, the happy change of his
affairs, and afterward considering the generous and obliging manner of
Lucius's proceeding, he presumed no longer to answer him, but only made him a
profound reverence, as if to signify that he submitted to his Orders. In the
mean time before we went away from Lucius's house, Publius went alone to
Aemilia's Chamber, where, (as we knew afterward (he gave her a thousand
testimonies of esteem and dearness, which that prudent Lady received with all
the civilitie and submission, which she thought her self obliged to render to a
person of high quality, grave years, and extraordinary wit. After whose return
to us in the Hall, we departed, and went to my Fathers house, who was extremely
glad to see us, especially perceiving we seemed very joyful; but that which
surprised us was, that when he had embraced us, and expressed his tenderness to
us, Publius told him that he (...) come from Lucius's house, and that without
losing time we were going to that of Regulus. These words augmented my fathers
joy, who having once again embraced Scipio, accompanied Publius to go
accordingly to Regulus's house, and Scipio and I followed them. But as Publius
and my father were speaking together, and I was entertaining my self with my
Illustrious friend, either concerning Emilia's beauty, or in conjecturing the
occasion of our going to Regulus's house, my father turned about toward me,
and to^d me he would not have me so surprised as Scipio had bin; and therefore
you must now, Laelius (added he) that you are going to see Attilia, and
moreover to engage your self to her, and in all appearance within a few days
you shall marry that amiable person. Verily, Madam, you will be surprised at
the effect of these words; for I had no sooner heard them, but Attilia
instantly presented her self to my mind with her amiable, sprightly, and
gallant aspect; and I remember I thought upon the charms of that fair Virgin
with a certain motion of dearness, such as I had never resented before. But
as soon as I came to Regulus's house, and had cast my eyes upon his amiable
sister, that dearness made it self more sensible in my heart, and contrary to
the practice of those who cease to love when they marry their Mistresses, I
assure you I began to love Attilia passionately from the time it was told me I
should marry her. And indeed that fair person had charms sufficiently powerful
to affect the most insensible hearts. But it not being her History that I am
relating, you will please to excuse me, Madam, from repeating the
particularities of the conversation we made; it suffices that you know it was
extremely handsome and agreeable that Attilia spoke, but little in it, but very
judiciously, and with much modesty, and that after we had set a day for the
meeting of our friends, we departed extremely satisfied with the civility of
Regulus, and all the fair qualities of his amiable sister. My Father detained
Scipio that right at his house, notwithstanding Publius's reluctance to part
with him; and after having taken care of our wounds by the resistance of the
Chirurgions we brought with us from Ostia, he left us in the Chamber of Scipio,
where that Illustrious Lover and I had the sweetest conversation that ever we
had made, speaking of nothing but the pleasing adventures that had befallen us,
and frequently reflecting upon the circumstances which seemed to augment our
felicity.

The End of the Second Book.
The Grand SCIPIO.
PART II.
BOOK III.
THe report of our arrival being soon dispersed about the City, the next
morning we received very many visits from our relations and friends at my
fathers house, of which the most acceptable was indeed that of Regulus and
Emilius, who came thither together. The conversation we had with them was
perfectly delightful, and the expressions of our mutual esteem so agreeable,
and our discourse so complacential and obliging, that we received not without
displeasure other visits that interrupted so sweet an entertainment. For our
relations having resolved to keep secret the treaties that were between them,
it behooved us not only to charge our discourse before the company that came to
us, but also to use the same deportments amongst our selves (which likewise
we have ever since observed) that were wont to do before the mentioning of
our aliances. But, Madam, Aemilius and Regulus had no sooner left us, but
amongst other persons that visited us this morning, we were surprised to see
some of the relations of Minutius and Varro come to us, and to be ascertained
of what we had understood only uncertainly, that the report had bin no more
then of a sickness we had suffered, that our quarrels were not published,
that Varro, Minutius, and Metellus, were in the Country, and that no body much
enquired what reason made them continue so long out of Rome. We were
afterward informed by Appius, who visited us also that morning that Scipio's
Letter had not bin delivered to him, but that Minutius had undoubtedly
corrupted the slave to whom the delivery of it had bin recommended; for Appius
assured us he did not find him at home when he returned out of the Country,
whither Varro had engaged him to go in reference to an affair which he told him
was of great importance. But, Madam, if the sight of our Parents and our
friends gave us contentment, we received one more considerable in the afternoon
at Lucius's house. For after Scipio had bin at his fathers, whom he desired to
wait upon, he drew me to go with him to Aemilia, telling me that since his love
preceded mine, it was more just to go to Lucius's house before going to see
Attilia. But, Scipio (answered I with very much trouble) I am obliged to go to
that of Regulus, and you may, if you please go alone to Aemilia. True, Laelius
(replied he) but if you come not with me, there will want something to the
pleasure which I am to receive there. But, verily, Scipio (answered I with an
increase of discontent) you are unjust to prefer your pleasure above my duty.
If we could not both go together as well to the house of Lucius, as that of
Regulus (replied he) I would be ready to do whatever you pleased. But, Laelius
(added he smiling) do not trouble your self, I will not cause you to fail in
that exactness for which you reproached me, the first went to Servilius's house
to see Emilia there.

He had scarce ended these words, but we beheld a slave belonging to Regulus
pass by, of whom I demanded if his Master were at home; but when he answered me
he was gone abroad, and I was going to aks him the same question concerning
Attilia; I was suddenly seized with a kind of fear which caused me to change
countenance, and I felt a certain disturbance in my self, that withheld me
from speaking, which Scipio did not fail to take notice of, and smile at. After
which having asked the slave what I was unable to do, we were told the amiable
sister of Regulus was with the Illustrious Emilia; wherefore without losing
time in a further contest, we went immediately where we were to see the two
fair persons whom we loved. I shall not tell you, Madam, that if I seemed
timorous in speaking of Attilia, I was much more so when at Lucius's house, I
was approaching near to that fair person; I shall also forbear to mention to
you what satisfaction I resented while I was entertaining that lovely
Virgin, who treated me with all the svveetness that she thought her self
obliged to express to a Lover, whom she was shortly to marry, and that without
repugnance; for that I am only to speak concerning the Illustrious Scipio, and
the divine person which he adores. You may please therefore to know, Madam,
that as we entered into Emilia's Chamber, after notice given her, and her
permission obtained, we found only Attilia with her, and two or three other
Virgins who were employed about works in Silk, at the end of the Chamber
opposite to the Bed, which presently caused us to imagine, that they had no
intention of seeing much company that day, and conceiving at the same time that
we were priviledg'd, and that we should alone have all the liberty we could
wish to entertain them; which thought gave us extreme satisfaction. As Soon as
we had made our reverence with a profound respect to those two admirable
persons, they saluted us very civilly, though without offering to look upon us;
and we had scarce endeavou^ed to meet their eyes, to observe in them what we
were to hope or fear, but we beheld a pure vermilion ascend into their
countenance, in which, to our happiness, neither anger nor aversion seemed to
have any influences. Yet this made us not more confident; but we advanced
toward them with a very profound submission, and desired their pardon for that
we were come to see them in a time which perhaps they had resolved to pass in
private. It Is true (answered Aemilia with infinite modesty and sweetness) we
had no purpose to see much company to day; but for that I have all the
submission to the pleasure of Lucius that I ought, and Attilia but now told me
she had the like for that of her Brother, whom she is willing to comply with;
we have not presumed to refuse your visit after the commands laid upon us.

Aemilia in pronouncing these last words, felt that lovely redness to increase,
which blended it self so agreeably with the purity of the complexion, that it
was perfectly discernable upon her countenance; and Scipio could not hear them
without resenting an extraordinary trouble; so that beholding that fair person
with eyes that showed both a violent love, and a very sensible displeasure: Ah!
Madam (said he to her sighing) you are extremely cruel, in returning me
presently into a condition of not doubting of my misery, and intimating to me
in the beginning of our conversation, that I am obliging for the honor I
receive, rather to the command of Lucius, then to your own goodness. But that
is not all, Madam, (continued he with the same air) for I find something so
rigorous in your saying, You dared not refuse my visit, that I can imagine
nothing in the world more cruel. In sincerity (replied that prudent Lady) I
confess to you, I would not have received it in the manner I do, if I did not
know in what degree Lucius requires me to respect you. Ah! Madam, (answered he
sighing) if it be true that you are sincere in speaking as you do, it is too
true that I am miserable. But, Madam (proceeded he some moments after, he had
beheld her with a very passionate air) sweeten the matter at least, and in
stead of telling me you would not have dared to refuse my visit after the
command of Lucius, I conjure you to say, you would not have dared to receive it
without that command. Verily, Scipio (replied she with a modest smile) you make
me wonder at the difference you put between those two expressions. But without
puzling my self in being so severe as you are to examine them, I shall not much
scruple to consent to what you desire, and to permit you to take what I said
according as seems most agreeable to you. I know, Madam (replied this
passionate Lover) you will not find the same difference in it that I do; for
it is of a nature not presently to be discerned, and there is nothing but love
that can find it out. So that, Madam, I do not wonder you confound those two
expressions; for however lively your wit be, it is impossible it should
apprehend such a distinction, it is your heart that must do it: But, alas! it is
requisite that that Illustrious heart be first affected, and give me to observe
upon your countenance that you well understand all the force of the terms you
use, and employ them not but upon choice. Then would it be, Madam (proceeded he
with a mixture of several passions appearing in his eyes) that I should be as
happy as I am now unfortunate; for since I know all the tenderness of love, and
that all that proceeds from you, Madam, makes an impression in my heart, I
never fail to resent to the full whatsoever it behooves me to be sensible of.

Scipio continued this discourse still with a passionate air, whilst I was
speaking to the fair Attilia; but the Illustrious Aemilia always answered him
with so much prudence and modesty, that at the same time he esteemed her much
more, and also complained of her for it; so that, Madam, I cannot determine
whither the amorous Scipio resented this day at Lucius's house more grief or
joy, or whether he went from it more satisfied or discontented; for Aemilia
treated him with very much complacency in every thing that concerned not his
passion, and which was most of all obliging to him, she acknowledged with great
freedom and sweetness, that she would obey the command of Lucius with less
repugnance then she should have had for any other. But on the other side, that
which afflicted this Illustrious lover, was that she continually acted and
spoke with such reservation, that he could never observe that she resented any
thing for him beyond esteem, or that he had gained upon her heart. The next
day, indeed, he was much more happy, as you shall now understand; for, Pyneas,
who arrived that morning, went to pass the afternoon with Attilia, because he
was informed Aemilia was gone to her house with her brother. Fabius, whose love
was discovered, was there also with Cato: and there was likewise two very
lovely persons that lived not far from that place, who were conducted thither
by Flaminius and Marcellus, whose presence occasioned the conversation to be
more general, and consequently more agreeable to all those that had no
particular interest. So that, Madam, Scipio had no great reason to be satisfied
with this kind of general and tumultuous entertainment, where usually there are
some whose humor leads them to the affairs of State, or an Army, whilst others
desire only to speak of Balls, Comedies and Fashions, where the discourse is
of a hundred different subjects; and lastly, where every one produces what his
interest or genius severally incites him to. Nevertheless Scipio had very
great reason to think himself happy; for Aemilia received the King of Illyria
and Fabius, with all the coldness she could show without seeming uncivil; and
whilst she treated them with a kind of severity, of which persons that are
intelligent in such matters easily take notice, she approved with great
complacency whatever was spoken by Scipio, and comported her self with a more
obliging air toward him then toward the rest, which caused all the company
who were ignorant of the secret transaction, to believe Scipio Aemilia's
friend, as it was known I was, and none ever suspected him to be her Lover. For
it was always believed, Madam, as without question you have reported, that
Scipio was not capable of being amorous of any thing but glory; besides, that
no person could have imagined, knowing Emilia's humor, and having never heard
of the command Lucius had laid upon her, that that severe Virgin would have
treated Scipio so obligingly as she did, if she had known he was inflamed with
love for her. But, Madam, this Illustrious Lover had soon after a more sensible
satisfaction; for a Lady of high quality, named Martia, Aunt to Attilia (who
dwelt at Regulus's house, because having no children of her own, she desired to
take care of her nieces education after her Mothers death) entered into the
Chamber where we were, and after the performance of civilities usual in such
occasions, told us the day was sufficiently fair to invite us down into the
Garden; whither she accordingly caused us to descend both to take the air
there, and for the pleasure of the walk. But for that Pyneas was a stranger,
and had newly come from his journey, Martia treated him with more exact
civility, which occasioned him at our going forth of Attilia's Chamber, to give
the hand to her Aunt, whereby Scipio had the opportunity to lead Emilia: For,
indeed, though Fabius was a very comely person, and infinitely ingenious, yet he
was of a temper near to that of Cato; he appeared so cold, so sage, and so slow
in his carriage, that he was no very dangerous person to obstruct the happiness
of a Rival; nor was he very like those dextrous Lovers* who by a way they have
learnt in the world, are always ingraciating with their Mistresses, by
rendering them a hundred little Offices, leading them, and whispering in their
ear, and all this without being liable to be taxed in what they do, of
intrusion or ostentation; besides that in brief, the coldness Emilia shevved
him this day, was not I conceive very effectual to dispel that of his temper.
By this means, Scipio, as I told you, had the happiness to give the hand to
Emilia; and being those two Illustrious persons are chiefly concerned in my
relation, you must know, Madam, that when we were in Regulus's Garden,
which is extreme spacious, and the vvalks exceeding handsome, Scipio beheld
the fair person he led with infinite love and respect. After which, alas! I
beseech you, Madam (said he to her suddenly) be pleased to tell me whether I
am more in favor with you then Varro, Pyneas, and Fabius; or, to explain my
self better, Tell me, I conjure you, whether I should have bin treated this day
as the two latter were, if Lucius had not bin favorable to me. Being he has
bin so (answered she) I am obliged to have such sentiments for you as I ought
not to have any other. But, Madam (replied he) is it to that obligation you
speak of, that I owe my happiness, and will you not be pleased to let me know,
whether it would have been lawful for me, to hope you would have done that out
of goodness, which you have done out of obedience? Since that which you call
happiness is ascertained to you (answered she) why do you seek to bring it in
doubt by speaking as you do? Ah! Madam (interrupted he) I have no longer any
happiness, if to speak as I do, be to bring it to doubt; For indeed, I
apprehend that in such occasions as this we are speaking of, it is impossible
for a man to be effectually happy, if he owes his felicity only to the command
of a Father. Speak therefore, Madam, speak (continued he sighing) but not to
kill me with grief: say, I beseech you, that Scipio owes not all to Lucius, but
that the adorable Aemilia would have preferred him above all his Rivals, if she
had had the liberty of choice. Sincerely (answered she with very much goodness)
I will acknowledge to you, that I should not account my self just, if I could
admit Varro into my mind in concurrence with the Illustrious Scipio, and you
would have cause to believe me very little grateful, if after all you have
done. I were capable to prefer either Fabius, or the King of Illyria before
Scipio, to whom I have without doubt such obligations, as I have not to those
you call your Rivals.

The Illustrious Aemylia pronounced these words with so much sweetness, and
such an amiable freedom, that Scipio could not but be highly pleased with
them, which yet he was not absolutely; for after a few moments he reflected
that Aemylia seemed rather to act out of generosity then inclination, and that
she would have had the same sentiments for any of her Rivals, if he had done
the same services for her that himself had performed. So that not knowing well
whether he ought to make remerciments for them, or complaints he spoke after a
manner so incoherent, his sighs so often interrupted his discourse, and there
appeared in his eyes so much love, fear, and respect together, that if Aemilia
were not absolutely moved with it, it was only for that she accustomed her self
to hear with insensibility, all the most passionate expressions of her
Illustrious Lover. But this prudent Lady having very much severity in her soul,
she spoke nothing that could persuade Scipio he had touched her heart: It Is
true indeed, the fair eyes of that admirable person, were little more
favorable then her mouth, and seemed to tell Scipio in a language, which
appeared still timorous (as I may so speak) that an Illustrious Lover, who has
all the advantages of nature, and fortune joined with excellent acquired
accomplishments might hope to become happy. Thus Scipio parted at this time
from her upon good terms, and afterward had several conversations with that
Illustrious person, during which she discovered to him all the esteem she had
for him; she told him with very much freedom part of her sentiments, and
intimated to him upon diverse occasions, part of the dearness she already
resented for him. Scipio also understood that Lucius and Aemilius always
infinitely esteemed him, and that Claudia had ever so great a dearness for him,
that she was oftentimes upon the point to tell his mother a little before she
died that she designed Aemilia for the uniting of their families. He likewise
learnt that Claudia, before her departure from Rome had commanded her adorable
daughter, to have sentiments of esteem and acknowledgment for Scipio; and that
she afterward left Rome for no other reason, but only that she might not be
obliged to discover to Lucius all that she knew of the proceedings of Varro:
And in brief, this passionate Lover had so many reasons to belief himself happy
in those delightful entertainments, that I may conclude he was so in reality.
But Madam, whilst love and joy are the passions that rule in the illustrious
heart of Scipio, and this famous Roman is enjoying all the purity of delight
and contentment they afford, Intelligence is brought from the Camp of
Sempronius, that Hannibal had advanced toward Trebia, that the Numidians had
already made excursions as far as the banks of that river, that they forraged,
plundered, and wasted all the Country, and made desolation in all places,
whence the Roman Army might draw subsistence. The Carrier that brought these
tidings certified also, that Sempronius was upon the point to draw his army out
of their entrenchments, and to march directly against the Enemies, without
expecting till Publius, his Colleque, were in a condition to join with him and
fight them. Upon which all the Officers and Valunteers that were then in Rome,
took order the same day for their affairs that they might depart the next,
which many accordingly did; for the most part of them expecting suddenly to
receive some such tidings, had all things in readiness that could not be
provided in an instant, to the end they might have nothing to do, that might
afterward occasion their delay at Rome. I shall not tell you that Publius as
unfit as he was still for an expedition, would notwithstanding depart, and
resolved also to carry the young Scipio with him. I shall also omit to tell you
what regret I had to forsake Attilia, or what I said to that fair person, when
I was upon the point to take my leave of her, and how obligingly she answered
me. Nor do I think it necessary to let you know that Flavius at this time was
entertained into the attendance of my Illustrious friend, who had sent to him
at Ostia a reward of inestimable value. Only I shall tell you, Madam, that it
was requisite for Scipio to depart too, notwithstanding the indisposedness he
was in by reason of his wounds, and the extreme reluctance he had to leave
Aemilia. But what did he not say, or what did he not do before his going? he
went to the house of Lucius, he saw Aemylia, and being in the presence of the
admirable person, and considering that he was now at the instant to leave her,
he beheld her a long time without being able to open his mouth to express his
regret. After which, perceiving she was a little mollified, Alas! Madam (said
he to her sorrowfully) must I be separated from you! must I part from the place
where you are! must I go where you are not! Ah! no, no, Madam, I will never do
it: glory has no longer any charms to move me, if I must go so far from you to
seek it, and its luster seems to me too obscure and too fatal, if it must
withdraw me from that of your eyes. As he was proceeding, his sighs
interrupted him; and though he had a thousand passionate and tender thoughts to
express, yet he was not able to speak, either because he had too many things to
say at once, or for that his soul was suddenly too much engrossed by Grief and
Love. It Is true, these very passions spoke themseves by hindering him from
speaking, and expressed his sentiments in so affecting a strain, that at length
the fair eyes of Aemilia laid open all the tenderness, which that fair and
discreet person, had cautiously concealed to that hour, so that these two
Illustrious persons beheld one another for some time without speaking; after
which Aemilia with a melancholy that had something in it infinitely sweet and
amiable, told him there was an absolute necessity for his departure; for you
are obliged to it (continued she) both because you are a Roman, and especially
because you are Scipio. Go therefore (added she) go whither glory calls you;
and if it be true that you have a reluctance to part from one, begin to
overcome your self, that you may be able afterward more easily to overcome our
enemies, and make us hope that he that can gain a victory over Scipio, may well
pretend to gain one over Hannibal. Ah! Madam (answered he) how difficult is it
to gain the victory you speak of, and how contrary is this to those of
Conquerors, since the heart it self, is unwilling to enter the combat, in order
to gaining it? It behooves you then (replied she) to serve your self of contrary
means, and I conceive flight will soon bring you to the attainment of the
victory we speak of; fly therefore, I conjure you, Scipio: fly the presence of
a person who has been the cause that you have been capable of weakness: And to
show you (added we with an extreme goodness) that it is only for your glory, and
not through aversion that I entreat you to depart, I promise you that I will
pray the Gods for your preservation, that I shall be glad that you preserve for
me the sentiments which you already have, and that I shall have such for you
(added she casting down her eyes and blushing a little) as shall be full of a
real esteem and kindness, which the command of Lucius and your own merit
sufficiently authorize. Ending these words she offered to go into her closet;
but Scipio stayed her by her robe, and casting himself at her feet, because
there was only one waiting woman in the chamber, from whom Aemilia concealed
nothing, How? Madam (said he with extreme grief) have you the cruelty to leave
me, after having enjoined me by a too rigorous prudence to depart from you?
will you so cruelly deprive me of the satisfaction which I receive; and in
brief, Madam, will you have me fly from a person for whom I live; from a
person, without whom I cannot continue one moment, and who alone in the world
is able to render me happy? Ah? Madam, this is not possible. Yet it must be so,
Scipio (interrupted she) and absolute necessity requires it. Aemilia pronounced
these words with so much majesty, and such an imperious air, that the amorous
Scipio durst not answer; yet he retained her still, and having beheld her a
while, after a manner extremely respectfull and passionate; Well Madam, (said
he sighing) I will go since you command me; but I beseech you (added he with
the same air) grant me that which I am going to request of you, since in the
condition wherein matters are, I may desire it without injury to the respect I
owe you. After that which is past (answered she with her first sweetness) I may
without doubt do many things for you; Be pleased then, Madam (said he) to
suffer an excellent Painter of Sicyonia, who is arrived in this City two or
three days since, to draw your pourtrait, to the end I may carry it to the
places where I must not see you, and comfort my self with the sight of it, for
the miseries I am there to suffer. In truth, Scipio (answered she) I am
extremely sorry, that I am obliged to refuse you what you desire. How? Madam
(interrupted he) will you refuse me the favor which I request? Scipio, I must
do so (answered she) and Lucius is the sole person in the world that can induce
me to admit what you speak of. Well, Madam (replied he) since Lucius can effect
it, I do not despair of obtaining what I desire; and I conceive (added he)
that after all that he has done for me, he has not the same severe cautiousness
that you have. There is no time left to intercede with Lucius to that purpose
(interrupted she) and you would absolutely disoblige me, if you should do it.
For I put no difference between giving my picture, and teaching the means to
obtain it, nor have I less scruple for the first then the latter. But, Madam,
(said he infinitely dejected) what shall I then carry with me, to sweeten the
cruelties of my absence? The love of glory (answered she) and not of certain
things which may in some manner render you capable of weakness, as I have
observed at this present. The things you speak of, Madam (replied he) are of
value beyond all the laurels that glory can Crown me with: so that, Madam, if
you -- As he was proceeding to speak, Aemilius, Regulus and I entered into the
chamber; and being we perceived Scipio was dejected and sad, Aemilius told his
sister, she was obliged by very many respects to a dearness for Scipio, and
especially in this conjuncture. But brother (answered she with very much
sweetness) what would you have me do, when he desires things of me which I
cannot grant him. Choose, Madam, (answered Scipio) choose what you please to
give me. I should be much troubled (replied she) if it were requisite for me to
do what you say; for what ever I gave, if I should consider Aemilia were the
person that gave it, I should think she gave too much; and on the other side,
if I considered (added she with great goodness) that Scipio were the person
that received it, perhaps I should imagine she gave too little: She had scarce
pronounced these words, which manifested an extreme delicate modesty, as well
as much dearness for Scipio, but Aemilius answered her, that the choice
proposed to her, was not very difficult to be made; for sister, (added he) you
need only give Scipio the Scarf which you promised me; Being I promised it to
you (replied she) it is now yours, and it consequently belongs to you to give
it. I am not forward to believe (answered Aemilius smiling) that Scipio desires
to receive it from my hands; therefore sister, if you please, let it be from
yours; and to give you convenience to present it to him, in a manner that may
more endeare it, (added he with the same air) I shall withdraw with Laelius,
Regulus. And accordingly he went out after these words, though he perceived
Emilia was unwilling he should, and seemed extremely perplexed. Scipio still
pressing that fair person, with extreme respect, and a thousand tokens of a
violent passion, at last obtained the Scarf Emilius spoke of, which was
carnation ambrodered with silver, wherein were seen the Characters of the
admirable Virgin that gave it; but she delivered it to him with an aspect, that
manifested a contest of modesty and kindness in her heart. After which she
commanded Scipio to depart, and bad him adieu, having first tendered her hand
to him, which he kissed very respectfully; and as she retired, she turned face
away to hide it from Scipio, the tears which undoubtedly fell from her fair
eyes, and so entering into her Closet presently made fast the door. Scipio crossed
his arms and sighed, in beholding this department of Aemilia, and the grief he
resented would certainly have hindered him from going forth of the chamber, of
that fair person; if he had not endeavored to moderate it by casting his eyes
upon the Scarf which he had received, and recalled into his mind the obliging
expressions, and shows of tenderness, he had observed in that adorable person,
at her separating from him. Indeed these very thoughts afflicted him
oftentimes; for he could not conceive it possible for him, without dying with
sorrow to depart from a divine person, who had very much goodness for him, and
began to give him some tokens of a kindness, which certainly was able to charm
the hearts of the most insensible. Nevertheless when he came also to consider,
that it behooved him to be wholly covered with glory, that he might merit the
esteem of Aemilia, and likewise remembr'd what he had done before he was a
Lover, and so proceeding to think of the great exploits he was obliged to
perform, in order to rendering himself in some manner worthy of the most fair
and illustrious person of the world, his courage was excited to as high a pitch
as his love. Upon which he left the chamber of Emilia with a generous
resolution, and it may be said that the consideration of this fair person now
drive him thence, as it had before attracted and retained him there. Yet before
his going he made many civilities to Silia, which was she of Emilia's
attendants, that was most favored with her friendship, and privacy of her fair
mistress. After which as he was going away and passed into the hall, he beheld
Lucius to enter, whom had been called by some of his servants, because he had
given them order, notice should be brought him when Scipio came to his house.
My Illustrious friend presently made a reverence to the Father of Emilia, and
afterward made him a complement, in which he expressed both his grandeur and
generosity, together with that profound respect which accompanied all his words
and actions. Upon which Lucius embraced him and answered him with a thousand
testimonies of esteem and dearness; and then commanded him, as a father, to
take care and to preserve himself in all occasions, where the service of Rome
was not concerned. But, Madam, not to detain you with any more circumstances of
Scipio's actions before his departure, you may please to know that the next
morning we went out of Rome, very early in a very brave company; For Publius
was so generally esteemed that the greatest part of the Officers that were yet
at Rome, would go along with him, as likewise all the volunteers did. Fabius
and Cato were also of our troop with Servilius, Flamminius, Marcellus,
Lentulus, and many others of that rank; but amongst all that number of gallant
persons, there was a most intimate friendship contracted between, Scipio,
Emilius, Regulus and me, which society was so infinitely delectable, that we
enjoyed a thousand contentments during our journey. Not but that Scipio was
extremely inclined to pensiveness and melancholy, if we had not soon observed
and endeavored to divert it, whereby he moderated his anxiety; and became by
degrees capable of entertaining a certain air of joy together with us. For
being infinitely amorous, he had nevertheless an unquestionable assurance of
possessing the fair person which he loved. And that which rendered our pleasure
greater, was, that Aemylius had as great hope of possessing Papyria, whom he
was passsionately enamored of, as I had to marry Attilia. So that we were all
happy Lovers excepting Regulus, who instead of being a Lover, had his heart
possessed with hatred, yet he enjoyed no less satisfaction, since he was going
to fight against a Nation whom he hated in perfection. But, Madam, when we
arrived at the Army, we found our selves in danger of losing our former
contentment, and even ready to fight one against another upon occasion of a
contest that happened at a Council of War, which was held as soon as Publius was
arrived. For, you must know, Madam, Sempronius, who was a person of high
courage, but wanted something of the moderation requisite to a great Captain,
was absoutely desirous to give battle, fearing lest the new Consuls that were
shortly to be created, should come and prevent him of that glory; besides, that
he was puffed up with the good success that a party of two thousand Roman Horse,
had had another of three thousand Numidians, who were beaten and dispoil'd of a
prodigious booty that they were carrying to the Camp of Hannibal.

Publius on the other side, who was one of those Great men that are satisfied
in themselves, both of their own courage, and the goodness of their intentions,
and who besides that advantage, enjoy a solid glory acquired by a thousand
brave actions, would consider nothing in this occasion but the advantage of
Rome; so that he protested he could not consent to the resolution of his
Colleague, and maintained it was absolutely important to decline fighting for a
time. Then we must decline it for ever (interrupted Sempronius roughly) for
since the two Consuls are joined together, I think it ought not be declared
till a third be created by a Law and sent to our assistance. Say therefore
(added he with the same air) that you will wait till you are perfectly cured,
which yet I account not very material; for we ought never to consider our
particular interest, when the Glory of Rome is in question. For the same
reason (ansvvered Publius) you ought not to consider yours, as I see you only
do; But, Sempronius (proceeded he fiercely) we shall see in the fight,
whether the inconvenience I still am under by reason of my vvounds, will
retard me from performing the actions of a Scipio, and whether afterward you
and I may not have a discourse concerning the law of a third Consul you tell me
of. In the mean time (added he) endeavoring to moderate himself) in
expectation of the end of the battle, I would at present, as Consul of Rome,
draw you from your error, and convince you that it is by no means expedient to
fight Hannibal. For we have intelligence (continued he) that Mago Bardo is come
from Sicily to join with him, and that a considerable number of Gauls are added
to his Army; so that we ought to expect till that numerous Army disperse it
self, which in all appearance will shortly come to pass. For, Italy being still
almost entirely ours, Hannibal will be necessitated continually, in order to
getting Ammunitions of War and Provision, to send out parties which our Allies
will encounter with; besides that the Gauls, who make a great part of our
enemies forces, will certainly in a short time retire into their own Country;
for there is a great measure of impatience peculiar to that Nation, as well as
a daring and generous ardor whereby they will become weary of bearing Arms and
not using them; and it being very easy for them to retreat, in all probability
they will not be slow to do it.

If these words of Publius did not absolutely convince his Colleague, yet they
persuaded the greatest part of the Convention, and even hindered Sempronius
himself, who considered the weight of them, for returning a sharp answer, which
would without question have desperately embroiled us. But the unhappiness was,
that though Publius had more partakers, as well as greater reason then his
Colleague, yet there were fewer that declared for his opinion; because in that
of Sempronius there was a certain splendour of generosity, which is more
powerfully attractive then solid wisdom, that is not always judged aright of
in Armies, and which we scarce ever dare follow. Wherefore all that Publius
could do, was not to issue forth of his Intrenchments during the time he
commanded: but as soon as it came to Sempronius to give orders, he could not
longer continue in his Camp; besides that there was an occasion offered, which
strangely seconded his intention. For Maharbal and Mago came in the head of
four thousand Horse, to the Gate of the line of our Trenches. Upon which
Sempronius presently summoned four thousand Romans to horse, the command of
which he gave to Scipio and Regulus. In which preferring of Scipio before all
other Romans, he did justice to his birth and valor, and proceeded generously
by making it appear, that if he had contested against Publius, it was out of no
inducement of hatred or envy; nor was it without reason that he preferred
Regulus before many others, for besides that he was a person of infinite
courage, he had already more experience in Arms, then the greatest part of his
equals in age and quality, and moreover he was used to sue for these kind of
emploments with as much earnestly as the most ambitious Roman could do for the
office of Consul or Dictator. Aemylius, Marcellus, Flaminius, and I ranged our
selves with our friends, and resolved to fight under them, as likewise all the
volunteers soon after did, and amongst the rest the young Scipio.

Thus we marched out of our Trenches with such alacrity and promising
fierceness, that our party drew the eyes and hearts of our Generals, and
excited admiration in all the Army. Though Scipio were yet indisposed by reason
of his wounds, yet I may say he felt then no inconvenience from them; for
besides that motion and activeness usually suspends those sorts of pain, the
Idea of Aemilia, and the presence of glory (as I may so speak) had a greater
effect then his agitation. I shall forbear to describe to you, Madam, the
prodigious valor we admired this day in Aemilius, and omit also to tell you in
what manner Regulus signalized himself, and what my good fortune enabled me to
perform; but being to speak only in relation to Scipio, I must inform you,
Madam, that that Illustrious Roman no sooner perceived that the four thousand
Horse under the conduct of Maharbal and Mago, made a stand to expect us, but he
fell in upon them with an unparalled impetuosity: he would use only his
sword, because other weapons could not so well have bin managed by his ardour;
but he employed that so courageously, that he performed miraculous action with
it; he dangerously wounded Maharbal, killed three or four Officers, and at
length made our enemies give gronud after a resistance of an honr and half. He
drove them back as far as the main body of their Army, which was ready drawn up
in battalia, without their Trenches, to come to their relief: and when we
observed Sempronius had done the same for us, that Hannibal had done for
Maharbal, we charged the right wing of our enemies which was commanded by
Braveus, King of the Allobroges, because it consisted of Auxiliary forces, and
as it happened, Pyneus commanded our left wing, and consequently backed his Rival,
though he was ignorant of it. But that passionate King knowing that Aemilius
was fighting in the same place, presently came to the head of his squadron, and
without delay joined with us. At which time he performed a thousand brave
actions; so that it would not have bin difficult for us to have beaten those we
were engaged with by this re-enforcement, if on a sudden we had not bin called
off to run to the succor of Sempronius and Publius. But there happened two or
three strange accidents in a moment, which soon lost us the advantage we had
gained at first; for Mago Barsa, with six thousand horse, issued forth of an
ambush where Hannibal had placed them, in moorish places covered with Willows
and Poplars, and charge our rear which Publius commanded, so unexpectedly, that
that Illustrious Roman was soon abandoned by his own forces; upon which he
endeavored to fall into the battle where Sempronius was; but whilst these two
Generals were fighting with extraordinary valor, it began of a sudden to
snow, and a strong Wind arose which blevv the snow in the face and eyes of
our Soldiers, so that all these disadvantages, together with the prodigious
valor of Hannibal, frustrated the courageous attempts of Sempronius and
Publius, and caused our Army to retire with a loss sufficiently considerable.
It Is true, this Victory cost our Enemies dear; for if Hannibal lost abundance
of men in his main battle, his left wing was not much more happy, where
Fabius, Servilius, Cato, and Lentulus, fought vigorously; and we had without
doubt utterly defeated the right, had not we also had our particular
misfortune. For after Scipio had performed the gallantest actions that could be
done by man, saved the life of Pyneus, vvounded Ducarion, who was an
Insubrian of quality, and commanded the forces of his own Nation in Hannibals
Army, and after he had also taken the King of the Allobroges prisoner, he
resolved to go where Hannibal was said to be fighting, presuming that was
the place where the Romans most needed succor. In order to which commanding
Flavius to carry Braveus to our Camp, and to take a thousand horse to guard him
thither, he endeavored to charge the Enemies body; but he was of a sudden
surprised to see twenty Elephants in the front, like so many forts or hideous
Bulwarks. We endeavored to make our Javelotiers on horseback advance against
them, because we had no infantry to goad those beasts, and drive them by that
means against our Enemies; for it was not very easy for us to kill them: but
this was impossible to be done, for their terrible bulks so affrighted our
horse, that they could not be made approach them. Wherefore we were constrained
to draw off: and being forced to fight to open our selves a passage, we could
not reach where we intended, till our Army was retreating in sufficient
disorder. It Is impossible for me to represent to you the grief we resented for
this inprosperous enterprise; and indeed, being almost all wounded, for a good
time we thought only of lamenting our unhappiness, without considering to get
our wounds dressed.

It is not necessary I should tell you the particulars of our loss, or that
Cato and the King of Illyria were taken prisoners by the Enemies, and
afterward exchanged for the King of the Allobroges (whom Flavius had conducted
to the Camp with very much dexterity and valor) and Ducarion, whom Aemylius
had likewise caused to be conducted thither; it is sufficient, Madam, you have
bin informed in what manner we gave battle at Trebia, and how the Romans were
unfortunately overcome, notwithstanding the great actions of Scipio and
Aemylius, and all our Illustrious Gallants that followed them, and intimated
them in that famous occasion. Publius and Sempronius performed wonders there,
and this latter quitted the resentment he had kept against his Colleague, after
the loss of the battle; for he had kept it indeed (notwithstanding his civility
to Scipio) by reason of the words which Publius answered him in the Council of
War; and he also caused Publius to quit the sentiment which he still retained;
for he went to visit him at his Tent, desired his pardon for not having
followed his opinion, and protested to him with more respect then his dignity
and fierceness seemed to permit, that it was to go against Rome, to go against
the opinion of such a Roman as Publius. The Illustrious Father of Scipio
received the complement of Sempronius, with very many testimonies of
acknowledgement and esteem, and having returned his civilitie, they went both
together to encourage their Soldiers who were still terrified, and to put all
things in a readiness, that they might stoutly repel the Carthaginians, in case
they should attempt to fall upon our Works. But for that the losses they
suffered were not inferior to ours, they had no thought to pursue us. After
this there passed nothing memorable, till the Creation of the new Consuls, who
were the Fathers of Flaminius and Servilius. But, Madam, not to insist
punctually in relating things you are unquestiably not ignorant of, since all
the world knows them, and not to detain you with describing the losses we
suffered in Italy; I am only to tell you, that after the battle of Trebia,
Publius prepared himself to go to his Government of Spain, where his brother
Cnaeus was arrived long since.

Scipio's sorrow was redoubled, when he considered that he was going to be
further removed from the Aemilia; and because he saw it was impossible for him
to go to Rome, he writ to that fair person, and encharged Fabius with his
Letter, using all the motives he thought capable to cause him to make the
greatest diligence and speediest return, because he knew he would bring him an
answer from Aemilia, that divine Lady having had the goodness to pass him a
promise to that purpose. And accordingly Scipio had the satisfaction he hoped
for; He found in Aemylia's Letter very many evidences of her esteem, and could
discern in it a certain tenderness which that discreet Virgin had as it were
obscured in terms that seemed to be only modest and obliging. By which means,
of all the inquietudes wherewith the violent passion that possessed him, is
usually accompanied, he resented at that time only that which was caused by
absence.

In the name of the Gods, Laelius (interrupted Nadalia) repeat us those two
Letters; for I confess, I passionately desire to hear a kind one of the
Illustrious Emilia. Sincerely, fair Nadalia (answered he) I am sorry I cannot
satisfy you at this time; but I protest to you, that I did not read Emilia's
answer often enough to be able to remember it, because it happened that I did not
see that of Scipio. But be not dissatisfied, Madam, I beseech you; for in the
Narration I am to make, happened so many different events, that there will be
also in it Letters of as many different strains. After these words, observing
Nadalia has no more to interrupt him with, he pursued his discourse in this
manner.

I am telling you, Madam, that Scipio upon his departure from Italy, resented
only the inquietude that absence gives passionate Lovers; and I can moreover
assure you, that he was not discontented to hear that Varro and Minutius were
so highly ingraciated with the people, that they might reasonably pretend to
the most considerable offices. For we understood that as wounded as they were,
they desired, or at least made semblance to desire that they might be carried
to Sempronius's Camp before he fought the battle of Trebia, that the people
withstood their purpose, admired their generosity, and according to the genius
of other Nations, augmented a certain blind and indiscreet ardor they were
before possessed with; for persons who had lately dazzled their e^es by something
that surprised them. We also understood that after the loss of that battle,
they had given great sums of money toward the levying of forces, and in brief,
had omitted nothing that might promote their advancement to some splendid
dignity, so to cover the obscurity of their descent. And you shall hear, Madam,
in the sequel of my discourse, that they attained that, but too soon for the
misfortune of Rome, whereunto their ambition aspired. I shall omit to tell you
with what preparations Publius departed from Italy, as well as the particular
circumstances of his voyage, there being none remarkable enough in it to
deserve your attention. When we were arrived in Spain (for you may judge,
Madam, I may speak in that manner, and was with my Illustrious friend) we
understood Himilcon was set forth from Carthage with a good number of ships,
and was coming to re-enforce the Naval Army of our Enemies, of which he was
Commander; upon Publius resolving to oppose Himilcon, left the other Army to
his brother Cnaeus to withstand Asdrubal, Barsa, and appointed Scipio and me
his Lieutenants General, Caeneus had already his Son, surnamed Nasica, and a
Roman Knight named Martius.

You have without doubt heard by fame, with what success the Scipio fought in
Spain, and you cannot but know that under those Illustrious Romans, our Eagles
flew there both by Sea and Land, the Carthaginian Forces being not able to stop
them. You also know, that Hamilcon and Asrubal were beaten, that Publius and
Cnaeus conquered a part of Spain, that they founded the City of Taragona there,
and lastly made alliances very advantageous to the Romans. But for that perhaps
you have not known the particular actions of Scipio, I should be obliged to
make you a relation of them, if I did not think it more requisite to assure you
in few words, that he was the person that contributed most to the acquisition
of the Victories which the Romans gained, that he performed actions that filled
me with astonishment, and that he was several times in the Army of Cnaeus to
serve in it, and consequently render it victorious, when he had put that of his
Father in a posture not to fear the enterprises of the Enemies. And indeed it
was extremely necessary, that this young Hero should do all those great
actions to repair in some manner the losses we suffered in other places; for
our Armies had successes very contrary in Italy. When the fame of our Victories
was spread abroad in Rome, Rome was no more then a desolated City, it was in a
strange general consternation; the death of Flaminius, was publicly known
with the loss of his Army; and, in a word, tidings was merely brought thither
of the events of the battle at the Lake of Thrasymene, which I shall not relate
to you, being certain they are known throughout the whole world. I shall also
silently pass over, that at that time they were constrained to create a
Dictator, and that Fabius was the person chosen to that charge, namely the
Father of him that was amorous of Aemylia, who with the surname of Most-Great,
gained also that of the shield of the people of Rome.

These memorble passages are unknown to none, no more then that Minutius was
made General of the Horse of the Dictators Army, that he was afterward
equaliz'd to him in Authority, beaten by Hannibal, and relieved by the
Illustrious Fabius; and at length deposed himself from the Magistrates, and
would fight no longer but under the orders of the Dictator. Its also well known
that Fabius was called the Delayer, because instead of fighting Hannibal, he
still declined the encounter, but it was with a destructive design to our
enemies, whom he held besieged by possessing himself always of the high places
that commanded the plain. So that the Carthaginians being no longer able to
send forth parties to forage for provisions which they frequently wanted,
their wilely General was constrained to make use of the Oxen of his Army, for
opening a passage for his Army in the manner you have heard reported, and
posterity will without question admire. But, Madam, if we were surprised in
hearing of the advancement of Minutius, we were much more strangely at that of
Varro, who sometime after that I am speaking of, was to our unhappiness created
Consul with the Illustrious Father of Aemylia.

Scipio suddenly admired the capriciousness of our Nation, but being willing
afterward to excuse their proceeding, he told me with a sincere and heroical
generosity, that perhaps Varro had since our departure acquired the moderation
and other virtues he wanted at our being there, that at least he passionately
wished it was so, and that the people of Rome might not have cause to repent
the choice they had made. But, alas! we, and all the earth, too soon understood
that Varro was not at all amended, that he was always violent and void of
conduct, and that the headiness of his humor in a short time rendered the
plains of Cannae famous by the dreadful overthrow he occasioned the Roman
there. We no sooner understood that in Italy the two Consular Armies were to
unite to make one notorious encounter for the driving the Carthaginians from
thence; but Scipio determined to go thither. For seeing the affairs of Spain
were in a matter quiet, he could not continue there, and especially when he saw
that by passing into Italy, he might render some service to Lucius or Aemylius,
or at least might partake in the dangers they were going to adventure in.

Publius had a strange repugnance to suffer us to depart; but he consented to
it, being pressed by the entreaties of his Illustrious Son. Wherefore we
departed as soon as possibly we could, and omitted no diligence till we
rendered our selves at Lucius's Camp. I remember that in our first enterview,
the Illustrious father of Aemylia embraced Scipio a long time in his arms, and
then having caressed me almost in the same manner, he told us, the
inconsiderate humor of Varro was more formidable to him then the valor of
Hannibal, and that in all probability that Roman would do more mischief to Rome
then all the Forces of Carthage. But as he was continuing his discourse, and
informing us of the state of affairs, Servilius, who had bin Consul the year
before, Aemylius, Regulus and Cato, entered into the room, and brake off the
conversation by the civilities and caresses they made to us and Lucius, gave
way for us to receive. We were afterward astonished to hear, that the next
morning the battle was to be given, and that Varro wished for fight with as
much impatience as the Great Fabius had avoided it with wisdom. But, in brief,
it could not be avoided, but all the Soldiers of the Plebeian Consul (so they
styled Varro) were absolutely for what their Chief desired, apparently incited
to it by the false glory of their insolent Captain, and the false-apprehended
limidity of the Illustrious Lucius. What need I tell you, Madam, since all the
world knows it is but too true, that the bad genius of Rome, and the temerity
of Varro caused us to give that fatal battle, and suffer those dreadful losses,
which without doubt posterity will not hear of but with astonishment? Yes,
Madam, we gave that bloody battle; and as if the good fate of Carthage had not
bin well enough seconded by the adventurous blindness of Varro, the subtilties
of Hannibal must needs bear a part in that disasterous victory. For he drew up
his forces in such a manner, that ours were exposed to the disadvantages of the
wind and sun, by which they were so cruelly inconvenienc'd, that we not only
could not overcome our enemies, nor so much as fight, but remained exposed to
their blows without knowing which way to ward them off. Not, but that for all
these inconveniences, Scipio surpassed himself, in performances exceeding all
belief, and that Aemylius did wonders, and that all the Illustrious Romans I
have mentioned to you, signalized themselves gloriously; but in fine, all their
endeavors were not capable to resist an Army of an hundred thousand
disciplined Veterans, conducted by a great Captain, and who besides all these
advantages, had all that situation of places for such bloody encounters could
afford. So that, Madam, in this fatal field, besides so many thousand of
Soldiers that perished, we lost an infinite number of Knights and Senators, we
lost Servilius who had bin Colleague with Flaminius; but, alas! that which
afflicted us most sensibly, was the loss of the Illustrious and unfortunate
Lucius, who was unfortunately slain in the rout. Ah! Madam, how can I recount
to you the circumstances of this deplorable death? The Illustrious Lucius
beholding all was lost on our side, resolved not to outlive this day; but yet
to dye gloriously, he sought out Hannibal to fight him, he thrnst himself
wherever he saw the greatest danger, and in a word, the greatness of his
courage made him perform actions little different from those of Scipio and
Aemilius. But, alas! how fatal was that excessive valor to him! For as this
great person was upon the point to charge Hannibal, his Horse was slain under
him, and not losing his judgment, he disentangled himself from the stirrups,
and fought on foot very vigorously, till at length he received three or four
wounds at the same time, which enforced him to retire out of the fight. We
presently received information of his misfortunne, and Scipio, Aemilius,
Sempronius, Regulus, and my self redoubled our endeavors to get to him and
relieve him. But as we were upon the point to do it, we were prevented by an
extreme strange and unhappy accident. For Lucius being wounded in the manner I
have told you, was sat down with his face turned toward the enemies, holding
his sword in his hand, which he still lift up as often as his faintness would
permit him: When Lentulus, who fought near that place, seeing him in so
deplorable a condition, alighted, and presented his Horse to him; Here, my Lord
(said he to him) make use of my horse to preserve a life so necessary to our
Republique. I thank you Lentulus (answered he faintly, and yet in a manner that
showed his gratitude) do you preserve your self from Rome? I beseech you, save
your self, and leave an unfortunate person to dye, who will not survive the
desolation of his Country. They who beheld Lentulus's action alighted also, to
go succor their Illustrious General, and likewise the Horsemen that were at
some distance doing the same, upon a mistake that they were commanded to fight
on foot (which was a case not without example) this strange and lamentable
accident happened just as we are approaching to Lucius, so that we suddenly
beheld above a thousand Horses loose, which made a horrible disorder, and were
an obstacle impossible for us to break through. Yet we endeavored to open our
selves a passage; but as we are using all our diligence to that purpose, a body
of our enemies Cavalry falling upon those of our Horsemen that were alight,
easily cut them in pieces, and afterward driving back both the Horsemen and
the Horses, and all that was in their passage, we were unhappily carried along
with the crowd; and had the grief to see that apparently, the body of Lucius
had bin trampled by the feet of the Horses. It is impossible, Madam, fully to
represent to you the greatness of the resentment of Scipio and Aemylius or what
they performed when despair came to be added to their ordinary valor; I shall
only tell you that they had undoubtedly perished, if that which was most likely
to contribute to their ruin had not saved them. For being left but about ten
or twelve thousand men of all our brave and numerous Army, we were soon
surrounded by that of Hannibal, who had still above fourscore thousand. Upon
which Sempronius and Appius desirous to preserve the remainder of our fortunate
Troops, cried out to Scipio and Aemylius, that they should not fight where they
did, but put themselves in the head of Romans that were left, and save them by
opening a passage through the enemies, and so recovering a way for their
retreat.

Scipio and Aemylius, either for that they were still capable of that Roman
constancy that induces to prefer the interest of our Country before all others,
or that their grief resembling their disposition, was more effective to carry
them to great actions, then unprofitable complaints, by adding the desire of
revenge to that of Glory; However it were, they put themselves in the head of
the ten or twelve thousand men I mentioned, and notvvithstanding the vvounds
they had already received, made themselves a passage with their svvords, and
carried their party to Cannusium, as the world has heard and highly commended
Sempronius for being the Author of that attempt. But, Madam, at Cannusium,
these two Illustrious Romans manifested all the tenderness of their souls, and
abandoned themselves wholly to grief, when the body of Lucius was brought to
them, which they had presently sent to Hannibal to demand. I say, when the body
of Lucius was brought to them, without denoting to you the circumstances of a
time which was wholly a time of affliction, I shall also omit to describe to
you the consternation that was seen at Rome; Cannusium, and all the Cities of
our allies, choosing rather to pass that over in silence which I should fall
infinitely short in representing, herein imitating a famous Painter, who drew a
vail over those countenances whose extreme sadness he believed beyond the power
of his Pensil to express. I presume you have known, Madam, that the ten
thousand men whom we led to Cannusium, with the common consent both of Officers
and Soldiers, chose the Illustrious Scipio to command them, and Appius with
him, because he was Scipoi's kinsman, and had bin, together with Sempronius,
author of the enterprise that saved them, as I have told you; and lastly,
because they would either preserve an order which resembled that of their usual
command, namely, the having of two Consuls which were two Generals, or to
favor Scipio, who they saw was considerably wounded. But for what reasons
soever it was, they chose Appius with his Illustrious Kinsman, although there
were then at Cannusium, an infinite number of persons considerable both for
their descents and employments; for excepting Varro, Fabius, Flaminius, and
Marcellus, who took their way toward Rome, all the remainder of brave and
Illustrious persons was retired to Cannusium with us. For Aemilias, Sempronius,
Fabius, Regulus, Cato, Leutulus, and too many others were there, but wounded as
well as we. It Is true, the Illustrious Scipio had little mind to think of his
cure, for his soul was wholly taken up with his own grief, and the apprehension
of that which he foresaw the adorable Aemilia would resent when the doleful
news of the death of her illustrious fore-father, should be reported to her.
Yet this extreme affliction did not absolutely hinder him from taking care of
the troops which were put under his conduct in so obliging a manner. And
indeed, when we were determining to cause the body of Lucius to be carried to
Rome, notice was brought us that diverse young Romans of chief quality resolved
to abandon Italy, and seek a Sanctuary in some remote Country; we were informed
Metellus was the author of that Cabal, and it was at his quarte^s that the
complotters were assembled. Upon which, Scipio, as all the world as all the
world has heard, went to Metellus's his lodgings, and being transported by his
grief, the greatness of his courage, and zeal for his Country, drew his sword
as he entered alone into a Hall where there were about forty men assembled, and
looking upon them one after another, with a fierce and scornful aspect, mixed
with terror and sorrow, I come hither (cried he to them) to know who those
unworthy persons are that intend to abandon Rome, and go seek and infamous
safety in another Country; I come to make them renounce so horrible a design;
or to punish them my self at this instant: and if you are all of this
detestable complot (added he, beholding them with greater fierceness, and
lifting up his arm) and will not alter your resolution, know I have drawn this
sword only against you, which I will never sheath till I have washed it in your
blood, till I have slain you all, and till I have revenged my Country. Yes
(added he again) I will kill you all, if you have taken up so infamous a
resolution as you are accused of; for if you are capable of such cowardises,
you will not without doubt be capable to resist ont Scipio all together.

He had scarce pronounced these words, but all the assembly was not only
astonished, but so terrified at them, that there was none of them that answer
(...) in the name of the rest. Our young Hero vva^ nevertheless not satisfied
by having frightened such a multitude; but perceiving that speaking to all, no
particular person thought himself obliged to answer; he advanced fiercely
toward Metellus, who was said to be the author of so black a desiggn; he
seized with one hand on his Coat of armor, and lifting up his sword with the
other; It Is to you, Metellus (cried he with a menacing accent) that I address,
as he that has engaged all this company in so detestable an enterprise; but you
must either perish at this moment (added he) or swear before the immortal Gods,
that you will cease to live before you will cease to serve Rome. Metellus was
much more terrified by this last action and words of Scipio, then he had bin by
his first menaces; so that seeing himself so straightly urged, he accordingly
swore at length, and after him all his companions swore also in the manner
that Scipio required.

After this action which made so great a report in the world, our Illustrious
Roman went to Aemilius's quarters, where he was visited by the principal
Officers of his Troops, who had bin there before to make there complements to
Aemilius upon the death of Lucius. Scipio received them with all the civility
that the public and his particular affliction could permit him; and having
afterward recommended to them the constancy of true Romans to their death, he
desired Appius, who also came to Emilius some moments after, to take care
alone of the Troops which they commanded, telling him there was a necessity
upon himself to go to Rome, in relation to an affair of highest importance. So
we departed the next morning from Cannusium, and caused the body of Lucius to
be carried to Rome, which we accompanied with all the Romans of quality,
whose wounds were not considerable enough to oblige them to keep the bed. But,
Madam, if I have not bin able to describe to you the affliction of Scipio and
Emilius; how is it possible for me to represent that which Claudia and her
adorable daughter resented upon our arrival? It Is beyond all the power of words
to do; and you may please only to let me tell you, that the constancy of
Claudia abandoned her in this occasion, that this desolate Lady was not capable
of remembering that at least the death of her Illustrious Lucius was glorious,
that as truly Romans as she was, she forgot for some time the losses of the
Common wealth, only to think of that of her own house, and in a word, that she
so absolutely resigned her self up to her sorrow, that she caused all those to
weep who endeavored to stop the flood of her tears. Not, that she presently
fell to violent weeping; for her grief was of such a nature, that it could not
so express it self; for she was seen to embrace Emilius, and close him fast in
her arms during more then a quarter of an hour, without being able either to
speak or lament. Nor did she let her dear Son go, before she was several times
advertised that he was wounded; and as she beheld him retiring, that he might
not show her the excess of his affliction, Ah! my son (said she to him
lamentingly) you have now no longer a father! This, Madam, was all Claudia was
able to speak to Aemilius in that first interview. Scipio, who intended to make
a reverence to her, could not do it at first, so vigorously was he seized with
sorrow himself, because he perceived the adorable Aemilia was infinitely
afflicted; who being met in the passage by her Illustrious brother, they
embraced one another, and expressed so many tokens of a real dearness, and an
extreme affliction that all the spectators were yet more deeply affected with
it. How then, Madam, could Scipio be Master of his grief, since there was no
person in the company, but showed as much sadness, as if every one of them had
lost some very near relation in the person of Lucius. It must also be
confessed, that Aemylia alone might have drawn tears from persons that had the
least disposition to tenderness; for could any without being deeply affected,
have beheld a young and fair person, whose extreme grief appeared upon her
countenance only by a faint languor, which rendered it infinitely moving, and
yet withal made it evident, that she was far more sensibly sorrowful, then
those that express themselves in Acclamations and transport. Besides, Aemilia's
beauty being of a fair complexion, the brightness of it was undoubtedly
heighned by the mourning attire that is usually worn in the like occasions. So
that it was impossible, as I have said, to behold a person so fair and so
afflicted without, presently resenting all the motions of tenderness that
compassion and grief are capable to excite. But, Madam, it will be no
exaggeration to say, that the affliction of my Illustrious friend was beyond
all that others suffer in such losses; for he was not able to speak to Claudia,
when he made his reverence to her, though that Illustrious Lady embraced his
head a long time togegether, which he bowed down out of respect, and told him
that she lost much more in the death of Lucius then he believed, because he he
had bin loved by him above what he imagined. But, Madam, when this afflicted
Lover was to approach to Aemilia, he found it was impossible for him; so that
after having made a thousand offers which proved unprofitable, he was
constrained to go away without making a reverence to that afflicted beauty; so
true it is, that he could not be master of his grief, having cast his eyes upon
the divine countenance he was infinitely enamored of. When we departed from
Claudia's house, we went to that of my father, who losing not much time in
testifying to us the sensible joy he resented to see us return from a battle,
where it was believed all were perished, caused us presently to be led to a
bed, and having taken order for our wounds, and some convenient repast for us,
went forth of our Chamber to leave us to take repose. But, Madam, how little
was Scipio capable of keeping any! For his mind was wholly filled with Aemilia,
and his affliction. He sighed every other moment, and his sleep was interrupted
frequently by the image of that fair person; he believed every thing be beheld
looked gashly, and resented so lively a sorrow after the sight of that of
Aemilia, that he imagined all things had changed their aspect, or at least
ought to have changed it by the affliction of that divine person. Whereby,
Madam, this grief of Scipio destroyed that little health his travels and wounds
had left him, and cast him into a long and languishing disease, during which we
had either hope or fear according to the different relations that persons which
visited him brought him concerning Aemilia, though without knowing the high
interest he had therein. But at length we knew by the amendment of his
distempers, that there was some mitigation in the sorrow of Claudia and
Aemilia; and as if Love had been as well Master of his body, as it was
certainly of his heart, his health returned as soon as Aemilius was in a
condition to go and see him; inasmuch as he gave him assurances of his
happiness, by confirming to him in the name of Claudia, the promise that Lucius
had made him. Claudia visited him some days after her self; for besides that,
we were lodged at my fathers house, the Ladies not only made no difficulties
at this time to visit those that were returned wounded from the Army; but they
wholly addicted themselves for a good time to that pious employment; so that
according to what was told us by those that saw it, it was the most sad
spectacle in the world to meet frequently companies of Ladies, and those of the
most Illustrious, coming forth of one house drying their tears, and entering
into another, where they were sure to find a new occasion to weep: for you may
judge, Madam, such visits were not made without the recounting of some of the
particulars of that fatal battle we had lately lost; But if Claudia's visit
corroborated a health that Aemilius had in a manner revived, I may say the
adorable Aemilia absolutely confirmed it by an obliging answer she returned to
a Letter writ to her by Scipio, as soon as he was able to do it. The amorous
Scipio had written with all the passion that he could express in keeping
nevertheless a certain decorum, which the condition affairs were then in,
obliged him to observe more exactly then a contrary conjuncture could: for if a
time of rejoicing seems in a manner to be consecrated to love, and consequently
to give us a certain liberty of expressing the sentiments that noble passion
inspires us with, a time of mourning is destinated only for tears; and it
seems to be irregular and unsuitable to speak of other then sad subjects, and
such as serve not to feed the miserable passion that is then predominant, and
that with the consentment of the sufferers. But Rome was not in this
consternation so long a time, as it was apparent she would have been; for
intelligence was brought, that Hannibal was gone to Capua in stead of
prosecuting his Victory, and that in Spain the two Scipios, Publius and Cnaeus
had almost utterly defeated the Carthaginians, with the confederates they had
in that Country. My Illustrious friend received this last news with extreme
satisfaction, and moderated the regret he had for not partaking in that
Victory, when he understood his brother and his kinsman Nasica had highly
signalized themselves as well as the brave Martius, for whom he had already
many sentiments of esteem and friendship. But as it seems, that Illustrious
persons are never unhappy by halves, this news that Scipio received, served
only to suspend his affliction for a time, to the end his mind might be more
sensible of the grief, which he was afterward to be cruelly assaulted with.
For within a short space after the tidings of the death of Publius, and that of
Cnaeus were brought him; and he also led their Armies, whereby defeated, after
gaining of the last battle they fought, if Martius had not preserved them by an
admirable conduct. Verily, the constancy of Scipio was found too weak to
support this last stroke of misfortune; and this Illustrious Roman, whose soul
was as tender in these kind of accidents, as unmovable in other occasions,
could not think of the loss new befallen him, without lamenting in so sensible
a manner, that it moved the hearts of all that came to see him, and evidently
discovered the greatness of his affliction. But when I was alone in his
Chamber, he abandoned himself much more to his grief; for walking up and down
there, he recalled into his mind all circumstances that could augment it, he
reflected on the extraordinary merit of Publius, and discoursed to me of it,
and then recounting a thousand testimonies of dearness he had received from
him, he suddenly stopped, and lifting up his eyes to heaven, dispatch, cruel
destiny (cried he) accomplish thy fury, unmerciful fate! and since it is not
enough to afflict me to make me see Italy ruinated by Hannibal, to make me see
Lucius dead, Aemilia afflicted, and destroy Publius and Cnaeus in Spain, while
I am at Rome, to the end they may not receive the assistance they might require
of him. I would not interrupt these complaints of Scipio, least I should
augment the violence of his grief by causing him to restrain it; so that
walking with him, I observed that after having a little mused upon what he had
sad said, he lift up his eyes again to Heaven, and following the motions of
piety that all the world admires in him, he sighed, and then cast down his
eyes, as if to desire pardon of the Gods for his transport, for to submit
himself entirely to their providence. Aemilius about this time entered into the
Chamber where we were, not standing upon the caution that forbids persons that
have endured great losses to make visits of this nature. For his own grief did
not hinder him from resenting that of Scipio, of which he gave so apparent
tokens, that he seemed by an undesired gratitude to repay our Illustrious
Mourner what he before received from him; and indeed I think never two persons
gave testimonies of a real dearness with more regret in the like occasions. Yet
they could have no great conversation together, by reason of the great company
that began that day to visit Scipio, who came so numerously during seven or
eight days, that it was impossible in that time for his best friends to
entertain him in the manner they desired; for not only men of quality came
thither, but likewise almost all the Ladies, those that were young and fair,
being accompanied by some relation of elder age. Yet Claudia was not there,
either for that her mourning dipens'd with her for making that visit, or by
reason of some indisposition that hindered her; but she sent every day to
enquire of his health, in so obliging a manner, that without doubt he preferred
those complements above all the honors that accompanied the visits that were
made him by others. Wherefore Scipio was extremely desirous to wait upon her
with his remerciments, and see her afflicted daughter, which she did, as soon
as seemliness could permit him.

Aemylius, who came that day to our house, went thither with him; and for that
at his going in, he was told Claudia could not be seen without disturbance to
her, he had Scipio to the Chamber of his Sister, where he tarried not long but
left him. This passionate Lover notwithstanding his grief, could not hinder
himself from beholding Aemylia with all the tokens of a violent Love, so that
this discreet Lady fearing least he should mention a passion to her that was
not very conformable to her present state, beheld him with an air that
sufficiently showed the greatness of her affliction, and having suffered some
tears to fall from her fair eyes: Alas! Scipio (said he to him) your presence
would soon remind me of the death of the unfortunate Lucius, could I be
unnatural enough to forget it; for though you had not lately suffered a less
resembling mine, yet there are many circumstances which would not cease to
represent to me the greatness of my misfortune, It Is true, Madam, answered he
sighing) that we have suffered equal losses. But, Madam, (added he) with an air
extremely passionate) since they are inseparable, I find so much sweetness in
being miserable while you are not happy, that the resemblance certainly
lightens part of my affliction. Ah! Scipio (replied she) you consider not well
what you say, for if you reflected both on the public and the private
affliction that we ought to resent, you would unquestionably not imagine there
was any thing left to lighten part of your grief. Ah! Madam (answered he) you
little understand me, if you can believe I speak before you without considering
what I say; and you little imagine what passes in my heart, when you believe
that grief alone can entirely possess it. For indeed, Madam, when I revolve in
my mind the desolation of Italy, the consternation of Rome, the death of Lucius
whom I honored infinitely, and that of a father* who was infinitely dear to
me, I should without question dye with grief, if I did not immediately consider
there was something left me more estimable then I^aly, Rome, and all the
Kingdoms of the earth, something more dear then Lucius, then Publius, and then
all my relations and friends; which is, Madam, (continued he, after having
beheld her after a manner perfectly passionate and moving) the passion which I
have for the fairest person in the world. Yes, Madam (added he again,
preventing Aemylia from interrupting him) that passion alone makes the felicity
of my life, and being not dependant on the Empire of Fortune, I may say the
dominion of that inconstant Goddess extends not to the greatness of all my
happinesses, and that it is impossible for her to hinder me from living and
dying happy, because she cannot hinder me from living and dying the adorer of
Aemilia.

These last words of Scipio mightily perplexed the fair person that heard them,
because if she considered 'twas a lover perfectly illustrious that pronounced
them, and that with infinite respect, and a passion generally approved by all
her relations, she withal feared to offend against virtue, or at least against
seemlinesse, if she should be capable to hear a discourse concerning other
subjects then that of her affliction; wherefore she took a way of answering
Scipio without wholly checking his sentiments which she could not condemn, or
infringing a certain severity she believed her self obliged to observe during
this time of sadness. But as she was going to speak, one came to tell Scipio
from Aemilius, that Claudia was awaked and would be glad to see him, so that
this passionate Lover was constrained to part from the person he loved, without
knowing her sentiments upon what he had spoken. Indeed when he made her a
profound reverence, and beheld her eyes to consult her mind from thence, he had
the satisfaction not to see any signs of hatred in them, and he was willing to
flatter himself by believing, that if he observed not the contrary passion in
them, it was grief alone that hindered it to appear in the places were it self
had taken up its jurisdiction. This flattering thought tempered part of his
sorrow, and even inspired him afterward with more confident sentiments then
his affliction seemed to permit him: for he came suddenly to imagine, that
perhaps Claudia might consent to the consummation of his marriage forthwith,
that in probability she would not insist on the severe policy of Lucius, and
that especially the absence of Pynaeus was a very favorable conjuncture for
it. Besides, that if that King, whose sole interest had occasioned the
deferring of his happiness, was gone into Illyria to make new Levies there; his
other Rivals were as little able to prejudice his pretensions, Fabius having
not yet declared his, and Varro reduced to a condition, disabling him to
proceed with his former addresses. Upon which considerations the passionate
Scipio determined to request Claudia to consent to render him happy: but as soon
as he was entered into her Chamber with Aemilius, he was was far from being
able to declare his design, his grief, which had been only suspended by the
presence of Aemilia, resuming its former violence from the sight of that of
Claudia; so that the conversation was extremely sad, and being only employed
upon the subject of over-throws, deaths and desolations, it filled the
imagination of the three afflicted persons that were engaged in it,
notwithstanding but the images of Urns, Ashes, Tombs and Funerals. But Scipio
was no sooner come away with Aemylius from Claudia, then Aemilia returned again
into his mind, and dispelled thence by her luster part of that gloomy humor, a
mournful discourse had possessed him with, so that he was again in a condition
of thinking of the means to render himself happy, and resolved to discover his
sentiments to Aemilius, as the only person who might best do him a favor in
this important occasion. Yet he received not from him that satisfaction he
desired; for Aemilius weighing the matter without passion, answered him, that
it was not time to think of celebrating his marriage, that though the interest
of Pynaeus were not annexed to that of Rome, their families had lately suffered
too considerable losses, to constrain the deferring the accomplishment of such
a Treaty. To which he added so much reason, that Scipio was convinced of what
he alleged; besides that of a sudden this generous Lover came to think that he
was obliged to go and revenge the death of Publius, and acquire a glory that
might not only encourage him to demand in a more noble way that of the
possessing of Aemilia, but give occasion to Rome for some of those
extraordinary rejoycings that seemed necessary to a marriage of that
importance. In which heroical design being fully confirmed, he departed, and
with all speed betook himself to demand the Government, and command of the
Armies of Spain, and obtained the same, as you have unquestionably heard,
thongh he; had not yet arrived to the age required thereunto by our Laws. Thus,
Madam, we are going to see Scipio marching to Victory with a more firm and
glorious place, and we shall soon see him a conqueror, because we shall see him
General; and moreover, we shall remark what has hitherto bin unknown, that love
will have a greater share in the brave actions he is going to perform, then
either ambition or the interest of his Country. I shall not detain you, Madam,
with any particulars preceding our departure, as the equipage of my friend,
which showed both his magnificence and his affliction, the Levies he caused to
be made to recruit the Troop; which were scarce any thing more then the
Relics of an Army, nor with the last conversation he made with Aemilia. I
shall content my self with telling you that their separation was not without
expressions infinitely dear and extremely heroical, and that Scipio left the
Palace of Claudia with so great regret, and yet with so noble an ardor, that it
was not difficult to remark in his countenance a mixture of fierceness, love,
and sorrow. After which, he speedily took order for all things requisite to his
voyage; and having had the goodness to tell me he would give me the command of
one of the two Armies; we departed from Rome embarked, and without the arrival
of anp accident that deserves relation, happily landed with thirty ships of War
at the Port of Emporia, from whence we went to Taragona, the to hold a Council
of War, and receive the Ambassadors of our Allies.

Nevertheless, these Military affairs did not hinder Scipio from resenting a
sensible sorrow, when he considered how far remote he was from Aemilia, and in
a Country where his Father and Uncle had bin slain. But if this circumstace of
place reduced into his mind the death of those two men, it was more lively
represented to him by the presence of his young brother, and that of his
kinsman Nasica, whom we found at Tarrogona. It was in this City that Scipio
intended to add to the immortal glory of Publius and Cnaeus, the magnificence
of Monuments, which he did with so much sorrow, that I esteemed his affliction
infinitely more valuable then the marble and porpliry which he caused to be
employed in the Work. Nevertheless, if, as I said, the Offices of a General did
not hinder him from performing the duty of a Son, his piety did as little
hinder him from discharging that of Captain of an Army. Wherefore he drew his
Forces into the field, as soon as he judged himself in a posture to march
against Asdrubal, who had made a confederacy with the Kings of Celtiberia, and
the Illergetes, and was moreover advantaged by the valor of Lucius Prince of
Celtiberia, who was deeply enamoured on the Princess of the Illergetes, for
whose sake he was come into Spain. Hereupon Scipio resolved to fight those
three Confederates, whose Army was indeed gallant and numerous, and left the
Naval Forces to be commanded by me, with a satisfaction that was so^n abated by
the necessity of our separation. I should have a thousand things to tell you of
the great actions performed by this admirable General, were they not already
sufficiently published by fame, And I might also tell you by the way, that I
had the happiness to give chase to all the Carthaginian ships that appeared
upon the Coast which I guarded, and at length we gave battle to Himilcon, in
which I came off not ingloriously. But, Madam* neither was any thing that I
performed, or the young Scipio, N^si^a, Martius, and Syllarus, though persons
of eminent valor, in any measure comparable to the actions of our Hero: he
beat Asdrubal, took prisoner Mangonius King of the Illergetes, and in spite of
the opposition of Lucius (who is one of the valiantest Princes of the world,
and was dangerously wounded in this encounter) cut in pieces part of their
Army, put the other to flight, and to complete the terror of the Spaniards,
resolved upon the siege of their capital City, the new Carthage, which was
without doubt one of the fairest, richest, and strongest Cities of Europe. I
being at that time not far distant from Scipio, he was pleased to require my
judgment upon the resolution he had made, in order to which I was no sooner
come to him upon his summons, but he called a Council of War. But we scarce
assembled to deliberate what course to take in this important enterprise, but
we beheld a man enter, whose sadness presently affected Scipio, and caused him
to advance toward the door of the chamber to enquire the cause of his coming,
and his melancholy. What intelligence do you bring us Valerius, said he to him?
(for he was a person that belonged to Emilius) Is it any bad news of Claudia,
your Master, or -- he was not able to pronounce the name of Emilia before one
that came from her, and sad too. I left Claudia and Aemilia in good health
(answered he) but, my Lord, the case is not so well with my Master, who is
wounded and prisoner in no Carthage. How? Aemylius prisoner, and wounded?
(cried Scipio with great surprise, although with less grief then he would have
resented, if he had not before heard good tidings of Aemylia) It Is most
certain, he is so, my Lord, (answered he) and to tell you in few words the
circumstances of this misfortune, you may please to know that my Master would
not go with you from Rome, fearing least the alliance which is shortly to be
between you, might induce you to offer him the most eminent employments even to
the prejudice of Laelius; for which reason not to cast you into the necessity
of being deficient either in relation to love or friendship, he would not
discover to you that he intended to serve under you, and staid till you had
given your friend and your relations the most important charges before he would
come to join with you; And he no sooner understood that Laelius was to command
the Naval Army, and that you had also disposed of the eminentest places, but he
departed from Rome, though not till after he had acquitted himself in a combat
with the Prince of Macedonia for the interests of Papyria. But, my Lord, we
accomplished not our voyage so happily as we began it; for about seven or eight
days since, we were set upon by a party of Carthaginians, when we had but three
or four hours journey to reach your Army. Although my Master had only some
Officers of his house, and two or three slaves, yet he would not yield himself,
but with admirable valor for a long while resisted a body of sixty or eighty
horse. Nevertheless it behoved at length to give way to number; Aemylius was
wounded, taken, and led to Carthage, where he is very well accommodated, but
extreme vigilantly guarded, because the Carthaginians having learnt who he is,
resolve not to deliver him either for exchange or ransom, but to keep him, in
order to advantage themselves by him in making a composition, in case your
valor reduce them to that extremity. We shall, perhaps, have other means to
free Aemylius (answered Scipio) and since ransom or exchange cannot avail for
his liberty (continued he, suffering himself to be transported by the greatness
of his courage) I will my self go break his fetters, maugre the forces of our
enemies, and the rampants of Carthage.

After these words, he remitted Valerius to the care of ^lavius; and without
staying to inquire in what manner he had escaped, he turned toward the
Officers that were assembled in his Chamber, and told them with a fierce and
ardent aspect, that the siege of Carthage was resolved upon, and that he would
either perish or win that City the same day he attaqued it.

At these words all the company silently looked upon him, the valor of Scipio,
and the greatness of the enterprise holding their minds in suspense what they
should answer; whereupon our famous General again confirming what he had said,
all the Officers consented with him, not being able to believe him capable of
attempting what he could not execute. In the mean time, Martius, who had not
bin at Scipio's quarters, because he was at that time employed in preparing all
conveniences for a journey to Rome (for, Madam, he was not in a condition fit
for service, and had received in the last skirmish a wound with a javelin in
the right arm) Martius, I say, was astonished when the procedure of Scipio was
related to him; and for that he well knew the temper of that young Hero, and
admired his rare qualities, he was so apprehensive lest he should impatiently
precipitate himself into some great danger, that being of more years then
Scipio, and the services he had performed warranting him the liberty to speak
his sentiments in the like occasions, he writ to him that he ought not to
suffer himself to be transported any more by that noble ardor which had already
gained him glory enough to merit immortally, entreated him to remember that he
was General of an Army, that it was no longer free for him to act as a
Volunteer, and that in a word be ought not to be prodigal of a blood
illustrious and absolutely necessary to the Commonwealth.

Scipio, who had his heroical qualities, conjoined those of civility and
candor, by which he was led to interpret things according to the intention of
their Author, received this Letter of Martius with many demonstrations of
friendship, and answered to it in these terms.

Scipio to Martius.
DId you understand all the power of Love, I could easily justify my procedure
to you by naming to you the person whom I must see at Carthage; and by that
means disco^ering to you the secret of my heart. After which I presum you would
not condemn me, but rather pardon the ardor which you now reproach me with,
though in a very obliging strain, and after the manner which I judged as
ingenious as it is obliging.


All the company being withdrawn when Scipio received the Letter of Martius,
and testified his intention to answer it, I was left alone in his Chamber with
the Officer who waited for the answer which was to be returned to his Master;
so that Scipio, after he had written it, read it aloud to me, and told me, he
did not judge it meet to name the person whom he said he was to see in
Carthage, for fear lest the matter should come too soon to the knowledge of
Claudia and Aemylia. But when we were alone, he entertained me with the
violence of his passion, telling me of the grief Aemilia would resent, if she
came to understand the misfortune of her brother before the taking of Carthage;
and afterward discoursing to me concerning the siege of that City; Wonder not,
Laelius, (said he to me) that I resolve to win Carthage in one day, though it
be very strong and seem even absolutely impregnab^e; you know (continued he)
that it is encompassed on one side with a little bay of the Sea, that on the
other there is a Lake that washes the foot of the walls, that the Lake and the
Bay meet together, so that there is only a tongue of Land that hinders it from
being wholly encompassed: Now you may easily enter with your ships into the
Port, and block up the City toward the Sea, and I will cause Syllanus to
possess himself of the Tongue of Land; and I conceive (added he) I shall win
the City on that side toward the Lake. But it is not foardable (interrupted
I). It seems not to be so (answered he) and all the world believes it is not,
which will be to my advantage; for the walls that stand toward those ^aters,
being neither high nor well guarded, it will not be difficult for me to employ
a Scalado there with good success. Trebellius has positively assured me of what
I now tell you; you know he is not often mistaken in such affairs, but after
having a long time bin the disciple of the famous Archimedes, he has had the
curiosity to see all the strongest places in Europe, whose situation he has
exactly observed. Besides, his skill not hindering him from being courageous,
he has desired me to permit him to follow me in this occasion, which leaves us
no reason to doubt of the truth of his words. Yet, I have heard the contrary
reported (replied I) to what you are assured of. The persons then that informed
you (answered he) made not the same observations with Trebellius, since they
have not told you that the Bay and Lake joining together, the latter is greatly
augmented by the flux of the Sea, but afterward decereasing by the ebb, there
is not left water enough in it to hinder it from being fordeable.

Scipio having added many other things tending to convince me, after all (added
he) ought not something extraordinary to be done for the deliverance of
Emilia's brother, and the taking of a City which is not only the chief of all
Spain, but into which many persons of greatest quality of several Nations are
retired with all their wealth, and whatever they account precious? Which being
achieved, it will not be difficult for us afterward to reward our Soldiers,
and gain the affection of the several Nations by gentle treatments of their
Sovereigns or Magistrates which we shall without doubt find in Carthage. This,
Madam, was the conversation I had with Scipio, concerning the memorable
enterprise; after which we parted, and the next morning I took my way to my
Ships, as Martius did his to Rome. But not to be tedious to you, I shall
proceed to tell you, that Scipio having ordered all things necessary with
extreme diligence, he assaulted that important place three days after he had
taken the resolution to do it. And he observed the same order I mentioned to
you. For as I had the good fortune, in spite of all resistance made me, to
enter into the Port of Carthage, and Syllanus was come in the head of his Troop
to assault the walls of it by Land, Scipio some time after the reflux of the
Sea, sent us order to redouble our storm, so to draw the principal forces of
the enemies to those parts, and consequently to weaken that by which he
designed to gain it. Syllanus and I had no sooner obeyed him, being seconded by
Nasica, and the young Scipio, but our Hero standing upon the Lake at the head
of the troops which he had chosen; My friends (cried he with a sprightly and
fierce aspect) I should be injurious to you, if I should speak much; words are
needless to to men of courage, therefore I shall only tell you that you are
going where your General shall be your company, and the witness of your valor.
Let us on then, my friends, let us win Carthage; and I promise you the taking
of this City shall render us Masters of all Spain, make Africa tremble, and
crown us with immortal glory. He had no sooner spoke these few words, but he
seized upon a Ladder, and then casting himself into the Lake, incited by his
example a thousand brave persons to do the same. It Is true, he always preceded
them, and being arrived at the foot of the walls, planted the first Ladder
against them; and then drawing his sword, and covering himself with his shield,
he began to ascend with an aspect that no doubt encouraged the hearts of all
those that followed him. The walls were not so unguarded, but that they were
suddenly bordered with Soldiers at the first allarm that was given there, so
that our valiant* General likewise redoubled his forces as the Carthaginians
did their, and always supporting his shield with a strong arm, continued to
mount up with an heroical audacity, notwithstanding a shower of arrows and
stones falling upon him; and though he beheld a hundred Ladders overturned on
each side. At length he got up, and as a Soldier was stretching forth his arm
to strike at him with his sword, and hinder him from casting himself upon the
walls, the courageous General prevented him, and by a great back blow struck
off both arm and sword down into the Lake. This remarkable blow so terrified
those that beheld it, that Scipio had time to leap upon the wall, before they
were well enough recovered out of their amazement to hinder him, and afterward
casting those down into the City that came to oppose his passage, he soon saw
himself backed by Trebellius, Digitius, and above twenty others whom his example
had emboldned; so that the fight becoming very disorderly* upon the wall, the
Romans found fewer obstacles in ascending it; after which the Illustrious
Scipio did not delay to cast himself into the City, designing to gain one of
the Gates, and open it to Syllanus,. Yet he found great resistance in the
execution of his purpose; for the Prince of Celtiberia ran thither, being
followed by a thousand selected Spaniards, who signalizing themselves in this
encounter, sufficiently justified the choice which the valiant Lucius had made
of them. But as lightning shafts, all that seems to make a strong resistance,
our invincible Conqueror beat down all that opposed his passage; he strikes,
thrusts, kills, wounds Lucius, gains a Gate, causes the Romans to enter, who
suddenly setting up a great shout, displayed our Eagles in the conquered City,
and made the air resound with the glorious name of Scipio. The Governor of
Carthage, with whom I was engaged (for I had landed, and was so fortunate as to
get into the City after I had gained the Port) went to relieve Lucius, and
repel our forces; but after a very great resistance he was taken prisoner, with
the Prince of Celtiberia, who caused us to admire his valor, and would
without doubt have occasioned himself to be slain, had not his svvord bin
suddenly broken, and he found himself enclosed amidst a thousand Soldiers. But
I need not, Madam, particularize to you the actions of that memorable day,
since all the world has known that the valor of Scipio equaled the sublimest
degree of that of the most recorded Heroes, and that this famous Roman raised
himself afterward an admiration for those virtues which are esteemed much
more then that prodigious valor. For there is a passage I am going to tell
you, which more deserves our vvonder then what I have hitherto related; and we
cannot but with astonishment consider a change in Scipio, which most
certainly is more to be extolled then the noblest constancy. For scarce was
Carthage in the Roman power, and the brother of Aemylia at liberty, but our
Illustrious Roman appeared to be a Carthaginian; this young Conqueror, so
fierce, ardent and terrible, becomes of a sudden so gentle, so moderate, and so
full of svveetness, that nothing is more certain then that the Spaniards and
Africans began infinitely to love him, as soon as they ceased to fear him. But
they shortly after accompanied their love with veneration greater then what
uses to be entertained for men; which was not without cause, since our Hero
did things which men are not accustomed to do. No doubt, Madam, you have heard,
that the Kings of Celtiberia, and the Illergetes, with the Queens their wives,
being followed by the most considerable of the Spaniards, and five and twenty
or thirty fair prisoners, were presented to Scipio, and received by him with a
civility so great, that they resented pleasure in the bitterness of their
fortune, and offered to their Conqueror that which certainly an Emperor of the
Romans, or the greatest conqueror in the world ought not to have hoped, and in
a word, that which could not be rendered with justice to any other then our
Grand Scipio, who unquestionably showed himself perfectly worthy of it, since
in the ardor of a most flourishing youth, he placed himself above the reach of
the most violent passions, and whatever is most charming in them, especially in
an age where the intemperate heat of blood usually favors tumultuous passions.
It Is unknown to none, Madam, that our generous Roman would not suffer himself
to be proclaimed King of Spain, and answered those that termed him by that
title, He was a Roman Citizen, and that he only used his sword for glory, and
the advantage of his Country. But if the moderation of a Conqueror was
esteemed, who out of a perfectly heroical generosity had refused a potent
Kingdom; the Ladies that were Prisoners much more admired his virtue, when they
found a Protector in a young Conqueror, and were treated by him with an aspect
that gave them assurance that the fairest among them were in absolute ^afety.

Moreover, Liberty was immediately granted to them, as also to all the
Spaniards; but it was after such a manner, that without doubt gained their
hearts, and so sensibly obliged them, that it may be said Scipio captived all
those which he declared to be free. But scarce had the Queens rendered thanks
to so generous a Victor, but Mandonius and Iudibilis, their husbands protested
solemnly that they were not contented only to disengage themselves from the
interest of the Carthaginians; but that they gave themselves up entirely to
Scipio, and were ready to hazard their Lives and States for whatever concerned
his service.

The Spaniards, and the fair Prisoners which were in their train, were willing
also to testify their acknowledgment, which they expressed in shouts of joy
and admiration; and there happened to be heard amongst them certain broken
speeches in which were confusedly pronounced the names of Scipio,, Olinda, King
of Spain, and marriage. But at length all the crowd being withdrawn, Scipio was
ravished with joy to see himself in a condition, enabling him to express to
Aemylius the sentiments of his esteem and dearness; so that he went presently
to his Chamber, where he embraced him, and enclosing him between his arms,
manifested to him the excess of joy he resented by his presence, and by that
what sorrow he had endured upon understanding the news of his imprisonment and
wounds. After which he mentioned the obligation he had to him, for that in
respect to him, he had chosen rather to serve in Spain then in Italy,
complaining withal of that admirable modesty which had constrained him from
discovering to him his intention of coming to his Army; nor did he omit to
speak concerning the quarrel he had had with the Prince Pers^us, which he did
with an ardency that sufficiently showed the great interest he took in it.

When he had ended those discourses, he beheld Aemylius after a manner which
signified, that what he was going to speak, was yet more agreeable then all he
had already spoken. Which Emilius taking notice of, and beholding the amorous
Scipio with an obliging smile: To answer to your eyes (said he) rather then to
the caresses you have spoken, I will speak concerning my sister, and assure
you, that if we are not much obliged to those who esteem our enemies, you are
without question not much obliged to Emilia. For as such enemies alone
(continued he smiling again) are contemned who are not feared, so they seem
only to be looked upon as considerable, that are accounted terrible; and
consequently my sister esteems the enemies of Scipio, since she extremely
dreads them. Ah! Emilius (answered this passionate Lover) how happy should I
be, if your adorable sister had such an obliging fear! I^ that fear conduces to
your happiness (replied he) you have no cause to complain of your fortune, for
Aemylia permitted me to discover a certain discontent he had, which assuredly
the interest of Rome alone did not produce, when it was reported there, that
the Kings of Celtiberia and Illergetes, were united with the Carthaginians,
that the Prince Lucius was arrived in Spain, and that their Armies were
extremely strong. Upon which their united forces seemed to her so formidable,
that verily (added he smiling) if you had had the same sentiments with her, we
should not now be making this conversation in New Carthage in the manner we are.

He had scarce ended these words, but a Centurion entered with very much haste;
and as he was going to speak to his General, I entered also, followed with ten
or a dozen Officers, who were accompanying me to visit Emilius; and Scipio
retired to one of the Windows to hear what the Centurion had to say to him; My
Lord (said he presently with much commotion of countenance) you have never seen
any thing so handsome as what I shall cause you to see at this present. There
are so many kinds of handsomness (answered the moderate Scipio, smiling) that
it is difficult for me to comprehended what you mean, unless you speak somewhat
more clearly concerning the thing you intend to show me. It Is, my Lord (replied
he immediately) the incomparable Olinda; it is the fair Princess of the
Illergetes; and in a word, it is that rare person whom the Prince Lucius is
infinitely enamoured of, and all Spain admires. Yes, my Lord (added he) it is
that charming Lady whom I have caused to be put in a place of safety, and I am
going to cause her to be brought to you at this instant. You need only conduct
me where she is (interrupted the generous Scipio) for it is inconsistent with
decency to give that kind of trouble to a person of her sex, merit, and
quality. After these words, he accordingly went whither the Centurion conducted
him, before he so much as caused some slight wounds he had received to be
dressed, which he had neglected before through his ardency to deliver Emilia's,
and discourse with him concerning his divine sister; besides that the great
number of prisoners I told you of were presented to him of a sudden.

The Centurion had no sooner opened the door of the Hall where the Princess
Olinda was, but offering to retire he was retained by Scipio, and caused to
follow him; but as he advanced toward that young and handsome person, he
perceived she was all alone; upon which he suddenly stopped, and instead of
approachig to her, retired after he had made her a low reverence. At which time
he forthwith sent to call some Ladies of Carthage, desiring them to abide with
the Princess of the Illergetes; and taking some Officers also with him, he
entered again and advanced toward her. The youth of the Conqueror, and the
beauty of the Prisoner would not without question have promised the success
that was admired in this interview, if Scipio had not bin the Conqueror; but
Olinda knowing him immedately by his goodly aspect, and better by the action he
had performed at his entering the first time, she arose up, and went toward
him, offering to cast her self at his feet, not so much for her own interest,
being generous enough not to be capable of fear, but to show all kind of
submission to a Conqueror, who by the right of Arms had an absolute power over
the King and the Queen of the Illergetes. Scipio presently restrained her
purpose, and told her after an obliging and respectful manner, that it belonged
to the Princess Olinda to receive such homages from men that approacht her. I
protest to you, my Lord (answered she) that I would render that respect to you
less as conqueror of -- Madam (interrupted he) if you would render it with
justice, I shall conduct you toward the persons to whom alone you owe it. For
I am not come, Madam, but to beseech you most humbly, that you would please to
pardon those who apparently have not treated you with all the cautious
reverence that is due to you; I am not come but to declare so you, that you are
not only free, but that you are still Princess of the Illergetes, and to lead
you my self to the Queen your Mother, whither decency and affection require you
to go, and whither virtue certainly, and the respect I owe you, oblige me to
conduct you. Olinda admired the high generosity of Scipio, and having made him
a remerciment sufficiently expressing her gratitude, and the esteem she had of
the grandeur of his mind, she tendered him her hand, and went accordingly to
the Palace, whither the King her Father was retired with the Queen his wife.

As Soon as Scipio had remitted the Princess Olinda into the hands of the Queen
her Mother, and received a thousand thanks for it, accompanied with praises and
acclamations, he went to the house he had made choice of to reside in, and
caused himself to be dressed, whence afterward he went to see the Prince of
Celtiberia. Lucius immediately advanced toward Scipio, and without either
pride or lowness performed all the honors he judged befitting an Illustrious
Conqueror, which he never accompanied with that shameful submission that she
vanquished, who preserve not all their generosity in bad fortune, are wont to
express toward those whom the lot of Arms declares their Masters. But the
deportment of Lucius evidenced, that that Prince had a soul above his
misfortune, since their could not be observed in him that ferocity which is
sometimes affected in like occasions to show greatness of courage; nor that low
yieldance, that is often made use of to draw the compassion of a Conqueror. But
if the Prince of Celtiberia's acting in this sort, made it appear that he did
not too much remember his defect, the civilities that Scipio returned him,
showed sufficiently that he forgot his Victory. They parted therefore with very
much esteem one for another, after the Illustrious Roman had told the generous
Celtiberian he was free; but yet he desired him he would defer to make use of
the liberty he gave him till the next morning. After which he retired; and as
he was about to dispatch Flavius to Aemilius, and cause a kinsman of Flaminius
to depart and advertise the Senate of all that had passed, he beheld five or
six men enter into his Chamber, the first of which preceded two others which
carried two magnificent shields, filled, as was soon perceived, with Gold and
Jewels. He that was to present them advanced, and having made a low reverence,
told Scipio, that the King of the Illergetes his Master, had sent him the
ransom of the Princess his daughter, intending to levy forces in lieu of his
own; and venture his life for the service of an Illustrious Victor who had so
generously given him it.

You shall tell the King your Master (answered Scipio) that I accept his
friendship, but not his present; for since I have bin able to restore him a
treasure of inestimable value, he ought not to believe me capable to receive
that which he now offers me. Ah! my Lord (cried the Illergete) what generosity
is this? After which having mused a little, he suddenly added, My Lord, I must
in brief declare to you, notwithstanding the concealed interest of my own in
the matter, that all the world wishes you would marry the Princess Olinda, and
that you would establish your self King of Spain. I shall take your proposals
into consideration (answered Scipio smiling) and in the mean time you may tell
the fair Princess of the Illergetes, that if I have broken her Chains to day,
it is possible I may fasten them to morrow with an indissoluble knot.

After these words, the Illergete retired, Scipio dispatched those he intended
to send to Rome, entertained discourse with Aemilius a while, and so went to
his rest. The next morning he was no sooner in a condition to be seen by all
persons without distinction, but the Kings of Celtiberia and the Illergetes,
with the Queens their Wives, followed by Olinda, and causing more magnificent
presents then those Scipio had returned to be brought with them, entered into
his Chamber, and immediately protested they would refuse the liberty Scipio had
given them, if he would not accept that which they came to offer him. Scipio
answered, that he did not refuse the thing of greatast value that had bin
offered him, which was the amity of the two Kings. But, my Lord (said the Queen
of the Illergetes to him) it is requisite, and that absolutely too, either that
you receive the ransom which we offer you for Olinda, or that Olinda her self
resume her fetters. To do yet more then you desire, Madam (answered Scipio
smiling in an obliging manner) I will accept all that you offer me, and I will
consent also that the Princess Olinda cease to be free. In ending which words,
he whispered to an Officer, after he had desired the Queens permission; and as
he observed presently that she of Celtiberia appeared to be very sad, he
comforted her, by informing her that the Prince Lucius was not dangerously
wounded. You have seen him then, my Lord, (interrupted she presently with much
satisfaction) and according to what you say, he is your prisoner. It Is true, I
have seen him, Madam (replied he) but I do not agree with you as to the rest,
and especially before the fair Princess of the Illergetes, with whom I should
be much troubled to have any contest in usurping her rights.

As he ended these words, Lucius entered, and his presence having filled the
Kings and Queens with joy, and caused the modest Olinda to blush, also filled
the spectators with contentment and admiration. But, Madam, it needs not that I
should here detain you in particularizing an action all the world has wondered
at, even to the least circumstances. I shall content my self to tell you, that
then it was that Scipio made the memorable marriage of Lucius and Olinda, that
he gave that Princess all that he was constrained to accept a little before,
that he wholly gained the hearts of the Spaniards, and filled all the earth
with veneration of his virtue, as it was already filled with the fame of his
Valor and his Victories. In fine, Madam, I have now spoken of an action that
all the Nations extol, all Painters represents, and all excellent wits write of
to consecrate to eternity, and make admired as long as virtue shall be known in
the world. As Laelius was upon this part of his Narration, the Prince Magasba
entered into the Chamber of the Princess his daughter, and told her with a kind
of haste and severity, that she was to be reproved for not being at the Chamber
of Aemilia, that that Illustrious Roman Lady had bin in a condition to be seen
above a quarter of an hour ago, and that for his own part, he had not failed to
go to that of Scipio, and to yours also; My Lord (continued he, addressing to
L^lius) where I had the unhappiness not to find you. Laelius made his
remerciment with a low reverence, after which observing Magasba, went out to
return again to Scipio (as he had told him) and that Palmira intended to go to
the Chamber of Emilia, he gave her his hand, and to Nadalia also, and so they
went all three thither, but it was with an air perfectly agreeable, and very
different from that of the Prince of Capsa. But for that it was already late,
Aemilia delayed not to descend down into a low Hall, whither Scipio, Magasba,
Regulus and Cato likewise repaired, and were all there magnificently treated.
The conversation that was made afterward was extremely pleasing; and that
which was most agreeable, was, that the modest Aemylia often showed a lovely
mixture of Carnation in her countenance, when it came into her mind that
Laelius had newly related her History. In the evening this Illustrious company
went to walk in the Garden, where Magasba gave the hand to Aemylia, Scipio to
Palmira, Regulus to Nadalia, and Laelius and Cato, went together, till
insensibly Scipio, Aemilia, Magasba, and Palmira, were separated from the rest,
and entered into a pleasant Arbor of Jasmine, Regulus and Nadalia rested
themselves in a Banqueting House, and Laelius and Cato continued walking
together in a fair and spacious walk, that led to a gate of the Garden. But as
Laelius was at that time in expectation of news from the Camp, and likewise
from Carthage (for Terence who was there, was either to write to him, or to
come and find him at Capsa to speak in favor of the Delegates of his City, to
the end Scipio might receive them more graciously) he was suddenly surprised
when he beheld three strangers enter into the Garden, whose faces were at first
unknown to him. But advancing toward them, he soon perceived that two of them
were young Romans of goodly personages, Rutilius and Albinus, whereof the first
was Cousin to Aemilia, and had not long before obtained the command of a
Legion; after which casting his eyes upon the third, he was agreeably surprised
when he saw it was the famous Terence, whose wit was so celebrated in the
world, and whose Verses were of a strain so facil and agreeable, that it was
impossible not to be charmed by them. As soon as Laelius had caressed the three
strangers with affectionate civilities, and suitable to their quality and
merit, he led them to the Arbor where Aemilia was, who received them with an
air extremely obliging, though expressing such tokens of affection to Rutilius,
as Albinus and Terence could not reasonably expect. But when Scipio, Aemilia,
Magasba, Palmira, Laelius, Cato, and the three strangers had passed all the
Ceremonies usual in such occasions, the conversation became perfectly handsome;
and that which rendered it more agreeable, was, a pleasant piece of Railery
between Laelius and Nadalia. For this lovely Virgin coming to rejoyn with the
company, Laelius advanced toward her, and presenting Terence to her without
naming him: I do not content my self, fair Nadalia (said he to her) to be your
friend; but I desire to make this stranger known to you, who will soon be
likewise that in quality. You assure the matter very confidently (answered
she). If persons of the same Country (interrupted he) have great inclinations
to love and kindness, when they meet at distance from it, you ought not to
wonder at what I say. How? (interrupted she again) is this stranger a Spaniard?
Yes, Madam, I am so (answered Terence in the language of that Nation) and if
Laelius do not deceive himself, my birth will be extremely advantageous to me.
Ah, Laelius (cried she immediately) the accent of this stranger does little
agree with your words. Nevertheless (answered Laelius smiling) if he be not a
Spaniard, yet he is a rare wit, and consequently better deserves in this latter
quality the friendship of Nadalia. Believe him not, Madam (answered Terence
agreably) he deceives you a second time; but if my accent has already disabus'd
you, my words shall soon free you from the second error. In speaking as you do
(replied she) you manifest that he does not delude me; yet I will not pardon
him the prank he has shown me in representing you to me for a Spaniard, unless
he tells me who you are. That you shall not know (answered Laelius.) Upon which
words Nadalia became so impatient, that addressing to Aemilia, and having
observed in the countenances, she beheld little readiness to satisfy her; In
the name of the Gods, Madam (said she to her) make me know who this stranger
is; whose aspect is so sprightly, and who speaks in so pleasant a manner. I
know not (answered the discreet Aemilia) whether you will not be as much
surprised as I was, when you are told it is the famous Terence that you are
discoursing with. Verily, Madam (replied Nadalia) I am extremely joyful to know
so worthy a person, and to see that he is not at all disordered; the first
time he enters into a great company where he is infinitely esteemed. I see not
that he has cause to be so (answered Aemylia) since he is so esteemed as you
say. But, Madam (replied Nadalia) be pleased to consider, there is nothing more
troublesome then to go into a great assembly to make good a great reputation;
for if such a person speaks subli^^ly he distasts many of the company; And if
he speaks otherwise; without doubt he does not maintain the esteem that was
conceived of him. And this is so true (added she smiling) that if I were fame,
I would not excessively commend persons of wit in the places where they are to
go.

There is a greater unhappiness in that which you say (ansvvered Terence
pleasantly) which is, that when a man is once received for a wit, though he
should afterward speak the handsomest things in the world, and had the art
even to please generally, yet he would not be esteemed the more, because it
would be always believed that he speaks out of obligation, and that it is
much easier for him to acquit himself more agreeably then they who have not
the same design. That which I apprehend inconvenient to the persons we speak
of (said the Princess of Hippo) is, that it seems they ought always to have a
peculiar language, and it is no longer free for them to employ such terms as are
ordinarily used. And that which I find most unjust (said Scipio) at least in
reference to their works, is, that there are certain people, who pretending
to learning and wit, speak of a handsome Comedy, or such like divertisement,
with a contemning judgment, and look upon them as mere triflles, without
considering that the most excellent morality, and the subtilest policy may be
learnt in them, after a pleasing manner, and far from the severity of Maxims.

As Scipio ended these words he observed a happy opportunity offered to speak
to Aemilia; upon which he turned toward her, to entertain her with that
profound respect that never abandoned him in the presence of the fair person:
For, advantageously for him, Magasba was discoursing for some time with Cato,
and so left him liberty to speak to the person he loved, though rather out of
difference then address. Palmira, Regulus, Rutilius, and Albinus, entertained
themselves very agreeably, and the conversation of Nadalia, Laelius, and
Terence was no question gallant and debonair. But when it grevv late, the
Illustrious company reunited their conversation; about which time Nadalia was
desiring Terence to give her some Verses of his composing, and asking for them
with something a loud voice; Cato, who was not far distant overheard her,
and answering her with a cold and serious smile; It is requisite then (said
he) that you give him some other thing, for in my apprehension there is nothing
of more powerful inspiration to handsome Poetry, then that which I
understand. You have so little experienced what you say you understand
(ansvvered Nadalia smiling) that methinks you are not a very fit person to
whom to be referred in this case. It Is true indeed (said Scipio to Cato) that
I cannot herein be of your opinion, though it be the same that most of the
world follows: for I never could conceive it possible to express a violent
passion well in measured words, and confine transports that will own no
bounds to a limited of expression. Besides (added Nadalia) I never can endure
those superfluous words (wherewith such kind of Verses are ordinarily filled,
though I were capable of not hating those pieces of gallantry as I certainly
do. Yet I have a way to cause you to receive the Verses we speak of
(ansvvered Terence smiling). But, Terence (interrupted Laelius) how dare you
speak as you do, after what we have from the mouth of Nadalia. Do you not know
(continued he) that that fair person would be as cruel a Mistress, as she is
really a good friend; that she had rather see a Lover die, then understand his
passion: And lastly, that there is nothing but the death of a poor slave that
could warrant a discovery, without incensing her, that her fetters were worn.
Assuredly Terence did not remember all these things (said Palmira smiling).
Pardon me, Madam (answered he to her) 'twas because I did remember them, that I
spoke after that manner that surprised Laelius. It would be a desirable
pleasure then (replied she) to hear the way you speak of, for I presume it will
be one of those pleasant turns of wit that you are accustomed to use.
Sincerely, Madam (answered he, affecting to speak seriously) there will be
neither mirth nor pleasantness in what I intend to make. What is it then you
intend to make? (said Aemilia with a little smile). My own Epitaph, Madam
(answered he with his affected seriousness) for since Nadalia says she would
understand the passion of a dead man without being incensed, and that a dead
man can speak only by his Epitaph, be pleased to judge, Madam, whether I have
not reason to set upon the making of mine, and send it to her.

All the company laughed at the agreeable conceit of Terence, and Nadalia
having beheld him smiling also; Verily (said she to him) this conceit seems to
me so exquisitely ingenious, that all the company will be glad you make what
you speak of; and for my part, I shall be extremely pleased with it, for I
confess to you such kind of fancies are perfectly correspondent to my humor.
This conversation was upon a subject so agreeable, that it would have bin
continued longer if time had permitted: but for that it was already late, the
Illustrious Company retired, and as soon as they came into the low Hall, which
was handsomely beset with Lights, Laelius and Terence went apart by themselves
to speak of important affairs, though after Nadalia had smilingly told the
Carthaginian she would expect his Epitaph.

Terence did not sup that night at the Palace of Magasba; because having a
friend that was unwilling yet to show himself, he did not account it fit to
leave him alone: Besides (added he smiling, in answer to those that desired to
stay him) I do not conceive a Palace (where nothing but glorious and brave
spectacles amaze the eyes, and where all thoughts are unsuitable but those of
joy) a fit place to inspire me with Funeral Verses. But if the conversation of
so worthy a person was wanting in this Illustrious company, the productions of
his Wit were not; for they had no sooner disposed themselves to pass the
evening with Divertisements, but a man who was presently known to be a
Carthaginian entered, and after a low reverence delivered a Packet into the
hands of Nadalia. As Soon as this amiable Lady had her eyes upon it, she
perceived it was a rich Writing-Table, wherein she presently read these words
which were written in a Character not unknown to her;

To a fair person, who will not understand the passion of a Lover but by his
Death. Nadalia mused a little, and blushed at the reading of these words* after
which having opened the Tablets, she found therein these Verses;

How great a number in one rigid fate,
Iris, do you involve,
If only you resolve.
A dead Adorer to commiserate;
And will not own the Tropies of your eyes,
Till Death has made the World your sacrifice.
Repeal, fair Iris, this severe decree*
Unless your sins you will not hide,
But in your mischiefs take a pride:
Then think but how untoward it would be
A thing so grim, so rude as death should dar^
To make a Court to one so young, so fair.
All the company unanimously applauded the hand somness of this conceit, and
condemned the sentiment of Nadalia, since in effect death has all the contrary
qualities to those we see in the comely persons of Lovers: but as they were
going to attaque that fair person, who was at that time not so debonair as
usual, she gladly took occasion to avoid the onset, by opening the other
Tablets which she received, the cover of which was plain black without
superscription, and in which she read the following words,

I expect your Epitaph. These, fair Nadalia, were the terrible words you spoke
at my parting from you. I know well you have demanded nothing beyond your
rights. I know you need only declare your pleasure to persons that know you as
well as I do, and that I ought not to disobey you, even when you require my
Epitaph. Nevertheless I presume to say you ought something to sweeten the
matter, and might have shown less pleasantness in pronouncing these cruel
words, and moreover that you ought not to demand my Epitaph with the same air
that another Lady would have asked me for a Sonnet. It Is true, that being you
had rather behold the death of a Lover then understand his passion, you are so
often obliged to desire Epitaphs, that being accustomed thereto, you speak at
present not only without reluctance, but even with your ordinary debonarity.
But since a dead man may tell you the sentiments he has, without offending you,
I believe one that sends you his Epitaph, ought to have the same liberty, and
consequently I may declare to you that I am absolutely yours. But, fair
Nadalia, I mean with all the respect that is due to you: for, as for any thing
more, in truth I feel my self not yet dead enough to presume to speak it.


The end of this Letter immediately appeared so pleasantly conceived, that all
the company was agreeably surprised with it: and as they were going to speak
concerning the wit that was resplendent in all the works of Terence, Nadalia
read the following Verses;

EPITAPH.
Stay Cousned Reader, and forbear to cry,
But rather envy my blessed destiny.
It was Nadalia slew me; for her sake
I passed with gladness over the Stygian Lake,
That I might bear the news to shades below;
'Twas to her eyes that I my Fate did owe.
But after I had looked long in vain,
Amongst all the Ghosts that in Elysium reign,
I found it true; that, nor the world above,
Nor this had any, that deserved her love.
Go, pray her then the favor we may have,
At least to take repose within thy Grave.
If the Letter of Terence was judged ingenious, his Verses did not seem less
handsome; and as they observed the happiness of his infancy in them, and that
both pieces were of the same Author, the opinions of this Illustrious company
were divided, whilst some persons of wit commended the Epitaph that was now
read, and others repeated with applause the handsomest passages of the Letter
preceding it. But that which occasioned a little wonder, was, that Nadalia did
not speak so much in this occasion as was expected: it was remembered that she
appeared a little pensive before she opened the Tablets of Terence: and if some
kind of pleasantness appeared in her countenance, it was easily observable not
to resemble that sprightly jollity that was natural to her. Whereupon she was
set upon by Laelius, who told her smilingly, he wondered she had lost her
cheerfulness even before the apparition of Terence. Yet methinks (said Aemilia)
she has very much left still. No doubt, Madam, (answered Regulus smiling) you
apprehend so, only because she has very much wit. But for that she has also
very many enemies (replied the Princess of Hippo) it is fit that she have also
some friends. If she stood in need of friends after what you have said, Madam
(answered Scipio) I should presently embrace her party. You do me too great a
favor, my Lord (said Nadalia) but I have no necessity of so great a succor in
this occasion, and I shall only desire a protection which two fair and
Illustrious persons will without doubt not refuse me: since therefore (added he
smiling) I need only my jolly humor to silence those that attaque me, and to
manifest, that at least in this encounter I am able to surmount my enemies by
laughing. But since laughter is a thing not voluntary (answered Regulus
pleasantly) you cannot overcome us when you please; yet I need only to express
my debonarity (replied she) to manifest my triumph. But you know well, fair
Nadalia (said Laelius) that mirth ought to be spontaneously produced, and when
it is enforced, it ceases to be agreeable, and our heart disowns it as a
stranger: Moreover (added he smiling) the cheerfulness we speak of, methinks,
seems constrained in the borrowed attire it is dressed with; and it is
impossible it should please when it bespeaks observation and effects to be
taken notice of.

This conceit of Laelius gave the company occasion of pleasantness, and caused
much divertisement in this evening's conversation, in which Rutilius and
Albinus engaged themselves agreeably: and even the Prince of Capsa and Cato
spoke some things of a strain not very ordinary with them; Magasba conceiving
himself obliged to speak to the persons he entertained in such manner as might
be most acceptable to them, and Cato judging it fit to remit a little of his
severity, since he beheld nothing austere in the persons in whom he admired a
noble prudence, and a sublime virtue. But when it was time for this Illustrious
Company to separate, the two famous friends went to entertain themselves after
a very different sort, since they went to speak of the charms of the divine
Aemilia, which they never did, but after a manner in which might be seen a
profound respect mixed with an exordinary admiration. Their conversation indeed
did not endure long; for it being extremely late, Laelius referred the relating
of the important affairs he had to inform me of, to the next morning, as also
the giving him account of what he had lately understood concerning the
Deputations of the Carthaginians. The amorous Scipio much incapable to expect
with moderation what was promised him, resented a sensible grief as soon as
Laelius was gone out of his Chamber: for when the Idea of Aemylia presently
filled whole extent of his imagination, he could not consider that that
admirable Lady was the fairest person in the world, and the person in the world
that he loved most, without afterward repassing in his mind all the obstacles
that had hindered him from being happy.

This remembrance would without doubt have caused him to expire with grief, if
he had not sweetened it by coming suddenly to think that his rivals were yet
more unhappy then himself; and that besides, that their pretensions were not
better favored, they had not then the advantage of seeing Aemilia, of being
lodged in the same Palace, and having Illustrious persons with her to promote
the interest of their passions. From these thoughts he was capable to pass to
that of conquering his enemies; for in this conjuncture he was able to bestow a
part of his cares for the interest of Rome, without ceasing to think on the
beauty of Aemilia, because his ambition was then a dependence of his love; so
that it may be said, this Illustrious Lover in betaking himself to his bed, did
less abandon himself to rest, then to the tyranny of those two violent passions.

FINIS.

