THE NUNNS Complaint Against the FRIARS.

BEING The CHARGE given in to the COURT of FRANCE, by the Nunns of St.
Katherine near Provins, against the Fathers Cordeliers their Confessors.

Several times Printed in French; AND Now Faithfully done into English.

LONDON, Printed by E.H. for Robert Pawlett, at the Bible in Chancery Lane near
Fleet Street, 1676.

To the Truly Honorable BELLALMO.
Most Dear, and Honored Sir:
It Is now long since, that I have desired your Commands, when I was about
leaving England. I must confess, it was rather to testify my esteem of those
uncommon Qualifications in you, that have gained you the affections of the best
men, and laid Charms of respect upon all, than to persuade you, that I had any
considerable service in prospect to gratify you withal. But being loath to
return without any signs of having ever been mindful of what I had made a
profession to you of, I sought for some opportunity to continue you in the
assurance I had given you of my constant disposedness to do any thing that I
thought might be agreeable to you; and which I looked upon as an acknowledgment
due from all honest men to Persons so eminently virtuous. And therefore after I
had met with these Religious Ladies, and understood the nature of their
grievances, and the use that might be made of their Information; I imagined
that this might be no unacceptable Present to you, since I found that they were
Strangers in England, and scarce suffered to look abroad in France. For I found
them under as great restraint in the Shops of the Stationers of the Sorbonne,
as ever they were in their Cloisters, and no leave allowed them to take the
air, but with such as would pay well for their company. They were indeed at
first very publicly sold; so that I have seen three several Editions of them,
and have at present two of them in mine own hands. But after that the Nunns had
gained their cause, and the Cordeliers were cashiered their house; to put a
stop to all farther scandal amongst the people, the Copies, that were printed,
were ordered to be suppressed and a watch set upon the Sellers. From this
severe confinement I did very much desire to deliver them, and to bring them
into a freer air, where their conversation would be acceptable, and courted.
And I knew so well your kind receptions of all Strangers, of whom you might
learn any thing, that I questioned not but that these would find a welcome
from you. I have reason to think, that you will find them very good company,
and afford you variety of entertainment. It may be they will gratify your
cnriosity by making you a spectator of such lives, as are designed to be
withdrawn from the common view, and amongst which possibly you will meet with
such new Scenes of Action, as all your converse never before represented to
you. The innocent Gallantry of the Nunns and Friars in some Pages may give you
very agreeable divertisement: And their excesses, and disorders in others, if
they raise less grateful Passions in you, yet will furnish you with true, and
certain accounts, how the Profession of Monkery is reduced to practice. But
whatever eflect you find in your self by it, I hope you will be confident, that
my great design in recommending this new Acquaintance to you, was to assure
you, that I am very zealously, without any fiction but what you approve of,

Most excellent Bellalmo, Your most devoted humble Servant, LAELIO.

THE TRANSLATOR TO THE READER.
CErtainly never had Book more need of a Preface than this. For, to set no less
than Eighteen angry Women in the Front of it, all full of talk and story, must
needs endanger the frighting away all Readers, that have any respect to their
understanding. So that it looks like a malicious design against the Stationer,
kindly to present him with a Copy, put him to the expense of the Press, but to
lay such a spell upon it, as no body should dare to touch it. I thought it
therefore necessary fairly to bespeak the Customers, and to draw this Curtain
before the first terrible Scene, till I had stroak'd the Readers into some
tolerable Gentleness. It may be, when I have taken off the fear of this thing
with the rattle, the Birds will come in with more freedom. Know therefore,
Courteous Reader, that the Fair Strangers, I here offer to you, are above the
ordinary rate of the Sex. By their way of life they are under very solemn
Obligations to silence. They have vowed to God, that they will never speak any
thing, but what is Necessary, or Useful. The things, that they come to acquaint
you with, are things of importance, not all the impertinencies that were done,
when they were in France. They will caution some against public
inconveniences, and Alarm others to look to their Families, and Relations.
Indeed I know no sort of men, whom they may not profitably instruct, nor any
whom they should offend, but such as by the Laws of the Land are not supposed
to be amongst us. The Assertors of the Privileges of the Gallican Church, and
the Bishops there, have given them their applause already, and the Seculars
never thought themselves better justified against the Regulars. The Hugonots
looked on, and cared not much what pleasure others took in it, but were pretty
sure that it was one of the best arguments for their Wives, that they had ever
met withal.

I could not but hope that they would be full as useful here, as they had been
at home, and so resolved they should travel with me for the benefit of the
Nation. But I must affirm, That if any party among us be more particularly
obliged by it than others, it must be those of the Roman Communion. All others
can pretend to no greater advantage by it, but only that they have a
confirmation of what they thought they were sure of before, and had been long
in the practice of: But these Gentlemen are taught new Truths about their
nearest Interests, the concerns of their Families, the Education of their
Daughters, Their Sisters, Their Cosins, or their Aunts. For, if these Nuns
are to be believed, we may easily see, to what a kind of Education those Young
Ladies are committed, that are ordinarily sent over from hence into the
Convents of the Poor Clare's in France, and Flanders. It may be, upon
Examination they will be found to be far the greatest number of those, that go
over into Religious Houses. Over this Order it is, that these Cordeliers
pretend a particular Jurisdiction by their See Section 5, 6. etc.
first Foundation, and which nothing but their scandalous behavior has
deprived them of, not only in this, but in several other Convents in France, as
appears about the conclusion of this Factum. And had not the Affairs of the
Kingdom favored the Interests of the Episcoparian party amongst them more
particularly in this present Age, These Nunns might have groaned much longer
under their Tyranny, as well as have made so many fruitless attempts as they
did, to shake it off for some considerable number of years before. We find that
those that are sent to Pension amongst them are not exempt from the common
fate, but are as liable to the pursuits of these rude and unruly Friars as the
rest. What, can we think, will become of those Early Principles of Virtue, and
Innocence, that the care of their Parents had planted in them, when they see
such different practices, as these, authorized by the persons, that are not
only their Guides, and Instructors, but also more peculiarly devoted to God,
and set apart from the World by solemn Vows, and the Observance of rigorous
and severe Impositions, for an instance, and trial of what the Principles of a
Religion could do? But more especially when they see all this so customary a
fashion amongst them, as to get the Authority of their Batchelors, Doctors,
Superiors, and Provincials, and all the men of greatest note amongst them.
What other effect can it naturally produce in the best disposed amongst them,
than what we see ordinarily done in the World, that is an imitation of those
actions which they see constantly practiced by the most Regular, and best
reputed? Surely it must make them look upon an innocent and sober life as a
mere notional thing, and not to be found in nature, when they find so general a
corruption of Manners (as these Nuns have attested) amongst those, who are
bound up by all the solemn Obligations imaginable, and sequestered thereby from
all the impediments of common life, to attend to nothing but Divine
Inspirations, and extraordinary Sanctity. In all these reflections they will be
still much more confirmed, when they come to hear them justify themselves in
their practices by false Principles of New Morality; when they hear them nicely
state, how much may lawfully be permitted to their new relation (their Bon
Amy;) how much must be allowed to their present state, and Natural
Inclinations; when they are informed by them, what are the only necessary
requisites to qualify them for a plenary Absolution; and how easy
compensations for their past Offenses will bribe the Divine Goodness to a
reconcilement, and purchase them an Intimacy, and Friendship with God: In
sum, when they are acquainted, what blessed Privileges their Church is
endowed withal, that by the virtue of its Indulgences upon the performance of
some small bodily motions can confer an Imputative Saintship that shall
equalize a true one. If then they take a full prospect of all these
Considerations together, and find licentiousness allowed by Principles, and
made a Case of Conscience; Or, If more Exorbitant, cleared off by Absolutions
without the trouble of Reformation; Or, if yet attended with anxiety, and
uneasiness, turned into a Traffic with the Divine Justice by Commutations of
Penances, which also may be Exchanged yet farther for greater Ease; what can we
expect, but that they should make themselves Votaries to so agreeable a state
of life, as soon as might be, and abhor the regularity of true, and sincere
Virtue, all the precepts of which they must needs now look upon as Fantastic
Rules for Impracticable things, and fitted only for Naked Ghosts, and another
World? Locks, and Bars, and Iron Grates may raise fine solemn Imaginations in
a stranger, but they will prove very weak Securities for their very natural
Honesty, when there are Keys, or a free access for the Cordelier Confessor.

By this time, I suppose, the Reader will fairly conclude by my zeal, That the
Timaretta whom I adored was put to School to a Convent, and that there I was
basely choused of her by a Friar. I wholly discharge the Fathers of any such
imputation, yet as I would be loath to trust them, so in Charity I bid my
Neighbors look to themselves. I forewarn them of sending their Women to
Conventicles beyond Sea, when we see such ill effects of it at home. And as I
shall be glad to have obliged those that take it for a courtesy, so my revenge
upon those, that will not take my counsel, shall be to commend those that do.

But my Countrymen of the Reformation, I hope, will make better use of this
advantage: They will now reflect with more pleasure upon the Prudence of their
Ancestors, whom now we may suppose to have very warily examined the behavior
of the Monasticks: It Is very likely, that they saw, that the Religious did not
always spend their time in Devotion, or Study, or Acts of Charity, or Bodily
labor, or Innocent Divertisement: It may be, it was not so much One Anne
Bolen, as thousands of Melita's, and ten thousands of Thyrsis's, that caused
the ruin of the famousest Structures in the Land: And it is probable, that the
scandalous disorders of such an Order of men, as these, who had all the
advantages that men could have, to observe their Vows of Caelibacy, might make
our Sober Governors conclude, That those Arbitrary and unalterable Resolutions
were necessary causes of very dangerous Consequences. We see in the present
case, that here there has been a General corruption of a whole Order of
Regulars, of their very Superiors, and Provincials, and this for very
considerable numbers of years together; And yet this Order is esteemed one of
the severest, and strictest of all the Regulars. Their Founder, St. Francis,
was the most extravagant of any, (both in his own practice, and in the Rule he
lest his Disciples) for the rigidness of his Injunctions. He obliges them to
Beggary, to such Self-denial, and Mortification, and Discipline, as one would
imagine should make them insensible of any kind of worldly pleasure. And all
this they have solemnly sworn to observe, and in order to it have withdrawn
themselves from the noise, and business of the World, and to confirm themselves
in their first resolutions, have deliberately tied themselves before God never
to alter their present state. The Church, and State, where they live, oblige
them under penalties of the highest nature to keep close to the observance of
what they had vowed, and public Infamy always attended the violation of it:
Yet all these ill consequences are not able to secure them; But, as if there
were some Magic in nature that was too irresistible for all these provisions
and precautions, we see them delivered up to the uncontrollable power of their
natural Inclinations. And indeed, when we consider not the frame of our
Natures, nor the dependencies of our beings upon the varieties of Objects, that
act upon us, but will, contrary to the Laws of our Creation, pretend in a very
wrong notion to take the Kingdom of Heaven by violence, and forced Methods, and
bind our selves unalterably to such Laws in the doing of it, as shall
contradict those inclinations, that God has planted in us, and (it may be)
given that power, and force to in some, that they shall not be countermanded,
but by the ordinary Provision, that he has made for them; it is no wonder,
that we find our selves rashly foolish in endeavoring to be wiser, than he
that made us, and instead of being extravagantly Divine, prove at last to be
ridicolously brutish. But on the other side were the Design of these Religious
retirements from the world so managed, as that they should be free and
voluntary, both for the beginning, and continuing of them, and made serviceable
to the Public, either as convenient Seminaries of such as should be any ways
influential abroad, or as Receptacles for such, whose former Merits should
claim their Alimony, and Writ of ease from the places, which they had obliged,
they would be so far from being dissik'd, that they seem to be by all means
encouraged, and promoted:

Before I dismiss this whole Cause, I think it not unseasonable to invite the
Intelligent Reader to take a small view of the present State of the Roman
Church. We know, that the Regulars are the Janissaries of the Court of Rome;
That they have their exemptions from the Jurisdiction of the Clergy of those
particular Kingdoms, where they are, and so have no dependence upon their
Natural Prince, or Bishop. And yet to the care of some of these are almost all
the youth of Europe committed. It was the complaint of the University of Paris
in 1643, That the Jesuits had ruined all the Universities in France, by
draining all the youth into their Schools, so that the two Colleges in Paris,
had more than all the Colleges besides: And that almost all the other
Universities had scarce Auditors for their Professors. It Is well known at
present, that the Colleges of the Jesuits are almost as many as the
Grammar-Schools, in France. Their teaching gratis being a great invitation to a
People that has so many public Impositions upon them, and so little Money.
It Is as well known, that the first Lesson which they endeavor to insinuate
into their Disciples is, to be firm and constant in the Maxims that they
instill into them; which indeed we find is a natural effect of that Relation
betwixt a Tutor and his Scholar, when there are not mighty precautions used to
prevent it. But if we be at all acquainted with the Affairs of those men, it is
still much better known, what are those Principles, that not only particular
men, but such as have the Subscriptions of the Deputies of the whole Order,
have publicly owned in Print about Moral Theology, and the Government and
Conduct of our Lives. The Provincial Letters have sufficiently shown by an
infinite number of Quotations out of their Principal and Leading men, all
Licensed by the Authority of their Order, what deductions they have made from
that Principle of Directing the Intention, so as to indulge all manner of
Immorality; killing men for a box on the ear, though they would run away from
them; Theft, Uncleanness, Lying in the gross sense, Killing of Judges, and
Witnesses, barefaced Simony, Covetousness, so as to wish the death of the
Persons that stand in their way, assisting of Superiors in things known to be
directly vicious, palpable Cheating, and all this with this only Proviso, that
they be all the while so well-meaning men, that they look only at the Good,
that may arise from the thing, to their advantage, not the hurt and damage that
will follow upon it to their Neighbors, though the latter may far exceed the
former.

The Collections of these Maxims have been done by many out of their Writings;
some very pernicious ones, by the faithful Grotius, in his Book de Jure Belli,
and Pacis. But to remove all subterfuges, and scruples from those who have not
leisure to examine these Casuists, the Learned Author of those Letters, one of
their own Church, has performed it; the weakness of their Answers to him
established it, and given Authority to what he has affirmed.

Excepting therefore that small Party of Seculars, that never had their
Education under these men, and those few, that became Converts afterward from
the Principles that they had once sucked in (no very ordinary thing) shall we
not conclude, that the remaining body of the Church is in a very deplorable
condition, and it may be, so universally, that it may almost endanger the
visibility of the other little remnant?

Next to the Jesuits, in power, and interest our Franciscans are esteemed the
most prevailing Party; and as the Jesuits have got the vogue for the only
Masters of Learning, so these come in for their claim of the greatest
Exemplariness of life. For there being two necessary requisites for all
practical Sciences, that is, Rules, and Instances of the practice of those
Rules for particular circumstances: It was thought fit by the then
Governing-party of that Church, to set up a certain Order of men, retired from
the common converse of the rest, who should be as so many convincing
Experiments to demonstrate the power, and efficacy of the Rules of their
Religion; and these were always thought to be more necessary for their public
influence upon the lives of the people, as the power of Example exceeds that of
Precept, or as a true fire does that of a Picture. Of this kind are our
Franciscans, and of all other Orders, by the severity of their Institution most
likely to answer their Churches intention, both for the evidencing the
Principles of it by their practice, and for persuading imitation by their
Examples. See then the utmost of what such a Religion can do, and what Fruits
are to be expected amongst such, as imitate them. If Jesuits have given
dangerous Precepts, certainly the Friars had given a greater strength to them
by their lives, and practices. So that they must still have that praeeminence,
so often boasted of, of being at wonderful Unity with one another, of having a
perfect conformimity betwixt their Rules, and Examples, and (considering the
indefatigableness of both for promoting the common Interest) of spreading their
Doctrine, and Party almost Universally. This seems to be the present
repraesentation of the state of that Church, and alarms all Christian Princes,
since Christianity is almost lost in Christendom, to recover this Holy Land out
of the hands of this Usurping Leviathan, and to settle new Teachers of Old
Morality, and let punishment distinguish betwixt the ordinary sober practice of
Virtue, and Pharisaical Impurity, or Holy Cheats. There cannot be a more
glorious Design, than to take care against the debauching of natural Principles
by a false Religion, and of advancing their Power by the happy assistances of a
true one: Nor a greater security of the Civil Government, than by excluding all
other Independent Authorities from the overruling of natural Conscience, the
Spring of all humane Actions, that tend to the Public good, and the
preservation of Commonwealths. The distinct Jurisdictions may otherwise clash
with one another, in which contest we may well think, that the Conductors of
the Conscience will have the superiority. The experience of this has been fatal
to the Persons of Princes, and does always make them obnoxious to bold
Assassinates in their greatest security. If there happen any Disputes about
Civil Rights in the Bowels of a State, the way ordinarily taken to determine
them is by open and generous Methods; but if once Bulls of Excommunication are
passed, or it be generally supposed, that the Prince is an ill friend to some
Usurpations, or ill conduct of the Church, he is no longer secure in his Privy
Chamber, nor in the midst of a wellarm'd Guard of Suisz. The Desperate
Religionist is ambitious to oblige God, and his Church by murdering his Prince,
and losing his own life in the most exquisite tortures. In one Age have we had
no less than two Instances of this nature from France, and a third attempt
without effect. Is not this a sufficient forfeit of their Liberty, and
toleration, that maintain this Opinion, and have often evidenced it by their
practice for more than 800 years, not only to the prejudice of the Princes
person, but frequently also to the dissolution of his Government? I leave the
instancing in known Stories to those that have made it their particular design.

It is, I confess, no very easy thing to remove an established Power, that has
a general Interest to second it, and Henry the Fourth (who foresaw the danger,
which at last had its effect upon him) when often solicited to banish the
Jesuits, who were something insolent upon their Restoration, was afraid, that
they would send him out of the world before he could send them out of France:
And therefore sure these should applaud, and relish their present condition,
that are far from fearing the power of such men, as they would hardly be able
to get rid of, and encourage all endeavors that are used to prevent the
increase of them.

Notwithstanding all this Tragical, and true repraesentation, that I have drawn
of the present Face of things, I cannot but take notice of a particular Mystery
of Providence, that has laid such strong and sensible obligations (in the
frame of our mind, and the state of things without us) to a right, and due
behavior of our selves, and does moreover so second them with peculiar
influences of his good Spirit, that we often see good men secured from most of
the ill effects of pernicious Principles, and that they contradict their Belief
by their Actions. This has made me have a respect for many of that Party of
men, (whom I have here been so free withal), such namely, as have given all
outward proofs of Innocence, Justice, and (which is strongest) of Universal
Benignity, and Charity. And the like Observations, I have very much pleased my
self in, when in all the converse that I have had with the several varieties,
and Sects of Religion, I could not but perceive, that in all kinds, and sorts
of them, there were some very signal instances of Good, and Virtuous Tempers.
But then the Design of Religion, and Rules of Practice being to lay firmer,
and closer Engagements to Reformation of Life, and Manners, than the ordinary
helps of our natural dispositions, it follows, that whatsoever Religion
contradicts this, puts men into greater danger, than if they were without it.
And consequentlp, that many of those who in other circumstances would obey the
motions of their good Inclinations, when backed, and encouraged by the Learned,
and the Grave of that Religion will make no scruple of taking the
Determinations of the Church for Guides, and Conductors to a more easy, and
pleasant, though a very mischievous way.

After all this long and tedious Discourse, the main of which is grounded upon
the truth of the things that are alleged in the Factum, It may be scrupled by
some, whether it were not either a contrivance of the Archbishop of Sens, or an
excess of passion in the Nunns, that transported them beyond the bounds of
truth, and honesty to depose such things of the Friars, as never were done. To
both which I shall return, That after that the composure of the Factum had been
charged upon the Archbishop, the Nunns called the Notaries of the next Town
over to them, and there made a Protestation to them, which (as all public Acts
usually are) was registered by them; in which they vouch that Writing to be
their own: and add besides, that they have still far more horrible things to
depose against them, if they still persisted to molest them: That the Nunns did
all this deliberately, for a great continuance of time together: That they were
the Gravest, and most Ancient amongst them: That there were no less than
eighteen of them: That by their Quality, the Testimony of one of them is
esteemed of aequal validity, with that of many others put together, since, when
there is no evidence to the contrary, their integrity is supposed to be more
strictly preserved, and secured by the solemn Consecration of themselves to
God's Service: That they exposed their own Reputation to the censure of the
World by thus doing, and were sensible of it before they did it: That they
themselves were Actors, and Parties in most of the things, that are deposed;
and is not all this sufficient to qualify them for Witnesses, and make it
clear, that they did both know the matters, which they testified; and did
faithfully deliver the matters which they knew? What Judge can desire more
sufficiency in a Witness, than Knowledge and Integrity? But yet to this I add,
That the Fact was so notorious, that the Court of France thought fit,
notwithstanding the great Scandal that must needs arise upon it in those
Catholic Countries, to discharge the Cordeliers of their Office, to deprive
them of a Jurisdiction, that they had enjoyed for many hundreds of years. That
this could not be prevented by all the Interest that those Friars could make,
although it is well known that they are the most numerous of all the Orders of
the Regulars, and the most powerful (except that of the Jesuits) and
notwithstanding that they had made use of all their Arts of Address, and all
kind of Solicitations both in the Courts of Rome, and France to prevent the
Execution of the Sentence against them.

For the care taken in the Translation, I have only this to say, That I make no
Question, but that upon the comparing of the Copies, it will appear, that I
have very industriously avoided all manner of liberty, that might any ways
endanger the true meaning of the Testimonies, and have purposely omitted all
the Ornaments, that would, it may be, be requisite for the recommending any
other Writing to the Reader. For I imagined, that where Religious Persons are
brought in to accuse one another, all care ought to be taken that their words
be faithfully related; and if made to put on a foreign Dress, that it do not
disguise the natusal Mien, and Air of the Parties; That the Translation be as
little different, as may be, from the Words, and Connection, that were made use
of in the Original Narration. So that I believe, it will be found, that I have
here followed the Style of a Court of Justice, rather than that of the Modish
part of the Town, or the Theater. For the whole Design of it being a matter of
Fact, I thought a Verbal Translation would the best suit it, lest the altering
of the Words should cause a misrepresentation of the true Sense.

A CHAPTER-ACT OF THE RELIGIOUS SISTERS OF THE Royal Monastery of Saint
Catharine, near Provins, to own their Factum against the Cordeliers, and all
the Matters of Fact contained in the same.
THis day Monday the fourth day of the month of April, one thousand six hundred
and sixty seven, about three of the clock in the afternoon, We Notaries,
Hereditary Note-keepers, and Registers to the King, undersigned, at the request
of the Sisters Margaret Le Cocq de Chauvigny, Magdelaine Pilon, Susan Gaultier,
De Flovigny, Gedouin, Darzillers, Paris, De Beaufort, Du Pas, Bourdault, De la
Salle, Rohault l' Ainee, Rohault la Jeune, Vessiere, Bourgouin, Guignet, Des
Plasses, and D' Aguerre; All of them Nuns professed in the Royal Monastery of
the Mount Saint Catharine near Provins, are come over to the said Monastery,
where being, the said Religious Sisters being assembled according to the usual
manner, they made a Declaration to us, Tha having understood that the Fathers
Cordeliers, notwithstanding, and to the prejudice of the Procuration, that they
gave of it, intended and endeavored to make the Factum, that they had composed
for the defense of their Cause against the said Fathers Cordeliers, be reputed
to be, A piece without any consent to it on their part, and of which my Lord
Archbishop of Sens was the Author; That so, after their having been the causes
of an infinite number of disorders in their Monastery, as well in their
Spiritual as their Temporal concerns, they might by this means still frustrate
the design that the Religious Sisters had to publish the particular accounts of
them, (though with a great deal of regret, and confusion of Spirit;) since that
they have learnt at last by God's mercy to prefer the Salvation of their Souls
before all Temporal and Worldly considerations: They do now acknowledge and
declare, That they made the said Factum, that they gave the Copies and
Originals of it, and that they are ready respectively, and every one in
particular for her own part, to maintain the said Factum in all the things that
it contains, and moreover to add to them Things much more horrible, which also
have been already declared by them, and are in the hands of the said Lord
Archbishop of Sens, if what is contained in the said Factum be not thought
sufficient.

Moreover, They have told us, and declared to us, That the Widow Du Gast could
not truly say, that the said Lord Archbishop of Sens did compose the said
Factum, that he gave her the Papers, and Manuscripts of it, and took the Sheets
back again: but only, that the person who was entrusted to carry it to be
printed, did, it may be, make use of the name of the said Lord Archbishop to
secure himself, and to avoid the having it seized upon by the Fathers
Cordeliers, in case it had been printed in the Nuns name. As in effect,
notwithstanding all kind of precaution they could use to prevent it, they have
been acquainted, that the said Fathers Cordeliers did seize upon some of the
Sheets of it, which they would have put into the hands of Monsieur the
Lieutenant Criminal of Paris, to hinder all their designs and intentions.

Of the which present Declaration thus made by the abovenamed Religious Sisters
after they had been heard separately, being assembled together, as is
aforesaid, those Religious Sisters did demand an Act of us: And to them this
present one is given, and granted to serve for what it is proper.

This was done, passed, and dispatched in the said Monastery: And all the said
Religious Sisters before-named, and appearing in their own persons have signed
upon the Copy of these presents, together with us Notaries signed underneath,
it remaining in the possession of Bruyant. Signed, Bruyant, and De Huchy. Each
of them a Paraphe.

Compared with the Original by the Kings Counselor, Secretary of the House of
the Crown of France, and of the Finances. A FACTVM, OR, DECLARATION in COURT;
FOR The Religious Sisters of Saint Catharine, near Provins, against the Fathers
Cordeliers.
IT is with a great deal of regret that the Religious Sisters of Saint
Catharine, near Provins, see themselves forced to give an account to the
Public of the Suits which they make at Court against the Fathers Cordeliers.
But the injustice, with which it has pleased those Fathers to traduce their
best intentions, and to make the unanimous consent of the greatest and soundest
part of their Community pass for a Faction, and a Caball only of some private
persons, will not allow them to hold their peace; and they might well fear, if
they dissembled their sense of this injury, that they might seem to authorize
all their other disorders. It is nothing then but the bare necessity of
defending and justifying themselves, which moves them to speak. And whatsoever
mischiefs these Fathers may have done in their House, whatsoever scandals they
may have occasioned; yet nothing does more nearly affect them, than the force
which they now constrain them to put upon themselves to publish such things, as
they could have wished for the interest of God and his Church, for the honor
of that whole Order, as well as upon the account of their own reputation, to
have buried in an eternal silence.

SECTION I. What gave occasion to the Suits, which the Nuns of Saint Catharine
make at Court against the F. Cordeliers.
THe Monastery of the Nuns of Saint Clare near Provins, was founded in the year
1237. by Theobald the Fourth, King of Navarre, and Earl of Brie and Champaigne.
The Traditions of this Monastery say, that this Prince caused it to be built in
honor of Saint Catharine upon occasion of a vision, which he had in his Castle
of Provins, from whence he had for several nights together seen upon the Hill,
where the Monastery now stands, a bright shining light, in the middle of which
he discovered a Lady of extraordinary beauty, who with the point of a Sword
marked out the compass of this House. This Prince, who had a great devotion for
Saint Catharine, was persuaded that it was she, that thus designed out the
place, where God would be served under her good guidance. He resolved therefore
to build a Nunnery there, to endow it, and to settle those Nuns there, whom
Saint Clare, who was then living, had sent him from Assize, from whence the
fame of her great Sanctity had diffused it self all over the World. These holy
Maids lived in his Castle of Provins the space of four years, at the end of
which the House being completely finished, they at last took possession of it.

Theobald the Fifth, who succeeded him, had not less affection for this
Monastery than his Father, who had left his heart there for a pledge of his
love. He gave these Nuns great endowments, granted them great privileges, and
at the solicitation of Isabella the daughter of Saint Lewis, whom he had
married, he procured of Pope Urban the Fourth a permission for them to take the
Rule, which at the desire of Saint Lewis he had made for the Nuns of
Long-Champ, who had been founded by this holy King twenty two years after the
Monastery of Saint Catharine. Theobald the Fifth dying as he returned from the
voyage, that he had undertaken with Saint Lewis his Father-in-Law beyond Sea,
would be buried in this Monastery: The Princess Isabella his wife, who died the
same year, chose likewise this place for her interment; and accordingly their
ashes lie here to this day.

This is all that is known of the History of this Monastery. The several Fires
that have happened, and the care that the Cordeliers have taken to make away
all the Titles and Writings, hinder us from being able to give any further
light into it. There is nothing but a Bull of Alexander the Fourth, which
escaped them, which shall hereafter in its place be mentioned, and a permission
from the Archbishop of Sens to beg in the Diocese for the rebuilding of the
Church of Saint Catharine, which had been burnt down by the English; so that
one cannot precisely determine the time, when these Cordeliers first intruded
themselves into this Monastery. All that is known for certain, is, that about
an hundred years since, this House having been again consumed by Fire, was a
while after rebuilt by the care of the Lady Margaret de Billy, of the
Illustrious House of Prunay, then Abbess of it, who retired in the mean while
into the Castle of Provins, as her Predecessors had done upon the like
occasions.

Five or six and twenty years after Madam d'Osonville being chosen Abbess, and
finding the House in horrible irregularities, occasioned by the conduct of the
Cordeliers, who had made themselves Masters of it, set her self about applying
some remedies against it. She got a Nun of Amiens, where the Rule was observed,
to come over to her for this purpose, to teach it her Nuns, to give them the
example of it, and to be assistant to her to deny those Fathers entrance into
the House. God preserved her forty years in this Charge in spite of all the
attempts, and persecutions of those Friars, during all which time they
frustrated all her good designs, and all the regulations which she had made for
settling the Discipline according to the advice of many learned Divines; so
that as the greatest number of the Nuns were habituated to these infamous
communications, she could never draw them out of it, notwithstanding all the
precautions she could make use of: and the disorder did still much more
increase after her death, which happened in 1636, which was the time, when the
Cordeliers bethought themselves of making the Nuns accept of the Triennial,
that the Abbesses might be in greater dependence upon them, that they
themselves might be absolute Masters of the Elections, and that they might with
the more ease and success oppose the good designs of those that should be
elected.

They exercised their Tyranny in this House till the year 1648, when many of
the Nuns abhorring their extravagancies did make suit in Parliament to be
discharged of their conduct. But Father le Fort, who was then appointed
Commissary, and who ruled all in this Monastery, imagined, that now was the
most favorable opportunity offered him to advance himself higher in the esteem
of those of his own Order, and to make himself still more absolute in this
House. He thereupon gives such advice to each of the Parties, as was most
proper to foment the Division; and in the Chapters, which he called no less
than three times a day, he loaded them with such horrid and injurious language
upon their intending to withdraw themselves from under their direction, calling
them People of Sackcloth and Cord, Souls of Brimstone and Saltpeter; That
those Maids being terrified with it, seeing that unless they were assisted in
it, they could not yet shake off this so intolerable a Yoke, were contented to
let them make some new regulations, and to let the late Monsieur Coqueret be
named by the Parliament to draw them up for them: and thus they continued under
the same Government, but yet hoping withal that the Regulations that were made
for them, would give some remedy at least to the evils that they labored
under. But these Regulations were never put in practice, nor so much as
communicated to the Nuns, the Cordeliers being always resolved to retain to
themselves the same power, and the same facility, to commit the same disorders.

At last in the year 1663, The Nuns seeing that the Abbess, who had then
finished her Triennial, and who had never been advanced to that charge but by
the factious arts of the Cordeliers, would, if she were longer continued,
wholly consume both Temporal and Spiritual incomes of the Monastery to
satisfy the greediness of these Fathers, were resolved to make choice of
another. The Cordeliers were well aware of this design, and omitted nothing to
continue this Nun in her Government. They made use of all ordinary artifices in
order to it. The Provincial took those for Associates, Scrutatour, and
Secretary, whom he knew to have most power over the inclinations of the Nuns.
They had private conferences with them, some of which were continued till two
a-clock in the morning: They used the assistance of Kindred, and Friends
abroad, who openly made parties for her. They spared not for either promises,
or threats. Some of the Nuns a great while before had by the Physicians order
desired leave to go out to take the waters. They were now offered to have it
upon condition that they would give her their vote: They had refused it them
for two years before, foreseeing what use they might make of it at the time of
the Election. They gave them and many others Notes to sign, that were wrote by
a Cordelier to assure themselves of their votes, and of their faithfulness to
what they had promised: They took away the office of Scribe from her, to whom
it did belong according to the order of the House. And in fine, after all these
precautions proceeding to an Election, after that the scruting had been renewed
no less than nine times, without being able to overcome the resolution which
the best-inclined amongst them had taken, never to consent to the Election of a
person who was so directly contrary to the good of their House; They advised
her to give her vote for her self, and the Provincial also gave her his, a
practice never before heard of amongst them: so that of thirty three votes
counting that of her own, and another of the Provincial's, who had no manner of
right to give any, she had in all but seventeen. Although this Election was
against all form, yet they were forced to suffer it: but not without this
provision, that the Treasurers should be joined with the Abbess in the
management of the Temporal revenue, and should sign the Acquittances: which
nevertheless was never put in execution, no more than all those other things,
which the Society has demanded from time to time for the settling of good
Order, and which these Fathers to draw them to consent to their desires
promised them, but did afterward make sport at it, when they had obtained
their ends so that all things have ever since continued in greater confusion,
and disorder.

But at last God being weary of the insolence, with which these Religious
abused the easy natures of these poor Maids, did so provide, that a person
unknown to them, who was deeply affected for the loss of so many Souls
consecrated to God, presented a Remonstrance to the late Queen Mother, wherein
was declared in short to her Majesty a part of the excesses, which the
Cordeliers committed in their House, and the necessity there was of removing
those Directors from the Nuns. That Princess was concerned at those disorders;
she testified her indignation against the Authors of them, and got a letter of
the Kings Privy Seal, to command the Provincial to set things in right order
again.

In this Remonstrance there was mention made of two Nuns, to whom the
Cordeliers had given leave to go out of the House: My Lord Archbishop of Sens
upon the scandalous reports that were spread abroad concerning them, had advised
the Provincial to make them come home again: That Father therefore commanded
them to return to the Monastery: They obeyed him. And he himself went over
thither a little while after to punish them for the pretended scandal they had
given. And to do it after a more exemplary manner, this severe Judge, and sage
Reformer, as those Nuns themselves report it, set himself to caress them for
three days together, to entertain them with a thousand expressions of fondness,
and an infinite company of idle professions of love, and to turn all that had
been said of them abroad into raillery. After all which the Secretary made them
sign a paper, which upon the faith of the Provincial they were made to
believe, was a declaration of their Innocence, as indeed they had all reason to
believe; since that one of them maintains, That in an entertain, which he had
with her for a good part of the night, and in which he had made her a thousand
foolish caresses, so as several times to desire to kiss her, That he had then
declared to her, that he was not at all persuaded, that either she or her
Companion had deserved any punishment, but that what he did in it was only to
take off all blame from their Order out of the Queen Mother's apprehension:
Adding, That he would not have her trouble her self for what he should do the
next morning, which he had not so much as acquainted his secretary withal;
And, that the excommunication, which he must of necessity pronounce against
her, should be but a formal show, a counterfeit anger, and a piece of Mummery.
But the next morning having entered the House, and called these two Nuns to a
Chapter, to make them confess that they had put off their Habit, and
consequently had incurred the penalty of Excommunication, for which he would
have them desire Absolution in full Chapter, that Nun to whom the Provincial
had made so many professions of Friendship, and who made account, that she had
signed him a certificate to the contrary, was so touched with this kind of
procedure that she withdrew from them instead of coming on forwards. The
Provincial thereupon commanded his Secretary to go and seize her, and to bring
her upon his back: Those were his very words.

The Secretary pressed her with a great deal of earnestness to do what was
desired of her; and to make her more tractable, and to free her apprehension of
the fear she might have of some ill usage, he had the impudence to embrace her,
and to kiss her by force in the presence of all the Nuns, and said to her
aloud, My Heart, My Dear, My Friend, be our deliverer with the Queen Mother,
thou will oblige us more than I am able to express. But seeing that all this
could not incline her, he fell down on his knees before her, and protested to
her, that as the Provincial had promised her all that they did was but a piece
of Mummery, and that they would null the sentence immmediately after it was
pronounced.

All these extravagant submissions not being able to overcome the resolution of
this Nun, the Provincial gave sentence against her and her Companion, by which
he deprived them of Active and Passive vote, of the offices of the Religion, of
the freedom of Conversing at the grate, and this for as long a time as he and
his successors should think fit, and told her particularly that had shown so
much stiffeness, that he Excommunicated them: And in effect, the Cordelier
Confessor of the House would not since that time admit them to the Sacraments.

These Nuns seeing themselves condemned to such rigorous severities without
other form of process, without bringing in either charge or information against
them, and without confronting them with witnesses, notwithstanding that they
pleaded that they had witnesses of their Innocence, thought themselves obliged
to seek for redress at Court by way of appeal for redressing of abuses, and to
make known their grievances there, as well for their making of factions at the
Election, as for the disorderly conduct of the Cordeliers, and the ill
government of the Abbess both as to the Spiritual, and Temporal concerns of
the House. Upon these complaints the Court by a Decree of the 15 May 1664.
remitted them to my Lord Archbishop of Sens their natural Prelate, and
ordained, That whatsoever should be done, and ordered by him should be put in
execution, notwithstanding any opposition, or appeal whatsoever to the
contrary. These Nuns, in conformity to the wise provision of this Decree,
presented their request to my Lord Archbishop of Sens, that he would please to
come over to them to do them justice.

Then it was that many of the Nuns in the House, who had for a long time
groaned under the disorders that the Cordeliers had committed in their House,
and who had very passionately wished, that it would please God to withdraw from
under their Tyranny, now thought themselves obliged to declare themselves, and
to make use of this favorable occasion, which God had put into their hands,
for the regaining of their liberty. They united themselves therefore with their
Sisters, and with them did unanimously present a new request to this Prelate,
to beseech him, in execution of the Decree to come over to their Monastery to
inform himself of the disorders of the Religious Fathers, and of the truth of
those things which they had specified in their request.

But neither did they stop there: Their number being increased according as
their good intentions came to be better known to their sisters, they drew up a
solemn Act signed by the hands of seventeen Nuns of the Quire the most ancient
amongst them, by which they voted amongst themselves, To petition my Lord
Archbishop of Sens in all humility to receive them under his jurisdiction and
conduct, seeing that the disorders of the Cordeliers both in their Spiritual
and Temporal concerns were grown to such an height. In this Act they also
mutually engaged not to separate, or disunite themselves in the good design
which God had put into their minds to establish good discipline in their House;
and for this end to make all earnest endeavor and suit to effect it, to give
unanimous consent to all that should be thought necessary for it, and to
beseech my Lord Archbishop of Sens not to forsake them in this good design, and
to give them his protection for the complete execution of it.

My Lord Archbishop of Sens considering the duty of his Character to watch over
these Religious Maids for the good of their Souls, and that he ought to be so
much the more sensible of this obligation, as they were more earnest in begging
his assistance in their extremity, came over to their Nunnery, began his
visitation there the 3d of September 1664, drew up their Declaration; and
seeing that a part of the disorders of the House proceeded from an ill
management of the Tem. poral revenues, and from the driving a Trade of
blanching of linen by the Servitour-sisters for people abroad, he took care to
remedy that by wise and most judicious Orders. But as it had been no great
matter to have made good provisions for the Temporal, if he had not applied his
charitable cares to reform their Spiritual condition, especially after he had
particular informations from the Religious Nuns, of the state of their
Monastery and of the danger they were obnoxious to, if they were not put into a
perfect liberty of Spirit, and if the Authors of so many horrible scandals were
not removed from them, this Prelate thought himself obliged in Fatherly charity
to furnish them with Divines which he approved of, who should have the care of
their Consciences, who should assist them in all their necessities, and
administer the Sacraments to them, and to forbid the Cordeliers doing any
function of their Ministry without his express permission, and that under his
hand.

This he did by a new Order of the 10 of February 1666 by which he enjoined the
Nuns to receive for their confessor Monsieur Bourree, Dr. of the Faculty of
Paris, whose ability, life, exemplary manners, and charitable zeal were fully
known to him; and commanded the Cordeliers forthwith to leave the House, which
they had involved in such horrible disorders.

The greatest and soundest part of the Nuns submitted with joy and comfort to
the Orders of their Prelate: But some others to the number of nine or ten of
the Quire, engaged by no body knows what false Maxims, to say no worse, to the
interest of the Cordeliers, made opposition against them together with the
Servitour-sisters, whom the Cordeliers had managed for such a kind of design a
long while before, and whom they had won over to their party by making them
equal to the Religious of the Quire against all order, and by allowing them
all kind of Liberties against their vows of Confinement and Poverty, and
against the particular obligations of their quality.

Upon the refusal of these nine or ten Maids, there was issued out a Decree of
the 24 of March 1666, by which it was enjoined that the Orders of my Lord
Archbishop of Sens should be put in execution according to their form and
tenor. This Decree was backed with another of the 14 of April following, by
which the united Nuns being received as Appealers from the abuse of a pretended
obedience to the Commissary General given to F. Houdry a Cordelier, and of
certain pretended Bulls of exemption from the Jurisdiction of the Ordinary in
favor of the Religious Maids of St. Clare denounced to them under the penalty
of Excommunication to the prejudice of the Decrees of the Court, the Orders of
my Lord Archbishop of Sens, were confirmed a new, and the Lieutenant General of
Provins enjoined to give his assistance to the execution of those Orders.

Those absolute Commands, which came from an Authority which all ought to
reverence, instead of opening the eyes of these nine or ten Religious Maids,
and making them listen to the reasons that persuaded the Court so effectually
to maintain the Order of my Lord Archbishop of Sens, served to no better
purpose, than to make them give clear evidence of that spirit of Rebellion,
with which the Cordeliers had inspired them. It was therefore necessary to have
recourse to the Lieutenant General of Provins and that the Eldest Counselor
of that Court should come over to the Monastery of St. Catharine the 18. of
April, in Execution of this last Decree to settle the Sieur Bourree in the
Ordinary House of the Confessors of this Monastery, in spite of all the
opposition of these nine or ten Nuns. Such a public Contempt of My Lord
Archbishop of Sens's Orders, and so notorious a Violation of the Just Authority
of his Sacred Character, could not but raise a very reasonable Indignation in
him, and one would think should have drawn down upon the heads of these nine or
ten Nuns, the Thunder which God had put into his hands. But this Prelate
considering, that their Obstinacy proceeded from their Errors, and the false
Maxims that the Cordeliers had instilled into them, rather than from any
deliberate malice, resolved to try all possible ways of Sweetness and Charity,
to reduce them to a Sense of their duty. He therefore took care to have that
particular obedience, to which they were obliged by their Vows, and the
hainousness of that Sin, which making them violate those Vows would make them
lose the quality of the Spouses of Jesus Christ, represented unto them. He
moreover provided to have it remonstrated unto them, how unwarrantable those
strange Heats were, and that violence of spirit, which they had added to this
disobedience, and which deserved an Exclusion from the graces that God has
united to the Sacraments of his Church; and a separation from the Society and
Communion of his Holy Family. And finally, he made it be declared to them, with
that Fatherly Authority which God had given him for their concern, That he was
most tenderly inclined for their Spiritual welfare; but withal, that he did
most perfectly abhor their Rebellion: That he would root that out to the
preservation of their Souls, and that after he had waited for their Repentance
with patience, and used the admonitions which Charity required of him, he
should be constrained at last to make use of the sharpest remedies to penetrate
into, and so to dissipate that hard Tumor of their hearts.

But all these Charitable Remonstrances were wholly ineffectual. The
Servitour-Sisters continued their unlawful commerce, and the nine or ten
Sisters of the Quire remained still as pertinacious, and obstinate in refusing
to acknowledge Mounsieur Bourree their Confessor. And as if the Cordeliers
were afraid lest these Maids by doing their duties, and frequenting the
Sacraments, should come to be sensible of the precipice they had engaged them
in, they persuaded them to absent themselves wholly from them: and all the care
that My Lord Archbishop of Sens could use to make them come to these
Solemnities, and the goodness he showed them in offering them Confessors of
any of the other Religious Orders to draw them to it, could not prevent them
from letting Easter Day pass without receiving the Communion. That Prelate
threatened them with the penalties incurred by the Holy Canons, if they
acquitted not themselves of a duty, which he made appear to them was so
indispensible. They had three Admonitions for it according to the custom. They
returned no other answer to all this, but injurious Language and Contempt. And
in fine, after a tedious Expectation of their Repentance, having declared to
them in the usual form, that they had incurred Excommunication, they behaved
themselves so haughtily, that their Sisters, who were more sensibly affected at
that violent and stubborn Deportment, with which they opposed the good Order
that was intended to be settled in the House, than at the particular Injuries
which they had received from them, having informed the Court of it, and
presented a Petition, to which was joined a Declaration of all that had passed;
The Court by a Decree of the 5th. of September, 1666. remitted them to My Lord
Archbishop of Sens to be redressed by him by all ways due and reasonable, and
even to the carrying away of such Nuns as he should think fit into other
Monasteries: Did enjoin the Lieutenant General of Provins, and others the Kings
Officers, to assist the said Lord Archbishop with the Secular Arm, and the
Kings Deputy-Attourney to give his Aid. My Lord Archbishop of Sens, seeing
himself forced by their obstinacy to put this Decree in Execution, did cause
some of them to be carried into other Monasteries. They then began to abandon
their former stubbornness, and to acknowledge the voice of their true Pastor:
And as they were now no longer beset with the Cordeliers, who made them stop
their Ears, and who encouraged them in this their Rebellion, they had no sooner
had the taste of this happy liberty, which was procured them by delivering them
out of a place where they were held Captives, but they acknowledged the need
that their House stood in of the Remedy which was applied to those wounds, that
the Religious Fathers had given to their Discipline; the necessity of my Lord
Archbishop of Sens's Orders, and the Justice of the Decrees of the Court that
had confirmed them. They therefore presently wrote to this Prelate to beg his
pardon for the disobedience which a false Zeal for their Rule had made them
commit, and to assure him of the good disposition they were in to submit
themselves to his Orders, and to acknowledge him for their lawful Superior.
And not only those who were carried out to other Monasteries, but even those
who stayed still at St. Catharines, did by public Acts, and before Notaries,
protest the Nullity of all that they might have done, or signed to the
contrary. But the Cordeliers, who whilst these nine or ten Nuns did make
profession of so much resolution to retain them still in their House, had
several times made a show of leaving them to themselves, not considering with
themselves, that these Nuns being no longer managed by them would soon return
to their duty, and would not fail to execute that themselves, which the Fathers
did but make a show of doing, betook themselves to other Artifices to maintain
themselves in the Usurpation they had assumed in making themselves the
Directours of this Monastery.

For this purpose they undertook two things equally contrary to the Laws of the
Land, the Privileges of the Gallicane Church, and to the Authority of
Parliament: The one under the name of the Procuratour General of the Order; and
the other under the name of the Nuns of St. Catharine. Under the name of the
Procuratour General of the Order they addressed themselves to the Congregation
of the Regulars at Rome, where thinking to elude the Execution of the Decree of
the 15th. of May, 1664. and of those others issued out since, by which the Nuns
of St. Catharine are remitted to the Archbishop of Sens, they procured a Decree
bearing, That that Prelate should have a time assigned him to be heard, That in
the mean while the Censures pronounced by him should be taken off, and that the
Monastery should continue under the Conduct and Jurisdiction of the Cordeliers.

Under the name of the Nuns of St. Catharine, they obtained of their General a
Commission, by which Father Pinault Warden of the great Convent at Paris, is
fully empowered to reform the Nuns of St. Catharine, to correct them, to govern
them, and to give them Religious Fathers for Confessors; And they are all
commanded under penalty of Excommunication to obey him, and to acknowledge him
Commissary; which is in plain terms to make all that is dependant, and
undecided in the Court, to be judged at Rome by their General, without any
cognizance of the cause, and without hearing of the parties.

The Religious Sisters of St. Catharine, being acquainted with the private
intrigues of the Cordeliers, met in Chapter the 5th. of February 1666. and did
to the Number of twenty of them, all Nuns of the Quire, resolve to present a
Petition at Court to get a Decree, by which My Lord Archbishop of Sens should
be declared Superior of their House, with a prohibition to all others to
disturb, or hinder him in the Possession and Jurisdiction of this right: And
the 4th. of August the same year, it being noised abroad, That Father Pinault
Warden of Paris, had got the Kings Letters Patents upon the pretended
Commission of the Father General, they presented a new Petition to My Lord
Archbishop of Sens, signed by twenty Nuns, all professed of the Quire, to
request him in all Humility, to receive them once more under his Protection,
and immediately to come over to their Monastery, to settle the Regulations
there, which he should find necessary, as he had already began to do. And that
they might omit nothing, that might contribute to the procuring them so
Powerful an Assistance against the mischiefs with which they saw themselves
overrun; On the twentieth of the same Month, they opposed the Registring of
the Letters Patents, which might have been imposed upon them upon this
pretended Commission from the General: and on the thirteen of November they
appealed as from the abuse of this same Commission; and on the seventeenth,
they signified their Appeal to Father Pinault. But because they had not as yet
made their Appeal as from an abuse of the pretended Decree of the Congregation,
obtained by the Procuratour General of the Order, not imagining that in France
there ought any regard to be had to a Grant, so contrary to the rights of the
Bishops, and to the Maxims of both Civil and Ecclesiastic Law; they presented
a new Petition to the Court on the 29th. of the same November, 1666. Upon which
by a Decree of December the second, they were received Appealants, as from an
abuse of the beforementioned pretended Decree of the Congregation: and it was
ordered in these terms; That the Declaration of the Visitation, and Hearings of
the said Religious Sisters made, and received by the said Archbishop of Sens.
shall within a month be brought to the Civil Office of the Court, the Clerk to
be obliged to do it by all due and reasonable ways, and in the mean while
prohibited to put the said Decree of the Congregation in Execution, as also
against the Archbishop's making his appearance upon any such assignations,
which might be set him in virtue of that Decree; and Ordered that those
undernamed, Hubert, Apostolic Notary, Brugare and Messagio, Notaries of
Provins, who signified that Decree, shall be appointed to appear at Court, to
answer to the Articles that the Attourney-General may draw up against them, for
having dared against the Duty and Obligation of their place to signify a
Decree, which does so openly wound the Liberties of the Gallicane Church, and
the Laws of the Realm.

This is the state of the Affairs of the Nuns of St. Catharine, and whither all
the suits they have made at Court for these two years do tend, that is, to be
discharged of the direction of the Cordeliers, and to return under that of my
Lord Archbishop of Sens, who is their Lawful and Natural Superior: And this is
that which is here designed to be Justified, by making it appear that these Two
Pleas are agreeable to all the Rules of the Church, and to the particular
Obligations of these Nuns: That the State and Religion are concerned in it, and
that Reasons, which to them seem Invincible, and which respect the Glory of
God, and the good of their Souls, will not suffer them to neglect them.

SECTION II. The first Plea of the Nuns of St. Catharine, which is to return
under the Conduct and Jurisdiction of My Lord Archbishop of Sens, their Lawful
Prelate.
THe Nuns of St. Catharine have such powerful reasons to live under the
Government and Direction of my Lord Archbishop of Sens, their lawful Prelate,
that one can scarce comprehend how they come to be engaged under any other
Conductors, nor by what Charm they have been kept in subjection to that of the
Cordeliers, who have made themselves Masters of the Government of their House.
For besides the reasons in general, which do submit, as shall be made appear,
all Religious Houses to the Bishops, they have such particular ones from the
nature of their Order, and the Maxims of their Holy Founder, that the
Extravagant disorders, which have been committed in their Monastery under these
Mercenary and Self-interested Pastors, as we shall afterward show, cannot but
be attributed to the Violation of all those Holy Rules.

Here follows a Discourse of above Eighty pages, to prove that of Right all
Religious Houses belong to the Jurisdiction of the Bishops, and not to any
Monastical Superiors, which being likely to prove very tedious to English
Readers, was thought fit to be omitted: The Heads of the Chapters are these
that follow.
SECTION III.
That Religious Houses cannot be withdrawn from under the Jurisdiction of the
Bishops, and that whatsoever Exemptions have been granted them, the Bishops
notwithstanding are their Lawful Superiors.

SECTION IV.
That the Order of St. Francis was in its first Institution submitted to the
Bishops; and that it was the intention of that Holy Founder, it should always
continue under that Subjection.

SECTION V.
That it is far from the mind of St. Francis, that the Religious Sisters of St.
Clare, should be under the Conduct of the Friars Minors.

SECTION VI.
That although the Friars Minors a little after the setting up of the Order of
the Nuns of St. Clare, did insinuate themselves into the Government of their
Monastery, they were notwithstanding always under the Jurisdiction of the
Bishops.

SECTION VII.
That the Nuns of St. Catharine, were at their first Institution submitted to
the Archbishop of Sens.

SECTION VIII.
The Bulls alleged by the Cordeliers, to maintain their pretended Jurisdiction
over the Monastery of St. Catharine, are answered.

SECTION IX. The second Plea of the Nuns of St. Catharine, which is, to be
discharged of the Direction of the Fathers Cordeliers.
It Is not enough to have proved, (as has been done.) That if the Cordeliers
have had any Jurisdiction in the Monastery of St. Catharine, they have usurped
it against the Rights, which the Holy Scriptures, the Councils, and all
Tradition do give My Lord Archbishop of Sens, and against the indispensible
Obligations that lie upon the Nuns, according to the mind of St. Francis, and
the Rule of their Foundation to live under his Conduct and Authority. It must
besides be made appear, that they have rendered themselves unworthy, upon the
account of those Horrible Disorders committed by them in their House, and that
utter Impossibility there is of ever resettling any good Discipline there.

SECTION X. That the Cordeliers have rendered themselves unworthy of Governing
the Nuns of St. Catharine, by reason of those horrible Disorders they have
committed in their Monastery.
It Is a certain Maxim in Law, That He that abuses a Privilege granted him
deserves to lose the Power he has in virtue of that Privilege. Privilegium
meretur amittere, qui permissa sibi abutitur potestate. There need then nothing
else be done, but to bring into open view the abuses, that the Cordeliers have
committed of this pretended Jurisdiction over the Monastery of St. Catharine,
to give undeniable proof that they deserve to lose it, although they had been
lawfully possessed of it: and that they are wholly unworthy of bearing the
style of Pastors to these Holy Sisters; having all the Characters of those
miserable Mercenaries, those False Prophets, those Thieves, those Robbers, who
are mentioned in the Holy Gospel; To whom the sheep belongs not, who are
clothed like sheep, but within are ravening Wolves; who enter not by the gate
of the Fold, that is, by the Order of the Bishop, but climb over another way,
that is, by the way of Exemptions and Privileges, and come for nothing but to
steal, devour and destroy. Fur non venit nisi ut furetur, etc.

SECTION XI. The Disorders that the Cordeliers have committed in the House of
St. Catharine, as to the Spiritual concern.
IT were to be wished for the Honor of the Church which suffers by all her
disorderly Children, that the Cordeliers would have made good use of the
moderation, which had been exercised toward them till now. There would then
have been no necessity at this time to declare things which Charity, that
covers a multitude of Sins, has so long concealed, and which seemed to have
kept them secret from her own view, lest Zeal should oblige her in Justice to
prosecute the Authors of them. But it is found too plain, as it shall soon be
shown, that this long Patience has served to no other purpose, than to make
them the more insolent, and to give them liberty to carry their Excesses to
such an height, as has rendered them the scandal not only of one Town, or one
Province, but of the whole Church.

To be able to conceive an Idea of it in general, one need but represent to
ones Fancy all the mischiefs that humane passions are capable of producing when
they are covered with pretenses of Piety, and abuse the most Holy and Sacred
things to satisfy their own inclinations, and as much as in them lies, to
corrupt poor innocent Souls. One need but fancy all the most shameful and base
ways, that may be made use of to overthrow good discipline in a Religious
House. In fine, One need but imagine all the abuses, which people that are not
restrained either by the fear of God or man can commit, of an Authority which
they have usurped, and which they employ to inspire Viciousness, and to set up
Wickedness in full power. And one need not fear that these general Idea's
should be either too high or too large, seeing that these Fathers have this
unhappy advantage, That the Wit of man is not capable of imagining that which
they are capable of committing. For that reason, as their Extravagancies exceed
all imagination, there shall be nothing said of their Disorders here, but what
is faithfully drawn out of their own writings, and the depositions of a great
number of the Nuns. And besides, there shall be so much condescension shown in
their behalf as not to name them openly, whenever it shall appear necessarily
to particularize any of their Disorders: and those Actions shall be suppressed,
which could not be mentioned without doing violence to Modesty.

The Education of Pensioners.
THE First care of those who design to make Virtuous and Religious Nuns, is to
bring them up as soon as possible in the Fear of God, and to withdraw them in
their tenderest years from the Vanities of the World. But as the Cordeliers who
have had the direction of the Monastery of Saint Catharine have had ends far
enough distant from this, so have they taken different measures; and their
first care on the other side has been to inspire the young Virgins, who were
sent to pensi^^ (...) this House, with a spirit of Wan^^^^ and Libertinism, and
to incline them from their tenderest infancy, to love to be Caressed and
Courted. See how one of these Sisters speaks in her depositions. The Education
that they gave was most pernicious: The Confessors spent their time in
caressing the Pensioners that were sent them to be instructed for the Holy
Communion, and entertaining them with all kind of ridiculous stories. When upon
occasion they went to the Fathers Convent, they used all kind of unseemly
privacies with them, to take away from them that Modesty that is natural to
their Sex, and so early enough dispose them to be afterward the more
complaisant to them. The Ancientest and the most Reverend amongst them
appointed their Novices to entertain those Pensioners, whose inclinations were
most suited to theirs: They gave them names of Kindred, and from time to time
made them give them visits to foment their Intimacy, and to give one another
mutual assurances by Words, by Presents, and by Collations. This was the
foundation, upon which they laid their Education of Youth, and which in my
opinion might easily convince them of what has been done since in their riper
years, having taken such timely care to persuade the young Virgins that all
these things were innocent.

Education of Novices.
THey were not content to instill such dangerous inclinations as these into the
young Virgins, but took care also to foment and cherish them according as they
advanced in years. And whereas in other Monasteries the time of Noviciate is
that, wherein they apply themselves most to those who design to enter into the
Religion, and acquaint them with all the least appearance of a Religious
severity, the Cordeliers on the other side made it their business to divert the
Mistresses of the Novices, from informing them of the obligations of a
Religious Life, which they concealed from them with a great deal of care, that
whilst they put them upon some trifling ordinary Observances, they might not
lose any thing of that spirit of Wantonness and Vanity, which they had
endeavored to inspire into them before the time of their Noviciate. I can
affirm, as having assured knowledge of it, that Three Novices ready to be
professed, having been with Father N. Confessor, to be instructed in order to
this Sacred Action, He made them an hundred idle Complements of Love, and gave
every one of them a token of his Affection, obliging them to wear them; gave
them very earnest advice to get them good Intimates amongst the Fathers,
telling them that it was very convenient for the Fathers, keeping them from
going to the Tavern, and diverting entertainment for themselves to make them
pass their time pleasantly, and gave them very particular silly Instructions
about the way to manage these Intimacies. He desired one of the three to retire
privately, that he might acquaint her with the Passion he had for her, when he
gave her Holy Water at the great Grate of the Church; That he reserved himself
for her, That if it were the Rule of the House, that the Nuns should not come
to the Grate till four years after that they had been professed, he would wait
till then to have her for himself. He told another Father, who also had an
Inclination for this Novice, That he had nothing to do to pretend to her, that
he had reserved her for himself. But not having found in these Novices all the
compliance he could have wished, he threatened to stop their Profession, as
indeed he did endeavor, but to no purpose. The Sisters being nigh the time of
their Profession, were often sent to Father N. the Confessor, to be instructed
by him in the Obligations of the Religion. But he, instead of acquitting
himself of this duty, talked to them of nothing but Love, and to effect it with
more success, he often entertained them in private, and gave them Medals with
knots of Ribbons of diverse colors, according to the variety of his
inclinations, making them promise him to wear them for his sake. And perceiving
once that they had not put them on, he was in such a rage, that he threatened to
keep them from their Profession, which he set himself on work to do, by
persuading their Mistress, that they were not well instructed in the things
which were necessary for them to know. He called Sister N. his Inclination;
Sister N. his Sweeting; Sister N. his faithful Confident. These were the
subjects of his Entertaines with them. Some Novices having been sent to receive
Instruction of the Confessor, he instead of preparing them to the Sacrament,
of a true Religious Vocation, gave them for a constant rule, to make themselves
sensible of the Love he bore them. For tokens of the ardent zeal of his Love to
them, he gave them Ribbons of Fire-Colour, blew, green, and other colors, that
were significative of his passion, engaging them above all to come to the Holy
Water, the better to encourage him to sing Mass: And that he might have them
daily at his grate, he blamed the Mother Governess for the unpreparedness of
these Novices, to oblige her to send them to him under this false pretense of
Piety.

Of the young Professed Nuns.
ONe may Judge by what has been said about the manner of the Cordeliers
instructing the Novices, what measures they took with the young Professed Nuns.
In effect, it were strange if they should not have taken all kind of liberty
before them, since now they feared not, That Modesty would make these Maids
leave the House to avoid the snares that were laid for their Chastity. A young
Professed Nun, who had taken very strong resolutions (by the assistance of Gods
Grace, and the Instructions of a Divine that was a friend of her Family) never
to entertain any communication with the Cordeliers, upon occasion found her
self engaged to see one of them, and to entertain him. And because she stood
very cautiously upon her guard; this Cordelier gave her an hundred reproachful
taunts. He told her, that such a kind of reserved life was fit enough indeed
for mere Innocents; but that it was pity, that she should affect such
preciseness: That she was too well made both in body and mind, to hide her self
from the World: That when she came to be a little more advanced in years, she
would run into despair for not having improved her parts, or had the pleasure
of being Loved; and to this he added all that might make impression upon the
inclinations of a young Virgin.

Books allowed.
But yet they thought it not sufficient to make use of such kind of discourse
as this, to draw off the young Nuns from doing their duty, and insensibly to
engage them in vicious inclinations. They brought them Romances and Plays to
read, and all other books that might choke the sentiments of Piety in them, and
make them easily susceptible of the Affections which they endeavored to
cherish in them. Their Passion besotted them so far, as to make them give the
Nuns, The Maxims of Love, The School of Maids, The Catechism of Love, whch are
most abominable pieces, and which one may say, were suggested by the Devil of
Impurity. Nay they have even given them books of Magic, and full of an
infinite number of infamous and diabolical secrets: And one of them was so
beastly, as to give a Nun a Character to write nasty things withal.

Instructions.
To these Books they added Instructions, which were not less impudent. They
have been heard at the Grate an infinite number of times to sing Lascivious
songs, and one could scarce go thither when they were there, without hearing
some sottish thing or other. Once in a pretty round company, upon a refusal
made by a Nun to put her fingers through to one that desired her, he fell to
abuse her, and told her that she must know, that all from the middle upwards
was so wholly at the disposal of their particular Friend, that he was not to be
refused, neither the sight, nor the handling of them. Our Mothers Governesses
have assured me, and many others of our Ladies, that the Cordeliers gave them
this for a lecture that 'twas to be well practiced, That the Bosom, the Mouth,
and the Hand, must be their particular Friends. A Sister complaining to a
Cordelier that they talked so freely of immodest things, He told her, that it
was not so great a sin as she made account of; That in the Primitive Church
every one gave the Kiss of Peace, and that it was not forbidden but upon the
account of those that abused it. the same person telling another Father, That
she wondered that Priests dare present themselves before the Altar, in the midst
of such communications; That for her part, the mere shame of confessing such
actions, were enough to withold her from them: He told her, That these things
being not done for any ill end, but only to express the tenderness of their
Friendship, it was at the most but a venial Sin.

Presents.
These Instructions were backed with Presents, which relisht of nothing but
Vanity and Libertinisme. Father N. (when our Confessor) desired often to speak
with two Nuns, to entertain them with professions of his Friendship, and gave
them wet and dry sweetmeats, to oblige them to comply with him, and to
satisfy his unlawful desires. Father N. Rival of Father N. gave his picture
drawn as a Gentleman to Sister N. and made that Lady be drawn as a Pallas.
Others as great Gallants as these gave them Rings, Gloves trimmed with Ribbons,
Watches, Looking-glasses, Seals, wherein they engraved their Ciphers, and the
first letters of their Names, interwoven with Motto's and Emblems that
expressed their Passion: And for fear they should not comprehend the mysteries
of them, they accompanied them with passionate Letters and Verses which did
unriddle them. See how one of the most reputed amongst these Fathers, has
explained them in one of his Posies and dear Letters which is under keeping.

LETTER.
My Heart is wholly yours, wholly in you, and wholly for you, seeing it lives
only for you. Doubt not of it no more than of those Oaths which I have made to
you, and which I now renew to you, to Honor you without Equal and without End.
It Is the Device, which I have caused to be graved upon one of the Seals which I
send you, of the Ciphers of our names interwoven; which in its first part
expresses the high and singular esteem I make of your Affection: The other part
expresses the duration of it, which shall have no end, no more than the ardour
of my Affection, and the absoluteness of my submission shall have bounds. As
you have most Amoureasement.
Affectionately given me up your Arms, and as I have received them and kept
them by me, because the Caske becomes not your Sex, which ought never to
conceal the Charms of their face and eyes; and besides, because I should be
sorry that those that should set upon N. should find him unprovided of his
Arms, and not able to defend himself, so now I send you them back again in
another Seal. As they consist of two flames and a bell, the first of which make
themselves sensible by the effects of heat, and the other by sound and noise, I
have put for the Device; more of Fire: suppressing the rest, which would make
up a perfect sense: More of fire than sound, that is to say, more of effects
than words, more of fruits than noise, more of passion than talk, more of love
in the heart than in the mouth. The bell also is enclosed, and covered with a
Chevron, and though provided of its clapper, yet it is at rest, to signify,
that it says not a word. The ribbon that ties them together with its three
colors, expresses the quality of our affections. You love the Ash Color,
which signifies the infinity of your love. I have a fancy for the White and
Green, the one of which signifies fidelity, candor, and sincerity; the other,
hope and increase. So that beginning at yours, they sing: My Love has no
bounds, because my fidelity always increases: beginning at the white: My
fidelity shall always increase, and therefore my Love shall have no end: And
at the Blew: I hope that my fidelity will acquire me a Love without End. These
Artificial pieces of the workman, and these weak productions of my own fancy,
will however acquaint you with that Sovereign empire you have over my will, and
what constant employment you give my heart, which thinks of nothing but of my
Conqueress and Soveragn. I protest to you, most amiable Melita, it is true, and
if it were in my power to give you any considerable proofs of this truth, I
would soon put your mind out of a capacity of ever doubting of it, and your
heart in a condition of feeling as constant and tender inclinations for
Thyrsis, as he now wishes for his happiness and repose. I conclude with these
ten ill-made, but true lines, speaking to this pitiful Present.

Vous partez Avortons? Vous osez hazarder?
Allez foibles efforts d'un Caeur plein de Courage;
Si Melite pour vous aussi bonne, que Sage
A'l abord sealement daign vous regarder
Vostre bonlieur digne d' Envy
Allumera ma jalousie.
Ne me derobez rien, ny du caeur, ny des Yeax:
Dites-luy settlement, que je suis tout en Elle,
Et jurez-luy pour moy sur le plus grand Des Dieax,
Que je serray constant autant qu'elle est belle. OR,
Dare you Abortives thus your Fortune try?
Go then weak sallies of a Generous mind;
If you as Good as Wise Melita find.
TO allow you but one glance of a kind Eye,
Your Happy Fortune will in me
Kindle the flames of jealousy.
Rob me not either of her heart, or Eye,
Tell her, in her I only live; and swear,
Swear't for me by the greatest Deity
That I Will be full as Constant, as she is Fair.
But these Fathers were not contented only at this rate, to employ such profane
stuff as this to win the hearts of these Religious Sisters: There was nothing
that appeared any thing glorious in the world, which they did not make use of
to corrupt them. See how one of them has turned the entry of the King and Queen
into Paris into applications of flattery to his Correspondent, where he says he
was with the body of the University in his rank of Doctor.

LETTER.
Seeing the Queen under the Canopy of State and upon the throne, I wished her
the shape and mien of my Sovereign. Hearing the public Acclamations, and the
solemn vows they made for her, I wished that the merit of Melita had been as
much revealed. Nay sometimes when I saw the King enter his City, I felt the
transports of my heart, and the urgent efforts of my Soul carried forth to wish
my self a like happiness, which would have completed my felicity, if it had
been with less Pomp and with more secrecy. Thus this whole pompous day was
spent in a continual commerce betwixt my eyes and my heart, applying all the
glorious representations that charmed the one to the Charms that triumphed over
the other.

THESES.
THey have sometimes employed even things, which common decency and piety
seemed to have secured from the attempts of their wicked passion: For to
signalize it the more, they have even dared to dedicate Theological Theses to
them, borrowing to this purpose after a new-invented sort of impiety, the
pictures and qualities of the Saints, whose names they bore. This possibly
could hardly be believed, if the very Extracts of their own Letters were not
here produced.

LETTER.
I am just now going to carry my Theological Theses to the Printer: I must
defend it the sixth of October, and I intend it shall be under your Patronage.
If I did not apprehend the talk of people, I would set out your name and merits
in public upon the Title, and the Epistle Dedicatory of the same Theses. But I
will content my self to dedicate it to you tacitly, for the picture putting a
Magdalen, and for the Title these words: Multum Diligenti, that is, To her who
Loves much -- This is the design, see now the execution of it in another.

LETTER.
My Beloved Heart, I desire you immediately upon the receipt of this to send to
Monsieur Michels (He is the Messenger of Provins,) you shall there find that
which I promised you, that is, a piece of Satin with a dozen of Theses, which I
send you to give to your Friends. Send me word whether you have received them
all, and if there be nothing spoiled, especially the satin. If I were with you
I would have a Frame made to put it in. You will find at the opening of the
packet a piece of my hand, which is an Epistle Dedicatory. I would have put it
all in French, with your name in the press, and would have printed it so. But
it is not time yet to take such liberties. I believe you know the reason why.
Although there be but one Title upon the Theses, yet it makes a great many
people talk who know the Mystery of it, and to declare their sense about it,
and to say, that it is to you that I dedicate it. They must have very little
wit if they should judge otherwise, since the Title makes it clear enough to
them. To testify then that it is to you that I dedicate it, I was not content
to put those two words only, which I sent you notice of. I should not have
thought that I had sufficiently gratified the ardour of my Love. And so I would
put in all the Title, which you may now see, together with a picture of her,
whose name you bear. See then the explication of the Title -- To both the
Disciple and Mistress of the Sacred Love, Mary Magdalen, who as a mark has been
struck with the Arrow of Love, and who reciprocally as another Arrow has struck
another mark: To the Well-beloved: To Her who has loved much, and does love
much: To the Well-chosen: To Her who has made choice of the better part, which
shall never be taken from her. This is the Explication of the Title, which may
be understood of the Magdalen in respect of Jesus Christ, of Jesus Christ in
respect of the Magdalen. But I understand them of you and my self reciprocally:
Let them talk of it that will. It Is too long a while since, that I could but
only wish for an opportunity of giving you a testimony of the sincerity of my
heart: And these are the least testimonies I could give you of it. I hope one
day to do more to assure you, that I Love you in reality, and not in appearance
only, and that I am,

My beloved Heart, your Engaged for ever.
One must be very curious about profanations and impieties, not to be satisfied
with this; for it is not very easy for impiety to go higher, than to abuse the
words of the Gospel and of Jesus Christ himself, to express a scandalous
criminal passion by; and to borrow the Idea of the chastest and purest Love
that ever was, for to dedicate and sacrifice, as one may say, the truths of
Divinity to a ridiculous and abominable Love. And yet these are the least
testimonies of affection, that these Fathers thought they could give the Nuns,
and made use of Profanations yet still more impious and exorbitant.



SERMONS.
HOw frequently have they made the Talent that God gave them to preach his
word, serve to entertain their infamous commerces? How often have they
endeavored by a most execrable profanation of this Divine Ministry to make the
Nuns believe, that it was they that animated them in their preaching, that
encouraged them to undertake it, that upheld them in this painful work, and
that they proposed to themselves nothing else, but the glory of pleasing them.
See how one of them, when about to perform the Lent-course in a very
considerable town, has expressed himself in one of his Letters.

LETTER.
This does testify to you, Most dear Melita, that Thyrsis loses no
opportunity, whereby to assure you of the extraordinary pleasure he finds in
entertaining himself with her, whom he loves more then himself: His
constitution, which is none of the strongest, fills his mind with terror, as
often as he thinks of the approach of a five weeks labor, under the toil of
which he foresees either the shame of sinking, or the danger of death it self:
He shuts his eyes against these disasters, and stops his ears aganst the
complaints of his head, and his lungs, by the strength of that desire he has to
see before, and after these hardships; the object that will animate him to
undertake them, and that will give him a sweet consolation after all his
languor. If you are very well acquainted with the incomparable Melita, you may
assure her, that it is none but her, that can effect these wonders in an heart,
that is more here is than its own. Nothing refreshes this languishing creature in
his continual indispositions, but the Idea of her perfectiions. It Is to that,
that he makes the most pompous sacrifices: It Is to that, that he addresses his
most solemn Vows: It Is that, where he places his most affecting delights: It Is
upon that, that he intends to set up his rest, and without End, and without
Change.

MARRIAGES.
BUT they were not thus satisfied with the Profanation of a Ministry that ought
to be so much reverenced: They carried their Sacrilege yet higher, by
profaning the Sacraments and the most Holy Ceremonies of the Church. They had
taken care so to contrive it, that there should not be one Nun in the House,
that from her Novice-ship, that is, in an age, and at a time when she durst not
oppose them, had not some Cordelier for her particular friend, and with whom
also she was made to contract a very intimate Alliance. This was done with all
possible solemnity: and as for the future they were to call themselves Husband
and Wife, according to an Order long since established by them in the Nunnery.
When they would make any new Intimates, they observed the same formalities,
which were used in common Marriages. The new Lovers addressed themselves to the
kindred and friends of those, that they desired to incline to them. They gave
pledges of their Affection, made demands and conventions: They assigned days to
draw up the Articles, to make the Contracts, and at last the Marriages, where
there was jollity and feasting, and a thousand impertinencies uttered.

It is now sixteen, or eighteen years since, That Father M. Cordelier and
Doctor of Paris, being come to court a Sister, and to take her for his good
Friend, (That was their Ordinary Character) did scarce part from her for three
days together, the time that he stayed there. He advanced his discourse with
her by degrees, made insolent propositions to her, alleged those unwarrantable
liberties, that he had taken with the Ladies of the N. Cordeliers, to her; and
such freedom as many of his Order had told him they had taken in our House, at
which without the particular Grace of God, she had yielded to him.

Another Sister after she had been courted a long while by Father N. at present
Warden of -- had all solemnities provided for her Marriage. A Cordelier as the
Father of F. N. demanded her of M. N. the Abbess, who passed for the Mother of
this Sister: Father N. Cordelier served for the Notary to pass the Contract:
They published the banes at the Grate of the asorementioned Lady, and in the
Hall below. Father N. served for Curate, making them say the very words, and he
for his part reading the same Prayers, and using the same Ceremonies that are
observed in ordinary Marriages. There was a Ring given, and put upon the finger
of the Bride, Sister N. disguised like a Cordelier, made them an exhortation
about the duties of Marraige, and after that, he and she were sent alone to
another Grate, to consummate the Marriage together.

Entertainments.
THese Solemnities, which were almost continual, never passed without all the
frolickest humors that these Fathers could put themselves in. They eat
together at the Grate, They drank together in the same glass with hollow reeds:
They drank healths on their knees, and broke the glasses after they had drank
them off: They made use of little Artifices to lift up the Sisters Neckcloths:
They reproached them, that they were but mere geese in comparison of the Ladies
of the N. Cordeliers, in whose Nunnery ten or twelve Cordeliers did constantly
lodge. And after that cited the debauches, that were practiced in other Houses
of their Order, to excite them to imitate them.

From these Entertaines they proceeded to discourses, that were yet more
licentious and impudent: They danced their parts to tunes that were sung to
them: They threw off the Cordeliers habit, and dressed themselves in Suits of
Satin, and trimming of colored Ribbon: sometimes the Cordeliers gave the Nuns
their habits, and the Nuns theirs to the Cordeliers: some of the Nuns at the
Friars entreaty disguised themselves like seculars, and appeared before them at
the Grate, with their Necks naked, and set thick with patches, as well as their
faces. Others of them disguised themselves like Comedians, and acted Plays
before them: And others were to be seen with necklaces of Amber, yellow Tiffany
Hoods, with their hair curled upon their foreheads, and with neck-cloths, and
vails of silk. In this condition they played for kisses at cards, and other
idle games, till five a clock in the morning. They brake the very Grates to do
things with more ease, and they spent whole days and nights in these kind of
entertainments.

If they were obliged to be long absent from this Monastery they took care to
maintain their correspondence by Letters, where nothing was forgot that would
serve to express the height of their most shameful passions, or to debauch a
mind, and make it sensible of amorous Inclinations. There are a great number of
these Letters in keeping, whose Language is full of profaneness and impurity,
and in which these Religious Fathers talk of nothing but of destiny and fate,
and of good and bad fortune: Nothing but expressions of the bitterest and most
invective jealousy, protestations of fidelity and services, complaints of the
cruelty and indifference of those to whom they write.

LOVE LETTERS.
One of them there treats her be writes to, with the Title of his Mistress;
another with that of his Soveraignness: another calls his, his Duchess,
another his, his Princess: another his, his Beloved; another styles his his
Dear Heart, another his his dearest Gallant, another his his dear Confident;
another writes to his dear Comrade, another to his Beloved Heart, another to
his little Dove, another to the Incomparable One, that makes the subject of his
adoration.

The superscriptions are, To her whom I soveraignly honor: To my Amiable cruel
one, To the Victorious Melita, To my Dear Child, To the only subject of my most
tender affections, To Her whom I think of, To my new Conquest, To the
Loadstone, that draws me to your self, my Dear, To the most Amiable, and most
beloved of the Nymphs of the sacred Mount.

It Is not hard to judge, of what style the Letters might be that were wrote to
Virgins, to whom they gave such qualities as these, and whom they ordinarily
called Mardana, or Mariana, or Timaretta, or Cleopatra, or Melita, according as
the Friars fancied them to have any resemblance with these Hereinaes in
Romances. There shall be here some extracts of them set down, or at least of
some of them, that are the least impudent, and the most Ingenious amongst them,
and such as are written in the most respectfull terms. For, as for the rest,
they are too beastly and impious to be exposed to the view of all the world.

LETTER.
It is but just Madam, that you should serve for a Sanctuary for my complaints
to fly to, since that you gave them birth, and that they tend to no other end,
but the cause which produced them. I beseech you then condemn me not, if I open
my pain to you, and if I force my self to give you a small intimation of my
Love. Give my spirit, that lives only for you, some encouragement to its
pursuit: and if Love has made so fair a composition as to unite my heart to
yours, I hope to enjoy without Rival, the Glory of calling my self, --

LETTER.
-- This must be the subject of one of your Letters, if you desire to make the
happiest man that lives: you must acquaint me, if the Incomparable Timaretta
has not altogether forgot the Unfortunate Sesostris.

LETTER.
-- It Is not only, as you tell me in yours of the sixteenth of May, the effects
of my good nature, and Generosity: No, you make other kind of Impressions upon
me. But I durst tell you them, that I might not be contradicted in a thing,
which I do tenderly cherish, and the bare Idea of which gives me satisfaction
enough for ever suffering my self to be diverted from it, or to be undeceived.

LETTER.
Is it possible, Incomparable and Dear Timaretta, that you should be strangely
surprised at the sight of my Character. And is my missortune so great, that for
an involuntary, and forced silence, you could be able to do me the injustice to
think, that I could live without being wholly yours, and wholly sacrificed to
your service.

LETTER.
-- See now, we are in all appearance sixscore leagues distant one from
another, and consider whether I be as near you here as I was at Provins. I know
not whether I my self stayed behind in that place, as I have brought you hither
along with me into this. However I dare say, you ought to have stopped me, and
kept me there, to be revenged of my Stealing you away, and that you might have
near you one full of Respect, Esteem, and Reverence for your merit.

LETTER.
-- You may assure her, whom you know, that there is nothing in this world that
is better beloved, more tenderly thought of, nor more Religiously adored, than
she is in the heart of that other person, of whom I am speaking.

LETTER.
-- Whatsoever Idea your Imagination may frame of my Love, believe it, my
Dearest, it must be less, than the reality of that passion that I have for you.
Injure me not so far as to doubt of it, -- cheer up your self my amiable One,
and let me bear all the burden of this Affliction. It is not reasonable, that I
should be the occasion of the least trouble to her, who makes up all the
sweetness of my life. -- For mine own part I Will endeavor to sweeten the
trouble by reflecting upon your worth, and your relation to me, and the
faithful testimonies you have given me of it.

LETTER.
-- But my candle is all melted: Midnight has struck. I Will go see if the Organ
can give me an entertainment any thing nigh those agreeable delights, which you
have made me relish in your Charming conversation.

LETTER.
-- Though my Heart swims in the midst of the Waters, and baths, and Minerals,
which I drink; yet I feel not that they have quenched the least spark of those
fires, which yours has kindled there. -- Alas that it should not be as Aussi
puissant.
able, as affectionate: without doubt I should live with more content, if it
were so, because I should give you more satisfaction.

LETTER.
-- Do not bemoan me, fair N. The tears that Heaven shed something too
plentifully at the time of our short interview, and the many waters that fell,
could not quench the flames, which a flash of Lightning from you had kindled in
my spirits. None but my self should be concerned at my troubles, because I did
imprudently search for the occasion of them: But the cause of them is too
Lovely to be sorry for the effects.

LETTER.
-- I have but this moment -- to protest to you, that if I had as many hearts
as hairs, I would carry them all to be lodged in the bosom of my Dearest, and
most amiable Melita.

LETTER.
-- Our Daughter has done very prettily to send me those two little glasses.
But I am not satisfied with so little sweetness, and do not let her think to
persuade me that she Que elle ait tout petit.
has every thing little. I Will doubt of it, till I have found it so by
experience. Our Son's Ink is frozen, and I hear no talk of him. Let her know,
he shall be soundly whipped, as soon as he appears, and I do not know whether she
can escape it.

LETTER.
-- Time is a great workman, as he is a great Master. It has taught me a great
many things; but it was never so favorable to me, as when it made me know
Melita, and her true value, by the sweetness of her Conversation, versation,
and what she can do, if she please, to oblige those persons that she has
engaged to her. Whatsoever she may merit, though she had as many Adorers, as
she has hairs, that is, chains upon her head, and as many as she has rays, that
is, darts in her eyes: yet Thyrsis has the vanity to think, and say, That he
alone will not yield to all that Troup, That his heart contains as many fires
in it for her, as all those put together could do; and although he should yield
to them in merit and good fortune, he thinks with justice that he should carry
it from them all in Love and Fidelity: So that it will always be true, That as
the amiable Melita is without Equal, so the respects and tenderness of Thyrsis
shall be without End. It Is by these mysterious words, my Queen, betwixt us two,
that I would for the future conclude all my Letters, and I desire the same
favor of you. The first of these Motto's represents me the Object of my
happiness, and the second intimates the extent of the devoirs of your faithful
and inviolable subject. Adieu my Queen, good morrow my Sovereign; good night,
thou most faithful to the happiest of Shepherds.

LETTER.
You have, my Amiable Melita, a very particular Grace in tickling the passion
of your Faithful and Sincere Thyrsis, by the charming assurances you give him
of preferring him before a Cavalier much worthier and a fitter object for your
Love, than that poor Shepherd, whom Age, Melancholy and Infirmities, have
already made gray. It Is this, that would make him assure you of all his
affections, if he could have reserved any thing when he sacrificed his heart
upon your Altars. Live then my Sovereign, in full security of this possession.
Put Thyrsis amongst your Conquests, though none of the richest indeed, yet
doubtless the most absolutely gained; and believe that neither Death nor Time
shall ever interrupt the duration of an engagement, that this Shepherd makes
account is eternal. Keep your self in good humor, and think upon the bounties
which you design Fair Melita, to Yours, Wholly Yours, Thyrsis.

LETTER.
-- Speak the truth, she resembles you, Elle est belle toute nue comme vous.
she is Fair all naked as you.

LETTER.
-- If the cold hinders you from writing it is no matter, provided that it be
not at the Heart: for my part, I am never cold in the aux parties castees.
hidden parts.

LETTER.
-- The reading of your last has excited a greater passion of Joy in my heart,
than I have felt these ten years; I know not, whether I ought to except even
the moments I enjoyed in the happiness of seeing and conversing with you. For
in fine, my Dear Sister, I am of opinion, that there is more sweetness in a
little correspondence, than in a une visit sterile.
barren dry visit to her that one loves. And it is always the peculiar talent
of your sex to make fewer advances in Conversation, than upon the Sur la
papier. --
Paper -- I am not at all ungrateful, yet I know very well, that I am not yet
where I would be, since you condemn the irregularity of some of my thoughts.

LETTER.
-- You reproved me for having wrote I will, and I will not, and you call me
presumptuous. I remember very well, Melita, how I made use of those imperious
words. But in short, if you had but once in your life been in Love, you would
have found in this manner of expression more of tenderness than Authority, more
of sweetness than Arrogance -- You are in the right, Melita, you are to give
Laws for all things, not only for what passes betwixt you and me, but to my
whole destiny also -- you would have me believe that you are full of
acknowledgement, and an enemy to ingratitude. Alas! if you love me for no other
reason, but to avoid that base vice, you love me little enough, and after a
very languid manner. However I will acknowledge my obligation to you for that.
How small a part soever you can allow me in your favor, I cannot claim it as
due to me, and it is a pure free gift. It Is true I had reason to hope for
something more, and I had all manner of probability for it. But what?
appearances are very deceitful, especially appearances drawn from the discourse
of women. Allow me this expression of my anger, and trouble. One, and the other
have reduced me to a condition that would make you pity me, if you saw it.

LETTER.
-- Although you be the Sovereign of my Will, you have given birth to I know
not what Rebellious motions in my Heart, which will not be satisfied by you
with such things as you undertake to stifle them with. If it be so, Melita, and
that I am not able to rule them after your way, be so good as to indulge
something to their Rebellion, and to suffer them for the future to show
themselves.

LETTER.
-- There are so many marks of your goodness in the last lines you wrote to me,
that if my passion were never so little regulated, very likely it would have
nothing more to pretend to: and yet I find I know not what, that enclines me to
desire of you something beyond the passions of honor, esteem, and gratitude:
And, Sister, do not object to me that injurious veil, that covers a part of
your Graces. The little god, whom you know, has his veil too, as well as you,
which suffers him not to take notice of the austere habit which encloses you.

Sacrilege, and Profanations.
IT IS but too true, that the passion, that possessed these Religious Fathers,
has blinded them to such a point, as to make them an hundred times forget
themselves, and as often those to whom they discoursed. In effect, can one
without an extraordinary blindness say to a Nun in the very Tribunal of
Penitence: my dear sweeting, be confident, and then sighing, Confess you of
your cruelty, my Dear Heart.

Can one without an extraordinary blindness and impiety, (demanding the
Ornaments to say Mass withal,) fall down upon his knees to a Nun, and tell her,
That she is the first Deity that he would sacrifice to?

Can one without extraordinary blindness, impiety, and beastliness, when he is
Confessor, and sees a penitent give reasons for scrupling that amorous
passionateness, and those insolent transports that he acquaints her with, and
that she protests, she could not yield any compliance to what was proposed to
her, not knowing how to confess her self of such infamous Attouchemens.
Contracts, if she should allow him, thereupon offer himself to learn her how
to do it, and to give her a form in writing to help her to confess her self of
it.

ENTRIES.
THere shall be no particular mention here made of secret and nocturnal entries
into the Garden and Monastery by the help of false keys, or ladders of cord,
and in baskets: of such as were made in open daylight upon frivolous
pretenses: of dancings, performed in the Refectory, and other regular places:
nor lastly, of the insolences committed at the Nuns Funerals. It was ordinary
for the Cordeliers before and after these kind of Ceremonies to run after those
they fancied, to take them in their Arms, to kiss them, to carry them from one
place to another, to play the foolwith them, to go into private Nuns Chambers,
to feast it there, and be frolic, to stay whole hours there, a Father and a
Nun alone by themselves, and a little pensioner set as sentinel in foolery to
keep the door.

Nothing was ever able to put a stop to these insolences, and they have scarce
ever gone in to confess the sick, or to administer the Sacraments without
committing new ones.

There has been some of them, who after they had heard the Confession of one
sick Nun, were upon a bed with others, and after they had spoken some devout
words aloud to them, laid themselves down again to kiss them, and would have
put their hands into their bosoms.

There has been some of them, who after they had given extreme Unction to a
sick Nun, and entered in again to assist her at her death, instead of performing
this duty, have conducted other Nuns to their Chambers, and there cooped up
themselves together in a small closet.

There has been some of them, who after they had sat up a night with one that
was dangerously ill, made themselves be carried into the Dormitory, to go into
the Nuns Chambers to see, as they said, their Loves in their beds before them.

In fine, there has been of them, that, at the very foot of the Altar did
violence to a Novice upon the holy day of Good Friday it self, who had been
ordered to go out into the Church to take down the Reposier, according to the
custom of this Monastery: she was kissed by force, and her neckcloth was torn
off, and she was oftentimes Plusieurs attouchemens.
very rudely handled.

IN SOLENCIES.
IT is fit now to conclude the representation, that was undertaken to be given
of these horrible disorders. That which remains is too abominable, and our
tongue is too chaste to be able to express it. Not, but that a just regret and
indignation has made the greatest part of these Religious Sisters, find terms
to declare such things in their Depositions, as to use their own words, pass
all Imagination, and the bare mentioning of which makes them blush. But it is
enough that they have been once wrote, that they are under the hands of the
Judges of the Court, and that Time has not been able to blot them out of the
memory of those, who have seen them themselves in the time of their youth, or
by eyewitnesses have been acquainted with the names of those Nuns, whom the
Fathers have engaged in the Dans le dernier Desordre.
last Act of Incontinency, with the number of Children, that they have had, Les
Artifices criminels.
the horrid contrivances, that they have made use of to hinder these crimes
from making a noise abroad, and other abominable circumstances of Des plus
horribles corruptions.
most horrible corruptions, which made one of the Ancientest amongst them, who
had her self been overtaken in these dreadful debaucheries, say, That she stood
in admiration how this House could still subsist, and how it came not to be
swallowed up, as those miserable Cities, of which the Holy Scriptures speak.
But if the Cordeliers have omitted nothing that might draw down these sad
judgments upon this miserable House: And if the Nuns who have sent their
complaints to Court, may justly say, that they owe it only to the mercy of God,
that (these Fathers have laid all the traps imaginable to make them fall into
these dangerous precipices) they do not continue still engaged in them:
certainly they have not less reason to acknowledge, that if there be yet
amongst them any remainders of Piety and Religion, as it cannot well be
doubted, considering the warm instances they make at Court, they do also owe
that wholly to the particular providence and special favor of the same Mercy.
For the Cordeliers have omitted nothing that might plunge them in impiety, and
take away from them the respect, that is due to the Sacraments of the Church,
and the just confidence that ought to be reposed in them, that are the
disspensers of them. See what the Nuns say of it in their Depositions.

The Disorders of the Cordeliers.
One called N. when Confessor, being come into the Monastery to give the last
Sacrament to a Nun, was so full of Wine, that he put on the Priests Garments
the wrong side outward, and the Mother Infirmiere was fain to guide his hand to
apply the Holy Oil.

Another called N. Confessor too of our House came once into the
Confession-Chayr so overcharged with Wine, that he fell asleep, and the Nun,
that was confessing to him after she had began a part of her Confession twice,
and often endeavored to wake him, was at last forced to withdraw.

I my self happened to confess my self to one Father N. who was so full of
drink, that after I had repeated many Articles of my Confession over again, I
was forced to leave it.

One called Father N. who was here about eighteen years ago, has revealed the
Confessions of all the Nuns of our Community, and has given them in writing to
many Cordeliers to favor their design upon those whom they had a mind to
seduce, beginning these Sacrilegious writings by some passage of Holy
Scripture, that was agreeable to the humor of the several respective persons.
I have seen and read this paper, A Cordelier having entrusted me with this
secret -- I made my complaint of it to Father N. at that time Provincial the
first time, who confessed to me that he had seen that writing.

Father N. twelve years ago did the same, and besides, had always Women with
him. Once he kept a maid of Provins in his Closet, and her Parents being very
much troubled for her, thinking she had been stolen, he sent her away to Paris.
He himself entrusted me with this secret to oblige me to conceal what I knew of
it.

They commonly gave us Directours who had no sense of Piety in them, who came
into the Confession-Chair, after they had been well-drunk. And for proof of
this, I my self once confessed to one Father N. to no purpose: for he slept so
soundly that he heard not a word, which made me draw the curtain, and endeavor
to awake him; but to no effect at all: many saw him in this condition, and made
him be carried to bed.

Another called Father N. was continually thus distempered. A Canon of Provins
called M. N. came often to sup with him, to make him drink, that he might
afterward have the pleasure of making him reveal our Confessions. I know it
for a certainty, that he did so; And when he took his turn to go and divert
himself with the Canon, they carried him to his bed at eleven a clock at night
upon a Hand-barrow, which was known but to two other Nuns, sister N. and N. and
me. It Is fifteen years ago that this happened.

Another called N. who was here two years ago, and was the Provincial's
brother, was also of this humor, which made him entertain the Nuns with a
thousand impertinent follies, and made them perfectly ashamed of him.

If some of them have been free from these faults, they have had others that
were not less considerable. They have never set themselves about planting any
sense of Piety or Virtue in us, but on the contrary have studied the ruin of
both the temporal and spiritual state of our House. The only Devotion, that the
Cordeliers inspired our Sisters withal, was that of making them often desire
Masses, that they might get their money, and that they might have an occasion to
visit us in the morning, and so to stay at the Grate all the rest of the day to
divert themselves and to make Collations. These were their daily practices
which I have been a constant spectator of for near these thirty years, the time
that I have been in this Monastery, without mentioning other things that are
yet more wicked.

This Factum would be too much swelled if we should relate all the particular
proofs, that we have of the various disorders, that the Cordeliers have
committed in this Monastery, about the Spiritual concern of it. That which has
been hitherto set down is but too sufficient to raise horror in all, that have
any concern for the Holiness of our Mysteries, any love for the purity of
Virgins, and any tenderness for the interest of Jesus Christ in the Souls that
are consecrated to him, and whose fidelity these miserable Directours have
endeavored to corrupt for these so many years together: A rabidis enim
hominibus nomen sceleratum est sanctitatis; et ab immundis, et luteis pretiosum
conculcatum est propositum Castitatis.

SECTION XII. Of the Disorders committed by the Cordeliers in the Temporal
concerns of the Monastery of St. Catharine.
AFter the horrible extravagancies which have been mentioned, it will not be
difficult to believe, That the Cordeliers have consumed all the Temporal
incomes of this Monastery. It may easily be concluded, that Religious Fathers,
who by so many different ways have made it their business to draw off Virgins
from the fidelity they owed to their divine Spouse, and to rob them of their
Honor, and the Spiritual inheritance, which he had acquired for them with the
price of his blood have not spared the Temporal inheritance; which they had
received from the magnificent bounty of their Illustrious Founders, and the
liberal Charity of their Relations.

The profuseness, which the Cordeliers have engaged them to show in feasting,
in presents, and a thousand other vain expenses, and unworthy of their
profession, are alone sufficient to make any one imagine the abuses that have
been committed in this point. For as the Pensions of private Nuns were not
sufficient to furnish out the almost continual Collations that were made at the
Grates, the Sisters were fain to sell their silver-plate, and whatever they
could lay their hands on, of the provisions of Linen and other goods of the
Community (even to the Church Vestments, and the Ornaments of the Altars) for
the effecting of their purpose, particularly the Servitour-Sisters; who being
of mean birth, and not having ordinarily any Pensions, yet would have their
Gallants, and their Confidents amongst the Cordeliers, and would treat them
like Grandees. This was done without any check, or scruple of conscience: For
the Superiors of the Order had taken care to fortify them against any that
might rise in them; and Father N. the Provincial, upon the complaints that were
made at the last Chapter-meeting, of the theevish filching practiced in the
House, told them in express terms, That according to the Council of Trent, One
might steal to the value of twenty Crowns when he wanted Necessaries; which
indeed was an abuse of the Name and Authority of that Council to expose the
Monastery to pillage, under pretense of setting bounds to that licentiousness
of which they complained. Those Necessaries having no other measure, than the
passion that the Nuns had for the Cordeliers, and the Presents that they had a
mind to make them.

They have further proceeded to ruin this Monastery by another contrivance no
less destructive than the former: They allowed those, whom they knew to be
wholly at their devotion, to be Heiresses to their Sisters, and their Aunts,
that happened to die in the Religion: and the Father Provincial, made the
Abbess Madam de Montbron give one of the Nuns, one Sister N. five or six
considerable pieces of Silver-plate, that an Aunt of hers in the House had left
her when she died: and all this plate, which amounted to a considerable Sum,
failed not of being sold a little while after, and consumed in Feastings, and
Presents made to the Cordeliers.

Besides all this, against their own Orders, and the general complaints of all
the Nuns, they suffered the Servitour-Sisters to blanch linen for people
abroad, which made them not only make a gain to themselves against their vows
(for they disposed as they pleased of the gains of this traffic) but also made
them very chargeable to the Community. For by this trade of theirs, which took
up all their time, they became incapable of doing them any service: They broke
their vow of Confinement by letting in men and women to them every day, whose
service they stood in need of, and who consumed the provisions of the House
with them: They spent a vast quantity of wood to make the ashes, which they
needed for blanching; so that they have burnt twenty four thousand Faggots,
once or twice as big again as those of Paris, in the compass of a Year, and
more than fourscore strings of wood; and thus they wasted all things else,
Salt, Wine, Corn, Meat, making money of all that came into their hands to
satisfy the sensuality of the Cordeliers, who maintained them in these
unlawful intercourses, because all the advantage of them returned to them at
last; and the money that these Nuns raised by them, which amounted to more than
an hundred Crowns a year for each of them, was spent in Feasting, in Presents,
and in all kind of profuseness.

But the Waste that these Fathers made of the Revenue of this Monastery, never
appeared more visibly, than since the Election of the last Abbess, who was
wholly devoted to their Interests, and whom, for that reason, they have used
all industry to continue in that office by so many shameful and unlawful
means. It Is ready to be justified, that besides the Ordinary Revenue, and the
private allowances of the Nuns, besides eighteen thousand Livres of debt
contracted by her, A Muid is five quarters, one comb, and a bushel at London.
and which is charged upon the House; besides fifteen Muids of corn, that were
due to the House since the time of the Abbess that preceeded her, and which she
received, and above thirty Muids more which she has caused to be sold within
these thirty years, she has besides all this, since the month of February
1660. in Rents, Nuns-Portions, and other incomes of the House received more
than 40000. Livres of ready money.

And all this has been consumed partly in feastings and presents, and partly in
other prodigalities, done to satisfy the greediness of the Cordeliers, who
abused the easy nature of this poor Nun, to enrich themselves with the spoils
of this Monastery, and this with a greater insolence, than they ever did under
other Abbesses: As it is visible in this, that in so ordinary a town as Provins
they have within few years very jollily expended more than 25, or 30000 Livres
in nothing but Gallantries, and unnecessary things.

It Is not by this denied, but that the better disposed part of the Community,
when they perceived the insatiableness and unreasonableness of the Cordeliers,
did sometimes force themselves to make opposition against it, and from time to
time demanded, that according to the Order of their House, and confor mably to
their Rule, they might choose a Receiver, and that the Abbess might not dispose
of the income of the House but in conjunction with the Treasurers. But the
Cordeliers have always frustrated all such kind of endeavors, one while
persuading the Officers, whom they ruled, to take the rent themselves, and to
employ faithful and intelligent men abroad, who should be entrusted with it,
and sometimes making them take people for their Receivers, that were worth
nothing, but such as were wholly at their beck; and sometimes exciting the
Abbess as particularly the last, to take all the Revenue into her own hand, and
to dispose of it without giving account of it. So that notwithstanding all that
could be done, they have still found out ways to make themselves Masters of the
Revenue of the Monastery, and to dispose of it to furnish them for Voyages into
Italy, for the Provincials visitations in their Province, and to make provision
for Father N's Table, which is one of the most magnificent in all the Province
of Brie.

There is no mention here made of the cheats, that were usual upon the death
of the Confessors of the Monastery: Of the sums of money entrusted in the
hands of these Confessors for the affairs of the House, and which after their
death were carried away by the Provincialls: Of the Goods and Habits which the
House had furnished them with, and which they caused to be conveyed away: Of
the waste they made of the Wood of the Nunnery for warming and building of
their Convent: Of their custom of sending such Cordeliers into the Monastery as
were the particular intimates of the Nuns to engage their votes, and to live as
they pleased for two or three months together before the Elections: Of Feasts
made for the Provincials at the Elections of the Abbesses, and the two last of
which amounted each of them to four or five hundred livres: Of blank papers
signed by the last Abbess and put into the hands of a person appointed by them
for the same purpose, and of a thousand other ways that they have used to
devour, and waste the whole estate of this House.

What has been related is sufficient to show the necessity of having these
Cordeliers removed from this Monastery, since it is evident they have made use
of the access they have had into this House, and of the Jurisdiction that they
have usurped, for nothing but to enrich themselves with its spoils, and to
lavish out an estate, that was given for the subsistence of the spouse of Jesus
Christ, in feastings, debauches, and in all sort of idle and shameful expenses;
so that one may too justly compare these self-interested Directours to those
Mercenary Pastors, that Holy Scripture speaks of, who instead of taking care
to lead out the sheep that God had committed to them, thought of nothing but of
feeding themselves with their Milk, of clothing themselves with their Wool, and
of eating up the best and fattest of them: Which made God declare by the mouth
of his Prophet, that he would take his flock out of their hands, and would not
suffer them to be any longer under their keeping, nor be made a prey of by
them. Ecce ego super pastores requiram gregem meum de manu eorum etc.

SECTION XIII. That the Cordeliers are under an impossibility of ever
establishing good Order, and Regularity in this Monastery.
THe Cordeliers have not only rendered themselves unworthy of the government of
the Monastery of St. Catharine by the abominations that they have committed,
and by the Waste they have made of the Temporal income; but it is even
impossible for them to remedy the mischiefs that they have caused in this
House. This is now undertaken to be made evident by showing, That those
Fathers, to whom it most appertains to maintain Regularity in the Monastery,
are the persons who have committed the greatest Disorders: And that these Nuns
have invincible reasons to have no confidence in all the Fathers of the Order
put together.

SECTION XIV. That they are the Superiors of the Order, who have engaged the
House of Saint Catharine in the Disorders it is in.
WHen the noble parts of a man's body are not affected, and that the Malady has
not seized the Heart, nor the Head, we despair not of a sick person how
dangerous soever the distemper may be, that he labors under. But when the
whole disease is got into the Heart or the Head, or that it is from one of these
parts it passes into the rest, he becomes incurable, and we have no more hopes
of doing him any good. It Is the same in Religious societies. Whilst the
Disorder is but amongst private persons there is reason to hope to remedy it.
But when it is the Superiors that commit it, and that those, who are set up to
prevent it, infuse it into others, the corruption in a small time becomes
general, and there is no remedy to be had but by that way of Cutting off, and
Casting away, that Jesus Christ prescribes to all the faithful in these words.
-- If your right eye be an occasion of offense to you, pull it out, and cast it
from you, and if your right hand be an occasion of offense to you, cut it off
and cast it away from you.

It Is then with Prudence and Justice that the Nuns of Saint Catharine desire to
have the Cordeliers removed from them, since those of the Fathers, that are
styled their Superiors, and who ought in that character to serve as Eyes to
conduct them in the way to Heaven, and as hands to uphold them in the practice
of their Rule, are those who have diverted them from it, and have been the
greatest occasions of scandal and falling, that they ever had in their
Monastery. In effect, They are not only private, and ordinary Cordeliers, that
have committed all the horrible Disorders beforementioned in their House: They
are the Visitors, Their Deputies, The Provincial, The Commissaries General,
Their Secretaries, The Wardens, The Doctors, and the Batchelours of the Order,
The most Famous among their preachers. In fine, They are those that have the
greatest dignities amongst them, that are the occasions of all these Disorders,
that have maintained them, and have ever been the most pertinacious opposers of
the Remedies, which from time to time have been endeavored after. 'Twas they
that presented the young Nuns with their confidents, that wrote to them in
their behalf, that engaged them to those unlawful intercourses
beforementioned, and that took care, when they were fallen out, to reconcile
them again, and to renew their wicked intimacies.

These sottish absurdities (says a Religious sister, speaking of the alliances
and marriages that they contracted together) were so far from being reproved by
the Superiors, that a Nun, that often nauseated these kind of familiarities,
having taken an occasion to break off that Marriage that she had made with one
of these Fathers, Father N. the Provincial took cognizance of it, and
interested himself so far in it, that at his Visitation he persuaded her in
very idle, impertinent terms to renew that correspondence; He informed himself
of her other intimates, and told her it was not enough to see them but once a
week, that he allowed her twice at least.

Father N. Cordelier writing to a Servitour-sister in very passionate and
sottish terms, and the Letter coming into the hands of a Lady of the Quire,
addressed to her from a person without, she gave the Father Provirciall notice
of it, and of all the unseemly communication betwixt them that she had been
acquainted with, that so for the future he might give check to it: And yet
notwithstanding he gave not the least discountenance to it, and suffered the
Father to give the Servitour-sister as frequent visits as before. Again, These
Fathers have not only brought us in hither Books of natural secrets, Romances,
Catechismes of Love, and other pieces of that nature; but the Superiors also
have approved the same: And Father N. the Provincial in the presence of a good
part of the Community having found one of these books in the chamber of a
Servitour sister did only smile at it, and that passed for a consent.

Father N. Provincial gave all the young professed Nuns particular intimates.
He preached when I was professed, and called me his Daughter upon this account:
He told me as soon as I had my profession that he would give me a Cordelier for
my consident, an handsome fellow, a Gallant, and well-fashioned, and that he
would marry me to him: And he talked oftentimes of these kind of Marriages.

All the Superiors, the Provincials, the Confessors, have thus abused their
employment, favoring, or being themselves the cause of, the Disorders, by
admitting other Cordeliers into the House to engage the Nuns to these
insinuating intimacies, and by this means to continue themselves Masters of
all. For as favors, or persecutions, were always at the disposal of the
Cordeliers, according as their Beloveds were either complyant with, or
inflexible to, what the Superiors would have them do, the Sisters were fain to
suffer all that they pleased to have done, and to give their assistance to the
furthering of all their passions: And this made the Provincials, instead of
employing their Visitation in enquiring after the misdemeanors that were to be
corrected, to set themselves about courting and caressing the young professed
Nuns, to talk to them of their Good friend, and to excite them to take one,
that they might have the pleasure of being served by him. And in pursuance of
this they authorized the Collations and Entertainments at the Grates, Gaming,
lascivious Songs, breaking of Glasses, in honor of their Ladies before the
eyes, and to the scandal, of the whole Town: And yet they always talked of, and
amused the people with Reformations in paper, which they never so much as
propounded, much less intended to have executed in the House.

Besides, They did not only study to engage these young Virgins in such
dangerous communications, but took care also to put those into the Offices of
the House, whom they judged most proper to encourage and maintain them.

Ten years since at the Election of Madam d' Osonville, the fourth Abbess of
that name, they did what possibly they could to put Madam N. in her place, who
had committed the Le dernier mall.
last act of incontinency with Father N. Cordelier, and one of the reasons of
their persecuting Madam d' Osonville, was because she had been preferred before
that other Nun.

After the death of that Abbess Father N. Provincial used great violence to
hinder the Election of Madam d'Osonville her Niece, who had 25 votes against
seven for Madam N. whom the Cordeliers would notwithstanding make Abbess by
force, though she had neither desert nor birth, nor any thing more considerable
than a passionate love for the Cordeliers, who had ordered her in her youth as
they pleased.

Sister N. did very freely show about the Letters wrote to her from the
Cordeliers, and told all the idle fancies that they made her: she gave them
access into her Chamber night and day; and in consideration of her
correspondence she was made Mistress of the Novices.

Father N. esteemed the most Regular of them all did not scruple the taking
these kind of liberties in the cloister. At four a clock in the morning he went
into a garden with Sister N. his Good Friend, and gave this reason for it, that
they were fallen out with one another, and that he had a mind to be reconciled.
They were so well reconciled again, that she being made Mistress of the Novices
persuaded them all to entertain the Cordeliers, so that she pressed her own
Niece to receive Letters from them: she acquainted them with all the
Gallantries that the Cordeliers had shown her in her youth, made them act
Comedies against the express prohibition of Madam N. the Abbess. And when a
Novice was fallen out with her Cordelier, she slept not till she had made them
friends again.

But in spite of all the intrigues of the Provincials, and other Superiors of
the Order, they yet gave Offices to the better disposed part of the Nuns; they
then maintained the other Sisters in their licentiousness and libertinisme
against them, and endeavored to raze out of their minds the good impressions,
that these Nuns had labored to give them.

Father N. Provincial, in a Sermon that he made at the profession of a Novice,
exhorted her to vomit up the bad Education that her Mistress had given her,
which was to alienate her mind from these infamous correspondences; and told
her, That her Mistress did draw off the Nuns from honoring and loving the
Order.

All those frequent Entertaines, that the Nuns had with the Cordeliers in the
time of Madam N. were by the Order of the Father N. the Provincial, and of
other Provincials also with a note from them under their hand. So that when she
shut up the Grates, whilst the General Chapter was held at Provins, as also
upon other occasions, they found out ways to visit one another by the windows,
or else the Cordeliers disguised themselves like Gentlemen to visit the Nuns
without being known.

When Madam N. the Abbess had withstood some permissions that the Nuns desired,
which might have prejudiced the reputation of the House, Father N. procured
them for them under the Provincial's hand, and gave them this for a lesson,
That if she would not obey her Superior in this, that they were not obliged to
obey her. One has no reason to wonder, That all these Provincials and
Superiors were so indulgent to others, since that they cared not for
condemning others, in that which they practiced themselves after so scandalous
and wicked a manner.

The Licentious familiarities of Father N. with Mother N. has been these 38
years the scandal of all Provins. It was begun by magnificent treats, which he
caused to be fetched from the town for her, and her party: Was continued by
presents of Rings, Watches, Looking-glasses, and all kind of vanities, which
were even laid upon the Altars for her, where were interwoven the first letters
of their names with Hearts made up of Flowers, set with ribbons of
flame-colour, and born up by the Images of St. Francis and St. Clare, who
served as supports for this abominable Gallantry. After this Sister was made
Porter he discoursed with her ordinarily four or five hours together at the
great Gate (a place far remote from all company) with a Cordeliers cloak spread
out like a tent to defend her from the Sun. The Porter on the other side to
please the Reverend Father, dressed her self ridiculously with bracelets of
Pearl, and medals of Gold upon her arms, and with all manner of ribbons at her
waste: so that a Lady of quality taking notice of all these vanities at the
dressing one of the Nuns was so scandalized at it, that she could hardly endure
to let them finish it, and she has testified it in a Declaration that was drawn
up 17, or 18 years ago, when the Nuns of St. Catharine addressed themselves the
first time to the Court of Parliament to be delivered from the direction of the
Cordeliers. The scandal has continued ever since, and it is not above two or
three years since, and the Reverend Father having sent a nosegay of Flowers
with a great many dried sweetmeats, and marchpane to this Mother by the R. F.
at present Warden of N. on the vigills of her Festival, and the Mother having
entertained them the next day (the day of her Festival) at a noble Treat,
carried to the Convent of the Cordeliers by a victualler of the Town, in the
afternoon the Reverend Father accompanied with a great many others, who soon
took up all the Grates, came to her to give her a serenade under her
chamber-window that looks toward the great Court, and afterward carried the
Violin into the Hall below, where Sister N. was, whose Nuptials, he said, he
was come to solemnize with Father N. who the mean while did entertain her. He
began to dance first, and invited others also to take their part, which other
Provincials before him have often done as well as he.

After all this can it be denied, that the Superiors of the Order are to be
charged with these Excesses that have been committed in the Monastery of St.
Catharine? That they have not only tolerated them, while they were in Office,
but also fomented and authorized them by their own irregularity: And that if
the Integrity of those that command be the security of those that obey, that
the visible corruption of all the Superiors of the Cordeliers is the principal
cause of all the mischiefs of this Monastery.

SECTION XV. That the Religious Sisters of St. Catharine have invincible
reasons not to have any Confidence in the Cordeliers.
TWo things are absolutely necessary to the settling of good Order and
Regularity in a religious House, Authority, and a good esteem of that
Authority. Now it has already been made appear, that the House of St. Catharine
can hope for no good from those who have any Authority amongst the Cordeliers.
For they are the persons, that have cast it into the miserable condition
wherein it is. There remains then nothing, but to show that it is impossible
they should have any Confidence in them, to make it evident; That they are in
an utter impossibility of ever resettling good Orders and Regularity.

It Is omitted here, to represent the injustice and violence they have committed
against private persons, when their consciences have not allowed them to give
their Votes for those that the Fathers would have put into Office, and who were
often the least regular of any, but the most linked to the interest of the
Friars. It Is omitted here, to mention their refusals to allow extroordinary
Confessors even at the point of death, when any Nuns for the security of their
consciences have desired others than those of the Order: Their Excommunications
pronounced upon very slight occasions against those, that had no other crime
than the disallowing of their disorderly conduct: Their taking away the Right
of suffrage from the young professed Nuns because one of them once signed a
paper made by the greatest part of the Community in opposition to the veiling
of a Servitour-sister, which was solicited by Father N. Their abusing the
submissions of the easie-natured Abbesses to them, making their advantages
thereby to make them prefer the Servitour-Sisters before the Religious of the
Quire upon several occasions, so that they themselves laughed at them for their
softness. Although all these things concern the whole Community, seeing that
there is no private person that has not reason to fear the same treatment that
they have shown their Sisters, they shall however be passed over in silence.
For that which they principally insist upon, is what condition their House was
in under the conduct of the Cordeliers before the time of their admission into
it, In what condition they found it upon their entering it, and how they have
continually seen it governed for more than these forty years, during the space
of which they have continued their profession.

They themselves have painted out these Fathers so lively in their Depositions
as to make all abhor them, and which one cannot consider without being sensibly
affected, to see Virgins thus engaged, almost in spite of their wills, to live
without regularity, without direction, without light, without instruction, and
without piety.

How then could the Religious Sisters of St. Catharine after all this with any
reason put confidence in the Cordeliers? How could they hope to be moved by
them to keep a strict observance of the hours of Divine Service, when they knew
that ordinarily. These Fathers kept their Sisters at the Grates at that time,
and often made them stay there whole nights till five a clock in the morning:
so that they were forced to take the hours of Mattins and Mass to repose
themselves.

How could they hope to see them resettle the silence, that their Rule enjoins
them, in the House, when they knew, that by their continual Entertaines they
had plunged it into an horrible dissoluteness, and that their Sisters were used
to repeat Songs that they had learnt them, not only in the gardens, whither
they came to hear them, and whither they often came to surprise them, and there
passed whole nights with them; but even in the cloisters, and other consecrated
places?

How could they hope, that they should persuade them to modesty in their
Habits, when they knew, that they suffered their sisters to dress and trick up
themselves with an extraordinary niceness, when they were to come to visit
them, and that they furnished them with several sorts of colored Ribbons, with
trimmed Gloves, and many other instruments of vanity.

How could they hope to be inclined by them to keep nothing in propriety, and
to put all to the common stock, that they might not break their vows of
Poverty, when they have always allowed them to take as much of their Pensions
as should be sufficient to provide for the Treats, that they engaged them to
make them at the Grates, and for I know not how many other idle expenses that
they advised them to, even to the letting them distribute the bread to them,
which they disposed of as they pleased?

How could they hope to be instructed by them in the Fidelity that they owed to
their Divine Spouse, when they knew the measure of these Fathers dissoluteness
against all their vows of Chastity, and had been witnesses of all their
Profanations and Sacriledges?

Lastly, How could they hope to be assisted by them in their design of
laboring to live conformably to their Rule, to perform the Obligations of the
life that they had embraced, and to resettle the honor of their House, when
they saw that in all the conduct that they have observed in their Monastery
(from the time that they first made themselves Masters of it) nothing but a
base indifference for the interests of God, horrible libertinisme, and most
dreadful debauchery?

Of Whom should they expect this remedy? Of Private persons? They have an
hundred times blushed at their impudence and impiety. Of Confessors? They have
scarce seen any that have not wallowed in all kind of vice and debauchery. Of
Provincials? They have committed and authorized the greatest Disorders of their
House. Of Those, who are advanced to be Doctors, Batchelours, and Preachers
amongst them? They have still their Letters in keeping, that are full of
impurity and abominations. Of the Warden of Paris? There is so much disorder in
his own house, that his Majesty has been forced to name Commissioners to
rectify it. Of the whole Province? They have seen an Assembly in a General
Chapter, held at Provins about nine or ten years since, render themselves
accomplices of all the extravagances that the chief of their Fathers had at that
time committed in their Monastery: And besides, They know that the whole
Province is in a very dismal division and disorder. Of the Cordeliers of other
Provinces? Have not they learnt with horror, what passed at Desize, and in the
other House of Nuns that are subject to them? And have not the Cordeliers
themselves made use of it to entangle them, if they could have done it, in the
same Disorders?

There is not then any security for the Religious Sisters of St. Catharine but
by absolutely removing from them all the Fathers of the Order; and it is with a
great deal of ground, That they have not only distrusted, but even abhorred
their Conduct, seeing it has been always full of corruption, and that they have
with horrible licentiousness and scandal violated all the laws of Discipline
before their eyes, which by all the obligations of the charge that they had
usurped, they stood engaged, either to uphold when it began to fall, or to
raise up again when it was once fallen.

SECTION XVI. The Cordeliers Reasons to color the Disorders, that they have
committed in the Monastery of St. Catharine, and to maintain themselves
notwithstanding the Abuses they have made of the Jurisdiction that they
usurped, are answered.
THe Cordeliers perceived well enough, that if the Misdemeanors they committed
in the Monastery of St. Catharine came once to be discovered, they should be
universally condemned by all the world, and that there would be no person of
any judgment but would conclude them unworthy of the conduct of these Nuns,
though it had of right belonged to them. It Is that, that has since put them
upon using all kind of arts to prepossess the Higher Powers, and to fill them
with impressions to the disadvantage of the Nuns that prosecute them at Court,
hoping by that means to oblige them the easier to lay hold of their Protection.
To this purpose they presented Petitions to their General at Rome, and to the
Congregation of Cardinals; They presented others to their Majesty's in France,
and we have in our hands the copy of a Writing, made and presented by them to a
Minister of state. And it is out of all these Petitions this Writing, and also
out of some of the Letters, which their Friends have wrote to the Nuns, from
whence we fetch the Reasons, which we are going to set down here with all their
strength, endeavoring to answer them the most briefly and clearly that is
possible.

The Cordeliers Reasons. The Nuns are subject by their Foundation to the
General of the Friars Minors, and they cannot, without breaking their Vow and
their Rule, return under the Jurisdiction of My Lord Archbishop of Sens.
1. THese words must be understood either of all the Nuns of St. Clare, or
particularly of those of St. Catharine. It has been made appear that both one
and other are alike subject by their Foundation to the Authority, and under the
Jurisdiction of their Bishops: and surely after the proofs that have been
brought of it, there can no difficulty remain behind; whether we regard the
Right, that is, the obligation, that binds the Nuns to live under the Conduct
of their Bishops, or whether we regard the Fact, that is, the actual dependence
they have lived under, as well for receiving the Sacraments of them, as for the
Elections of the Abbesses and admissions of Nuns: And consequently, that it is
not true, that these Nuns have been submitted to the General of the Friars
Minors by their Foundation.

2. Neither is it true, That their Vows oblige them to continue under the
General of the Friars Minors: There is not one word of it in all their form of
Profession. And although they should think themselves tacitly engaged to it,
yet they could not perform it to the prejudice of their other Vows, that make
up the essential parts of their Religion, which it is impossible they should
acquit themselves of under the Direction of the Cordeliers.

3. It is true, that their Rule seems to commit the care of their Monasteries
to the Cordeliers. But it has been made appear that it is rather a permission,
that the Pope has given them to undertake to be their Guides against the
express prohibition of St. Francis to the contrary, than an obligation upon the
Nuns to be subject to them: That whatsoever intention the Popes had that drew
up their Rule, it could not prejudice the Rights acknowledged due to the
Bishops, by the Holy Scripture; The Canons of Councils, and the General
practice of the whole Church, to govern the Monasteries; and consequently, that
the Cordeliers could never exercise any Hierarchical Office, but in dependence
upon their Authority.

4. Though it should be granted that the Nuns of St. Catharine were by their
Foundation subject to the General of the Cordeliers, that their Rule obliges
them to it, and that their Bishops consented to it, (which yet is not true;)
they could not for all that without evidently endangering their Salvation,
continuelonger under them, and consequently are obliged by all Divine and
Humane Laws to deliver themselves from them, and to expect all their
assistances from the Conduct of their Prelate, for whatsoever they shall stand
in need of to the better acquitting themselves of their Obligations, and to the
reforming of their Lives.

It Is ridiculous to pretend, as the Cordeliers do, that the Nuns of St.
Catharine being without any necessity, and against the command of God and the
Rules of the Church, withdrawn from under the Jurisdiction of my Lord
Archbishop of Sens, that they cannot now without sinning return under it, how
great, how pressing, and how evident soever the necessity be, which forces them
to it.

The Cordeliers Reason. It Is only the Capriciousness of some private Nuns, and
the Revengefulness of two of them, that they would have punished for the
scandalls they have occasioned.
IT is not intended here to make a particular discussion of this Affair, nor to
apologize for those two Nuns, who are acknowledged in the process of the
Declaration to have been the first that implored the protection of the Court
against the unreasonableness and the Disorders of the Cordeliers.

It Is asserted here only, That the most Reputed amongst these Fathers, should
not then, as they did, and as it is ready to be justified by their own Letters,
have themselves procured their going out of the Monastery, and given them
recommendations to make use of to accomplish their design.

It Is asserted, That the Provincial and his Secretary ought not to have made
them buy their leave to go to take the waters at the price of their Votes for
the Election of an Abbess, to whom they thought themselves obliged in
conscience not to give it; and if there be any scandal come of it, it is they
that are to answer it to God and the World.

It Is asserted, That if those Nuns were guilty of the Crime that they were
accused of, The Provincial and his Secretary ought not to have protestted to
them, that the Excommunications, that they should pronounce against them,
should be but a formal show, counterfeit anger, and a bugbear, and that the
sentence should be nulled immediately after the thundering it out: That they
ought at least to have observed some shadow of Justice, and not declare them
Excommunicated, deprived of both Active and Passive Vote, of the Offices of the
House, and of the liberty of the Grate, and this for as long as the Provincial
and his successors should think fit, against all usual forms of procedure,
without any information, without confronting of witnesses, and only after that
the Provincial had entertained them for three days together at the Grate with
sottish impertinencies, and that the Secretary had the impudence to kiss one of
them by force in the presence of her Fellow-sisters, and consequently that they
had Right to appeal from a sentence so unequitable, and so abusive as this was.

Lastly, It Is asserted, That if the Provincial had had the least respect to God
in this pretended Chastisement upon the account of the scandal, that the Nuns
were accused to have been occasioners of, he should not have given one of them
any ground to write that, which we shall presently extract word for word out of
a Letter which she wrote at the very time that she hoped he would be more
favorable to her, and therefore cannot be accused, of having wrote it out of
Revenge.

LETTER.
I should never have believed, that a Provincial could ever have been capable
of talking as he does: He makes all things trifles and niceness: He calls
well-grounded Denyals, weakness of spirit, signs of Ignorance: In a word, we
are, said he, Novices in Love: If I were not afraid that this would be
intercepted, I would tell you such things as you are not able to imagine. No,
you shall never know them, for I shall never be able to acquaint you with them,
without blushes. If it be thus that he courts his Angelica, and desires such
favors as these of her, sure she must be far from being very squeamish to be
able not to nauseate him. His Passion and sighs, that he reproaches us for
being insensible of, do nothing but scandalize us; and the testimonies of his
affection that he would give us, do but make us hate him the more: sometimes he
thinks he has Right to command us to receive them, and at other times is sorry
that his Power extends not to the motions of the heart to gain him that which
he desires without further delay, etc.

The Cordeliers Reason. They have the greatest and soundest part of the
Community on their side.
IT IS not to be wondered at, That the Cordeliers should make such stories to
their General, and to the Congregation of the Regulars in Italy; But that they
should dare to procure Letters Patents in France upon such suppositions as
these, is a very strange thing, and such as does sufficiently acquaint all
people with the quality of their Spirit, which is, to dare to do, and to
undertake, any thing.

There were in the year 1664. in the Monastery of St. Catharine, twenty nine
professed Nuns of the Quire; There were seventeen of them, that on the fifth of
September, the same year, signed the Act, by which they agreed amongst
themselves, to petition my Lord Archbishop of Sens to receive them under his
Conduct, and to show all earnest readiness that was requisite to return under
his Jurisdiction. There remained then not above twelve, Two of which a little
while after joined with the other seventeen; so that now there was but ten of
the Quire that declared for the Cordeliers, and that continued for any time in
this party. Of these ten there were two that did most remarkably abandon them,
and with the other nineteen Sisters signed all the Petitions that were since
presented to the Court, and to my Lord Archbishop of Sens: and so the
procuration to desire the Court to let them be under the Direction of this
Prelate, and to be discharged of that of the Cordeliers, is signed by twenty
one Sisters, all Professed, and the most considerable of the Community, being
almost all Officers of the House, and having amongst them six discreet Matrons,
and Mothers of the Council, The Mistress of the Novices, The Treasuress, the
Porters, The Tourner of the box, The Chauntress, The Stewards, and the
Overseers of the sick. And besides, those eight remaining Nuns of the Quire
have since protested, and declared by several Acts passed in the presence of
Notaries, and that are now in their keeping, That they did approve of all the
Orders that my Lord Archbishop of Sens had made for the regulating their House,
and that they would observe them: That they beseeched him to receive them under
his Conduct and Jurisdiction, to which they submitted themselves as being their
lawful Superior, and that they did revoke, and disallow, all that they might
have signed to the contrary.

The Servitour-Sisters themselves, who had imitated them in their revolt,
followed them also in their return to their obedience, and besides have before
Notaries declared: That formerly they had adhered to some of their Sisters
Opinions, and resisted the Orders of my Lord Archbishop of Sens, in a
persuasion that they were obliged in conscience to continue under the
Jurisdiction of the Cordeliers: But that being since better enlightened in the
truth they did depart from them, and submit themselves to his Orders and
Jurisdiction. So that either these eight Nuns of the Quire, and the
Servitour-Sisters have been sincere in all these Authentic Acts, or they have
not been so, but Cheats and Hypocrites: If they have been sincere in it, then
is there not one of the Nuns of St. Catharine, that desires not to be under the
Jurisdiction of my Lord Archbishop of Sens, and that does not acknowledge the
necessity of banishing the Cordeliers out of their House: If they have not been
so, the Cordeliers must then confess, that they have but seven or eight Nuns of
the Quire, and some Servitour-Sisters, all of them without any sincerity, on
their side.

The Cordeliers Reason. The Zeal with which these Nuns have espoused the
Interests of the Cordeliers, does sufficiently vindicate them.
LET it be supposed, that these seven or eight Nuns of the Quire that made so
much show of adhering to the Cordeliers were inclined to do so only upon
scruples of Conscience illgrounded, since that they have declared it so
themselves. Let us not suspect them to have had so much as any kind of regard
to the Offices, that the Abbess had given them for giving her their Votes, nor
any Artifices that the Cordeliers used to maintain them in the Revolt, and of
which one may judge by an extract out of one of their Letters of the twenty
fourth of December 1666. which is in keeping. -- If these Good Ladies (This
Cordelier speaks of the united Nuns.) did but know what the Government of
Bishops is, they would not be so eager for it. They ordinarily court one
Superior Nun, and let the rest live miserably, and never see any body. We have
examples of it everywhere. -- Discourses of this nature do sometimes make
impression upon the mind, let it be never so well fortified: And thereupon it
frames to it self strange Ideas of silence and retirement, that fright any that
are not averse from conversation, and not accustomed to slight the
protestations of Esteem and Affection, that they might receive by means of it.

Whatsoever the true account of it is, it is certain, that the heat, with which
these Nuns have espoused the Interests of the Cordeliers, could not proceed
from any esteem they had of their conduct, and sufficiency; since they have
acknowledged in their Depositions, That there is but a shadow of Religion in
their Monastery, both in Spiritual and Temporal concerns: That there is but a
pretense of Noviceship, and that the Mistress of the Novices has but the bare
name of it: That there is no regular silence there: That there is no
Christianity: That the Superiors allow the Servitour-Sisters every thing,
because they have votes at Elections: That the Nuns have unlawful familiarities
with the Cordeliers: That there are great abuses in the admission of Novices
and professed Nuns: That all this is told the Provincials at the times of their
Visitations, but that they take no care to remedy it: And that if at the last
Visitation they gave some Order for it, it was only because of the Letters of
the Privy Seal, and that they never were observed, no more than those made in
the time of Monsiour Coqueret: That the Provincial himself laugh't at the
Order he had made before the Election, which forbade the Abbesses disposing of
the incomes of the House without the Treasuresses: That These Nunns themselves
were drawn in to the Cabal for the last Election: And that there are so many
disorders in the house, that they did heartily desire to leave it.

The Servitour-Sisters, for whose sake the Cordeliers have acted so many pieces
of injustice, have not given them any Characters that are more to their
advantage. One of the most Ancient of them has declared in plain terms, That
the Disorders have been very great amongst them for this long while: That she
does not believe, that any good Discipline can be settled again under the
direction of the Cordeliers: That whatsoever she was made to sign to continue
under their conduct was not her intention: That her heart bleeds, when she
considers all the disorders, and scandals that the Cordeliers have introduced
and approved of there: That the Nunns make their Cordeliers Gods upon Earth:
That upon the death of a Nunn they go into the Sisters Chambers, and they give
them all they have: That she knows of many Night-Entries of the Cordeliers
into the Gardens over the Walls, and in at the Windows of the house, to
entertain the Nunns there, and to pass whole Nights with them.

All the rest confess, That there is no observation of regularity in the House
at all: That they have known it always as irregular, and as full of
licentiousness in the Spiritual affairs as now: And that the Cordeliers
contract Alliances of near relations with the Nunns of the Quire, and the
Servitour-Sisters.

In fine, One of these Servitour-Sisters, that seemed the most reserved in her
Depositions, and studi'd the most to spare them, having well considered upon
it, and acknowledged the necessity there was, that their House should return
under the Jurisdiction of the Archbishop of Sens, wrote to him in these terms:

LETTER.
-- Suffer me, My Lord, to repeat my Vows under your hands, amongst which is
comprehended that Vow of Obedience, which I promise to pay, as long as I live,
to your Orders: It Is They, that must give us a new life of Grace and
Reputation, hitherto in great danger of being forfeited -- Which has always
made your Unworthy Daughter say; We stand in need of an Assistant as great as
My Lord Archbishop: But yet I opposed it under the mistake of a pretended
Charity, that I was afraid to break, though in the mean time I violated the
Obligations of true Charity, which should have made me adhere to you, as to my
true Pastor...... I therefore beseech your Grace to receive me under your
Protection, as I submit my self to your Authority with affection and reverence.

Could Virgins, that, after they had sworn, and promised upon their Holy Vows
to speak the truth, speak after this manner, or that write thus of their own
accord, and according to the dictates of their Consciences; could they do any
thing, that should not turn to the confusion of the Cordeliers, that had all
this while seduced them?

The Cordeliers Reason. There are none against the Cordeliers, but a few
factious spirits, that were offended at the Reformation which they would have
brought in in Execution of his Majesty's Letters of the Privy Seal, and the
Command of the late Queen Mother.
THe Defense of those persons, that have none to make, is to render those, that
accuse them the most justly in the world, suspected. It has been just now made
appear, what the Cordeliers mean by these Factious spirits, and that it is of 21
Nunns of the Quire, The Ancientest, and the most considerable in the House, of
whom they speak after this fashion, because they were not able to endure their
disorders and villainies any longer. They may in the judgment of the Cordeliers
pass for what they please to think them; That will not hinder them from
glorying in this reproach, nor from declaring, that they were not Offended at
any design they had to reform the House, (since they are very well persuaded,
that there was an extraordinary need of it) but at the manner of the
Provincial's proceeding in it.

They were Offended to see a man, that had the title of Provincial, and one
deputed from their Majesty's by virtue of Letters of the Privy Seal, which gave
him full power to punish, and to make those, who should oppose his Reformation,
be carried away into other Monasteries, to see him declare to all the Nunns
after he had assembled them together, That he did not believe they were in any
fault, but that he must do something to make a show for a little time only:
That he assured them upon the Faith of a Priest, that the consent, that he
required of them to the reforming of their Monastery, should not engage them to
any thing, and that he took this course only to salve his own Credit, and the
Honor of the Community, which had been reflected upon by an information given
in to the Queen.

They were offended, that during the three days that this Provincial made his
scrutiny, he promised many in private, That all the Orders, that he should give
should be but for a small time; And That from that very time he, and his
Secretary made themselves sport with them about all that great design of
Reformation.

They were offended, That after they had under this pretense of Reformation,
spent three whole weeks in their House in Feasting, and as loose conversation,
as they had ever used, he thought it sufficient to read them some Regulations,
that he had drawn up, and which the Cordeliers were the first that did openly
violate, entertaining the Nuns at the time of Divine Service, and Solemn
Festivals, against the Injunctions that he had made to the contrary.

Lastly, They were offended, That those whom their Majesty's had entrusted with
the Remedies that they thought fit to apply to their Disorders, had on the
other side labored after nothing more, than to disguize them, to conceal them,
and to invalidate them, by giving encouragement to hope for impunity. So that
if it be true, that this pretended Reformation gave the occasion to all the hot
pursuits that the Nuns make at Court, it is because it has perfectly convinced
them, That there was no good to be hoped for from the Cordeliers; That they
would always engage them still deeper and deeper in the greatest Disorders;
and, That they were not to expect Reformation from People, that had so many
things to reform amongst themselves, and who ought to have taken care to cure
themselves, before thinking of healing others, if they would avoid the reproach
mentioned in the Gospel.

The Cordeliers Reason. They made Songs of the Cordeliers, and turned the
Provincial' s Words and Actions into Raillery.
It Is not here intended to justify all that a false zeal, or the too great
liberty, that the Cordeliers had used these Nuns to, might make them say
against them. It Is only affirmed, That it was the interest of these Fathers not
to draw upon themselves the contempt of these Virgins by their disorderliness
so unavoidably as they did: Nor to vilify their Ministry by the execrable
profanations of it, that they acted before their faces: Nor to render
themselves ridiculous by transforming themselves into Gallants, and Romantic
Heroes; by using their language, and imitating their Actions, and Fashions.

Would not these Fathers have had the Sisters show respect to the fooleries,
and impertinencies, that they heard them utter? That they should have had a
venerable opinion of a Provincial, that danced, and played the Gallant at their
Grate? And that they should have expressed Esteem and Reverence for people, in
whom the most tolerable thing that they saw was the meanness, and extravagance
of their talk? Let them know, that in the opinion of the Holy Fathers, there
are Railleries, that are Acts of Justice, and that there are some things, as
Tertullian says, that cannot be confuted but by laughing at them, lest that if
they should be taken notice of in a serious way, one should seem to give them
respect. Multa sunt sic digna revinci, ne gravitate adorentur.

The Cordeliers Reason. My Lord Archbishop of Sens instead of Executing his
Commission, endeavored usurp the Power over them by infusing Rebellion into
them, and by maintaining them in it ever since.
THis Prelate never endeavored to usurp that Jurisdiction; for it belongs to
him by Divine right, and so is inseparable from his Character. Is it not an
impudent presumption for Friars, who in that quality are no more than Laics,
and ought to esteem themselves happy, that God has separated them from the
World to serve him in silence and retirement, should dispute with a Great
Archbishop for his most Hierarchical Rights, and the most essential to his
Priesthood? Multum erigimini, Filii Levi -- number parum vobis est, etc. Though my
Lord Archbishop of Sens (in the Visitation, which he was obliged to make in
this Monastery to satisfy the duty of his Charge, and the urgent supplications
addressed to him for it by the Nuns, whom the Court by Order had remitted to
him for redressing of their Grievances) were supposed to have warmly
represented to them, and with that tenderness, and Fatherly Charity, that in
all his discourses he joins to the Authority, and Holy Majesty, that goes along
with the Word of God, made them see the necessity there was of recurring to the
most powerful, and wholesome Remedies to cure the distempers that they labored
under, and others yet greater, that threatened them; Could they make such just
Remonstrances pass for the seeds of revolt and rebellion? If the Religious
Sisters of St. Catharine had not of themselves been convinced of the necessity
there was of removing the Authors of so many Disorders away from their House,
and of seriously applying themselves to the salvation of their Souls; Could My
Lord Archbishop of Sens, without wounding his Conscience, and being wanting to
the principal function of his Ministry, leave them any longer under such
mischievous engagements, and not draw them to a solid Conversion, to a true
Change of their lives, and to make the best improvement of those precious
moments of Mercy and Grace? And may not this Prelate, seeing the unjust
Slanders, that the Cordeliers spread of him, with a great deal of Justice use
those words to them, that Jesus Christ used to the Ruler of the Synagogue, who
was in indignation to see him heal a Woman on the Sabbath Day, that had been
for many years possessed with a spirit, that rendered her infirm, and that
bowed her so together that she could not look upwards; Ye Hypocrites, is there
any of you, that looses not his Ox, or his Ass on the Sabbath Day, and draws
them not out of the stable to lead them to drink? Why then should not this
Daughter of Abra- ham, (This Society of Virgins) whom Satan had kept bound for
so many years (by the means of your Ministry) be once in its life delivered
from those bonds?

The Cordeliers Reason. He Excommunicated those, that were zealous for the
Observation of their Rule, and caused Nine of them to be forcibly carried away,
so as was never before heard of.
It Is the least that people, who have so little Conscience as the Cordeliers,
could do to revenge themselves of the wrong, that they pretend to have received
of My Lord Archbishop of Sens, To suppose some things, and to disguise others.
It has been seen in the process of the Declaration what obliged that Prelate to
make it be declared to some of the Religious Sisters of St. Catharine, that
they had incurred the Censures of the Church, and that for not having presented
themselves to the Communion at Easter, and not for having zealously adhered to
the observance of their Rule. When one reflects upon the manner of observing
the Rule in this Monastery ever since the Cordeliers made themselves Masters of
it, and that there is scarce any single Article of it, that they themselves
have not openly violated, what can one judge of the pretended zeal of these 7
or eight Nunns for the observance of their Rule? And is there not ground to
fear with St. Augustine, That this shadow of Piety comes from the leaves of
that Tree, which our First Parents covered themselves withal, when they were
ashamed of their nakedness? Ista umbra pietatis, etc. As for the pretended
violence used in the carrying away of these Nunns, there is nothing more false,
as appears by the Declaration of it drawn up in Court: And we refer it to the
testimony of the Nunns themselves, who cannot deny but that they were
treated-with all possible kindness and civility.

The Cordeliers Reason. Although the Nuns of St. Catharine should of right be
under the Authority of my Lord Archbishop of Sens; yet this cannot be done but
by the Pope, who withdrew them from under his Jurisdiction.
THis way of reasoning supposes, that the Nuns of St. Catharine have been
wholly withdrawn from under the Jurisdiction of my Lord Archbishop of Sens,
which the Cordeliers can never justify by any Title; and though they could,
it is proved that these Titles would be null, and unlawful, being contrary to
the Holy Scripture, the General Councils, and Tradition, all which do (as we
have made appear) submit the Nuns to the Jurisdiction of the Bishops.

But supposing that these Nuns had been withdrawn from under the Jurisdiction
of my Lord Archbishop of Sens, It Is denied that there is any need of the Pope's
Briefs to make them return under his Jurisdiction. For it is a constant Maxim
in France, That to Authorize an Exemption, there must be certain and lawful
Titles, that is, such as are accompanied with all the conditions that the Laws
of the Land, and the Liberties of the Gallicane Church do require: But that to
render to the Ordinaries what belongs to them, there needs no Titles nor
Apostolical Briefs; the return to a common Right being natural and spontaneous,
and having no need of any thing, but the bare Renunciation of those, who are in
possession of the Privileges, by which the effect of that subordination that
God has set amongst the Members of the Body of Jesus Christ, that is, his
Church, is suspended, and obstructed. So that this Renunciation only does
happily return them to that rank to which they belong, and where God, according
to St. Paul, had placed them himself.

The Officers of the Court of Rome have acknowledged this truth themselves upon
on many occasions, and it is to be seen in the Registers of the Parliament, in a
Plea of the late M. Advocate General Bighon, inserted into the Decree that was
made betwixt my Lord Bishop of Bologne, and the Cordeliers, That they have
asserted, when they were recurr'd to upon like occasions, That there was no
need of the Pope's Briefs to restore things to a common Right. The Parliament
has often decided this Question, but particularly in the Decree
beforementioned: For some Religious Sisters of the Annunciade of Bologne having
appealed as from the abuse of the Orders, which the Bishop of Bologne had made
in their Monastery; and the Provincial of the Cordeliers having intervened in
the cause, and having also appealed as from the abuse of the same Orders;
amongst the Reasons that were used at the Hearing to confirm their Appeals, and
which were very nigh, the same that the Cordeliers now allege against my Lord
Archbishop of Sens, they stuck not openly to maintain, That the Pope having put
those Nuns under the Jurisdiction of the Order of St. Francis, His Holiness
ought to give his leave to withdraw them, and remove them from it. But yet the
Court by a Decree of the 6th of January, 1651. ( without having any regard to
the interventions) declared them not receiveable in their Appeal as from
Abuses: And the Jurisdiction, that My Lord Bishop of Bologne had some years
since reassumed over that Monastery, was confirmed, though the Cordeliers had
alleged, That those Nuns had been subjected to them from their very first
foundation, and that there had been neither Briefs nor Privileges obtained of
the Court of Rome to withdraw them from under their Juridsdiction.

The Cordeliers Reason. This is to affront the whole Order, to dishonor it,
and to scandalize the Church.
THere is nothing more abused, than the words that Jesus Christ made use of to
exhort the Faithful carefully to avoid the scandalizing of their Brethren; for
they are indifferently applied to those that reprove Vice, and to those that
commit it: And there are people, who value themselves highly for their
Spirituality, that are scarce at all touched at the licentiousness, with which
the greatest crimes are committed, and yet are even transported with rage at
the zeal, with which they are reproved. The Holy Fathers were of another mind.
They thought, That true Charity toward persons obliged them to write with heat
against their Extravagances, and they were not at all afraid, that they should
trespass upon that Charity, or pass for slanderers for reproving them openly,
if they were of a public nature. They thought, that they were the true causers
of scandal that committed these public Disorders, and the persons, to whom
Jesus Christ spoke, when he said; Woe be to the World because of scandals: Woe be
to the Man by whom scandal comes: And that on the other side, Those, that
reproved them, that put a check to them, were those, that Jesus Christ had
encouraged to this Pious Office, when he said, It is necessary, that scandals
should come.

The rank, which the Scribes, Pharisees, and Doctors of the Law held amongst
the Jews, was much more considerable than that which the Cordeliers hold in the
Church; since that Our Savior says of them, That they sat in the Chair of
Moses, and therefore commands to observe and do all that they taught: And yet
the eminent Condition to which they were raised, and the need that they had of
being in esteem amongst the people, that they might follow their instructions,
did they hinder him from reproving the irregularities of their base and
self-interested practices?

Does he not call them Hypoerites, full of stupidity, blind Guides, Serpents,
and a brood of Vipers? Does he not compare them to whited Sepulchers, which
appear fair without to the eyes of men, but within are full of dead men's bones,
and all kind of rottenness? Does he not tell them, That they appear also just
to the eyes of men, but within are full of Hypocrisy and Iniquity? That they
make clean the outside of the platter and cup, whilst their inward parts are
full of rapine and uncleanness? And though one of those Doctors replies upon
it, That in speaking so he dishonored them also, Does he for all that leave
off discovering their Villainies? And does he not on the contrary add, Woe be to
you also, ye Doctors of the Law, who load men with burdens not to be born, and
will not touch them your selves with your little finger? In fine, when his
Disciples themselves represented to him, That the Pharisees were offended at
the liberty, with which he reproved their errors, Does he not answer them, Let
them alone; They are blind leaders of the blind, Sinite eos; Coeci sunt, etc.

Let not the Fathers Cordeliers then fancy, that the Rules of any Charity,
that was due to their Order, are violated by representing, as has been done,
their disorderly practices, to show what necessity there is of taking an House
of Virgins out of their hands, who are in such evident danger of being ruined.
It Is the Abuses and Disorders that they have committed in this Monastery, that
dishonor the Order, and scandalize the Church, and not the zeal of those that
endeavor to purge the House of the corruption, with which they have infected
it: And there has been so little of a Design in this to diminish the true Glory
of the Order, and that of their Founder, that on the contrary, it is
acknowledged for a reason of the Cordeliers falling into all these horrible
misdemeanors: That they have departed from the spirit of St. Francis, and that
contrary to all his Maxims, and Prohibitions they have engaged themselves in
the Government of the Nuns.

But if any Persons after all this be yet offended at the liberty with which
these Excesses are represented, they will by that show (as St. Bernard said
formerly to justify himself for the holy liberty, with which he had in his
Apology reproved the Disorders that were slipped into the Order of Cluni) that
they love not the Order, since that they are unwilling, that the Corruptions
and Abuses of it should be condemned and banished out of it. And there is
nothing to be answered to these persons, but the saying of St. Gregory the
Great, cited also by St. Bernard: It Is better that Scandal should come, than
that the truth should be abandoned. It is better that Scandal should come of
it, than that Religious Fathers upon the account of their being Religious (and
therefore that their disorderly Practices cause great Scandal, when they come
once to be known) should without check profane the most sacred things, and
carry unchaste flames into the very Sanctuary, and into those hearts, which
Jesus Christ has after a peculiar manner made his Temples and a part of himself.

This is now that, which obliged them to discover the Disorders that the
Cordeliers have committed in the House of St. Catharine, and not the desire of
affronting an Order, which it may be, would be still in the high esteem that
the humility and simplicity of St. Francis had put it into, if it had continued
obedient to the Bishops under whom it received its birth; and if these Fathers
had taken care, as their Saint had often warned them, to avoid having any
communication with the Religious Sisters.

It was thought to be the Interest of the Church, That the Bishops, who have
Nunneries of the Religious of St. Clare in their Diocesses, and who are obliged
to give an account to God of them, should have knowledge of these Disorders,
that so having a pious indignation at them, they might apply themselves, as
they are bound by their Office, to hinder the committing of the like Crimes in
those Houses, or to banish them out of them, if by ill hap they were slipped in.

It was thought to be the Interest of the State, That Magistrates, and Public
Persons should have knowledge of these Disorders, that so they might be
convinced of the necessity there is of maintaining the Bishops in the Rights
given them by the Holy Scriptures and Councils over all the Monasteries of
Nunns, for fear that the Friars, who have gained upon their Jurisdiction,
should change those Holy Retirements and Sanctuaries into Houses of Debauchery
and Temples of Venus; and lest this abuse (that the Cardinals and Prelates
assembled together by the Order of Paul the Third did so long ago declare, That
it did disfigure the Church, and confound Christianity, should at last draw
down the wrath of God upon the whole Kingdom by the public Sacriledges, which,
say they, are committed with horrible Scandal in most of the Nunneries, that
are under the Conduct of the Cloistered Friars.

It was thought to be the Interest of all the Friars to have knowledge of these
Disorders, that they might the more zealously love and value the retirement and
solitude of their Cloisters: That they might take the more care to avoid the
Nunns Grates, with whom all the Founders of the several Orders have expressly
forbidden them to have any communication; And that that they might mind
themselves of that excellent saying of St. Augustine: Quid interest, utrum in
uxore, an in matre, an in sorore, dum tamen Eva in qualibet muliere caveatur.

It was thought to be the Interest of all the Nunns to have a knowledge of these
Disorders, that they might unite themselves with joy to the Government of their
Bishops, their true Pastors, and lawful Superiors, and that they might
carefully fly from those Strangers, those Mercenaries, and those false Pastors,
That come to them clothed like sheep, but within are ravening wolves; That
devour their houses under a pretense of making long Prayers, and that even to
this day compass Sea and Land to make one Jew, and after he is made so, they
make him twice as fit for Hell as themselves.

Lastly, It was thought to be the interest of the Nuns of St. Catharine, That
the World should have a knowledge of these Disorders, that they might withal
acknowledge the Justice of their Suits at Court against the Cordeliers, the
Generosity that has made them shut their eyes against all humane Interests and
Considerations, that might have drawn them from it, and the Christian Contempt
they have shown of Worldly Reputation to recover their solid and true honor,
which consists in resettling good Order and regularity in their House.

The Conclusion.
AFter what has been represented in both parts of the Factum, and the Answers
now made to all that can be alleged in favor of the Cordeliers, it cannot be
imagined that there is any person, that is not fully convinced of the Justice
of the Pretensions of the Religious Sisters of St. Catharine.

They desire not that the Authors of all the Disorders, that have been
committed in their House; should be informed against, That so long a
continuation of crimes should be punished; That the violation of so many Laws,
so many abominable profanations should be chastised according to the severity
of the Rules of Church and State.

They freely offer to chastise them upon themselves by the ways of Christian
Penance, to expiate them by their groans and tears, and (as much as in them
lies) to appease the Wrath of God (justly provoked by all these abominations)
by the Mortifications of a Religious life, and the constant Sacrifice of an
humble and contrite heart.

They only desire, that by removing these pernicious Directours of their
Consciences from their House, they might recover their liberty of acquitting
themselves of that, and their other Obligations: That by preventing these
Fathers from having any access to them, they might put a stop to the Scandals
that they have occasioned for so many years together: And that such people, as
have neither Faith, nor Honor, nor Conscience, might not be any longer suffered
in the face of the whole Church to abuse a Jurisdiction, which they have
usurped over them against the most Essential Rights of Episcopacy.

If nothing but their temporal interests had been concerned in it, and that the
Cordeliers would have been contented to have consumed their whole Revenue in
Feasting, Dissoluteness, and Debauchery, or to have robbed them of it,
according as they had occasion for it, and stood in need of it to satisfy
their ambitious ends, their self-interest, or their pleasures with it, it may
be, they should have dissembled the injury.

But the honor of their Monastery is now concerned in it, which cannot be
resettled in its former splendor, but by restoring it again to the Authority
of My Lord Archbishop of Sens, unto which, according to the Holy Scripture,
according to the Canons of the Councils, according to the Maxims of the
Gallicane Church, according to the mind of St. Francis, and according to the
first settlement of the Nuns of St. Clare, it ought to be submitted.

The Salvation of their own Souls, and of the Souls of all those Virgins, that
in Succession of time shall be engaged in this Monastery, are concerned in it,
whom these Fathers, considering what kind of people they are, will most
indubitably alienate from the Fidelity, which they owe to Jesus Christ.

Lastly, The main thing, that is made the matter of the present concern, is, To
procure a Favor for a great number of Virgins Consecrated to the Service of
God, that would never be refused to any Ordinary Virgins of the World, who had
been stolen away from their Parents, and implored the assistance of the Laws to
be restored to them back again, and to be forced out of the hands of those
Villains, who would with so much insolence have attempted upon their honor.

The Religious Sisters of St. Catharine expect this favor from the Court with
so much the more Confidence, as the danger in which they are is more evident.

They hope that that August Tribunal having always testified so much zeal for
the Rights of the Bishops, and for the true liberty of the Nunneries, will be
tenderly affected at the hard captivity, under which they have for so many
years groaned: And that they shall not have a less favorable Audience, than
the Religious Sisters of St. Eutrope of Chanteloup, Those of St. Nicholas of
Melun, Those of the Annunciate at Bologne, and so many others besides, who have
been restored to the Jurisdiction of their Bishops for abuses very like to
those, that the Cordeliers have committed in their House.

They hope, that It having given testimony of its great zeal for upholding all
Religious Orders in the first spirit, and sincerity of their Foundation, It
will not refuse this favor to the Order of St. Francis, by obliging the
Cordeliers to leave off being Directours to those, whom their Holy Founder has
so straightly forbid them to meddle withal, which he so earnestly endeavored
to separate them from, and which we looked upon as a very dangerous snare that
the Devil had laid for his Order, and which they themselves have found by
dreadful Experience to have been so mischievous to them.

Lastly, They hope, that the Court having always given evidence of so much
Judgment, Prudence, and Equity in its determinations, It will not now abandon
them to the power of those, who have engaged them in that sad condition, that
they have for so many years continued in; but will on the contrary conclude,
That the Mischief that the Cordeliers have done to their Monastery cannot be
prevented but by the cares of their true Pastor.

FINIS.
Jan. 5. 1675/1676.
Imprimatur,

Geo. Hooper. Ex Aed. Lambethan.

The Contents.
A Chapter-Act of the Nuns to own their Factum. A Factum or Declaration in
Court for the Nuns against the Friars. Page 1 Section I. What gave occasion to
the Suits made by the Nuns against the Cordeliers at Court. page. 3 Sect. 2. 3.
4. 5. 6. 7. 8. That the Cordeliers have no just Title for their Jurisdiction
over the Nuns. p. 37 Sect. 9. 10. That if they had had any Title, they have now
lost their Right to it by their Misdemeanors, which are specified by these
particulars. p. 40 Sect. 11. Abuses in their Spiritual Concerns. p. 43 In the
Education of Pensioners. p. 46 Novices. Education of young Novices. p. 48 And
of young professed Nuns. p. 53 Indecent Books allowed them. p. 54 Instructions.
p. 55 Presents to the Nuns. p. 57 Letters, Posies and Devices. p. 58 Public
Allusions. p. 64 Dedication of Theses. p. 65 Profanation of Sermons. p. 70 The
Marriages of the Friars and Nuns. p. 72 Frolicks and Entertainments. p. 75
Love Letters. p. 78 Sacrilege and Profanations. p. 93 Mad Revellings and
secret Entries into the Nunnery. p. 95 Insolences and Disorders of the Friars.
Which the Nuns blushed at. p. 97
Sect. 12. Abuses of the Temporal Concern. p. 105 Riotous Wastes of the Revenue
of the Nunnery in Debaucheries, by Thefts and Cheats, in Licentiousness. p.
105. to 115
Sect. 13. That it is impossible there should be any good Discipline settled in
this Nunnery by the Cordeliers. p. 116 Sect. 14. The Superiors of the Order
caused the Disorders, viz. The Provincials, Masters of the Revels. The Nuns
Preferred for their kindness. p. 117 Sect. 15. That the Nuns have Invincible
Reasons not to trust the Cordeliers. p. 130 Sect. 16. The Cordeliers pretenses
to color their Designs, are answered. p. 138 The Conclusion representing the
whole Case. page 180
A Catalogue of some Books, Printed for, and sold by Robert Pawlet, at the
Bible in Chancery Lane, near Fleet Street.
MAry Magdalen's Tears wiped off, or, A Voice of Peace to an Unquiet
Conscience; Published for the Comfort of all those who mourn in Zion.

Sermons Preached by that Eminent Divine, Henry Hammond, D.D.

Golden Remains of that ever Memorable Mr. John Hales of Eaton College, etc.
The Second Impression, with Additions not before published.

Episcopacy, as Established by the Law in England, written by the Especial
Command of the late King CHARLES, by R. Saunderson, late Lord Bishop of Lincoln.

A Scholastical History of the Canon of the Holy Scripture; or, The certain and
indubitable Books thereof, as they are received in the Church of England; By
Dr. Cousin, late Lord Bishop of Durham.

A Collection of Articles, Injunctions, Canons, Orders, Ordinances and
Constitutions Ecclesiastical, with other Public Records of the Church of
England, with a Preface, by Anthony Sparrow, Lord Bishop of Exon.

The Bishop of Exon's Caution to his Diocese against false Doctrines; Delivered
in a Sermon at his primary Visitation.

The whole Duty of Man, laid down in a plain and familiar way for the use of
All, but especially the meanest Reader: necessary for all Families, with
private Devotions on several occasions.

The Gentleman's Calling, written by the Author of the Whole Duty of Man.

The Causes of the Decay of Christian Piety: or An Impartial Survey of the
Ruins of Christian Religion, undermined by Unchristian Practice: by the Author
of the Whole Duty of Man.

An Historical Vindication of the Church of England, as it stands separated
from the Roman, etc. by Sir Roger Twisden, Baronet.

Mr. Chillingworth's Reasons against Popery, persuading his Friend to return to
his Mother the Church of England, from the Church of Rome.

The Book of Homilies, appointed to be read in Churches.

Constitutions and Canons Ecclesiastical.

Divine Breathings, or, A Pious Soul thirsting after Christ; In 100 Excellent
Meditations.

Hugo Grotius de Rebus Belgicis, or the Annals and History of the Low Country
Wars, in English; wherein is manifested, that the United Netherlands are
indebated for the Glory of their Conquest to the Valor of the English.

A Treatise of the English Particles, showing much of the variety of their
significations and uses in English; and how to render them into Latin,
according to the propriety and elegancy of that Language, with a Praxis upon
the same: By William Walker, B. D. Schoolmaster of Grantham.

The Royal Grammar, commonly called Lillie's Grammar, explained; opening the
meaning of the Rules with great plainness to the understanding of Children of
the meanest capacity, with Choice Observations on the same from the best
Authors: By W. Walker, B. D. Author of the Treatise of English Particles.

A Treatise proving Spirits, Witches, and Supernatural Operations, by pregnant
Instances and Evidences: by Meric Casaubon, D. D.

A Catalogue of the Names of all the Parliaments or reputed Parliaments, from
the Year 1640.

A Narrative of some Passages in, or relating to the Long Parliament; By a
Person of Honor.

Nemesius's Nature of Man, in English: by G. Withers, Gent.

Inconveniences of Toleration.

A Letter about Comprehension.

A Thanksgiving Sermon, preached before the King, by J. Dolben, D. D. Dean of
Westminster, and Clerk of the Closet.

Bishop Brownrig's Sermon on the Gunpowder Treason.

A Narrative of the Burning of London 1666. with an Account of the Losses, and
a most Remarkable Parallel between it and MOSCO, both as to the Plague and Fire.

A Collection of the Rules and Orders now used in Chancery.

Mr. White's Learned Tract of the Laws of England.

Graphice, or the Use of the Pen and Pensil, in Designing, Drawing and
Painting; By Sir William Sanderson, Knight.

The Communicant instructed for worthy Receiving the Lord's Supper: By Tho.
Trott of Barkston near Grantham.

Military and Maritime Discipline, etc.

Sir Francis Moor's REPORTS.

Baron Savil's REPORTS.

All Sorts of LAW BOOKS.

FINIS.

