THE ART OF Pleasing IN CONVERSATION.

Written by the Famous Abbott Richlieu.

Translated out of French.

LONDON, Printed for R. Bentley, in Russel Street, in Covent Garden. 1691.

THE PUBLISHER TO THE READER.
THE Art of Pleasing in Conversation, which is here offered to your Perusal, is
a Present well worth your acceptance. You will see the Contents sufficiently
make good the Title, and that a Book of this kind will be more useful than
(perhaps) you at first imagined.

Young Persons, who are not yet acquainted with the World, will find here such
Directions, as will keep them from committing a thousand Absurdities; and
procure 'em the Esteem and Affection of those whose good Opinion they must
value.

The Ladies, I suppose, will not be much displeased to find here Persons of
their Sex whose Conversation wants no agreeableness. And the Men may here see
the Air and decent Behavior they must observe among Women of Honor and Virtue.

It will be needless to say any thing of the manner of this Author's treating
so nice a subject; of his great Judgment and Knowledge of the World; seeing
this will only the longer withhold the Reader from the Pleasure of a better
Entertainment in the Book it self.

THE CONTENTS.
Entertainment I. p. 1 Entertainment II. 16 That one must be civil, yet without
falling into incommodious Ceremonies. Entertainment III. 41 Of Polite Language,
and the manner of telling a Story. Entertainment IV. 72 Of the Conversation of
Ladies, and how far the Complaisance we may have for them will permit us to
flatter them. Entertainment V. 81 Of decent Behavior at Table. Entertainment
VI. 95 Against great Talkers. Entertainment VII. 114 That it is not possible
for a man, who is generally esteemed a Liar, to please in Conversation.
Entertainment VIII. 129 That a Detractor is generally hated, and that he he
cannot please any other than envious and malicious Persons. Entertainment IX.
150 How one may insert Commendations in Conversation. Entertainment X. 177 That
to please in Conversation, one must be discreet, and keep an exact Decorum.
Entertainment XI. 191 What care must be taken in Raillery. Entertainment XII.
221 Of witty Sayings and Repartees. Entertainment XIII. 252 Whether it be fit
to reprehend any one in Conversation. Entertainment XIV. 266 Of the Air it is
fit we should have in Conversation. Entertainment XV. 276 Whether it be good to
prepare our selves for common Conversations. Entertainment XVI. 286 That to
please in Conversation, a man must be Master of his own humor. Entertainment
XVII. 304 That we must speak reverently of Holy Things. Entertainment XVIII.
314 That State Affairs must be discoursed of with great reservedness.
Entertainment XIX. 327 That to speak justly of the Passions, of Vices and
Virtues, we should ordinarily descend from a general discourse into particular
distinctions. Entertainment XX. 345 After what manner we should tell News.
THE ART of PLEASING IN Conversation.
Entertainment I.
HOW glad I am to see you, my dear Nephew (cried Dorante, in embracing Lisidor)
and how farther joyful should I be, could I prove serviceable to you in this
Town?

Lisidor. You know, Sir, the reason of my coming, was because you was here, and
that had it not been for this, those that have the care of me, would never have
consented to this journey.

After these words Dorante made Lisidor enter into an Apartment he had provided
for him, and having ordered the Collation to be brought in, he desired him to
sit down, and thus continued the discourse.


Dorante. I do not at all wonder, you have so greatly desired to come into this
Town. All young people desire the same; for one may say, that Paris is not only
the Capital of a slourishing Monarchy, but is even respected as the predominant
City of all Europe. People come here from all parts, some to polish themselves,
others to get Employments, others to see the finest Court in the World, and the
greatest King on Earth. However, to be well acquainted with Paris requires
time: Strangers are surprised in not finding immediately all the varieties they
have been told of it; they seek them, and discover only the least part of them,
as long as they see only the Streets and Buildings.

But how great is their admiration afterward, when they enter into the Houses,
and view the magnificence of the Furniture? If they be admitted into the
Company of Persons of wit and merit which at certain hours meet together?


Lisidor. I profess, Sir, that I love Paris the more for that reason, and above
all things wish I were capable of making one in these Conversations; but I am
sensible how unfit I am for it. I want natural parts to second the care you
will take of me.


Dorante. You have no reason to complain against Nature, you have been better
used by her than I expect you will tell me; and were I as able, as she has been
favorable to you, my Counsels, and your Talents would make you go very fast
and far in the way you desire to enter. However, I doubt not of the success,
notwithstanding the smallness of my assistance.


Lisidor. I know, Sir, how great a Master you are in the Art I would learn; and
all the World knows that your Age, which has yielded you Experience, has taken
nothing from you of that agreeableness, which makes the Charms of Conversation.


Dorante. As I am naturally complaisant, and that I love company, you may hear
something in my commendation, and therefore I shall not by an unfeasonable
modesty oppose my Friends opinion of me, seeing it may make you to receive the
advice I am desired to give you with greater relish. It is at your Father's
request, Sir, that I have undertaken this Province, who is the dearest of my
Relations, and therefore you may easily imagine I shall use my utmost
endeavors to satisfy both you and him. I much approve of your design; for
nothing is more important in the commerce of life, than to please in
Conversation; and if men are born for Society, one may say that it is
Conversation which is the Bond of Friendship. But I know not if before we enter
into matters which we should treat of, I should not ask you what you understand
by the word Conversation?


Lisidor. I am not at all displeased, Sir, you ask me this, seeing it will cost
you an explication; for I confess, that although I comprehend what a
Conversation is, yet I should be perplexed, should you require a proper
definition of it.


Dorante. I am not at all surprised at what you say; I have seen in the same
pain, persons more experienced than you can be at your age. There are a great
many distinctions to make hereupon, and every time several persons speak in
these Assemblies, they form not what we call Conversation. Obscure Sciences and
great Affairs must have a less share in their discourses, than agreeableness
and diversion. For in fine, let a man treat gravely of important matters, in a
Council of State or War, in a Low-suit or Distemper; where a Physician shall
banter you with hard words, and a Lawyer cramp you with Presidents; all this is
no more a Conversation, than the Brawlings in public disputes, or the
Scoldings of Fish Women.


Lisidor. What then, Sir, must there be no mention of Sciences, of the Court,
of War, or Politics, in the discourses you mean.


Dorante. So far am I from banishing the subjects you speak of, that I affirm
they serve to uphold Conversation, and to render it more instructive. The
Palace, or pleading places, have now and then such Causes as furnish the best
Companies with entertainment. There are great Subornations, contested
Marriages, and Divorces, which give occasion to some to Moralize, and to others
to utter a thousand witty Reflections. However a man would prove very
troublesome, if, to make himself admired, he should enter on particularising an
important Subject, and discourse of nothing else all the day long. It is
variety which makes any thing agreeable, an air easy and remote from
affectation, which is never tiresom; whereas should a man discourse on a
sublime Subject with affected expressions, you could not hearken long to him,
without falling asleep. Yet great interests, and extraordinary events may find
their place in most Conversations; provided they enter naturally, and be
treated of with that capacity and modesty they require. Particularly one is
assured to please, if there be News wanting, and you be the first that relates
a considerable Marriage, the birth of a Prince, the gaining of a Battle, or the
taking of a place. Men are generally pleased at the recital of Regulations
which relate to the Peoples welfare, or the beautifying of Towns, and
Fortifying of places. Add that we hearken with pleasure to one who comes from
Court, if she describes a magnificent Entertainment, or a Fashion that is not
as yet known in Town. Yet those recitals must not be long, the particulars must
only be touched on, wherein the chief of the company may be concerned; and the
most important advice I can give you, is to consider always before whom you
speak. Without this precaution you will be in danger of offending Persons whom
you would please; and therefore if you will believe me, you will never act the
Philosopher before young People, who desire only to talk of Plays and fine
Women; neither must you appear severe in a Ball before Ladies, who think of
nothing but dancing and diverting themselves. In fine, you must consult Reason,
which being your guide, I see few matters, but may be Subjects of Conversation.
It Is true one ought to speak less of ones self than any thing else. For what
can we say of ourselves? We shall make our selves ridiculous in displaying the
good qualities we possess. And can we have the imprudence to publish our
defects? or shall we deaden the Entertainment in speaking indifferent and
ordinary things of our selves? Extend this Rule, if you please, to Domestics:
An Husband must speak little and modestly of his Wife; a Mother would little
divert, should she give an account of the cryings of her Children, and the care
which the Nurses take of them; we must be no less retentive in citing the
saults of our Servants. What matter is it to the Company, if we have a lame
Footman, or a slovenly Cook, or a Steward that makes us pay dear for that which
he buys cheap? We should always observe what diverts, and what tires; and that
it is easier to avoid a fault, than to acquire a perfection: Examine we
presently what may render a man troublesome, and we shall soon perceive how to
make a Spirit of gayety and politeness reign in Conversation. You have seen an
agreeable representation of these importunate people in the Comedy of the
Troublesoms, and I doubt not but you have read the Conversations of a person
who is generally esteemed.


Lisidor. I have observed with pleasure, in that Comedy, after what sort one
becomes troublesome in making long discourses, void of agreeableness, wherein
the Company takes no part. I cannot endure that Man who pretends that his
Prince should recompense him with a Vessel which he has lost. He tells you,
without any man's offer to ask him, the Reasons whereon his pretentions are
grounded, and what may be alleged against them, and the replies he can make
thereto. He at length names those who built his Ship, and describes all the
parts of a Vessel, to show that his was very fine and costly.


Dorante. However here is something to be learnt in this narration, but what
profit can we draw from a dry and tedious genealogy, wherein we are not at all
concerned. I am not much interess'd to know that in a Family which is unknown
to me, that Thiband was the Son of Enguerrand, and that Enguerrand had Guy for
his Father. I find more diverting that Brave in the Comedy of George Andin, who
tells us that one of his Predecessors, named John Giles of Sotenville, had
heretofore leave to sell all his Goods to go beyond Sea.


Lisidor. I confess these Genealogical recitals are very tiresom; yet methinks
not altogether so vexatious as those Relations of tragical Events heapt up one
upon another, especially being recounted with a lamentable tone, as if designed
to make us bewail all the sad accidents which have happened since the beginning
of the world.


Dorante. I grant you that nothing is more troublesome than these doleful
Relations; but when a man is about making them, you will not, I suppose, advise
him to speak facetiously of them. Not that I think it always necessary to
accommodate ones Words and Countenance to the Matter treated of. On the
contrary, a man cannot more easily raise a fit of laughter, than in relating
some pleasant passage with a cold and serious air. There is likewise a certain
turn of Language which requires one to speak highly big of mean things, and to
give a plain and simple relation of great and noble Subjects. You may easily
perceive the Reason, for these latter bear up themselves, and others have need
of props. I suppose this is enough for this bout, having given you these
general Advices, whereunto I may add, that in all sorts of Entertainments, you
must be sure to avoid whatever may savor of For mality and Affectation.


Lisidor. I protest, Sir, you have already given me such a clearness of
understanding, that if you continue to instruct me, perhaps you will perceive
such success, as will hinder you from repenting it.


Dorante. I can assure you my counsels will be of little use to you, unless you
mix therewith the frequenting of Company, and making close and constant
Observations thereupon. The Maxims of the greatest Masters are not of
themselves able to make a complete Gentleman: A man becomes not a Painter, but
by using the Pencil, how great a Judge soever he may be of good Pieces; and
therefore I will not give you any Maxims for the world, unless you intend to
see it. These instructions will be fruitless to a Solitary; he can never
acquire the facility of using them. The best Precepts and choicest Morals will
never take from him the perplexed countenance which he brings from his Desert.
They can never take off that dull and melancholy air of his Cell. But on the
contrary, we may say that advice gives great Assistance to persons that take
care to practice it. An hours reading is more profitable to these, than a whole
year can be to contemplative persons who keep always in their Studies. A man
must practice immediately as soon as he is furnished with good Rules; and it is
useful for a man ever and anon to examine these Precepts, when he enters into
Company. This Precaution makes known the faults wherein one may fall; and there
are some of such a nature, as to make a man ridiculous for his whole life time,
the first time he commits them. So that a man cannot be too much cautioned
against them.


Dorante had no sooner said these words, but he observed the Collation bringing
in, which made him proceed no farther in that discourse. They went both of 'em
into a Garden which Dorante had taken care of embellishing. Lisidor viewed the
Flowers, a small Fountain, and some Statues; and being afterward sat down with
Dorante in a pleasant Arbor, this last reassumed his discourse, and began this
second Entertainment.


Entertainment II. That one must be civil, yet without falling into
incommodious Ceremonies.
Dorante. BEfore we reassume our discourse, you are desirous, I suppose, dear
Nephew, that we should say something touching the being handsomely clothed
before you appear in the Companies wherein I pretend to bring you. I do not
think you have made you Clothes before your departure, nor that you esteem your
Tailors so, as to prefer them to ours. We will go to morrow morning, if you
think fitting, to find out what is most modish and proper for a person of your
years and condition. You know we must not neglect the outside. We should always
so order it, that the first impressions turn to our advantage, and dispose
people the better to relish the Sentiments of our Mind, and the agreeable
products of our Fancies. That which does farther contribute to these favorable
dispositions, is a certain manner of behavior and speech that is soft and
polisht, which gives the name of civil to those who commonly use them.

You know what are the Qualilities which that which we call Civility requires;
and you have observed without doubt, That that of our French, and the Urbanity
of the Ancient Romans, draw their original from two words which signify City
and Villa. And we almost ever see that the persons who have been brought up in
Cities, have an handsome behavior opposite to that which we call Rusticity in
Country People.


Lisidor. If you please, Sir, tell me in what manner one may practice this
civility, and wherein it consists?


Dorante. The most important Rule which I would give in this matter, were I fit
to be consulted, should be, that a man who would gain on affections, should
carry tokens of modesty in his countenance and behavior. He cannot draw envy,
unless he appears possessed in a good opinion of himself; and on the contrary,
he cannot but be pleasing to Company, if, instead of appearing fierce and
positive, he gives them marks of esteem and submission.

I would have one also to observe exactly a decent behavior, according to the
Sex, Age, and Quality of the person you converse with, with regard likewise
both to time and place. In effect, a Lady would be but little charming, should
she appear with the blustering mien of a Soldier; neither would a Captain look
well, if he affected to speak soft and sine, like a Sir Courtly Nice; and an
old man would be ridiculous, should he look on his toes, and ever and anon
throw back the locks of his Peruke, like a young Beau of eighteen. Now to come
to another kind of men; would you speak to a great Prelate, or to a grave
Magistrate, with as mimic an air as to a Chamber-fellow in the Academy? We must
allow that Decency requires that we not only behave our selves respectfully
with persons of a distinct Rank, but even not so much as to speak of them in
any manner which savours of equality. I do not believe that a person who has
been of the Retinue of an Ambassador in his Travels, will be so ridiculous as
to say in his ordinary discourse, When my Lord the Duke d'Estree and I went to
Rome together; Yet there are People, who speaking to a great Lord, observe so
little distance as to say; You remember, Sir, what befell us when we set out
for Lions; whereas they should have mentioned only the Lord's name, and barely
have said, When my Lord Duke d'Estree went to Rome; and at to the second
expression, When your Lordship parted.

I do not tell you that there are an infinite number of other Rules to be
followed by a man that would appear like a Gentleman. You know that we must not
only give the right hand and the wall to persons of Quality, but likewise yield
them generally whatever seems most commodious. Your own Reason will show you
what is fitting in these matters, without my advice. However it is good to use
most of these little Maxims with an address so much the greater in that it must
not be perceived.

All must appear natural in a Gentleman, and nothing must savor of Art and
Affectation.

I might moreover insert some one of these precepts in our Entertainments:
Should I collect them all at present, you would be perhaps disgusted at them.
Let us first consider those which are to be observed in entering into Company.
When you go to see a person of a Rank above yours, you know, without doubt,
that it is to use too much familiarity, to enter with your Coach or Chair into
the Court of his house. Civility requires we come out of them to enter on foot,
unless the Porter, by his Master's order, opens the great Gate, and entreats
you to enter more commodiously. If you be not known, and your name be asked,
you are only barely to mention it, without adding thereto your Title of
Marquess, or Sir John. You likewise are not to be taught, that when we find the
Chamber door fastened, it is not civil to knock loudly with your stick, but
rather softly with your knuckles, or scratching the door. This fashion came
from the doors of the Louvre, and is now gotten to those of the Ministers and
Grandees of the Court, and I doubt not but it will get by degrees to all houses
where there is any Quality. But when a man first presents himself, commonly he
whose office is to introduce persons, takes care of leveling these little
difficulties.


Lisidor. However there is one, for when we find persons already at the door,
or there come any before it be opened, Civility requires one to withdraw, to
let them first enter who came before us, and offer the door even unto those who
came after, if they appear to be persons of any Consideration. However this
does (...) me from my perplexity; (...) I be not known to those (...); how far
am I obliged to (...) my Civility, or, to (...), this kind of Coremony?


Dorante. There is on the Countenance, and Behavior, certain Characters which
may make us guess at the Condition of persons; and which determines us to treat
them with more or less Civility, according as our Conjectures shall direct us.
But when a man that wants experience, and penetration, finds himself in the
uncertainty you speak of, he must take the furest side, which is, to pay more
respects than we think are due, seeing it is better that people who are not
worthy of 'em, should be obliged to us for 'em, than to expose our selves to
disoblige persons who me rit more Civility than we have paid them. Yet we must
not fall into those Ceremonies which were so incommodious in the former Court.
They have been long since banished, and we can hardly believe men should make it
an Art to torture themselves and others.


Lisidor. I know, Sir, there was never any Comedy more pleasant than was one of
those Contests whereon they fell every time two or three met at a Gate. I have
heard say, that they added strange contentions to their complements; that they
stepped back, to advance again immediately, and to push forwards with violence
toward the passage, those persons to whom they would give place.


Dorante. The eloquent expressions which were studied, and spoke with great
deliberation, were no less ridiculous than the postures they made; and methinks
I see a Viscount and a Baron of those times thus contesting it with one another.


The Viscount. No, no, Sir; say and do what you will, I Will pass no farther, and
stir no more from hence, than London Bridge does to White Hall.


The Baron. And for my part, Sir, let one word be as good as a thousand, I will
not enter; I Will as soon lie here all night in this corner, where the knowledge
of your merit has made me withdraw. In fine, Sir, I protest if it lay in the
power of my wishes, I would choose rather to dwell eternally here, than to
suffer your civility to supplant my duty.


The Viscount. No mention of duty, good Sir, for that belongs to me; and were
there another judge than your modesty to decide our disserences, I should ^^on
gain my cause. Fie on this modesty, it is not equitable enough to be our
Arbitrator, she will take what is due from you, and give me that which does not
belong to me. I hope she will be sooner tired than your Reason; and you must
yield to me, in permitting me to yield to you.


The Baron. However I shall do nothing, unless you command me to do any thing.


The Viscount. Well then I command you; That I may obey you.


The Baron. In this case, my obedience will excuse my fault; and I may now say,
that we shall go in procession; where the principals march the last.

The peace had no soorer ended this conflict, but at a new door new phrases and
new strivings.


Lisidor. I think the young people happy in being born in a time wherein they
are delivered from these tiresome fashions: But, Sir, ^^y whence came they, and
how came they to be received in a Country, where franchisement has given the
name to the Nation therein established?


Dorante. It Is true, one would wonder how we could relish them, for the French
are too mercurial to remain whole hours in a state of complementing. But the
Italians on the contrary, more patient and more at leisure, and of more pliable
spirits, perhaps have introduced this manner among us. However the samous
Monsieur de la Care tells us, that the Ceremonies past from Spain to Italy; but
supposing this were true; and that the Spaniards have taken them from the Moors
of Grenad, as well as their gallantry, yet I must still believe, that they
rather come from Italy than from any other Nation. I have ever imagined that
the Italians have made a kind of Art of them, and heep as it were a Register of
them, which one may term their Ceremonial.


Lisidor. I suppose the word Ceremony is not ancient; and that it may have come
from that given to respectful actions which Church men make use of to denote
the honor they give to God, or to holy things.


Dorante. I am of the same opinion as you: We have extended in process of time
the signification of this term. It has been thought fit to apply it to the
Reverences which men make to one another, in bowing down; in uncovering the
head; and by accompanying these actions with an 100 other grimaces, the more to
testify our submission. This Custom is but the shadow of what it was, and it
is well for us it is so.

However it is not so much abased, but that it endeavors to raise up its head.
But those persons as know the world, retrench all these superfluities, and
observe only what decency requires. Hereby they fall not into fruitless
excesses of words, and submissions, which are seldom taken for sincere. And
therefore they be commonly used to flatter in appearance, such persons as we do
in effect despise.

To proceed farther; all these Ceremonies, and these Protestations of Amity,
would not only be looked upon as so many dissimulations, but one might look
upon them as Crimes and Treacheries; if those terms, which are at every turn
used, had not lost their first validity through long custom. But we are wont no
longer to take these words in a strict sense. We see every day people embrace
one another, kiss, and make a thousand offers, as if they were the best Friends
in the world; and who, a moment afterward acknowledge, without hesitation,
that they scarce knew one another. However we must follow this Custom, instead
of attempting to change it. It is less our fault than the fault of our age; and
all that wise people can do, is, to use it with moderation and diseretion. When
all the world falls into a fault, no body can be blamed; and how extravagant
soever a mode may be, a man would yet be still more extravagent, if he refused
to comply with it. Should he alone offer to withstand the general consent of
his Country. Let us grant therefore, that there are Ceremonies of duty from
which we cannot fairly excuse our selves, but offend persons who will imagine
we pay 'em not their dues. So that the authority of Custom may do all things in
point of Ceremony; and therefore it must be regarded as a kind of Law. Let not
a man examine whether this Law be good or bad, it is sufficient it has
obtained, whereby we are obliged to obey it; and therefore it is necessary to
know after what manner we should carry our selves, and what terms we should use
in receiving visits, how to return them, and to salute according to the Custom
of the Country. Great is the variety of expression in these rencounters: Among
us Civility requires we should use the plural in speaking to a single person;
perhaps to signify to him, that we esteem him as much as many others.

Addressing our selves to a person of ordinary rank, yet we accost him with, I
pray you, Sir; whereas the ancient Romans said, I pray thee. Which way of
speaking is still amongst some Nations. The Turks, who are so submissive to
their Sovereigns, whose mean Slaves they term themselves, yet use these kind of
expressions when they speak to him, If thy Highness commands it, etc. And
heretofore in Spain, Amirante used the word thou in speaking to the King of
Arragon; and we see that the Subjects of most Princes, speak in a quite
different manner; Amirante followed the Custom of his Country, and we ought to
obey the Custom of ours.


Lisidor. I have observed in a Relation of the Court of Spain, that there is
still practiced a thing very strange, which is, That a Lover who finds his
Mistress in the Queen's prefence, may entertain her with the same liberty which
he might elsewhere. Nay, he takes that of being covered, without offense; his
passion excuses all; it must be supposed to be too violent to permit him to
think of good manners. The more faults it makes him commit, the more it appears
obliging to the person he loves.


Dorante. I know not whether you have observed in the same Book one thing which
is no less surprising. Which is, That the young Gentleman who make love to the
Queen's Maids, send them openly dishes of meat, and without any scruple, at
every meal. But we shall go too far, should we examine the difference there is
betweenourmanner of carriage and those of other Nations. Let it content us in
saying that among us we must salute persons, accost them, or receive them in
the manner in use. A French man who would scruple to say, I am your most humble
Servant, because he felt in his Soul that there was no such thing, would pass
for a ridiculous Misanthropes. Men do not take these words strictly; and we
commonly use them without thinking on what they signify; and whatever
harshness there is in them, it is softened by long Custom. The exactest probity
permits us to use them, and when a man asks me how I do, I may answer, That I
am in good health, and ready to do him service; without being obliged to attend
him at that very moment; and follow him to his house like his Servant.

That which Reason enjoins us in these occasions, is, to use distinctions in
the Civilities which decency obliges us to pay. We must have regard to the age
and the condition of persons, and the state wherein they are; and if we find
them sick or busy, the more ceremonies we use, the more incommodious we make
our selves. We must cut short, and show our sentiments, rather by some
respectful Action, than by tedious Compliments. This proceeding shows that we
know the world, and he that shall do otherwise, will pass for an imprudent
person. Moreover our civilities ought to be different according to the
difference of places and Persons. We see in the Palace Royal a politeness not
to be met with in St. Dennis-street; and in St. Dennis-street we hear not the
quodlibers with which the Lawyers offend our ears. The Officers of an Army, nor
M^^^strates do not love we should (...) 'em lose time in fruitless (...)
^^^nies; and a great Lord would not much relish the compliments made him by a
Tradesman, no more than a Master would be pleased with his Servants offers of
service to him.


Lisidor. It seems that the instruction I may draw hence, is, That in matter of
Ceremonies, we must be neither sparing nor prodigal. If we make too few, we may
pass for uncivil; and we become troublesome, if we fall into the contrary
extreme.


Dorante. In the difficulty there is of observing always a just Medium, I think
we should do (...), if Ceremonies were entirely suppressed, our Fathers passed
well enough without them, and so should we likewise; but it is a contagious
Distemper which our Neighbors have introduced among us as well as others. We
cannot, as I have already said, be dispensed from being subject to them. It Is
true, we must never pass the bounds prescribed by Custom. This were to proceed
to such a Superfluity as Reason forbids, and which Persons will not endure that
hate to be sed with smoke and appearances.


Lisidor. Although Men take pleasure to receive Respects, yet they would be
without doubt disgusted at those paid them that savored of Design or Artisice.
I suppose likewise that excessive praises cannot please. Those who give them
us, have a strange opinion of us. They take us for vain or credulous Persons,
and easy to be deceived.


Dorante. I now told you, that Persons of great leisure made more Ceremonies
than People who are busied: So that you will not be surprised, when you shall
see Ladies, knowing enough in this Art, to read Lessons to others. They make
Reverences to certain Persons, Smiles to others, and make their Servants keep
an exact Register of the different Seats they must offer, high and low Seats,
Chairs with and without Arms.

Dorante had no sooner ended these words, but he was interrupted by the noise
of a Coach which entered into his Court. Here Is Erastus, said he, with joy. You
have heard he is the dearest of my Friends; for you know all my concerns, as
well as I know yours. And therefore have I not asked you any Nows of your
Family. As for Esastus, notwithstanding the inequality there is in our Age, yet
we are, I say, the best Friends in the World. You Will see a man of excellent
humor, and I can assure you he will be no small help to you in the Companies
whereinto you will go with him.


Lisidor. But how know you so precisely that it is Erastus?


Dorante. Because he enters without any notice given me, and it is only he that
claims that privilege of me.

Immediately Erastus appeared at the Garden-door, and, addressing himself to
Dorante, said: Reckon not (said he to him) this visit made to you, it is wholly
to Lisidor; suffer me to embrace him, and to demand his Friendship. In ending
these words he addressed himself to the young Gentleman, who had advanced toward
him; and having held him some small time in his Arms, they spoke both of them
in few words what Civility requires at a first enterview. I doubt not, said
Erastus, but that you were on some agreeable matter of Conversation, pray take
it up again, I need it to cure me of the headache, which a very different
Entertainment has given me; I prepare my self to hearken to you.


Dorante. How, to hearken? You shall speak more than we, if you please; and
therein we shall find our advantage.


Erastus. I know how I shall find mine; I come to sup with Lisidor, I shall
leave him as little as possible; and if it be not fair that I should take him
from you to night; I hope you will not deny me that happiness to morrow; for he
shall dine with me then.


Dorante. Not so hasty, good Sir, when my Nephew knows that your House is a
kind of polished Court, he will not be in such haste to go thither: Judge a
little, Lisidor, arriving from one end of the Kingdom to Paris, the first time,
whether you find your self presently in a condition to visit a Lady whose wit
and beauty -- At these words Erastus interrupting Dorante: Do not believe him
(said he to Lisidor) he has perhaps his Reasons to hinder you from seeing my
Wife; but she will be revenged on him, and will come and see you; let us talk no
more of it; it is a thing agreed; think only of renewing the Conversation which
I have so unseasonably interrupted.


Dorante. We were discoursing of the Ceremonies which Custom may approve, and
of those which are incommodious, and of the ridiculous Compliments which
heretofore attended them.


Erastus. I would willingly hear how you have condemned these Ceremonies and
these Compliments: But instead of continuing to make Remarks on these defects,
I had rather you would tell me, how one may speak agreeably.


Dorante. Another than my self would tell you that one must speak like you; but
is it just you should expect this sweetness from a man you come from offending?
I also see you pretend to edge me on; and engage me to make a discourse wherein
I shall find more difficulty than you imagine. It Is true, that I shall not be
alone in the perplexity; if I be hard put to it in treating of this matter, you
will have no less trouble in harkening to me.


Entertainment III. Of polite Language, and the manner of telling a Story.
Dorante. IT seems that the most important Maxim is, To take care of the
Subject of Conversation, and to choose requisite thoughts and expressions. We
must lay aside whatever may seem light or trifling when we should be serious.
Neither must we affect to appear Philosophers, where the company are all
disposed to be free and cheerful. A man that would prove any thing by
undeniable arguments, would not much divert young Ladies, whom the only word
Argument is enough to scare out of their wits. Others moreover would please
less, if to show themselves unseasonable wits, they set upon retailing jokes
before Persons in affliction. As to the choice of words, we must observe what
is in use and approved of by able and refined Persons; as when we dress our
selves, we cannot do better, than to apply our selves to the Modes which
Gentlemen of the best fancies do follow.


Erastus. I read yesterday that it is no less ridiculous to make use of words
that are obsolete, than to wear Steeple-crown'd Hats, although these words may
be brought in pleasantly enough in Raillery.


Dorante. You may have observed in the same Book, that if Prudence requires we
should omit words which are no longer in use; she forbids us likewise to hunt
after terms which the Ear is not accustomed to. We must leave these Novelties
to young People, seeing they affect them, and that Boldness is natural to them.


Lisidor. But must not a Language, that loses words on one hand, not only
recover them on the other, but also enrich it self?


Dorante. I grant it; but it is not every bodies Province to enrich it; it
belongs to learned and refined Persons to bring in new words; as it belongs to
Persons of the Court, that are well made, Richest, and of the best Fancies, to
invent Fashions for Clothes.

However it is not enough to have chosen words which use approves. We must
prefer those which are properest to give the Idea of things which we would
express; we ought also to seek with care words which please the Ear, and which
have Sweetness, or Magnificence, according as the Matters require. As for
Quibbles, Puns, and fulsom Jokes, we should leave them to the common People, as
being suitable only to men of their Rank.


Lisidor. I would willingly know why figurative Expressions are more graceful
than others, and how they make up the Ornament of a Discourse?


Dorante. We may say they affect more, because we are less accustomed to them,
but especially because they attribute more to things whereto they are joined,
than do the Proper and Natural Terms. They even enliven that which is
inanimate. I could cite an infinite number of Examples: You hear Men say every
day; What a sad Place is this old Castle; How I love this Meadow! How every
thing smiles there!


Erastus. For my part, I am for an Irony, and an Hyperbole; these are my two
Favorites; and I have an hundred times observed the Conversation would be
asleep, did not these two Figures ever anon keep it waking. Had Dorante ever so
little wit, or learning, he would do me the greatest pleasure in the World in
discoursing of them.


Lisider. Methinks you cannot more pleasingly begin this discourse, but by this
Example of an Irony.


Dorante. Do not you see that Erastus imagines he can disengage himself, by
thus smoothing me up; but he is mistaken, for I shall not quit him thus. He
must entertain us on this Subject. I am sure he is a perfect Master of it,
seeing these two Figures are so dear to him; and that he is a man not apt to
fall in love where he is not well acquainted.


Erastus. As to an Irony I am willing to say all I can on that Subject, but
I Will warrant you I shall take heed of speaking of the Hyperbole; for there port
is among the Wits, that you married her, when she was in mourning for Mounsieur
de Balsac her first Husband. So that it belongs to you to inform us of her good
Qualities: For I will not believe my Friend's Wife has any bad ones.


Dorante. I confess, that to do me honor, two or three of my Friends have said
that I had a strict Union with the Widow of this Illustrious deceased; but you
may have observed, that if my Conversation shows she pleases me; I appeared
less affected in what I wrote. However seeing you are pleased that I should
entertain you about her, I will do it, and instead of respecting her as my
Wife, I shall only consider her as a Figure, to the end you may love her
without any scruple.

An Hyperbole has commonly only excessive expressions, she augments or
distinguishes things in excess; but if it be permitted her to go beyond the
bounds of Truth, yet she must never pass those of resemblance to truth. You
know how I have treated of this elsewhere; and Lisider, not having seen the
passage I speak of, I need only repeat what the Idea which I still retain will
furnish me with. I cannot forget a bold stroke I gave, which perhaps will never
be pardoned me.

I said that Virgil went too far, when he set forth the lightness of Camilla;
and that I knew not whether in so great a Poem, one might make a Princess run
over the tops of Corn without bending them, and over the waves of the Sea,
without wetting the soles of her Feet. These are in truth glistering
expressions, but I think 'em not so well placed in a serious style, as they
would be in a light Poem.

There are also Authors, who think they carry not their Exageration far enough,
if they do not heap Hyperbole upon Hyperbole. Now although there are infinite
Hyperbolies in the Writings of witty men, who are pleased to sport ingeniously
with them, yet we must not think this Figure ought to be only used in raillery,
and that it cannot well be seen in the most serious matters. One of our Authors
praising Cardinal Richlieu, addresses himself to him in these Terms, in an
Epistile Dedicatory.

But my Lord, as there was heretofore a Valiant Man who could not receive any
wounds, but on the scars of those he had already received, so you cannot be
praised, but by Repetitions; seeing that truth, which has its bounds, has said
for you, whatever falsehood, which knows none, has invented for others.

I may add, that Hyperboles make a great impression in a Tragical Subject. This
Monster having not sufficiently glutted his Cruelty; and being not satisfied
with the Rivers of Blood, which he made run down this desolate City, put all to
Fire and Sword before him. He foamed with Rage, and his Eyes more ardent and
dismal than two Comets, etc.

But before we end, methinks we should not forget Voiture, who is so full of
agreeable Hyperboles. Have you not observed, How many Towns he discovers, which
are in no Maps? How many Mountains, which Geographers know nothing of? How many
Terra's incognita's; and how many Rivers, and Seas, which the World never
before heard of. He ingenuously confesses in another Letter, that he makes use
of the Figure we speak of: He makes the description of a Feast, and says, if I
be not mistaken, That the Sky appeared on Fire, that all the places round
about shined like Stars, and that it seemed as if the whole Universe was
turning into a flame. He afterward coldly adds, that these are 3 Hyperboles,
which reduced to their just value, are just worth nothing.

I know not, Erastus, whether what I now said satisfies you: You, I say, to
whom the Hyperbole was so familiar before you had espoused Cleonice. Perhaps
you have not as yet forgot how you set this Figure at work, when you came to
find me, to impart to me your Joy, or relate to me your Griess. It is not above
six Months since, That one minute without seeing Cleonice, was an Age of
Trouble to you; and I am certain, that if you could entertain her an Age, you
would look on this Age but as a Moment.


Erastus. I confess in those days I made more often use of the Hyperbole, than
the Irony; but seeing I find my self at present in a calmer condition, I should
be more disposed to Gaiety than the Figure requires, which you would have me
speak of. You know better than I, what a great relish she yields to Raillery,
and I believe that Lisider is not to be taught that an Irony consists in
learning neatly to be understood, the contrary of what we say. I saw yesterday
at a Lady of Quality's a Marquess who this day was to set out for his Province,
where he goes to confine himself. He came to Paris on occasion of a Lawsuit,
and I believe he returns less out of humor for having parted with a great deal
of money to Solicitors, and Lawyers, than to have remained three or four Months
from his Seat and his Farms. He took a great delight in recounting how he
busied himself in the Country; and being my near Kinsman, I could no more
suffer what he said, than his manner of living. A Lady of the Company took
notice of the Pain I was in, and represented to the Marquess. That in France a
Person of Quality thought it more becoming him to serve in the Wars, than to
amuse himself in feeding Ducks and Pigeons. Our Country Gentleman smiled, and
showed by his answer. That he pitied those Persons that served in the Wars. I
could not then forbear speaking, and directing my discourse to this Lady, My
Lord has reason (said I to her a little roughly) and I assure you that the
Corde's, the Turenn's, and the Crequi's, are to be blamed for not following his
Example. Their lives would have been Glorious far from Armies; whereas they
determined to spend them in beating their Enemies, gaining Battles, and taking
Cities. I know not what they thought in embracing a profession which so greatly
lessens their Memory. It Is true they had the mishap of not consulting a Wit so
solid as that of my Lord the Marquess. I uttered these words with a serious
Air, the Company smiled, and my Kinsman lost his Countenance, and could not get
it again all the Dinner time.

I do not doubt but Lisidor knows, That we comprehend the sense of an Irony,
either by a tone of Pronunciation which discovers that we are not in earnest,
or by the apparent opposition there is between the words and the thing spoken
of. It was by this last means that I was understood; for they saw nothing but
what was serious in my Discourse and on my Countenance. But seeing that you
have cited Authors, methinks it is lawful for me to say, That an Irony glisters
throughout all the Works of Voiture and Sarasin. You are not surprised at this,
but I am, in seeing in Malherbe's Letters a Raillery ingeniously turned, which
I may take for a kind of rony. I was so content with several passages of this
famous Author's Rhyme, that I dared not read his Prose, so greatly was I afraid
of losing the Esteem I would preserve for him. Lisidor will not be displeased
in hearing how ingeniously Malherbe relates the News of the Siege of Verue.

The Spaniards are always before Verue, it is a place that is a little more
worth than Chaliot; but is far from being so good as Lagny. However the Duke de
Feria lies starving there with cold, notwithstanding the Dog Days. The Marshal
de Crequi has lodged himself between the Besieged and the Besiegers, and does
wonders, according as he is wont. If you ask me what I expect, I believe that
the Spaniards will see the Steeples and Chimneys of this Town; but as for the
Streets of it, they must get their notices of them in the Map. I would advise
them, if they pretend still to the Universal Monarchy, either that they would
proceed more quick in their work, or beg of Heaven to put a stop to the end of
the World, that they may have time enough to finish it, etc.

I shall not expatiate any longer on this matter; I find it large, and I like
it; I am afraid lest it should carry me too far.


Dorante. You ought not to have the same fear of the Antithesis. I have ever
heard you say, That you could not endure it. However, the opposition of words
and thoughts, may give great luster to a discourse. But I am of your mind, that
he that uses this Figure, must be an Enemy to all Affectation, and not so much
consult the sporting with Words, as the uttering good Sense.


Erastus. Let us leave here these Matters; for they require too great
Application, and I am for diverting the Conversation.


Lisider. I demand Quarter for the description. It is agreeable, it renders the
Assembly attentive, and I see nothing more necessary than to know how to paint
well the things we would represent. We may find our selves every moment obliged
to make use of this Figure; sometimes in describing a pleasant Prospect, a fine
House; otherwhiles a Ship wrack or a Battle. Especially if I came from seeing a
Stranger of great Quality, or a beautiful Princess lately arrived, and I were
asked what I thought of one, and the other, should not I be glad to make a
Portraicture of them so like, as might place before their eyes the Persons I
would speak of.


Erastus. What you say makes without doubt the principal Beauty of what one
relates; but here is in what Terms Dorante has explained himself in one of his
Books touching Portraictures, which every one undertakes to draw after his
Fancy. There are a great many People who set forth their Friends; There are
others who set forth themselves, and who ratail out their Defects and their
Virtues, without concerning themselves at what the public will judge of them.
In fine, every body takes the Pencil in hand; but I know not whether there be
many Apelles 's among this great number of Painters. Yet it is certain, that a
Mediocrity is not excusable in these sort of works, for laboring therein less
through necessity, than for Ornament, every thing should glister therein, and
nothing should appear languishing. One may describe or make a Recital in two
different manners; The first Natural, Simple, and Succinct; The other more
Extensive and Flourishing. If the dispute be touching the waters of a River, as
to the right which may be pretended for the watering of Meadows, or turning of
Mills; a man need only relate precisely the circumstances, which may serve to
give light into the dispute. But if I speak not of this River, but to describe
a delicate place, I may then expatiate, and say, That it is Crystal waters wind
themselves about a delightful Valley, either to water it in the more places, or
to show that they are pleased with it, and leave it with regret. It is in these
occasions that Poetry may triumph, provided she uses, with a lively Fancy, and
a solid Judgment, the privilege she has of showing her self bolder, and less
reserved than in Prose. And therefore, in this last manner of making a
description, or a recital, I should forget none of the Circumstances which may
give any relish to what I undertook to recount. If it were an History, or some
adventure of those great Fables which have diverted our Nation, under the name
of Romance, I would endeavor to point my Hero's in a most exact manner. Those
who were to hear me representing them, should make, if I may so say, such a
kind of acquaintance with them, as would engage them to hearken to me, and
induce them at the same time to take part in whatever regards the Persons I
should entertain them with.


Lisidor. I assure you, that in reading the works of Calprenede, I have always
interess'd my self in whatever happened to his Hero's and Ladies; and when I saw
in Faramond all those Kings.


Dorante. Perhaps you saw too many of them. The Author, you speak of, has
gathered together as many on the banks of the Rhine, as the Marquess d'Vrfe did
Shepherds on the banks of Lignon: However you may easily judge there are
something fewer Kings than Shepherds, yet we may justify Calprenede in some
sort. The Romances he set forth were like Epic Poems in Prose. They had more of
the Illiad and Aenead than the Theagenes and Astrea. Moreover the Age of
Faramond permitted him to mention those great number of Sovereigns. It was
after the death of the great Theodosius; and as his Children succeeded not in
his Valor, and that they weakened the Empire in sharing it, so an infinite
number of Barbarons Nations took that time to settle themselves in better
Countries than their own. These Nations marched under Leaders who were Kings,
or to whom one might give this Title, which Homer has so prodigally bestowed on
so many Greeks. As for the Characters, I confess they are a little too uniform
in the writings of Calprenede. We find none therein but brave and fierce
Blades; whereas there should be variety, to give relish to a Recital, and to
render it more probable.


Erastus. I believe likewise we are obliged to observe a greater resemblance to
truth in what we invent, than in the true Facts which we mix with some
adventure: for we commonly believe what is true; and when it should not be
believed, by reason of it is little resemblance, we shall not be Vouchers, as in
things which come from us.


Dorante. It seems to me, that to make things probable; besides the truths
which we ought dexterously to insert, it is good to set forth Persons such as
they should be, to execute what we make them undertake. As for a bold Action,
we should describe a strong man, brought up in the Wars, of an assured
Countenance, and a grim Aspect. But if I may again speak of the Expressions
which we should use, I would say they must be Natural, without Flatness, a kind
of Nobleness and Elevation in them; according as the matters require, but
nothing flatulent or forced. A man should banish Equivocal Terms and
Transpositions, and use only Parentheses through Necessity and with Judgment;
and retrench all those Circumstances which serve neither to instruct nor
delight.


Erastus. Speaking freely, as we do in these matters, we may add something as
to the choice of words. It is not enough to use those which are properest to
give the Idea of what we would represent, we must also know the Terms which
belong to Arts, whether our Recital relates to matters concerning Painting or
Sculpture, War or Navigation.

This Remark brings to my remembrance a brisk Answer which an Officer of our
Fleet made to a young Gentleman of this Town, who made one Campaign on his
Vessel. The Parisian walking one night on the Bridge to take the Air, Pray,
Sir, says he, let us be gone, the wind is very high etc. Sir, says the Officer,
know that for a Seaman to say, The wind is very high, is a very great
absurdity, seeing the term is; It is foul, or hard weather.

Although we must use terms proper to Arts, yet it is not necessary to be so
scrupulous as a Physician of my acquaintance was the other day. Having called
to him a Surgeon who was in the Sick man's Chamber: You must not fail, says
he, to Phlebotomise the Gentleman to morrow morning. I will never suffer it,
(cried out the Sick man in a fright) and I am not, continued he, in so bad a
condition to have recourse to so dreadful an operation. The Surgeon replying
immediately thereupon (that he might not lose his little profit,) Sir, said he
to the sick Gentleman, be not troubled, the Doctor only orders a bleeding. Ah
for bleeding, replied he, I matter it little, but for the rest, I will as soon
dye as endure it.


Dorante. Do you think it enough to have spoken of words which signify
precisely what we have to say, or which are proper to Arts? Is it not also
fitting to find Terms which may neatly enclose the things which we would have
understood, and which modesty will not permit us to express openly? Should I
not do better in saying, There is a secret Correspondence between the Marquess
of -- and the Countess of -- than to explain myself too grossly on the manner of
their Commerce? It is also sitting in these occasions to heed the tone of the
voice, and certain smiles, which may make us too well understood, and
transgress those polished manners which a wellbred man should never forget.

I find likewise that there are expressions which Gentlemen should use when
there happens some contest between them. If any one should make me repeat some
circumstance of a Recital, and he should tell me he did not hear me. I would
not answer him; That it is your fault, not mine; I speak clai^ enough, but I
cannot make my self be heard when I am not hearkened to. Politeness requires
softer terms, Perhaps, Sir, I am mistaken; let us see, if you please, whether I
did not say that, etc. Civility likewise requires that we make not too vehement
reproaches, nor too precise, whenever one has failed of his word given. So that
instead of complaining against one, that has not performed his promise, I
should choose to say; That I hoped he would do it; but that I supposed he either
forgot his promise, or met with more difficulty in the thing than he foresaw.


Erastus. Can you suffer a man who domineers in Conversation, who continually
talks, or criticizes with the tone of a Master whatever others say?


Dorante. I find this more intolerable than People who deign not to speak, and
who seem to testify, by a slighting silence, that it is not in such company as
this, where they will utter what they know.


Erastus. I know some who are for appearing too knowing: I saw one the other
day who perplexed himself in speaking with a Stranger the Language of his
Country; and having not sufficiently studied it to use it freely, he fell into
such confusion, as gave great trouble to one part of the Company, and set the
other a laughing, according as they were differently inclined.


Lisidor. This is commonly the fault of young people: but they commit a far
greater, when they laugh at a Stranger who does not speak our Language well; or
run down in his presence the Vices of his Nation.


Dorante. Neither ought one to scoff at certain defects before persons who have
the like; and likewise a polished man does not directly praise the persons to
whom he speaks. He does it delicately; whereas people, that know not the world,
give praises with so little address, and with so great excess, that they
perplex and put to the blush those they think to oblige. Whereunto we may add,
That a man who excels in his profession, must not presently speak of it; and
when he does, it must be with great modesty, and when the Conversation turns on
that hinge.

In fine, There are several things requisite to form this Politeness, which
makes the chief agreeableness of Conversation. And there needs no fewer to make
a recital which may draw the attention, and please, and even (as it were)
enchant those who hearken to it. Besides what (...) have said touching the
choice, (...) placing of words, beauty of expressions, and lively descriptions
to be inserted; it is necessary there should be novelty, or something
mavelous in what we recount; that we should have ready in our memories, not
only the main of the story, but also the names of persons and places lest we
hesitate in searching them.

There are Authors, who find it advantageous to make a relation of a Person
known by the defect we reprehend: as of a covetous man known by his
Covetousness. I acknowledge, that those who hearken have more pleasure, when we
cite a person of their acquaintance, because they represent him such as he is;
but I should always choose to be less diverting, and more civil, and deny my
self and others that pleasure, than to disoblige any one. So that it is better
to invent names for the Persons who are to be concerned in a Recital, and even
to lay the Scene of the adventure in another Town, than where we dwell.

Dorante could not continue his Discourse: One came to speak with Erastus, and
told him that a young Sister of Cleonice was just arrived.


Erastus. Ah, Dorante, this haps very well, Lisidor and Lindamire arrive both
of them the same day at Paris. There is without doubt an assignation or destiny
in this affair: However we have reason to rejoice at it; the world already
praises the growing charms of my Sister-in Law; and if Lisider and Lindamire
come to be smitten with one another, the desire of Pleasing will do more in
their hearts, than all our Remonstrances can make impressions on their minds:
We shall soon see a change; they will have a better Air, more Sweetness and
Complaisance; and I profess I much wish it, for the advantage of Lindamire.


Dorante. You know that which Lisidor will find.


Erastus. Adieu; I expect him to morrow at Dinner, bring him to me; and seeing
he must be new Rigged as well as Lindamire, Cleonice will take care of both.
She has good Skill in choosing Stuffs, as you have in giving good advice.

Erastus departed in ending these words, and Dorante and Lisidor walked till
they had notice Supper was served in.


Entertainment IV. Of the Conversation of Ladies, and how far the Complaisance
we may have for them will permit us to flatter them.
DOrante and Lisider had no sooner supt, but the first began the discourse in
this manner. We cannot be excused from going to morrow to Erastus; but although
I use freedom with him, yet we will discourse to night of certain polished and
respectful manners with which it is fit to appear before Ladies. You know,
without doubt, that nothing makes a young Gentleman so much valued, as the
approbation of a Lady of merit; and that nothing more hinders Persons of your
Age from falling into irregularities, than the visiting Persons whose
sentiments incline ordinarily to Virtue. In the mean time, speak we of the
precautions it is necessary you be furnished with for this visit; and let me
begin by an advice which perhaps you little expect, which is on the manner of
making an honor. You are persuaded, without doubt, That your dancing Master
has omitted nothing he ought to tell you hereupon: and I am likewise willing to
believe you salute with a better grace than he that taught you to salute. I
know that most Masters are too formal in these matters; They bow down, and
raise themselves up by rule only. Every thing is starched in them, all savours
of Art, and searcely have they ended their Reverence, but they seem to promise
the beginning of a Courant or Minuet. Persons of Quality on the contrary,
salute with a better Air, and in a more natural manner. If you feel still any
kind of constraint, you must get rid of it as soon as you can, and give to your
countenance and action all requisite liberty. Remember then, if you please,
That we must always endeavor to do with a good grace what may draw the first
respects of Persons we address our selves to. Nothing afterward renders us
more agreeable than Complaisance: It is this which makes up the Charms of
Society; without it we must neither expect friendship among men, nor a
diverting Conversation in Company, nor any part at play, or in a walk, or any
other diversion. But when I say we must be complaisant, I do not mean, That
base and servile Complaisance which Juvenal attributes to certain Greeks of his
time, who made their Court at Rome. It must be acknowledged, says he, that this
Nation is very comical. Do you say it is hot, they wipe the Sweat off their
Forehead. Do you complain it is cold; they call for their furred Gown. There
are then several complaisances which one must not have. It is not lawful to
betray our sentiments in essential things, nor to favor Vice in any occasion
whatever. One may show the respect we have for great persons and Ladies, but we
must never show them a Complaisance which may be prejudicial to them. They will
no sooner perceive it, but they will hate and despise us.

Lisidor. I conceive that Complaisance is good in a thousand particulars, and
that no Conversation could be kept up long without it. However I know not
whether Conversation would not dye, if Complaisance reigned too absolutely in a
Company, and every body willed the same thing; whereas it becomes lively and
instructive, as soon as an ingenious debate encourages us to maintain different
opinions. So that I would willingly know in what bounds one may include a
commendable Complaisance, imagining that it consists in a Medrum, between two
vicious extremes, like other Virtues.


Dorante. We may without fear of being blamed, prefer, through Complaisance,
one pleasure to another, as play before walking, and of Plays the choice of
that which shall best please the person for whom we have a deference. However
our Complaisance must not turn to our notable prejudice, nor be prejudicial to
persons for whom we must not have so much Complaisance, as to play at a play
which a Person of great Quality may like, without any Skill in it, seeing our
Complaisance might be suspected of Interest. It will be generous, if we know
not so well the Game as the Person of Quality who engages us to play; however
we must never expose our selves to the undergoing a loss, which may incommode
us; for this last Complaisance will be liable to be ridiculed.

The best effect of Complaisance is to make us endure the weaknesses of a
Friend, and not to yield to anger when he is disordered by it. Far from
provoking him, by earnestly withstanding what he desires, we should immediately
seem to yield to him, and oppose only sentiments full of sweetness to the
violence of his passion. But there are several Complaisances which I can never
approve of: We may observe one, which may be called Universal, which makes men
say, Yes, to all sorts of things, without distinction; and this appears to me
to be such a sorry humor, That I should like better to be sharply contested
with.

I find no less incommodious that which the Citizens have one for another. It
is ordinarily attended with long Compliments, and never-ending Ceremonies.


Lisidor. The Complaisances you mention, may displease; but they deceive no
body; whereas those of the Court serve commonly only to make one take salfe
measures. A great Lord promises all, and a quarter of an hour after, he does
not so much as remember that he made any promise. So that all we get by these
fair words, is the vexation of renouncing the hopes we were made to conceive.


Dorante. The Complaisance which one has for back-biters is yet more
pernicious; for this is a sacrificing those who are absent, and the upholding a
vice which all generous Persons detest. I find this Complaisance so mean, so
criminal, that I think it needless to say any thing more against it; being
persuaded you can never be capable of salling into it. Let us rather return to
the Subject which has cast us on this matter, and let us say, That the
Complaisance which we ought to have for Ladies has bounds large enough. You
know that men are weak, but with respect which we owe to women: we may say they
are yet weaker, and more credulous than we. As they are ordinarily prepossest
with a good opinion of themselves, so they like those who flatter this
self-love, and cannot bear with any body that shall disabuse them. A solid
Friend who should undertake to open their eyes, will soon be cast off for a
Friend; and I have sound it more than once, That they put a sincere Person on
very vexatious Trials. Not that I would be so scrupulous to contradict them in
matters of small moment. On the contrary, I would give to the defects which
they might have, the Names of the Virtues which come nearest them: I would call
Covetousness, Frugality: I would commend in a lean Lady the liberty of her
Shape: and I would endeavor to commend the ample Corpulency of Madam Bouv^lle
(a great fat Woman in Searron 's Comical Romance) by saying she was in good
plight. Sometimes one must declare himself smitten with the golden color of
Red, otherwhiles with the Brown, and Black, all being to be commended,
according to the Companies wherein a man shall find himself. If it be permitted
to have this flattering Complaisance for Ladies, you judge you must not sail to
practice, when with them, the precept of never speaking of a defect before
Persons who may have the like. To speak all in two words, let us say in general,
That to be complaisant, it is good to consult the countenance and humor of the
Person whom we would please, and that we do in such a manner conform our selves
thereto, that she may not doubt of the part we take in what concerns her.

I think we have talked enough of these matters for to day: it is late, and you
have need of rest.


Entertainment V. Of decent behavior at Table.
THE next morning, Dorante and Lisidor walked out together to pay their devoirs
of Piety, which ought to be never omitted in the beginning of the day. Scarce
were they returned from Church, but Dorante turned himself to Lisidor, saying,
I know that Erastus keeps a very good Table, but you are young, and they always
dine late where women are, and therefore let us advise you to take a Breakfast.

After that Lisidor had followed Dorante's Counsel; this last reassumed the
discourse in these terms. Although I am certain that Cleonice will excuse your
faults, if you commit any, however it will not be amiss to give you some little
advices which respect the Table. This matter, perhaps, may not appear to you
very important: yet is it not permitted a Gentleman to be ignorant. You know
that amongst civilis'd Nations, there were ever diverting or instructive
Conversations at Festivals. The Banquet of the seven Wisemen, and the
Table-Talk in Plutarch, do sufficiently show it. But perhaps you will not
believe me, when I shall tell you that our Fathers, maugre the ignorance of
their time, respected the Tables of great Lords, as Assemblies wherein was much
to be learnt. A Proverb of those times makes me judge as much: [Good Table, a
good School.]

Lisidor. To ascend higher, and to come up to the Ancients; besides what the
works you have cited do discover to us; we may conjecture that at the Table of
great Persons the Conversation made one part of the Regale. In effect, the
Parasites, for to be there suffered, were not contented in being complaisant
even to the meanest flatteries, but they studied likewise to say something
witty, to divert those who surnish'd the Feast.


Dorante. I agree with you in what you say; but must tell you farther, that
these Parasites were more contemptible than diverting. Their profession was to
be pleasant; and you know what we have already said, That nothing can be
pleasing where there appears affectation. But let us leave these Wretches, and
return to the little advices which I am willing to give you.

Being to dine at a Friend's, I make no mention to you of certain Ceremonies
touching washing with Persons of great Rank. He must be very ignorant of the
world, who shall draw near to the Basin at the same time a Prince or great man
shall dine in the same company. You must stay till he entreats you to advance,
or by taking you by the hand, or by some sign denoting he intends you this
honor. Then you are to show, by a respectful bowing of the body, that it is
only out of obedience to his commands that you offer to wash with him; but if
in washing at Erastus's, the Servants come not immediately to take the Towel,
Civility requires you hold it till the Officer be present, or Erastus himself
takes it out of your hands. It is his part not to suffer you in this posture.
You may stay till Cleonice places you; but I believe it will be more neat for
you to place your self at the lower end of the Table, to avoid Ceremonies. Have
you never reflected on the different ways used in these occasions?


Lisidor. I have observed it an hundred times in my life, though I am not very
old. I have seen people cast their eyes greedily on the meat, as it were to
devour it before they came to it; and scarce were they sat down, but they
snatched up what they liked. They reached over their hands into the farthest
dishes, without minding whether they ought to stretch their arms over other
meats, and before Persons to whom they owed respect. I have also observed, that
in the beginning of the repast, there are some who bend themselves over their
Plates, as it were, to keep them in their sight, or to eat there with their
eyes, what they cannot hand up quick enough to their mouths. These are a sort
of people who bow continually, who excite others to eat and drink, and who
endeavor to change the mirth of a Feast into fury. They put all into disorder;
they imagine to bring greater honor to the treat, and the more trouble and
confusion they cause, the more they think the Master of the house is obliged to
them. I have known others, who disdain to make use of Spoons and Forks, as much
as if they were not made for their use: Their knuckles are indifferently in
every dish, and by this means they quickly make their Fingers and Napkins
loathsome to the sight of the Company.


Dorante. Seeing you have made these little Observations, and that it is
chiefly the things which regard an Entertainment that we have chosen to
examine: I will tell you, That at Treats men commonly fall into two contrary
faults, which are equally to be avoided; which is to praise with excess the
dishes before you, or to say nothing at all, but look coldly on the delicacies
and abundance of a Feast. By the first defect a man shows himself little
accustomed to good Tables, or too greedy of the good cheer; and by the other,
he seems to despise whatever obligations the Master of the Feast intends to lay
on him. Neither would I have a man to speak with great earnestness of the meats
he loves best, or those which he cannot endure, there are certain affected
relishes, which are only tolerable in women.


Lisidor. I imagine likewise that it is a great indiscretion, not to appear
content with the manner of seasoning certain dishes. One cannot find fault,
without provoking the Master of the house against his Servants, and making him
threaten the turning them away, and putting him all the time out of humor; and
the whole Company into a mournful silence.


Dorante. I am very glad you have made this remark, it will hinder you from
appearing uneasy, and passionate against your people, whenever you make an
Entertainment. I hope too you will not fall into a fault which I think an
intolerable one in Gentlemen; which is to drink hard your self, or make others
do it. Do you judge whether these excesses are agreeable to the politeness we
discourse of, and whether a man whose reason is drowned in Wine, can have an
agreeable Conversation? Is it not a shame to make it a point of Honor, to
empty more Bottles than the rest of the Company, without considering that in
this ridiculous contest, the gallantest man of the Court, cannot exce^ a Porter
or Carman? You know the Lacedaemonians took a particular care to inspire an
aversion to Drunkenness. They exposed their Slaves full of Wine to the sight of
their Children, and found nothing more likely to make this intemperance odious,
than the sidelong steps, the extravagancies, and nauseous belches whereto
Drunkenness subjects us. Let not any one tell me, that a man is willing to show
that he has a strong head: It is in other sort of occasions we should give
Proof of that; and not weaken our heads when all that is required of us is only
to be cheerful, and observe moderation. Let Us draw a consequence which relates
to our subject, and affirm that a Conversation cannot be agreeable during a
repast, nor immediately after, if we introduce excessive drinking, and a
tumultuous noise.

Derante could say no more, Erastus came and carried him together with Lisidor
to his house; where they found a lovely woman called Belise, a near Kinswoman
of Cleonice: Lisidor was received by these Ladies with all the marks of
Friendship, and it was observable that he saluted young Lindamire with some
emotion on his countenance: however gay this Company was, yet no jocose remarks
was made thereupon, lest he should be put out of Countenance as well as
Lindamire: On the contrary, Erastus turned the discourse on another Subject,
and spoke to Dorante with his wonted facetiousness.


Erastus. You see what care I have taken to content you. We are six, which is
just what needs: you told me the other day; That at Table the number should
never exceed that of the Muses, nor be under the number of the Graces, and now
here we are equally distant from one and the other.


Cleonice. We shall come nearer the number of the Muses than you are aware of,
Belise expects Philemon who is to come from Versailles; and word is left at his
house to send him as soon as he comes home.


Dorante. I am very glad of it; it is near eight days since I saw him.


Belise. I question whether he will come this morning, seeing he is not already
arrived: but let us talk of the two numbers about which Erastus seems to be so
precise.


Dorante. I said it was the fancy of an Ancient; not to be well pleased at a
Banquet, where there was more than nine persons, nor in another where there was
less than three. Let Erastus now joke if he will, provided the rest of the
Company (...) he has reason; for my part I cannot see it easy to avoid
consusion, where so many persons eat together; and we observe on the other
hand, that when there is but two at Table the Conversation often flags, for
want of Variety. I refer my self to Cleonice if you --


Erastus. Pray, Sir, excuse me; I Will not part with my right so.


Dorante. It is certain, that a Gentleman of your age, that disputes against me
that am very young, should not expect the Ladies to be very favorable to him.


Erastus. No mention of Ages, I entreat you: I confess I am younger than you,
but you know I am married.


Cleonice. He has reason.

Whilst they were smiling at these passages; Philemon entered; and Belise,
affecting to appear a little astonished, made him this kind of reproach


Belise. How happens it that you come when I did not expect you; I flattered my
self with the thoughts of being without an husband at this Regale?


Philemon. Before I answer you, I must salute an amiable Person, who pleases me
as much; as a young Gentleman, whom I shall afterward embrace, can be
agreeable to you.

After these words, he offered to Lind^mire and Lisidor all the c^^dities usual
in these occasions: and Cleonice in a low voice bidding Dinner to be brought
in, the Company sat down, and Philemon reassumed the discourse.


Philemon. I had been here an hour sooner, had not my misfortune brought to me
the greatest Babbler that ever was. He fell upon the news of Hungary, and the
Morea; and not contented to retail out the Progress of the Imperialists and
Venetians, he has extended their Conquests according to his humor. He has made
two or three Treaties of Peace, which he has broken. He has elevated to the
Throne five or six B^ssa's, in their Governments; and in fine, regulated the
affairs of the two Empires, without my so much as once opening my mouth; being
willing to let the discourse fall, and be gone.


Entertainment VI. Against great Talkers.
I Find nothing more troublesome than a man that always talks, who hears no body
but himself, and interrupts those who begin to speak, as if they usurped a
privilege which belonged only to him. It is very difficult for such a one to
speak things weighty enough to draw the attention of the auditory, and to
express them in a pleasing exactness.

Erastus. Some men indeed cannot bear with these great praters. However, as for
my part, I shift well enough with them; for without troubling my self with
hearkening to them, or speaking in my turn, I think on my own affairs, and
leave the field open to 'em.


Cleonice. You can then excuse these Troublesomes, who hinder able People from
entertaining the company to better purpose.


Erastus. I am very glad, Madam, That for the interest of your Sex, you
undertake to impose silence on ours; and indeed it is not to be expected that
men should speak much, seeing there are women in the world.


Cleonice. I am perhaps less a woman in this matter, than you think I am; and I
profess sincerely, that a prating Gossip is the more intolerable. Women have
commonly their minds less cultivated than men. They speak fewer things with
more words, and leave a greater Vacuum in a discourse. To prove this, I need
only tell you what a Chagrin I had at a visit I received yesterday; it was
Arpalice that gave it me. She entered into my Chamber, with a languishing Air,
and complained immediately of an oppression at her Stomach, which she said
filled her with boding apprehensions; so that, continued she, you will pardon a
poor infirm Creature, who is forbid to speak, if she endeavors to testify to
you the joy she has to see young Lindamire is truly worthy to be your Sister. I
protest, adds she again, that it is only in this occasion that I am glad to
dispense with a silence, which I take pleasure in observing in every other
Rencounter.

I am far from the humor of those women who will talk on continually; when
there is one that begins a discourse, the rest of the company must be silent
till night; but, in sine, what can she (...) of all this while* would it not be
better to take breath a little, and let others have their turns? When she has
showed her Petticoat, and made the color be approved of, what matter is it to
the Company that she bought the Stuff at the Crown or Blackamore's head, That
this Stuff has cost 4 Guineys more, or 4 less than the just Price. Must this
prating Gossip show her Commode, and make the Company guess what it cost, and
where she bought it? How happy am I who have been never tempted to prejudice my
health by much speaking and to deafen the Assembly. I had rather go into a
Cloister than to be troublesome as these everlasting Praters are, Dorince,
Arcinoe, Bellamire, Armasia, and Cleonne: You know they gave the headache from
morning till night to those who have the mishap to meet with them in Company.
Where do they gather up all this trash? For among us, they are no more knowing
than an infinite of women who talk less. Should one forbid them to speak of
their Accoutrements; you reduce them to a profound silence. As to my self, were
I minded to entertain you of these things, I would desire you to take notice of
the Gown I have now on, which I may say, without vanity, is the finest in
Paris. Pray observe it, view it well; The more you observe it, the better
you will like it. It was gazed at with admiration yesterday at the Princess's;
the Duchess of Mazarine took Coach immediately to buy the rest of the Piece,
and the Marchioness of Carnarvan was greatly afflicted 'twas all gone. I Will not
tell you it cost me a Farthing more or less than it really did; I leave these
Foolcries to Parthenissa, and Melinta. Is it not strange women should be so
vain in these occasions; for my part I will not say this Stuff cost me so dear
as Berenice would say it cost her; This woman is straught extravagant in these
matters. Does she think to draw more esteem, by having it imagined, that her
Petticoat cost more than another? Has she not reason to apprehend on the
contrary, that she will pass for a Fool, in giving more for things than their
value? Neither would I have you, Madam, to imagine that I am about to tell you
my Gown stood me in less than it was worth; No, no, I pretend not to set up for
a great housewife, thereby to get an husband. I have one already that I would
be loath to part with. You cannot imagine how complaisant he is to me, he brings
me home ever and anon a thousand knick-knacks; There can be no Opera, but I
must be at it; and the same it is for walks; and I do not remember that for two
years we have been together, that he once spoke of my Conduct, but to approve
it. It is true, I give him no cause; I never bring home any of those Gallants,
or Vagabond Sparks, that walk from Street to Street, casting up their Foppish
Countenances at every Window, and now and then step and strut, like a Crow in a
gutter, who never want fine sayings for all Complexions. Perhaps it may be
judged I am not handsome enough to attract them; but I see on the contrary
every day a thousand homely Pugs who have no more charms than I, and yet are
continually surrounded with crowds of Idolizers. I dare scarce add, what I was
told yesterday at the Princess Demarata's, whom I lately mentioned to you.
However I was almost as much out of order then as I am now, and you know with
what disadventage a woman is looked upon then. Yet a certain Spark would needs
persuade me I was the finest woman.

I thought I had now a good opportunity of speaking, imagining Arpalise would
not refuse to hear me in the occasion she offered me of praising her. Yet she
interrupted me at the first word I began to speak, and continued on talking
till night, with that rapidity, that I had not so much as time to thank her for
her visit. At length I had a deliverance, but I heard her tongue run all the
way she went down Stairs, asking my Servants questions, and answering them her
self, and I cannot tell but she she may be yet talking whilst I am relating
this to you.


Dorante. Here Is the most pleasant Satyr that can be made of a prating Gossip;
I have heard it with no small satisfaction, although it hinders me from
complaining of the vexatious hours I have had from these everlasting talkers;
for what can one say after Cleonice?


Erastus. I fancy she puts upon us, and makes Arpalise speak thus, only that
she might have occasion to speak much her self.


Cleonice. To speak the truth freely, you deserve no less than that I should
become as talkative as you accuse me to be. However I Will refer my revenge to
Arpalice, whereby you shall know what it is to affront a woman.


Erastus. O ho, You would fright me would you; know that I am not so easily
scared; let this Torrent of words wherewith you have threatened come, I have
prepared a Dike, wherein Arpalice will not find her Reckoning. If she entertain
me about her Coiffings, I Will talk to her about my Hat, and with that quickness
of speech, and will suffer my self to be so little interrupted, that I shall
not fear her attacks the second time.


Cleonice. But what can you --


Erastus. I Will tell her I bought my Hat on London Bridge. I Will tell her how
this Bridge is built on woolsacks, in what King's Reign it was built. I Will tell
her how many Arches it stands upon --


Belise. But --


Erastus. Do you think, Madam, I Will stop here on this Bridge, no I Will be hanged
first; I Will travel out of sight immediately; I Will pass over into America,
Dialogue with the wild Indian who truckt the Skin of the Castor whose hair was
mixed with the wool of which my Hat was made; I Will recount what trinckets were
given in exchange for the Castor's Skin; and afterward fall on the several
Commodities which go off well at America.


Philemon. This is something --


Erastus. I Will insist on the two parts of this new World Northern and Southern;
I Will forget none of the great Rivers, nor golden Mines, nor Rocks, nor
Mountains; whereunto I will add a Philosophical description of the Fruits,
Trees, Flowers, Plants, and Animals of the several Islands.


Dorante. Proceed.


Erastus. I Will embark my Castor Skin on a Vessel, I Will raise a storm against
this poor Ship; I Will make a large and most Poetical description of this
Tempest; I Will represent the Vessel as the Tennis-Ball of the Northern blasts
and Southern too as most irreconciliable Enemies* But do you think I can forget
our old friend Christopher Columbus the first discoverer, and Americ Vespuce
who gave his name to this great Country. I will make the first come to the
Court of France, where he shall be received as a Dreamer; I Will carry him
afterward over into Spain, where Ferdinand and Isabella give him a favorable
hearing; I will recount the famous Marriage which united so many Kingdoms in
joining Aragon to Castile; and if I must accompany these Recitals with
considerable revolutions, Mariana whom I have lately read, will supply me with
matter.


Belise. Pray be not so confident with your Mariana; these Historical Events
will sooner end than the prattles of these Gossips.


Erastus. Pray, Madam, you do not observe I have a Feather in my Hat; Cannot I
coast Afric whence we have our Plumes, and passing by Tunis, can I forget
Carthage? Let a whole douzen of Gossips come after this, I Will in serious tones
set forth to 'em the famous War of the ^wo stately sRepublicks who contended
for the Empire of the Universe; I Will cite the Scipio's, Fabius's, Flaminius's,
Marcellus's, Emilius's, Varro's. Hamilcar's, Hannibal's, the Syphax, and
Massinisses. If my Companions dare open their mouths. I Will ascend to the
foundation of Carthage; recount the amors of Dido; and if this will not do,
I Will have a Virgil ready which I will read in a sad Tone before my Arpalises,
to the last Verse of his Aeneads.


Cleonice. That which I approve of best in your Rhapsody, is, that you mix a
great deal of true History among your Banterings.


Dorante. A man must deal in this manner with this sort of People, to make 'em
more ridiculous.


Philemon. These kind of Folks in their relations heap up a thousand
circumstances which relate no more to their subject, than the foundation of
Carthage to Erastus's Hat and Feather.


Belise. It is strange to me people should take so great delight in prating:
for without doubt these Persons are not senseless, and it is the vivacity of
spirit which transports them beyond the matter they treat of: Whence is it
then, that this same vivacity does not show them that they trouble those who
hear them, and disturb even those who do not hearken to 'em?


Philemon. They are like those Horses who see nothing during the swiftness of
their course; who pass the bounds of their carreer, and who stop not till they
are beyond it, in running their heads against a wall which beats them backwards.


Cleonice. I believe there are few of these Animals that are so fierce; whereas
one half of the World consists of great talkers.


Dorante. If this were so, the other half would find it self very unhappy, and
I know not what you would have it do.


Cleonice. It need only hold it is peace.


Philemon. This is like receiving several blows in a Combat, and returning
none: However, Madam, I dare believe that there are great talkers, who in
several occasions imagine they have a real kindness for us, and are many times
punctual in their promises.


Erastus. For my part. I love a woman better that should speak a little too
much, than a man that should not speak enough. But I had like to have forgot to
tell you, that we have left our young Folks a great while in silence, they have
not opened their mouths, for fear of falling into the fault we now reprehended;
I would fain therefore hear what Lisidor will say on this Subject.


Lisidor. That in a Company as this is, he ought to hear much and speak little.


Erastus. I know not whether this answer be as wise as it seems to be: For
young people must speak to acquire the facility of speaking; and they can no
where better make cryal, than before their Friends, who will make it a matter
of duty to correct them: But seeing I have spoken sententiously, I must proceed
and interrogate Lindamire. How comes it, that being witty, young, and gay, you
have said nothing? were there but three Persons of your humor in this Chamber,
the discourse would quickly be at an end.


Lindamire. I can assure you, Sir, it is not I that would keep it up; though to
speak again it should cost you a second Voyage to America.


Dorante. Very well hit, for a Girl of fourteen; we come to see Lindamire, and
we find another Cleonice.

No sooner was this said, but the person Dorante named saw the Dishes bringing
up, and being moreover very glad to break off a discourse which might tend to
her praise; she reassumed the discourse in these terms.


Cleonice. Methinks for people who blame great talkers, we have enlarged enough
in this Conversation.


Belise. Before we end it, I would declare the instruction which a certain Lady
not far, has made me draw hence, which is, that to be never accused of speaking
much, one should speak as she does; and one had need only to see her often, to
accustom one's self to speak little, through the pleasure a body may have in
hearkening to her.


Erastus. It is your self, Madam, who now spoke too much, and you are now about
being recompensed for your flattery. The Lady perhaps whom you would have us to
understand, will be far from applying it to her self; and to punish you again
in another sort, I believe she will make you but very ill cheer.

At these words the company arose, Dorante gave his hand to Belise, Philemon to
Cleonice, and Lisidor his to the young Lindamire. They withdrew into a little
Parlor, where they washed without Ceremony, and after the same manner sat down
at Table. Although this was only a treat for Friends, yet every thing was
proper and neat: Scarce had they dined, when they returned into Cleonice's
Chamber, where they sat down, and talked only of indifferent things, till
Erastus began to speak to enliven the Conversation.


Erastus. Lindamire will perhaps be astonished if she hears me speak again
without setting forth for America, where she would again send me. So long a
Voyage does not seem to me absolutely necessary, for the reassuming of the
discourse we left off. I need only tell you, that among the defects of great
talkers, we have not, I think, made any mention of Lying, which yet is the Vice
wherewith such persons are commonly repreached.


Entertainment VII. That it is not possible for a man who is generally esteemed
a Liar to please in Conversation.
Dorante. ERastus has thought of a thing, which we ought very willingly to
examine, seeing it regards no less the main businesses of life, as all manner
of Conversation.


Cleonice. Before we enter on so considerable a matter, I would entreat you to
tell me punctually what it is to lie. It appears to me at first to be very
easy to comprehend; however I believe the matter will admit of many
distinctions, and I would very gladly learn them.


Dorante. Seeing you would have me undertake this task, I will tell you, Madam,
that we lie as often as we betray our sentiments, and that our words do not agree
with our thoughts. Thus I may add slandering to lying; should I say that
Timocrates basely ran away in a Fight, wherein yet I saw him behave himself
most valiantly. But I know not whether you will not be surprised, when I shall
show you, that one may lie in telling the truth. Chance sometimes makes a thing
to happen which at first seems strange. Let us, if you please, suppose I give
you a visit in a time when your affairs oblige you to go out, and that as soon
as I have left you, you go forth in effect, without my knowing it. I meet
immediately after with Theagenes; he asks me if you are at home, and through a
humor, which you shall call what you please, I answer, you are just gone out.
Thus in speaking the truth, I speak against my own thoughts, which tell me you
are still in the room where I left you.


Erastus. I believe I do not find all my reckoning in this example, and that
you may well give another.


Cleonice. Neither was it for you that it was given, no more interruptions, and
do not enter where you are not called. Continue, if you please, Dorante, and
tell me whether I am to blame, when I imagine that the whole world is full of
Liars.


Dorante. You are not at all mistaken, one part of men use all their industry
to deceive the other, and to disguise the truth; in War, Craft, Ambuscades,
false Marches, false Allarums, and false Attacks, are Proofs of it; and if
these Artifices are employed in a profession wherein is seen so much
generosity; what is there not practiced in others?


Philemon. I am persuaded there is ever something that is mean and low in lying
and dissimulation. There have been great Captains who would never have recourse
to Stratagems, they would win a Victory, not steal one.


Dorante. I confess this is a generous Sentiment, and it is observable, that
only weak Animals endeavor to supply by craft, the defects of strength, which
Nature has not given them.


Erastus. If Cleonice will give me leave to speak when Dorante has done, I
would say, that if there be any sincerity in the world, it is to be found among
Ambassadors.


Belise. But Ambassadors may, without scruple, disguise the truth. Having
received their instructions, it is not permitted them not to follow 'em; th^^
would be to betray their Master, and to fall into an unpardonable Crime.


Philemon. What may we not say of Lovers? They lie continually in the
protestations they make; and their Mistresses are no less dextrous at
dissimulations: In fine, they torment themselves, they groan, they dye; and yet
are scarcely got out of their Mistresses sight, but they make a party in the
divertisement with the first friend they meet.


Belise. These light words you speak of are so common, that they cannot be
condemned as lies, when there is no design mixed with them of deceiving: A Lady
who hears her eyes praised, or her mouth, looks on this piece of Gallantry,
only as a gaiety of Fancy which Custom has authorized. But what Liars should we
not find, should we run through the different professions of men, from the
highest to the lowest?


Cleonice. We should have too much to speak of, should we enter on each
particular; and if on the other hand we should examine the falsities wherewith
the Arts deceive our Senses, either agreeably, or with horror.


Erastus. We are not now to moralize on the Vices of men, nor on the Marvels of
the Optic: We treat only of Conversation, and it is sufficient to show, that a
Liar cannot please in a serious Entertainment.


Dorante. We are agreed that we would have such a one be silent, for we are
soon weary of hearing what we do not believe. We so greatly love truth, that
those who never speak it, are very willing that others should not disguise it
from them; and I believe there are only Romances and Poetry, wherein fiction
can divert. And here a resemblance to truth is required; and a relation that
wants it, would not draw much attention. So when a man has a design to pl^^^^
by his discourse he should mix, methinks, a Character of sincerity to the
agreeableness of his expressions and behavior. It is hereby that a discourse
pleases and insinuates it self; on the contrary, we hear with uneasiness (as I
said before) what we do not believe.


Philemon. But how will you distinguish an effective sincerity, from that which
is only so in appearances? You know that they are ordinarily only persons of
wit who dissemble; and you cannot doubt but they use all their Art to disguise
the truth.


Dorante. I confess they are more capable of dissembling than your gross dull
people; and therefore it is we see less sincerity at Court than in the Country;
and we see a subtiliz'd sort of People in a Neighboring State whose words are
not greatly relied on. However, it is not impossible to make the distinction
you speak of, provided a man has a piercing and discerning judgment. A man that
would appear sincere, without being so in effect, does oftentimes discover
himself, even by the care he takes to conceal himself. He forgets nothing to
attain his ends, but it is not so hard as you imagine to perceive certain
efforts he makes to persuade. The earnestness which he shows, and the turn
which he gives to his expressions are observable. Frankness guides it self in a
direct contrary manner, it tends plainly where it would go: It has a more open
Air, appears in the eyes, in the gesture, and all the countenance. In stead of
having recourse to Ornaments of Language, it rejects them as fruitless, it is
an enemy of ostentation, and neglects the appearing wholly and fully what it
is. It speaks without Art, and with Confidence, and yet never fails of making a
soft impression. Whereas scarce have we perceived the artifices of a
dissembling Person; but so far are we from being pleased in hearing him, that
we are at defiance with him, as imagining he is always ready to deceive us. An
ingenious carriage produces different essects, it agreeably insinuates it self
and according to the intentions it may have, it sets our hearts at rest, or
moves our affections.


Belise. However it is to be considered how far sincerity should proceed; for I
find nothing so ridiculous in Conversation, nor nothing more incommodious in
the occasions of life, than for a man to speak whatever comes into his head.


Dorante. You know, Madam, that sincerity has its bounds, as well as all other
Virtues, and I do not think we are obliged to imitate the simplicity of a
Country Lover, who declared his passion in a manner which I think was very
pleasant. He swore to his Mistress that he was desperately in love with her,
and yet he could not consent to marry her. How, said she in a rage, can you
pretend you find me such a one as you like, and yet not willing we should spend
our days together. To speak ingenuously, replied he, I can love you as my
Friend, but I am of the humor of my Father, who would never marry.


Erastus. Though he declared himself very ingenuously a Bastard, yet he hurt
thereby no body but himself, whereas there are simplicities which perplex a
whole company. And of this I have an instance in the beginning of the last
month, when the Court was at Fontain-Bleau. We were together in the Country,
Timante and I, and we visited in our journey honest Merigenes, to whose
politeness and capacity I suppose you are no stranger. Cleonice seemed shy of
traveling with two men, and therefore took one of her Friends along with her,
called Melicerte. I cannot tell whether you know her, but I can truly say, that
if she be not handsome, she is young and witty. She was of so an agreeable
humor the first night we supt at Merigenes's, that the good man showed himself
really smitten with her, and addressing himself on a sudden to Timante, I
wonder, said he to him, you should reckon Melicerte homely, I find you but a
bad judge of Beauty, and I Will never trust you in these matters again.

Consider, I pray you, into what confusion this simplicity cast us. Timante did
what he could to repair the fault he had committed in speaking, without doubt,
too freely to a person of Merigenes's humor. Remember more punctually my
words, answered he, I told you that Melicerte was a very amiable person, and
yet the charms of her face were not wholly comparable to the excellency of her
humor. Acknowledge, Timante, (replied Melicerte endeavoring to smile) That
you are less sincere now, than you was when you spoke of me before, and yield
that Merigenes is incomparably more than you. It is true, Madam, (replied
immediately the honest man) you do me justice; I protest I always speak what I
think is the truth. I perceive it, said she with a cold Air, and being not able
to dissemble her resentment. I began to talk, to turn the discourse on another
subject. My endeavors were vain, a solid peace could not be made, and the end
of the Feast answered not the beginning.


Dorante. I saw Merigenes some days after, and found him as knowing, as he
appeared to you dissimulative. He is as excellent a Geographer as he who looked
for Democracy in the Map, because we therein find Dalmatia. In entertaining our
selves on the conquests of the Imperialists, and those of the Venetians, we
pleased our selves in enlarging on the commendations of the Morea, that ancient
Peloponese where was the famous Lacedemonia, which the Modern Misistra does but
imperfectly represent. Merigenes was ravished at the great success we
mentioned; and in the transports, which made him lift up his eyes to Heaven, he
interrupted us to tell us, he could not believe the Country of the Moors was so
good as we made it. He began again to speak very pertinently when we entered
into the particular relation of what was done in Hungary, he much wondered the
Turks should build the most famous Bridges in the world. That of Essek, said
he, must needs be a very great and strong one, seeing two great Armies have
long since fought to get and keep possession of it. Yet I cannot imagine it is
comparable to Pont-Euxin, for it is not above four or five years that I hear
talk of that of Essek, but I have heard all my life time, admirable relations
of the other. We could not forbear smiling at the exact Geography of Merigenes,
and we better informed him in the sequel, lest the resemblance of names should
make him confound again such different things.


Cleonice. I am very glad this Conversation is ended, for you know that Belise
and I are to go and choose Stuffs for Lisidor and Lindamire.


Erastus. I think it were fit your Servants should eat their Dinners before
they put their Horses in the Coach; you have time enough.


Cleonice. Choose then another subject of discourse, in speaking against Liars
we are insensibly brought to detraction.


Belise. There is no body has more aversion to detraction than I have; however
I believe there is no harm in making little Recitals for Diversion, provided we
wrong not the reputation of people: Do you think you wrong Arpalise, in saying
she talks much? Why may you not call a woman a great talker? Do you not every
day say, that the Crow is Black, and that a Swan is White?


Erastus. If what Belise now said satisfies you not, we are ready to speak
against detraction.


Cleonice. You cannot do me a greater pleasure.


Entertainment VIII. That a Detractor is generally bated, and that he cannot
please any other than envious and malicious Persons.
Philemon. I Wonder there are so many Detractors. All the world hates them,
they are respected as sierce Beasts; they are feared, and yet we do not avoid
them, as we shun Tigers and Panthers. It is they on the contrary who shine most
in Companies, they are hearkened to, and even applauded, whether out of fear of
provoking them, or that men are naturally pleased with Detraction.


Erastus. I should be sooner surprised, at their being driven out of Sicieties,
Let Us not flatter our selves, most men had rather hear four Satyrs than one
Panegyric.


Cleonice. You have a strange opinion of Mankind; if what you say were true,
there would be a great many Misanthropos's in the world.


Dorante. And indeed there are more than you think, but they better disguise
their sentiments, than Timon of Athens did heretofore, and the Alcestus of
Moliere at Paris now.


Cleonice. But whence can proceed so malicious an inclination?


Dorante. From self love. If we have defects, and we are sensible of them; we
are pleased in hearing there are greater than ours: If on the contrary, we can
sufficiently flatter our selves, to believe we have great Virtues, we have the
satisfaction of seeing that we are lifted up above the people whose faults are
related to us.


Belise. Do not you find that the most dangerous Detractor is, he that begins
by praises; seeing by this Artifice he may persuade he speaks sincerely, and
without aversion.


Philemon. What you say brings to my remembrance an adventure, which diverted
the other day a great company at the Prince's Demarata's; they seemed to be
astonished there should be such a strict tie of friendship between Celanire, to
whom one may give thirty years, without being too liberal; and Dorinice, who
has never yet seen eighteen. However, there was no doubt made but each might
find his reckoning in this Society; it was said that Celanire, being less
virtuous than she appeared to be, found no disrellish in sharing in the
voluptuousness of a young person, whom Lovers and pleasures every where
attended. That Dorinice on her side might receive good advice from an
experienced friend; and even that she might vail her wanton Air under the
pretended modesty of Celanire. Scarce were these words ended when Celanire
entered, and a while after was told, that they had been just taking of the
friendship she had for Dorinice. I am not the only person that loves her,
replied she; it must be allowed she appears very amiable, when one does not
thoroughly examine her. It may be truly said she has a delicate Complexion, and
fire in her eyes; but I think she seems too affected in her carriage, and too
greedy of applause. I love her sincerely, I wish she would lay aside those
little humors, and endeavor as much to get reputation as new admirers; I
would not be thought to admire her defects; for we had like to have broke off
for the Gown she has worn for these four days. The Stuff is so rich, and so
remarkable, that every one will judge that Timocrates bought it. I was not
wanting in advertising Dorinice of it; I told her what was whispered abroad of
it, and that this report might become more public, and probably it might be
added, that a woman who accepts of presents, will grant favors. Dorinice
appeared to me surprised; and answered me, that Timocrates was not so well at
ease as was imagined, and that instead of making presents, he was scarce able
to satisfy his Creditors; that she had much ado to get an hundred Guineys of
him which she had won at Basset, even before this play was forbid; that, in
short, she was forced to make him take up this Stuff on credit to pay her.
That, as to the rest, she never made it her study to shut peoples mouths. That
she knew very well Calumny spared no body; and that to have ones mind at rest,
it was sufficient that one had nothing to reproach one's self withal. I made
show as if I believed what she said, and I replied coldly to her; Th^^ I wished
the world was convinced of the truth of what she now told me. And thus did
Celanire testify the sincere respects she had for Dorinice; and as if it had
been a decree of Fate that we should see the end of the Comedy; Celanire was no
sooner gone from Demarata's, but Dorinice entered, set forth in the magnificent
Gown so much discoursed of. Every body set forth the richness of the Stuff,
some praised it sincerely, others added roguishly, that what they liked it best
for, was, that Dorinice had not put her hand in her Purse for it. At least,
pursued Dorilas, if we may believe what Celanire now told us. I know not
(replied Dorinice coloring) what she may be pleased to say, but I suppose she
has said no harm of me. But if any spark of Envy has induced her to pour venom
in her relations, I could utter such truths as would not be very advantageous
to her. Dorilas, whose humor you know would not let pass this occasion of
diverting us, and pretending to be in the interests of Dorinice, whom he
thought fit to edge on; I know not (said he with a feigned ingenuity) whether
Celanire has a good way of setting off her Friends; however, I must say, she
has no good way of covering their defects. Why should she come with her
circumstances, the relations of which we never called for; what are we
concerned with her Timocrates, that she should bring him into a relation, when
the discourse was only about a Gown or Petticoat. I would willingly know
(replied Dorinice all in an heat) what she could say of Timocrates, and whether
she has had the malice to empoyson -- You are to blame in complaining (said
Dorilas, interrupting her coldly) she has only fairly related the opinions
which the world has, when a man buys a rich piece of Stuff, which is afterward
observed to be carried to a fair Lady; and after all, who can say, that
Celanire will speak of it any where else? What she has said here signifies
nothing; here was not in this room above four or five men, and seven or eight
women. We could not forbear laughing at this pleasant passage, which Dorinice
observing, she appeared moved with it, and was ready to fly upon Dorilas.
However she bethough her self not to disoblige any body, in a company which she
was glad to make savourable to her; and, dissembling her resentment, she
discovered only her passion against Celanire. I cannot comprehend, said she,
how this woman could have the imprudence to speak against me. Certainly she
must be Mistress of a great stock of Calumny, and very fertile in invention.
Besides, she should never have used these to offend a person who has long since
learned to hold her tongue, but who can now break silence in a terrible manner
for her. However, Madam, replied Do^^lus, whatever she said, she spoke with an
assured tone, and I am much mistaken if you can dismay her. Is it that she is
persuaded, replied Dorinice, that her Knight is redoubtable enough to stop the
mouths of the world? I would advise her to have less presumption, if it be only
this which renders her so bold. I am no more afraid of Timante than Celanire,
and I have an hundred times told them both, that I was ashamed of their
conduct. It Is well known that Timante has not above two hundred pound a year to
live on, and yet keeps his fine Coach, and three Lacqueys. It Is true he is
young, and well shaped, and is never from Celanire, whose old husband has
immense riches. I suppose one may draw from these particularities, such
consequences as will not be much to Celanire's advantage: but instead of
stopping at conjectures, I can find effects which will not tend to the
justifying of her conduct. It Is not three months since she gave money to a
person of Quality who went into Flanders, and entreated him to buy her some of
that Countries Horses. The Commission was executed, the Horses came, but not
into Celanire's Stable. They draw every day Timante in his visits to Court and
other Walks. The Coach they draw is a very fine one, and the Master of it knows
no more than I, what it cost. After this, shall a woman so liberal as she find
fault with Timocrates's paying me what he ows me?


Cleonice. This Comedy is pleasant enough, although the matter of it be neither
new nor rare; these are Farces we see every day acted; but I would willingly
know whether the divertisement you had, hindered you from feeling some
indignation. Can you like that the desire of detracting should break off a real
friendship, or make one renounce Civility, and the consideration one should
have for the appearances of Friendship?


Philemon. Observe all the particularities which concur in this detraction. It
is indignation which makes Celanire declaim first, she disgorges her self
against a person younger and handsomer, to whom she sees Lovers run as soon as
they are together, to the neglect of her self.


Belise. Is not the itch of talking to be at all regarded?


Dorante. The ease which a woman may expect when she reveals a secret that lies
like a weight on her heart, occasions these disorders.


Cleonice. As well as the pleasure of showing that she sees to the end of the
intrigue.


Erastus. Let us not forget the honor which Celanire does her self, when she
says she always gives good advice to Dorinice.


Dorante. Pass on farther, and confess we, that when detraction has no real
causes, she forms imaginary ones; she disguises every thing, and imposes what
names she pleases; she calls the Prudence of a General of an Army that
retreats, Cowardice; she terms Valor, Stupidity; and speaks of an Heroic
Constancy, as brutish Obstinacy. She spares least of all women, because they
are less in a condition to revenge themselves, however great their desire may
be to it. Detraction will speak the gallant Air of Arsinoe, to be the mere
affectation of a Wanton: the easy temper of Amasie, to proceed from cold
temper and want of Spirits; and if Partenice, who is naturally very handsome,
should wear a fine Gown, Detraction will not fail to accuse her of a Pride
capable of ruining her Family. You shall hear praises given only to authorize
Detraction. It Is said that Timocrates has wit, when it is only to persuade that
he is crafty and designing: and Dorinice is painted young and handsome, only to
render her more probable light and wanton.


Erastus. It is true, that we see every day Detraction spares nothing; but
leave we to others what concerns manners; and let us see, whether we cannot draw
some strokes of Satyr which may serve to exhilerate Conversation, without
offending Persons.


Dorante. One may observe from the Air and Behavior of those who speak,
whether the exagerations they make tend only to divert the Company. Then their
discourse is only to be regarded as a mere jolity, which I would not condemn:
but I would not like they should fall into an effective Detraction. So far
ought we to be from mixing malice, and citing Crimes, that we should never
touch seriously on the faults we would describe. If this be observed, I can
freely share in the diversion.

A famons Author speaking of a Pleader, made use of such expressions as seem to
me more pleasant than injurious. I am tormented, said he, by the most famous
Pettifogger of our Province, and I believe Normandy never bore a more dreadful
one; his only name makes Widows tremble, and makes Orphans run away: There is
not a piece of Glebe or Meadow, within three Leagues of him, that is safe from
him. He shows great favor to children, when he is content to share with them
in their Paternal inheritance.


Belise. I have an Aunt who has so great an aversion to women who seek only to
draw praises, that she was pleased heretofore to set forth her self in such a
manner, as furnishes us with those strokes of Satyr we mentioned, and here is
part of the Terms she used. I my self will give you my Picture to the life; and
first represent you with a low wrinckled Forehead, great Cheeks, and a picked
Chin, which put together makes none of the most agreeable Figure. My eyes are
small, round, and melanchollick, they speak nothing, and my mouth says as
little. It has made a perpetual divorce with smiles and pleasanties. There is
seen such a color on my Skin, as will not displease those who love variety. My
shape is like Madam Bouvillon 's in the Comical Romance, and I may say I am as
well qualified for Conversation. I never dispute, being no ways concerned in
what is said, and they would be to blame who should complain that I interrupt
People, seeing I always keep silence. Curiosity which is natural to my Sex, has
no power over my Spirit: I know nothing, I have learned nothing, and I have no
mind to learn any thing.


Erastus. I must represent to you a Cavalier, whom the Lady you speak of was
not willing to make your Uncle. His Size is low, and there is seen I know not
what of ill boding on his Countenance; his Eyes are so small, and so sunk in
his Forehead, that no body to this hour can tell whether they be black or gray;
the hair of his Eyelids cover them, and were the Hair of his Head as long, he
would not need to wear a Peruke; he has a strait and pointed Forehead, great
Lips, hollow Cheeks, and a tawny Complexion; I say nothing of his Teeth, he has
so few that they are not worth mentioning. The qualities of his Soul answer
th^se of his Body, he is of a chagrin humor, restless and contrarying, nothing
pleases him but what displeases others, and he finds nothing agreeable but what
the world disapproves: Envy and Hatred are his predominant passions, he is
never were out of humor than when he can do no mischief, and when he finds an
occasion to do it, he embraces it with joy. He has learned all sorts of
Languages, the better to deceive all sorts of People; he imagines the cheats
which are made, denote a superiority of spirit with which he is charmed. Judge
whether his Conversation be profitable and agreeable; He stutters, and cannot
utter four words distinctly; the difficulty which he has in speaking would make
him avoid Company, did he not frequent it to provoke and disturb it. Yet it is
said he is in love, but if we believe him capable of being so, it is only to
disappoint a Rival, and give perpetual trouble to a Mistress.

As Erastus ended these words, Cleonice was told that the Horses were in the
Coach, the Company arose, and Belise began in these words.


Belise. We have no reason to complain for our being interrupted; for we have
said enough of Detraction. We know it diverts but too much, and is but too much
in use. But I could wish we would treat of another Subject of Conversation very
different and which I have a mind to propose. I would willingly hear how a
Person might be handsomely praised in Company without putting him to the blush,
or disobliging others whom we do not praise.


Dorante. This is a nice point, and we may examine it to night. Lisidor makes
signs to me that he will treat us at Supper, and carry you to his House, and
therefore you may take your measures accordingly.


Cleonice. You being the chief of our little Society, we must be ruled by you.
I ought indeed to be gladder than the rest of the Company, because the good
Supper we shall have, will make amends for the course Dinner I gave you.


Dorante. Good, Madam, do not thus impose on a man of my years, you think to
engage me by this address to give you a Regale? Do you not see on the contrary
that I entreat you to sup with me, because two Feasts are not to be expected on
the same day.

After these words, the Ladies were led to Cleonice's Chariot to prosecute
their affairs. At night the Company came to Dorante's, and Belise, whilst
Supper was making ready, claimed the promise had been made her.


Entertainment IX. How one may insert Commendations in Conversation.
Dorante. IT will be easier for us to speak of the Muxims which are ordinarily
observed in praising, than to say with what tenderness we we may season
praises, to make them agreeable. What a turn ought we to give, and what
Novelties must we not speak to please in these occasions? If our commendations
be but mean, the person to whom we direct them, owes us less thanks than spite;
and the rest of the Company will scarce vouchsafe to hear us. If on the
contrary, we praise with excess, we cast into confusion, those whom we
endeavor to exalt to a pitch they do not deserve, and we are despised by
others, as pitiful flatterers.


Philemon. I am persuaded that it is less difficult to use the precepts which
serve to make a Panegyric, than to find the address of agreeably insinuating
praises in an Entertainment. And therefore the Ladies shall permit, if they
please, that I relate what my memory furnishes me withal, in respect of great
praises, and I will leave to Dorante, and Erastus the improving of this
subject, with a better and more delicate Air.

Beginning commonly, as we do by birth, I Will tell you first what I have read
heretofore on that of a great Monarch.

He was born in Purple, the Throne was his Cradle, and if it were possible to
find an Infancy in so glorious and rational a life, we should find that he
could only play with Scepters and Crowns.

Expect not I should enter on the particulars of what we may find praiseworthy
in a person whom we would commend.

You know better than I, that one may respect the Gifts which he may have
received from Nature; as an elevated Soul, an upright heart, constant and
generous, a sublime Spirit, vast and penetrant; an happy Memory, a solid
judgment and delicate discernment.

As for the gifts of the body, all the world immediately declares it self for
the beauty of women, and the good Mien of men, and for my particular, I prefer
health and a noble and free Air in all manner of behavior.

We forget not the favors which we hold of Fortune. It is she which gives
Riches and Honors. And I dare even affirm she often contributes to our Glory,
in conducting us as it were by the hand, into conjunctures, which become happy
to us. But say we, in few words, that true merit consists chiefly in the good
use we make of the different advantages we now mentioned.

I will follow the Custom we have to refer this discussion to Morality, without
charging our Conversation with it.

However I cannot but say something of Valor and Liberty, which are my two
favorite Virtues.

It is certain, that to be charmed with 'em, I would have them be in all their
purity, without mixture. That Valor lead us to brave Actions, without
proceeding to Rashness; that it be accompanied with a prudence which may make
us fear the ill Success which may be attributed to us; in a word, that it
marches to glory through perils, without Ostentation. I likewise require that
it have no need of any assistance to render it self worthy our admiration. That
it be not sustained either either by Ambition, nor Anger, nor Revenge. That in
a Battle Emulation, Shouts, and Cries, make it go neither farther nor with more
earnestness, than if it saw it self alone and disarmed. Neither do I know
whether I should give it the name of Virtue, how blazing soever it were, if it
appeared to me unjust.


Belise. There are then few Conquerours whom you esteem, and I believe you
spare neither the reputation of Caesar, nor the glory of Alexander.


Philemon. I confess I would have Equity reign every where. So that I would not
condemn those who reproach Caesar for having oppressed the Liberty of his
Country; and who cannot bear with Alexander's carrying Fire and Sword into
Countries where they never so much as heard of him. Let Us instance, for
Example, a great Monarch who makes only lawful Conquests.

Here Is what I read this Morning of it: Has he ever attacked any place without
winning it? Has he ever given Battle without vanquishing? Were ever better
disciplined Troops seen, Troops more zealous, more ready to fight and signalize
themselves? What Conqueror, surrounded with warlike Nations, has stretched the
limits of his Conquests so far, in so short a time? What Warrior has triumphed
over such puissant Confedarates, and ever rendered his Dominions more redoutable
and flourishing?

Here Is what was said heretofore of an Illustrious Warrior, whose Valor
raised him to the Empire.

He practices himself alone all the Military Virtues, and it is an admirable
thing, that being above all Corrivals, he contends for glory with himself; he
endeavors to ravish it from his first actions by others still more glorious.

As to what concerns Liberality, I would have it no less exempt from
Ostentation than Valor. I would have it readily showed, in a grateful manner,
and the most seemly as is possible, when it is to relieve persons who want
necessaries for their Subsistence. But I require, on the contrary, that one
give in the sight of as many people as is possible, when the gift is the
recompense of merit.

In a word I would have a liberal person to do as one of my friends did, whose
liberality is thus mentioned.

His Liberality equals that of a magnificent Prince in the greatness of
Presents, and surpasses it in the choice of Persons. Those who receive his
benefits, are the only Persons that can speak of 'em. In fine, his generosity
would be more universally admired, if it were not so great, because more
persons would comprehend it, in an Age wherein this Virtue is so rarely
practiced in it is perfection.

Loving as I do extremely this beneficent humor, you would have me speak more
of it, and enlarge my self a little on the bounty of a great King.

One cannot speak more advantageously of a private person, than to say that he
has the spirit of a Prince; and one cannot better praise a great Potentate,
than in saying he has the goodness of a private person: That in a condition
which permits him every thing, he endeavors only to satisfy others. Was ever
seen in a mean fortune so much goodness as he shows in the midst of his
greatness? Whilst all Europe lies prostrate at his feet, imploring his
protection or redoubting his prowess; it seems as if he had need of the least
of his Subjects; so sensible is he of their afflictions, so earnest is he to
offer 'em remedies, so favorable an ear does he lend to their supplications.

This incomparable goodness extends it self to all conditions; the great
receive every day Testimonies of it, the people every minute bless it, the
domestics are charmed with it, and strangers admire it. Of the two parts of
justice, he leaves to the Parliament that which disposes of the punishment of
Crimes, reserving only that which distributes recompenses. He uses his
Authority only to restore, to repeal, to pardon. In fine, his power appears
without bounds, when he is to do good; and it seems, as if it were without
Authority, when it is to punish. The Refusal of a favor is a Language unknown
to him, and his Closet as well as his Heart, is always open to the
remonstrances which is made him in behalf of the miserable.


Belise. I take notice in the praises you now made, you have spoken only to the
advantage of men, and not one word of Commendation to those of my Sex. I
believe it is I that hinder you, but if I shut your mouth herein, methinks
Cleonice should open it.


Philemon. Well then, for the love of her I will open it. I Will praise a
celebrated Beauty whom all the Court admires; and Cleonice will have the
pleasure to see one part of her Charms, in the piece which I shall set forth.

Yet Dorante could better than I acquit himself in this affair, he knows the
Author that drew the Picture; and the Lady for whom he wrought. But what ought
I not to undertake to recover your favors, I will satisfy you then, Madam,
and recite word for word the little work I promised, provided my Memory will
give me leave. Here Is in what terms the Painter addresses himself to the
Beautiful Lady whose Picture he drew.

You know, Madam, that ordinary Beauties go only to the Painters to seek some
new Charms, or to get rid of some Defects. You only, Madam, are above Arts
which flatter and embellish. They have never wrought on you but unfortunately,
and in making you lose as many advantages, as they are wont to bestow on
Persons less accomplished than you. But if you are little obliged to Painting,
you are less to dresses. You owe nothing to the Science of others, nor to your
own Industry, and you may securely remit your self to Nature, she having taken
such excessive Care of you. Most Women are handsome only from the Dresses they
use. What they put on serves to hide their Defects, whereas on the contrary,
whatever you put off discovers some new Charm.

I shall not give you any general and common praise. The Sun will no more
furnish me with a Comparison for your Eyes, than the Flowers for your
Complexion. I might speak of the regularity of your Face, and symmetry of every
part of your Body. But I perceive, beyond the observations I have made, there
are a thousand things to think, which cannot be expressed, and a thousand things
which are better felt than thought on.

You have collected in your self the diverse Charms of different Beauties. That
which surprises, which pleases, which flatters, which touches, which sharpens.
Such a one has resisted a disdainful Beauty, which has yielded to a delicate
one; and delicacy may give disgust to Lovers who like only to submit to
disdainfulness. You only, Madam, know how to charm all the world: The
passionate find in you the subject of their transports. Different spirits,
diverse humors, contrary tempers, all are subject to your Empire.

The charms of your Conversation are not a whit inferior to those of your
Face. One is no less affected with hearing you than seeing you. You can create
a passion for you, though veiled. Never was so much Politeness seen as in your
discourses, nothing so lively, nothing so just, nothing so happily thought. In
fine, Madam, what one may say, after one has examined you, is, That there is
nothing so unfortunate as to love you, nor nothing so difficult as not to love
you.

Having ended this Recital, Philemon continued to speak in this manner.

I see that Erastus is ready to dye with impatience to insult over me. His Eyes
tell me, that what I now gave out for a Picture, represents nothing in
particular, the whole being but a general description, an heap of expressions
which an Author would have pass for exquisite ones.


Erastus. Fear not that I shall complain for not having seen in this
description, a certain resemblance which you made me hope for: It belongs less
to me, than the Lady who expected it to make you reproaches. Had you been as
good as your word, Cleonice would have had the pleasure of believing her self
handsomer than she is, and I the vexation of finding her more disdainful. This
is a business that is between you and her.


Philemon. It is plainly seen you would set us at odds; but Cleonice may easily
distinguish in my recital; The regularity of her Face, and symmetry of every
part of her Body.

Moreover I would fain know to whom may be better applied, what I said of
Conversation, and Politeness? Must I declare openly that it was of Cleonice
that I spoke?


Cleonice. I would advise you not to do it, because no body will believe you.


Belise. You understood him well enough, he need not explain himself, and I
wonder my Husband should tell you such fine things in my presence. Let him
protest if he will, that this is only to practice the maxim we speak of, and
that he inserted these indirect Commendations, only to praise in an ingenious
manner. It belongs to Erastus to see whether he will agree in it.


Erastus. I Will agree to nothing to day. I have a controuling humor in my head,
and it is Timag^nes who gave it me by his obstinacy.


Dorante. You have been in a dispute then; let us know whence arose your
difference, and what has caused the heat you seem s^^ll to be in.


Erastus. It is observed, that of late, Timagenes has a particular love for
Berenice. He was notably set upon for it at Celysire's, even to the putting him
almost out of countenance. But in fine, being ashamed of his confusion, he took
courage, and with an assured tone thus spoke. Is it any marvel, says he, that I
should love a most amiable Lady? Show me any Snow whiter, or any Rose of a more
lovely color than her complexion? Berenice's Eyes are Black, great, well set,
and tempered with such sweetness, and yet so sparkling, that the room she sits
in seems to be on fire with 'em. Her mouth is small, well shaped, her lips
Scarlet, which as soon as a smile opens them, you see the finest Teeth in the
world.

I added immediately, that nothing could be truer than what Timagenes had said
of Belise. Of Belise, said he briskly, the resemblance of the names deceive
you, it is of Berenice that I speak. So much the worse for your Eyes, replied
I, with a tone of assurance, it is not the conformity of names, it is the
praises you give to Berenice which have made me believe you rendered justice to
Belise.


Belise. I would not interrupt you as soon as I ought. The Company it seems
must remark after what manner you give praises, whether true or false; besides
I have not the strength to make you silent immediately, for I am a woman, and
you give me fine words.


Cleonice. I shall never hear any discourse of praising, but I shall remember
an Elogium which a friend of Dorante's made for the King. Two Shepherds spoke
therein, one an Italian, whom I shall call Thirsis, the other a German, to whom
I shall give the name of Menalca. Their Character was as different as the
Genius of their Nation. Thirsis loved ingenious Arts and Rest. Menalca's
inclinations lay only for War; and his greatest delight was in a tumultuous
Life. They came to France only to see a King who filled all the Earth with his
Name. After they had considered him with great admiration, they looked on one
another, and immediately knowing one another to be strangers, they accosted,
and enquired the occasion of their Travels. They had no sooner understood it,
but this conformity of design made 'em continue their Conversation: But I know
not whether I should make them to relate in wretched Prose, what they most
ingenuously expressed in verse.


Dorante. Your Prose is well worth my Friend's Poetry; only go on.


Cleonice. I will tell you then in few words; that Thirsis was astonished how
the King could so easily govern a great Kingdom, as a Father of a Family rules
his House. He admired the Kingdom should be so flourishing, and in so good
order, even as Menalca admired the Discipline observed in the Armies. When the
Italian acknowledged that Paris exceeded Rome for fine Arts and Painting,
Buildings and Music; the German was charmed to see with what exactness all
that respected the Military Art was observed. He said there were never any
braver Troops, never any better picked men, better clad, better armed, and more
willing to serve. If Thirsis mused at Court on a King extraordinary well
shaped, Equitable, Magnificent, Wise, Merciful; Menalca could not be tired in
praising the Armies of a Vigilant Prince, Indefatigable and Intrepid. In fine,
not to engage my self farther into a discourse, whence I cannot, perhaps,
easily extricate my self, I shall content my self in telling you, that the two
Shepherds obstinately disputed; that they could not agree, and that in their
contest, they published all the King's Virtues both Civil and Military.


Belise. I do not doubt but you expect that I should praise in my turn, and
instead of excusing my self through modesty. I am willing to do it, provided my
memory furnishes me with the Subject and Expressions.

It is then the Elogium of a Victorious Prince which I undertake, with the
assistance of a delicate wit, whose Works to my great misfortune you too well
know, to thank me for what I recite out of 'em.

This Author writes to the Prince after the winning of a considerable Battle,
and makes him certain reproaches, and forms a kind of Quarrel, in a manner,
infinitely more agreeable than the most regular Congratulation. You may judge
by several passages which I remember.

How joyful I am, my Lord, to be at a distance from your Highness, that I may
the better say what I have long since thought of you. I dared not declare it,
lest I should fall into the inconveniences, wherein I have beheld Persons who
had taken the like Liberties. But, my Lord, you do too much to be past over in
silence, and you will be unjust, if performing the Actions you do, it remained
there, and no mention were made to you of 'em. If you knew in what manner all
the world talks of you, you would be astonished to see with how little fear of
displeasing you they speak of what you have done. In truth, my Lord, I know not
what you have thought of, for it was a great boldness in you to have at your
Age topt two or three old Captains, whom you ought to respect, if it were only
for their Age. To have taken sixteen pieces of Cannon which belonged to a
Prince who is the King's Uncle, and the Queen's Brother, with whom too you
never had any difference. To have put into disorder the best Spanish Troops who
so kindly let you pass. All this is contrary to good manners, and matter
enough, I think, for your Confessor. I have heard indeed that you were
obstinate, and that it was not good contending with you, but I did not think
you would have been transported so far, and if you continue, you will render
your self insupportable to all Europe. Neither the Emperor nor King of Spain
will have any thing to do with you.

You know the Letter is longer, but the Author speaking openly what he pleases
in the rest of it, I confess I would not charge my memory with it.


Cleonice. I have the same relish, and I had rather a thousand times know how
to praise in this lusory manner, than to be able to compose those long and
serious Panegyricks, which are very laborious to those that make them, and very
troublesome to those who are obliged to hear them.


Philemon. I wonder that Dorante has said nothing yet. Does he think to be quit
for having given us a Supper? Let him not be mistaken; we have now praised a
valient man; let him make an El^^^^ of a liberal one.


(...) I shall recount to you the tour of a gallant man, whose inclinations,
you will find, led him to liberality.

I doubt not but you have heard that Voiture was a great Gamester, and that he
lost in one day 1400 Lewis's at the deceased Monsieurs, where he had the Office
of introducer of Ambassadors Being an honest man as well as a man of wit, he
would send away the next morning the Sum he had lost; and finding at home only
1200 Lewis's, he sent to demand 200 of Costar his intimate friend. Send them to
me speedily, wrote he to him, you know I play no less on your credit than mine
own. If you have them not, borrow 'em: If you find no body that will lend 'em
you, ^ell all that you have even to your good friend Monsieur Vauquet. For I
must not fail of having 200 Pistols. You see with what imperiousness my
friendship speaks, the reason is because it is vehement. Yours would say, I
entreat you to lend me 200 Lewis's, if you can without putting your self to any
inconvenience; I beg your pardon that I should be so free with you.

Costar sent the 200 Pistols, and answered, he never believed he could have so
much pleasure for so little money. Seeing you play on my credit, says he, I
will always keep a stock to preserve it. I can moreover assure you that a near
Kinsman of mine has always a 1000 Lewis's as much at my disposal as if they
were in your Cosser. However I would not hereby expose you to any considerable
loss. One of my neighbors told one yesterday, that his lost Pecunia would have
proved the best friend in the world to him, could he have kept him by him, and
I advise you to keep yours. I send you back your Note but am surprised you
should deal thus with me, having taken such a different course with Monsieur
Balsac.

I will add then, that Balsac having need of money, sent to entreat Voiture to
lend him 1200 Livers, and charged the Porter to give him a Note for the like
Sum: Voiture told the Money, and took the Note, wherein were these words.

I underwritten confess to owe to Monsieur Voiture the Sum of 400 Crowns which
he has lent me for, etc.

Voiture takes the Note, and subscribes these words.

I underwritten confess to owe to Monsieur de Balsac, the Sum of 800 Crowns,
for the pleasure he has done me in borrowing of me 400.

After this, he gives the Note to Mr. Balsac's Valet de Chamber to carry to his
Master.

The Company was very well satisfied with this Recital, and could not but
entertain themselves with it all the Supper time.

Scarce were they risen from Table, but Cleonice reassumed the discourse; I am
charmed, said she, with the contents of Voiture's Obligation written under that
which Balsac sent him.


Belise. I like very well too the manner after which he sent for 200 Pistols,
grounding this sort of boldness on the firmness of this Friendship.


Philemon. Nothing but a strict familiarity could authorize this liberty;
without this there had been neither discretion nor civility in this proceeding;
and you know what would become of Societies without these two so necessary
qualities.


Cleonice. They are so necessary; that we cannot better spend our time, than in
treating of them.


Entertainment X. That to please in Conversation, one must be discreet, and
keep an exact decorum.
Philemon. HAve you not observed, that it is not young people who generally
please in Conversation, whatever agreeableness their youth may give them?


Dorante. I do not wonder at it, for besides that they have not a sufficient
stock of experiences for Conversation, they be commonly too hot in speaking,
and show in what they say more impetuosity than reservedness: But that which is
most considerable, is, that they seldom consider what they are, and before whom
they speak.


Lisidor. I beseech you to show 'em no favor for my sake, for I acknowledge
they are for the most part little discreet, and greatly conceited; they speak
with a blustering Air, interrupt, and interrogate after the same manner; they
speak what they please, without considering whether it may not displease others.


Erastus. We shall not accuse you of these defects; for so far are you from
interrupting, and questioning, that you have said little, but to the purpose:
But let us hear what Lindamire will say in her turn.


Lindamire. That Girls of my Age are less obliged to speak than to hold their
Tongues; and that it is easy for me to observe a modesty, which might be of
different use to a Person of wit.


Philemon. Men have less moderation than those of your Sex, and the heat they
have ordinarily when they come into the world, makes 'em to speak and act only
in a blustering way.


Dorante. That which I like worst in most of them is, that they never think of
correcting themselves, and never reflect on what good manners require.


Lisidor. But wherein consists this Decorum you speak so much of?


Dorante. I know not whether we have not already sufficiently explained it.
However, seeing our conduct is so greatly concerned in it, we will further
deliver our opinion about it. I think that to speak with a due Decorum, is to
utter only things precisely which are suitable to times, places, and persons;
such as are fit for him that speaks, and those who hear.


Cleonice. Do you think it easy to know what we are, and of what humor the
Persons are before whom we speak; to know what is proper for us, and what may
please the rest of the Company?


Dorante. I acknowledge it is hard to judge of the disposition wherein the
Persons are that compose an assembly. The greatest part of Mankind makes it a
kind of merit to be always on its Guard, and to conceal its intentions.
Besides, men's humors change; health is not always the same; Ambition, Love,
and different Interests inspire different Inclinations. But, Madam, it is not
necessary that our knowledge should reach to the hearts of Persons, and that we
sound into the depths of their Souls, whether they be such in effect as they
appear to be. It is sufficient we know what their rank is, that we may have the
deference for 'em that is due; and that we consider what their capacity is;
that we may not speak too boldly before abler Folks than our selves. It Is true,
that these reflections are not sufficient, we are obliged to remember our
selves. What would you think, if a little young Gentleman, though born in Wales,
should draw his Chair, and sit jig by joul with a Duke or Marquess; or
interrogate in a familiar tone with a Marshal of France?


Erastus. To pass over what refers to persons of quality. I say there are
things which are truly ingenious, and yet which lose their relish in the mouth
of a man that is not of the profession. You have perhaps heard of a
neighboring Prince entertaining one day his chief Minister, on the most
subtle parts of Natural Philosophy: His Favorite heard him with impatience,
and being desirous his Master would rather apply himself to the Study of the
art of reigning, than ^hysical Questions. Sir, (said he to him, in interrupting
him discontentedly) are you not ashamed to be so well verst in these matters?


Philemon. If a man of a mederate capacity, not knowing himself, should take on
him to speak great, would he not deserve to be told with an Ancient, My Friend,
you seem to me to strive to speak beyond your Ability?


Erastus. There are people whom another sort of Vanity blinds. You knew
Clitandre, he was the Son of a mean Citizen, and an Office which he held under
the King, was not more considerable than his Extraction. Yet he was well enough
received by persons of the greatest Quality, and it was his Conversation that
procured him this admittance. I may likewise say, that he would have extremely
pleased, had he but remembered what he was; But he showed more Vanity than Wit
in his discourses and behavior. One day being at a Princesses, where there
were none but Persons of great Rank, he addressed himself to some old Lords, who
were Governors of Provinces, or the King's Lieutenants of Countries, and
talked to them of Versailes, as one would speak of Japan to persons that had
never seen the Map. You cannot believe, said he to them, how great the Charms
are which fix us to the Court, maugre the fatigues and perils we may meet
there. I profess our Life is a real Navigation, that we are tossed about, behold
every day wracks, and are uncertain whether the Waves will drive us into Port,
or run us on a Rock. Judge in what astonishment was the Company. They looked on
one another, they smiled, and failed not to demand of Clitandre news from
Versailes, with as much earnestness, as when our Ambassador arrived from Siam.
In fine, his presumption so blinded him, That the Company grew weary of hearing
him and bearing with him any longer.


Cleonice. I have a Neighbor that is no ways inferior to your Clitandre? She
is wife to an Officer under the King, whose place is too mean to be known: This
Neighbor comes often to work with some Work-women whom I have employed to work
me a Bed. Some four Months past I found her more melancholy than ordinary, and
I asked her the reason. How, Madam, said she, with the greatest surprise
imaginable, do not you know that the King sets out to Morrow for Luxembourg,
and that my Husband is obliged to follow him. To speak freely, added she
sighing, the women of the Court are very unhappy, they pay dear in certain
occasions, for the honor they have in others. I saw yesterday enter into your
Apartment a Judge's Lady, whose Countenance seemed very Serene. I protest
sincerely, that in my affliction I wished to have a Husband of the same
profession, that I might spend my days with less hurry.


Philemon. There are an infinite number of Clitandre's in the world, and we may
see every day, that a man who thus forgets himself, is the common laughingstock
of Companies.


Cleonice. But is it so difficult a matter for one to know one's self? Do we
not feel our selves? Can we believe that we should conceal our Sentiments from
our selves, as we dissemble 'em to others?


Erastus Yes, Madam we take pleasure to deceive our selves. It so seldom
happens that our opinions be as just as they ought to be; that our hearts are
therewith irritated, and makes us secret reproaches of it. And therefore it is
that we dare not make too sincere reflections on the things which put us out of
humor; and if on the contrary, we be so satisfied with our selves to set
cheerfully on this examination, we fall into a Vanity which is more
intolerable than the Ignorance of our selves can be.


Cleonice. But why so much subtilizing to know exactly what we are, and the
persons before whom we are obliged to speak; when the matter concerns only the
due Decorum we ought to observe to one another. If we meet with Persons of a
considerable Rank, or extraordinaty Merit, do we not naturally fear to
displease them? And does not this fear lead us to testify to 'em the deference
we owe them? Do we feel any repugnance in yielding them the most Honorable, or
Commodious place? In stopping to let them go in or out, in directing our words
to them before the rest of the Company, in showing Complaisance for their
Sentiments, or at leastwise in not directly opposing them, if they prove
contrary to ours?


Belise. I imagine that it is more easy to keep this Decorum and Character of
Discretion with Persons that are our Inferiors, than with those to whom we are
obliged to submit. Our hearts are imperious, they suffer not over patiently
that any Law should be imposed on them; but perhaps they are generous enough to
lay only easy ones.


Cleonice. Do you believe all peoples hearts have the generesity of yours? You
are very favorable to 'em, if you have this opinion of 'em. Many Servants who
are continually ill used, will not consent to what you say, That they have only
a light Yoke laid on them.


Dorante. It is true, most Masters are very unjust, and far from that
discretion we speak of. Those who find themselves constrained to serve, are
they not unfortunate enough, wthout increasing the misery of their condition,
by Injuries and a Tyranny which comes near in humanity?


Erastus. That which I cannot comprehend, is, That in the Army most young
Gentlemen fly upon their Servants and misuse them, without considering the
need they may chance to have of them. You know how many occasions there are
wherein the life of a Master may depend on the fidelity of a Servant.


Philemon. Shall we fay nothing of our equals? And whatever familiarity we may
have with them, shall we not observe a Character of Respect in our dealings
with them? That which contributes most to preserve Friendship, to speak
properly, is only the effect of Discretion and the Civility we speak of. These
two Qualities are so necessary, that a man cannot well pass through the world
without them; and it is impossible that Pleasure and Politeness should reign in
a Conversation where these are omitted to be practiced.


Cleonice. And this Discretion and Decorum, which you so much commend; do they
hinder us from mixing some Railleries in our discourses?


Philemon. No, Madam, but they hinder our joking in such a manner as may give
offense.


Belise. It would not be amiss to examine within what bounds our Raillers
should be included; but it is (...) and it is better to defer (...) discourse
till to Morr^^, when the Company comes to dine at Philemon's, who entreats it.


Cleonice. This entreaty savours of Ceremony. Have you any Lindamire come,
whose arrival you would celebrate, as Dorante and Erastus have done for that of
a Nephew, and Sister in Law?


Belise. I find you little equitable, in that you would not let me have my part
in this joy; and profiting so much by this Conversation, it is no marvel if I
endeavor to renew it.

The Company consented to Belise's desire, and met at her House next Morning,
where they dined after the same manner as they did at Erastus's and Dorante's:
They afterward past into Belise's Chamber, and began the discourse after this
manner.


Entertainment XI. What care must be taken in Raillery.
Dorante. RAillery has been always respected, as Salt which scasons
Conversation, and renders it agreeable, by a little sharp relish that it gives
it. A Discourse that is not enliv'nd with it, will appear no less flat and
insipid than Meat without Salt. It Is true, we cannot suffer Meat that is too
salt, and a Raillery too picquant is more intolerable.


Belise. Nothing is more certain, than that Ragouts are so far from preserving
of health, that they ruin it. Yet the ravage they make in our Bodies, is less
hurtful, than the disorder that Raillery causes in a Society. It introduces
division, and breaks those Friendships which appear to be the most solidly
established.


Erastus. Why, would you have a little Mirth to destroy a Society, unless it be
composed of ill-natured People? Supposing an assembly of ingenious Persons do
meet, their minds being agreeable, and well turned, they will understand
Raillery, and divert one another, instead of falling foul on each other, and
quarrelling.


Belise. Believe me, Erastus, the Persons you speak of, who seem to take all in
good part, and understand Raillery, yet keep a secret grudge against these
Railers. They revenge themselves as often as they meet with an occasion, and it
is well if they can disguise the Subject of their Revenge.


Cleonice. I acknowledge my humor leads toward Raillery, but I resist the
inclination, when I consider the consequences. I find we ordinarily transgress
therein the Rules of Civility and Discretion, and expose our selves to the
danger of offending persons whom we should not disoblige. In a word, if there
be less pleasure in refraining from Raillery, yet without doubt there is more
safety; as I find more in walking in a broad Path, than in dancing on Flowers
on the brink of a Precipice.


Erastus. For my part, I am persuaded that there are Railleries which do more
offend, than effectual injuries. When we utter injuries, it is anger which
transports us against Persons that we hate; but it often happens, that we despise
so much those whom we jear, that we disdain to put our selves into a Passion
against them.


Belise. The more I search what Persons one may innocently rally, the fewer I
find. Let Us examine particulars, and Dorante will afterward tell us, whether
there be persons that we may lawfully Rally. I will begin by Friends; I would
have them spared, and Friendship respected as a Sacred thing. Moreover are we
not obliged for our Interest, to conceal their defects, that we may not give
occasion to be reproached for having made an ill choice.


Cleonice. For my part, I shall think less of rallying my Enemies, and if I
loved Revenge, Raillery would appear to me too weak a means to satisfy me.


Philemon. Persons of Merit should be still more remote from our Raillery, when
even we can distinguish some defect among their Virtues. Do we not consider,
that there is nothing perfect, and that we are bound to take every thing in the
most favorable sense we can?


Belise. I find moreover, that Persons without Merit are too contemptible to be
rallyed, and I would not so much as spend one breath about them.


Cleonice. It must be granted too, that Raillery is too weak to use to an ill
man.


Erastus. But what will Lisidor and Lindamire tell us? They must speak their
opinions, and intermix in our Conversations.


Lisidor. I would not have young People rallied, lest they be discouraged to
enter into Company; the small experience they have, requires they should be
indulged, and their first faults pardoned.

And it being not fit I should speak only for my interest, I could wish
likewise that instead of rallying Old People, they should have all Respect
showed them. I have heard say, that Nations who had the power of choosing
Magistrates, took them always from among Ancient Persons. But why should we
jear Old Men? Is it because they have lived long, is this their fault? If it
be, it is a Crime which every one is desirous to be guilty of.


Erastus. It Is your turn now, Lindamire, to speak.


Lindamire. I would not have women rallied, but that men should have a
Complaisance for them, mixed with Respect, as is observable in the behavior of
polite Gentlemen. However, to be no less equitable than Lisidor, I would not be
more partial toward my Sex; than he has showed himself for the interests of
his Age. And I acknowledge I like worse that women should undertake to rally
men, for they expose themselves thereby to blunt Repartees, and bring men out
of the bands of Respect and Civility wherein they should always keep.


Philemon. And I for my part add, that we must not let Lindamire nor Lisidor
speak, or resolve to hold our tongues. I doubt not but Cleonice and Dorante are
very glad to see the manner after which they enter into our Conversations; but
Belise and I who have not the same interest, cannot be expected to like that
young persons should show themselves more able than we.


Cleonice. I Will make no answer to a person who will regale after (...) manners;
it were better (...) our discourse, that I (...) whom (...) It is not (...) the
unfortunate (...) number, and that we ought to show our compassion to their
misfortune, far from making it a Subject of Raillery.


Belise. There is also a kind of inhumanity at laughing at deformed persons,
whether lame or crookt-back'd. This man not having made himself, why should I
reproach him with his defects, as one might do a Carver for an ill proportioned
Statue?


Erastus. I find no less injustice in mocking of a Stranger, in that he speaks
not well our Language, or that his Bonnet pleases us less than a Hat.


Philemon. For my part I pardon one who rallies the first on some slight fault,
but I cannot suffer he should make a jest of a considerable failing.

Lupo d'Vberti, according to the report of a modern Author, encreast his shame
instead of excusing his Cowardice, when he himself made a jest grounded on the
allusion of his Name. Having surrendered a Castle which he might defend, he
contented himself with saying, That Wolfs did not like to be shut up. But let us
see whether Dorante can cite many persons whom it is permitted to rally.


Dorante. Pray then tell me, if you please, whether I may not rally people who
are full of themselves, who are conceited of their own merit; in a word, who
are ridiculous, or intolerable through the extravagancy of their presumption.
Can you greatly blame me, if I enquire seriously of an hectoring Bully, whether
he has killed no body to day; and entreat him to tell me what Captain is to be
esteemed most after himself, Caesar, or Alexander? Shall I spare an infinite
number of People who carry the Fortune of the World in their hands, who promise
employs, dispose of places at Court, help Maids to Husbands, and Batchellors to
rich Wives: who can tell what passes in all places; know what the King
whispered the other morning in the Queen's Ear; who talk only of Lords, Dukes,
and Earls, and look upon it as a great condescension to so much as cite the
name of a Knight or ordinary Gentleman? Will you spare those who step first
into all Fashions, and distinguish themselves by the magnificent Gaudiness of
their Clothes, being but of ordinary Birth, and as mean Fortune? May I not seem
to admire the Points and Ribbands of one of these Gallants, and to make
exclamations on every thing that I see? May I not affirm that his Cloth is too
good to have been made in Europe? That his Peruke is longer by a Fingers
breadth, than that of such a Lord's, and of a better color, and sits better on
him than that of the Count de -- does on him? Will you forbid me to tell him in
his ear, that there is a most rich Stuff made in such a place, and that only
the King and his Royal Brother have any of it yet? and that I esteem my self
happy in having so luckily met with him before this wear becomes common? Shall
I not laugh at those Persons who think they are sull of Science, who approve of
nothing, who condemn every thing, who speak all Sentences, and explain
sometimes English into Greek to make it better understood; as he that
pronounced gravely these words; It is with reason that we call man a little
World; that is to say, a Microcosm?

Will you not suffer me to deride a Covetous Miser, whom an insatiable
greediness makes starve with Cold and Hunger in the midst of abundance? May I
not tell him, that his money is no more his than mine, seeing he makes no more
use of it? Would you have me love an odious Person, who contributes to the
public misery; who keeps locked up a Treasure which would be useful in Trades,
and who takes a secret pleasure in seeing the poor suffer, that he may make the
better Market of what he keeps in his Barns?


Cleonice. I confess the gentlest treatment which Covetous men can expect, is
to be rallied; and I think it is with these sort of People that one diverts
ones self most.


Philemon. You have, perhaps, heard a story of a man of this stamp, who was
more covetous than Plautus's Euclio. It is said that he had a prodigious heap
of Corn, whence he pretended to draw a most considerable profit; when of a
sudden the Rain which was much wanted came and destroyed his hopes. He would
needs live no longer after this misfortune; he fitted a Rope to his Neck, and
fastened it to a Beam of his Chamber, and throwing himself in a fury off the
Chair he stood on, by mishap he threw that down, which made such a noise that
the people underneath came running up and beheld this Spectacle, and a
Neighbor cut the Rope to save, if possible, this Wretches life. In sine, he
was so carefully plied with proper remedies, that his life was recovered
against his will. Endeavors were also used to compose his mind, and a certain
Almanac was produced that promised such storms of Hail as would destroy all
the Corn in the Fields. But he fell again into disquiet, when he was told in
what manner he was preserved. Nothing would serve his turn but that his Rope
should be paid for, and knowing that his Neighbor laughed at his folly, he got
a warrant for him to bring him before a Justice to satisfy for the damage he
did him in cutting his Rope.


Erastus. I have a Kinsman who has not hanged himself yet, although his
Covetousness is no wise inferior to your Usurer's My Kinsman is young, he has
Birth, and Courage; and yet a base humor blemishes whatever otherwise is
praiseworthy in him: I persuaded him to serve in the wars, and the better to
prevail with him. I set before him, that if he lived, he would be recompensed;
and that if he happened to dye, he would find -- You believe, perhaps, I told him
that he would find honor; not at all, but that he would find an end of his
expenses, which a man is obliged to make during the course of his life. Our
Miser resolved upon it, but when he was to buy Horses, and provide the rest of
his Equipage, he soon renounced War; he told me he had rather retire to an
Estate he had near Paris, and that he could subsist on an hundred things,
whence Farmers drew a profit, which he pretended not to let them have. To turn
him from this design, I offered to make a Campaign with him at Sea, if he were
willing to go; And he needed no Horses nor Tents for this; and the Captains
Table being at his Service, he consented thereto, and we set out. It Is not
necessary to relate to you what our Naval Army did, I shall only tell you, that
at our return, we found our selves at Provence in the beginning of Winter. We
would needs enjoy the fine time of that Country, and therefore made a match of
walking out with Ladies. One day as we walked in a Path separated from a Meadow
by a Ditch; we thought that this separation was not great enough to hinder us
from leaping to the other side, and enjoying a nearer Conversation with the
Ladies. Our Miser, being accustomed to sparing, was so sparing of his strength,
that he leaped into the Ditch. The Ladies burst out into a fit of loud
Laughter, and I made what haste I could to assist my Kinsman. I stooped as low
as I could to draw him out thence, bidding him only give me his hand; this word
affrighted him more than his fall; and looking earnestly upon me, what would
you, answered he me immediately, have me to give you? At these words I observed
the fault I had committed, and explaining my self in a manner more conformable
to his inclination; Cousin, replied I, shall I give you my hand? With all my
heart, answered he, dear Cousin; and having offered his, I drew him out of the
Ditch, where I believe he would have still lain had I not changed the
expression.

The Company having laughed at Erastus his Relation, they prosecuted their
discourse.


Dorante. You acknowledge then that one may deride a covetous man, and I
suppose you will as easily grant, that we may jear those persons who imagine
they are always sick, who are continually taking Medicines, and who yet sleep
well, and eat better.


Belise. I know a woman who has a great deal of wit, and talks well when there
is no mention of Sickness or Remedies. But she gives very good diversion, as
soon as the Conversation turns on matters relating to health. I was saying
something to her yesterday a bout her Husband, who is a very honest Gentleman,
and after she had allowed his good qualities, she added, that he had one bad
one, which she could not cure him of; which is, says she, that he is so
obstinate that he will take no Remedies? But why should he take any, replied I,
if he be well? How, said she, do you think it enough to be in health, without
taking Remedies for preventing distempers which you may fear?

In fine, when this imaginary sick body takes Medicines, she tastes it then, and
says there is too much Sena in one, too much Rhubarb in another, just as we
find fault with Broths being too hot or too cold. Her Physician in ordinary
dyed not long ago, and her friends fixed another on her of a humor so frank and
brisk, that instead of prescribing Remedies to her, he did her the displeasure
to tell her, that she was in good health. She fell into a passion, and answered
smartly to this honest Doctor, that if he would order her nothing, she knew
where to find out others that would. The next morning she chose one, who
regales her every morning with different Medicines to her content. It Is not
above three or four days ago that I was at her House, and diverted my self with
hearing her talk of the several sort of diseases she feared, and their
particular Remedies. Her friends do never fail to send to know of her health,
and a Lacquey of Amasia's being come on the same Errand; you may tell your
Lady, answered she, with a languishing Air, that I thank her for her
mindfulness of me, but that my health is lost, there falling a cold humor on
my left shoulder which puts me to grievous pain. This Lacquey was no sooner
gone, but we saw the Princess Demarata's Gentleman enter; he made such another
sort of Compliment, but he had a different answer made him. I pray you, Sir,
said our fanciful Lady, to let the Princess know how sensibly I find my self
obliged to her, tell her that a grievous pain in my head has hindered me ever
since yesterday from taking any rest. As soon as ever this Gentleman was gone,
I looked on the pretended sick body with amazement. Is your distemper gotten up
into your head within this minute, said I to her briskly, or have you forgot
that it is not a moment past that your illness was in the left Shoulder? Did I
say it was in my Shoulder, answered she? Nothing more true, replied I; it is no
matter, added our fancyful Lady, provided I said I was troubled with some great
illness, it is enough, I need say no more.


Dorante. When I should leave to the Stage the representing the humors of
these imaginary sick Persons, yet I may at least rally Lovers, and affirm that
they have Capricio's that reach to extravagancy; but I shall make me too many
Enemies, should I declare my self against so universal a Passion. Of six
persons who near me there would be four who would murmur against me. But as for
Gray Headed Lovers, I doubt not but you will deliver them up to me, and allow
'em to be ridiculous, when they creep to a young Wench who laughs at them and
their superannuated sweetnesses.


Philemon. What will you say of those young hearts who feel the first strokes
of Love, with so much the more pleasure, as not knowing it yet, they think
themselves not obliged to oppose it.


Dorante. Instead of rallying them for their Innocence, I would recount to them
little Stories which might open their Eyes.


Belise. You make me remember how you droll'd with Cleonice, when her heart
inclined to prefer Erastus before all his Rivals, when she did not then know
the Sentiments she had for him.


Dorante. To pass by this discourse, Is there any thing more pleasant, than to
see the pains your Coquettes take to bring in new Gallants, and to pile hearts
one upon another, just as Erastus's Kinsman would please himself in heaping up
money? Have you not a thousand times observed the continual perplexity of one
of these Wantons, how to dress her self, and to keep all she thinks she has
acquired? She speaks to one, looks on the second, and smiles on the third. This
Theme is so large, that it is sufficient to deter a man that has talked enough
already. I dare no more insist on the Railleries which one might make of
jealous Persons. I shall content my self in telling you, that these last Fools
are yet more ridiculous than others. They never fail to form imaginary Subject
of their frenzy, when they cannot find any real. They see nothing in the
Objects which they behold through their jealousy, but what may relate to this
passion, as we see all things yellow when we have the Jaundise. An Husband that
takes notice his Wife is careless of her self, thinks he is not loved by her;
and if she dresses, then it is to please others. I should never have done,
should I describe all these follies.

It Is sufficient to say, that a jealous Person poisons every thing, and that
instead of favorably interpreting things, for to set his heart at ease, he
gives every thing such a construction as may increase his disquiet. Among his
misfortunes, I observe one which is peculiar to him; which is, that a jealous
person is derided instead of being pitied; although all other wretched people
are usually commiserated.


Erastus. What stories might one not tell of a jealous Person?


Cleonice. And what may one not say of a Coquette?


Erastus. Madam, be ruled by me; let us not enter too far on such a nice
Subject; how do we know but we shall make the world laugh at us? Perhaps we
flatter our selves, and the world may know us better than we do our selves.


Cleonice. I Will not oppose my self against the common custom of the world;
people may laugh as long as they will with all my heart, provided you continue
always as jealous as you have been hitherto; and I continue to be as great a
Coquette as you have found me since you knew me.


Philemon. Methinks we have spoken enough of Persons that one may rally, but I
know not whether we may not add something on the manner, after which civilized
persons may rally one another.


Dorante. We have already said, that if they do it, it must be finely and
delicately, and to make the Conversation more agreeable. If you will, we will
say likewise, that indirect Railleries do please no less in an Entertainment,
than praises which are given indirectly, have a grace in a Panegyric.

Here Is a tour which will not displease you, it alone makes an indirect
Raillery so much the more delicate, as it appears simple, natural, without
affectation, and without malignity.

A certain Person of Paris whom I shall call Lisicrates, had nothing but what
was obscure in his birth and his life. However, a Son he had being gone into
Italy very young, had got a great Estate at Rome, and sent wherewithal make
plenty reign in his Family. The Father died, and a Nephew to whom he had left a
good Portion, set up immediately for a Spark. It came into one of my Friends
head to abase his pride, and to show him that his Family was still obscure
enough not to be known in its own Country. He found him in a company where the
Conversation turned upon News. My friend was asked what he knew, because he was
a person of good intelligence; he told them what was talked of at Versailles,
and passing afterward to Foreign Countries, he reported with an Artificial
Tone, That the Letters from Rome inform us that Lisicrates is dead in this Town.


Cleonice. Ah! Dorante, how this Satirical stroke pleases me! how smart is it
and ingenious! how it gives to understand, what your Friend would not explain!


Philemon. That which I like best, is, that the Nephew of Lisicrates could find
no just cause to be angry. One might say that Dorante's friend gave only a bare
acount of what he had read in a Letter.


Belise. I confess I should sooner give the name of a witty word, than that of
a Raillery, to what Dorante has now related to us.


Erastus. This expression is short enough to be called a witty word, if it had
I know not what of sharpness in it; for a witty word should more touch to the
quick, and surprise, than Raillery.


Philemon. It Is true, that Raillery is more extensive, and that according to
the opinion of an Italian, its sharpness should rather resemble the bitings of
a Lamb, than those of a Dog.


Belise. There are Raillers which we may effectually compare to Dogs, they make
as great a noise as if they barked, they set upon people and bite them.


Erastus. The Cynical Philosophers were too biting in their Railleries, and in
their pretended witty words; but seeing we are on witty words, shall we do
amiss in examining wherein they differ from Raillery? I am jealous too that I
am mistaken in citing a pretended witty word, of Lupo d'Vberti for a Raillery.
In effect, the allusion he made to a Wolf, and the few words which comprehend
his thought, would make one take what he utters for a witty Saying, if any but
himself had spoke this Witticism.


Cleonice. Before we come to witty Sayings, shall we say nothing of gross
Raillery, having spoken enough of that which is delicate?


Belise. I am very glad you censure those Balderdash Fellows, who imagine they
are fine wits, when they retail out some sorry equivocation, or trifling
allusion.


Cleonice. Besides this Raillery you speak of, is there not still a gross kind
of Raillery among the mean people, such as Porters and Carmen?


Belise. We must let them have their jokes too, and if they be suitable to men
of their breeding and Conversation, no more can be expected from them.


Philemon. These people have a very diverting way with them, which is, to give
one another blows with their hands on their shoulders, and these with them are
diverting strokes.


Erastus. They feel 'em so, I suppose.


Belise. I think Raillery should appear natural and without constraint, and the
air of the Countenance, the tone of the voice, and all the countenance of him
who rallies should be accommodated to the Subject of the Raillery.


Dorante. Except, if you please, when one pretneds to raise laughter, for then
we should appear cold and serious, the better to surprise by the joke, which
must not be expected or foreseen. Sarasin was admirable at this, and Voiture
too. The Works of both show what an happy Genius they had in rallying in an
agreeable and ingenious manner.

But let us pass to witty Sayings, seeing you desire it, and the matter leads us
thereto.


Entertainment XII. Of witty Sayings and Repartees.
Dorante. RAillery does not always include witty words; we may utter 'em (if we
can) in all occasions, and on all sorts of Subjects; but they being more
commonly used in Satyrs than in Panegyricks, let us begin with those which we
may regard as Railleries. They should be close, sharp, and lively, and in some
sort like Epigrams. So that all those pretended witty Sayings which are long,
and include a great Morality, are rather Maxims and Sentences, than witty
words; I am sure they relish not well with Cleonice.


Cleonice. You may answer for me. You know the aversion I have to hear cited
with a grave tone, a Sentence or a Proverb. I leave these Expressions to old
grave Citizens, or to some Doctors who are overrun with an excess of Greek and
Latin. I have over observed, that Courtiers and fine Wits, who understand the
World, speak with less swelling, and in a more easy manner.


Dorante. You will not then be over fond of a Moral Saying of Charles the 5th.
which the Spaniards take for very Witty. This Emperor said, That the
Counselors of State were the Princes Spectacles, but that those Princes were
very unhappy that needed them.


Erastus. I not only prefer an Answer of Lewis XII. before this Sentence, but I
acknowledge I am charmed with it, I find a more exact Sense in it than in
Charles the 5th 's Maxim, and I admire the generosity of its Morality. These
Ladies without doubt know, that Lewis XII. was a Branch of the House of
Orleans, which had had bloody Bickerings with that of Burgundy; and perhaps
they know already what I am going to say. When Lewis XII. was on the Throne,
one of his Courtiers joyfully told him, Sir, you have now the Power to be
revenged of your Enemies. No, no, answered this generous Prince, it is not for
a King of France to remember the Injuries offered to a Duke of Orleans.


Cleonice. I like better these Noble Sayings, than those of the Ancients, which
I have heard so greatly commended. And truly many of 'em do not over-please me,
I cannot tell whether it be my fault or not.


Dorante. However, we must do justice to the great Men among the Ancients. If
their fine Sayings appear to us slat, it is because we enter not into those
Interests which made them speak them. They are no more enlivened by the persons
who uttered them. They may have lost some of their beauty by the Translation
which has made you understand them, and they are found void either of the
allusions or of favorable conjunctures which upheld them.

However, Madam, the Circumstances which I now remarked, hinder not, but that
there remains from the Ancients, an infinite number of great Sayings, with
which you may be satisfied. But very likely you have not been much delighted
with the Language of Amiot, when you have read the Tracts of Plutarch, called,
The Notable Sayings of Princes, Captains, etc.


Philemon. I fancy this famous Author chose rather to relate the notable
Sayings of the Lacedaemonians than other Greeks, because they spoke at Sparta in
a more concise manner, and that these kind of expressions do more properly
belong to what we call witty Sayings.


Erastus. And therefore the learned give too strict and short ways of speaking
the name of Laconic style. These Ladies will pardon me, I hope, for using this
word Laconic, although it only means Lacedemonian.


Belise. My ignorance reaches farther, and I confess I know not what means the
word Style, although I use it every day, and hear other people talk of it too.
Derante should tell me what this word does strictly signify.


Dorante. You know perhaps, That Ink and Paper are of modern Invention. The
Ancients made use only of Tables of Wax, or the Bark of Trees, and thereon
engraved with a Pencil, which they called Style, as we write with a Pen on
Paper. So that by a figurative way of speaking, they said a Fine Style, as we
say a Fine Pen, when we speak of the Writings of a good Author.


Belise. I am very glad to be informed of a word which is of so common use.
Cleonice may now talk of her Lacedaemonians as long as she pleases.


Cleonice. I declare to you, that as to what regards this Conversation, the
Lacedaemonians are not so much mine as you think for. I am not so much pleased
with their notable Sayings as their notable Actions. However, I acknowledge I
have remarked an Answer which is of good relish to me, though I cannot tell how
you will like it.

A man of Sparta, being at Table at the same time with a Persian, fell upon a
discourse of war, which was likely to be between the two Nations. The Persian,
proud of being under the Government of a Monarch who was called the Great King,
and who held a vast Empire, would fright the Greek by giving him to understand
the Power of his Master. We shall have an Army so numerous, said he, that the
Arrows which we shall draw will darken the Sun. The Lacedemonian taking nimbly
his turn to speak, without any Commotion; So much the better, said he, for then
we shall fight in the Shade.


Erastus. That which a Captain of this warlike Nation, answered, appears to me
worth relating; The Lacedaemonians, says he, never ask whether the Enemy be
numerous, but in what place they be.


Belise. I would willingly know wherein consists the beauty of notable Sayings?


Philemon. There needs only an Equivocation to make a jocose saying.


Belise. And oftener to make a pitiful quibble.

About two Months past I was extremely surprised with one of these Quodlibets.
I was in the Country, where some of the women of the Neighborhood came to see
me. There was a young one who bore away the Bell for wit, she spoke much, and
laughed yet more, and was mightily stored with Quibbles.


Cleonice. It Is usual with these Quiblers to say, that a Scrivener is an
obliging man, by reason of the many Obligations he makes.


Dorante. There was heretofore at Court a man who past for a pleasant
Companion, but I question whether his fancy would be so much approved of by the
Court as it was by the City. You may judge of him by his Quibbles. An Abbot,
who had perhaps more Ambition than Merit, would needs pretend to be made a
Cardinal. He went to Rome for this purpose, but having taken wrong measures, he
returned little satisfied with his Voyage. At his Arrival he went to make his
Court, and appearing indisposed with a great Rhume, he was asked whence
proceeded this indisposition? Do not you know, answered our witty Gentleman,
that he came from Rome without an Hat?


Erastus. I have heard you tell another story of the same Courtier. He came
from the Camp, which held a Town besieged, and which we did not take: This rare
Wit was then sent to the King to give him an account of the condition of the
Place and Army; so that all the Court was very earnest in demanding News of
him. What say you of the Siege? say they. That she is very well, and begins to
rise, answered he.


Philemon. I know that Erastus has an Aversion to Quibbles, and that the other
day having quietly heard Timocrates utter many of them, he seemed at last to be
angry at him for them. Now for my part, I am for letting them pass, and think
my self obliged in some sort, to those persons who endeavor to divert me,
although they prove not always fortunate in their undertaking. But I could
never endure in History, that great men should make use of an Equivocation to
break their word. Can we excuse that Captain, who by a Truce grants that no
acts of Hostility shall be exercised for eight days, and immediately after
shall send out Parties every night to ravage the Enemies Country?


Cleonice. He may take this for a Warlike Stratagem, yet all the world will
condemn his breach of Faith. We may call things how we will, but that will not
hinder us from being infamous, if we under pretense of a Treaty, surprise our
Enemies. I much blame your Captain, but do more detest the cruel perfidiousness
of a Turk toward a Venetian. The latter of these surrendered himself, and the
Capitulation bore, That his Head should be safe from all mischief. His Enemy
had him no sooner in his power, but he made him be sawed asunder in the midst
of his body. In the excess of his pain, the Christian invoked Heavens Vengeance
against so cruel a treachery. And the Infidel answered him, with a malicious
smile, that he had no reason to complain, seeing his head was not touched.


Philemon. Have you observed one thing which I now remark? which is, That
designing only to examine what may please in Conversation: We are gotten
insensibly to Examples, wherein there are more Moral strokes than Maxims which
respect an Entertainment. May we not be told that we vary from our Subject, and
that we should retrench these digressions?


Dorante. I confess that a melancholy University Logic chopper might form a
Quarrel hereupon, and charge us home with our digressions, requiring a
Conversation dry, servile, and tiresom. But as to us who have a different
relish, we will allow our selves this liberty; and when any History or Tale
may serve to recreate the austerity of Precepts, or make us more exact and
cautious, we will gladly entertain it. Thus being instructed, if we are to make
a Truce for eight days, we will take such measures as not to be deceived, we
will express that it shall be for eight natural days of twenty four hours,
wherein the nights shall be comprehended. But instead of troubling our selves
with justifying our citations, it is enough to allege that they please us; and
if Philemon has any scruple hereupon, let him send it to some musty Pedant, and
let him be pleased with us, as heretofore. I am so sure that he will be so,
that I will reassume the discourse where it was broke off.

Here Is an equivocal word which heretofore surprised the whole world; or
rather, here is a subtlety of extraordinary consequence. You know, that of the
Scipio's there were two that bore the name of Affrican; that the first
vanquished Hannibal, and that the other destroyed Carthage. This last, the
better to subdue Enemies who were so terrible to the Romans, made use of an
Equivocation, or rather of a distinction which you will not find worthy of so
great a man. The Carthaginians, finding themselves too weak to hold out long,
offered to capitulate and surrender their Town; and Scipio promised them there
should be no hurt done to their City. But scarce was he Master of it, but he
caused the Fortifications of it to be destroyed. The Carthaginians cried out,
that the Faith of the Treaty was violated; but for all that, Scipio failed not
to level their Walls and Towers.

He endeavored afterward to justify himself, and show that he had not broke
his word. He represented to the Carthaginians, that the Romans did not confound
the names of Town, and City. That the Body of the Citizens formed the City, and
that the Walls and other Edifices composed the Town. That he should have been
displeased had the Inhabitants been ill treated; but more displeased, had he
left the Walls and Fortifications entire, which could be of no use, but only to
raise a Jealousy in the Roman People.


Erastus. I like not these Artifices to deceive People, and can yet less allow
it in great People. But as for the distinction you now spoke of, I think it has
been always used, and will be still so.

The Athenians, fearing to be besieged, and subjected by the Persians,
consulted the Oracle on the Resolution they were to take; it was answered, That
the City must depart the Town, and save it self by wooden Walls. So that it was
interpreted, that the Citizens should abandon a Town, which was not strong
enough to secure them; and that they should get on board their Ships, to fly
from the danger wherewith they were threatened. There is no body in this Room,
but has heard talk of Paris in this double Sense. When we mean the Town, we say
that Paris is every day embellished; and when we speak of the Inhabitants, the
Body of which makes what the Ancients called City; we say, That all Paris is
walking in the Park; That all Paris is gone into the Country in the beginning
of Autumn.


Philemon. A man may speak a witty thing in making an allusion; as when we
sport with words which refer to one another, when they are repeated, or the
Sense of them varied.

When the Marshal de la Meilleraie was Grand Master of the Ordnance, there were
several Latin words engraven on the Cannon which we may explain in these terms.

Here Is the Key, when the Door is refused.


Belise. I like this allusion, and I find it grounded on a double refusal which
may be made.


Cleonice. And I take a Cannon to be a terrible Key.

It Is true, according to Rablais, that there is nothing more aperitive.


Philemon. Here Is a sporting with words of another nature. It Is said that a
Soldier having not been orderly paid, had the insolence to complain, in this
manner to one of our Kings: Sir, three words; Money, or discharge. The Prince,
who was merciful, contented himself in returning this answer: Soldier, four;
Neither one nor other.


Erastus. Shall we say nothing of Repartees, when Anacharsis furnishes us with
so good an Example? This famous Philosopher was a Scythian; and a Greek, who
had no other merit but that of being born in Greece, looking on him with envy,
I acknowledge, said he to him, that the world has some esteem for thee; but it
must be granted, that there is nothing more barbarous than thy Nation. Very
well, said he; Then I am the Honor of my Country, and thou art the Shame of
thine.


Cleonice. A Marquess who has ruined his Family, had the other day a bickering
with one of his Neghbours, who is a thriving Person, and has lately bought a
considerable Office. Is it for you, said the Marquess, to contend with me, who
begin your Family? I begin mine, said he, but you end yours.


Erastus. This brings to my mind two Answers which you will find are very
ingenious; the first is of Phyrrus King of the Epirots, who being demanded
which was the best Player on the Flute, Python or Cephisus? Polipercon is the
greatest Captain, answered he; giving to understand that he was to judge of men
of War.

The other answer is of Count Maurice of Nassau. A Lady entreated him to tell
her who was the first Captain of the Age? Count Maurice was unwilling to speak
his mind on so nice a point; his Modesty did not permit him to name himself,
and his Merit would not permit him to part with an Honor, of which he was
worthy; so that seeing himself straightened, Madam, answered he at length, The
Marquess of Spinola is the Second.


Philemon. I like this turn, and I think this second Answer is more ingenious
than that of Phyrrus; the words of this Prince are one of these notable
Sayings, which has more Morality than Sharpness of Wit, as well as that we have
related of Charles the 5th. and Lewis the 12th.

I believe our discourse would last a great while on this Subject, if we would
relate whatever comes into our minds hereupon. It Is better to take Coach, and
go to the new Opera, for I have taken places.

Scarcely were orders given to make ready the Horses, when Erastus reassumed
the discourse in these terms.


Erastus. It must be acknowledged that Philemon has thought of a very agreeable
thing. Every thing is new in the death of Achilles, and I do not question but
there will be great croudings to see it the first time of acting. But whilst
things are getting in a readiness, would it not be better to take up our
discourse again on witty Sayings and remarkable Answers? And besides, do we not
see that therein is to be found a continual variety, which cannot but please?


Dorante. I am so much of your mind, that I Will tell you of an answer worthy of
Alexander. Darius asked a Peace of him, and offered him half of Asia, together
with Ten Thousand Talents. Parmenio charmed with such an advantageous offer,
Sir, said he to his Master, I protest, were I Alexander, I would gladly accept
of these offers: And I too, if I were Parmenio, answered he.


Cleonice. How sparkish are these words, and how worthy of Alexander, of a
Conqueror that will not terminate his ambition, but by the compass of the whole
earth?


Belise. I shall admire as long as I live the ingenious answer which the Queen
of Siracuse, Gelon's Wife, made. This Prince had a Breath strong enough to
incommode those that came near him, his Favorite thought himself obliged to
give him notice of it; and this Prince, angry that the Queen had never spoke to
him of it, complained very much to her about it. How, (answered she, with a
surprise, with which I am extremely taken) is it not the same with all other
men?


Cleonice. This simplicity gives a great opinion of the Virtue of this Princess.


Philemon. But before we end this discourse, should we not have some Modern
Instances? I profess I prefer 'em before the Ancients; and it is certain every
body is more concerned in them. Here Is one then with which our Ladies perhaps
will not be too much satisfied.

It Is not above two or three years past, since a gallant man, whom we all know,
and whom I shall call Themistus, became --


Belise. Ah! Philemon, I shall never forgive you this beginning of your Recital.


Philemon. I have committed a great fault then in few words, seeing there is no
hopes of pardon for me. But may I be so bold to ask wherein I am so culpable?


Belise. Did not you say that you preferred the Modern Examples before the
Ancient?


Philemon. I say so still.


Belise. And have you not added the reason, which is, that we are nearer
concerned in what touches the Persons of our acquaintance, than in things which
respect only Persons who have been dead several Ages?


Philemon. Most certainly.


Belise. Why then do you give a santastical name to a man whom we know? Are you
afraid we should hearken too attentively; or that we should take too great a
part in the adventure which you are minded to relate?


Philemon. You say well, that I should not have this fear, when I should have
named the man whom you know. My discourse would not be so touching, as to
produce so good an effect; but to speak freely to you, I was apprehensive lest
I should raise raise up two Enemies against my friend. I believed that Cleonice
and you would not fail to insult over him, in respect of an opinion he is
prejudiced with, and which I am assured you will both of you condemn before the
world.


Belise. How! before the World! what will you increase our faults, by accusing
us of dissimulation? What opinion then is this of your Friend's, let us know it?


Philemon. You shall know it, if you will let me go on without interruption.


Belise. Say what you please, I shall not so greatly heed you, as to raise any
more questions.


Cleonice. Am I no body? Am not I a woman? May I not have a little curiosity,
though Philemon blame me for it?


Philemon. To repair the fault I have committed, I Will lay aside the story I was
going to tell you.


Cleonice. Not so, if you please, for that will be worse; go on with it, pray.


Philemon. I Will tell you then, to satisfy you, that Themistus was carried into
the company of a young Lady, whose sight struck him with great admiration.
Celimene, let me so call her if you please, had but a very mean Fortune, with
an extraordinary beauty, so that Themistus, who had immense Riches, made
serious reflections on this sudden and violent engagement. He could take no
rest, He found himself in a perpetual agitation, and feared above all, lest his
passion, which he felt so violent in its beginning, would lead him, in fine, to
the satisfying his desires, to the prejudice of his Fortune.

He resolved to banish from his Soul so dangerous a tenderness, he opposed it
all he could; and finding he could not immediately overcome it, he called in a
sentiment of Glory to the assistance of his Reason. He had the strength to part
far from what he loved, and to go a Volunteer into the Army; but he returned
thence more amorous than he went. He visited his Mistress with greater joy, and
a stronger desire; then blaming himself for his weakness, he made a second
effort, and undertook a second Voyage, which was into Italy. He would try
whether the divertisements would appease those inquietudes which the perils and
fatigues could not allay, but the Carnaval of Venice was as little conducive to
that purpose, as the Siege of Buda. Our Themistus appeared to me at his return
more ardent and passionate than ever. My dear Philemon, said he, I lead a
wretched life, I cannot forget Celimene, I have her always in my thoughts, and
I see her continually before my eyes with all her Charms. In fine, added he,
and this was his saying, In short I must marry her, that I may cease thus to
love her. He married her in effect, and fifteen days of Marriage changed his
violent and tumultuous Love, into a sweet and delightful Friendship.


Erastus. I profess I like the saying well, and let the Ladies take it how they
please.


Cleonice. We cannot do better than follow a Maxim which you approve.


Belise. Your Friend was not so easily drawn into Marriage as my Uncle, who is
married again lately. His Children made great complaints to him on the
resolution he had taken of giving them a Mother-in-Law: They besought him to
tell them wherein they had been so unhappy as to displease him, and entreated
him to let them know what it was that offended him? I am so pleased with you,
answered he, that I only marry again to have other Children like you.


Cleonice. I am much mistaken if your Cousins took this for a good saying.


Dorante. You know that the illustrious Person who has given such fine
Conversations to the Public, yet was more pleased in doing a good Office, than
in making a fine Book; so that you will not be surprised, if she used her most
carnest endeavors in begging an employ for a young Gentleman who had been
recommended to her. The thing depended on a great Lord who was one of her
friends, and to whom she said a thousand good things of the person whose
interests she prosecuted. The great Lord examined the person, he found him very
fit, and that he wanted not sense; but he answered, he seemed too young for the
business he was recommended. How, Sir, answered our generous Friend, will you
repreach him with a fault, which we every day correct but too much against our
wills?

At the same instant as Dorante had said this word was brought that all was
ready; the Company immediately arose, and set out to go to the new Opera. They
law it with a great deal of satisfaction; but the application which Dorante had
to it, hindered him not from examining more than once Lisidor's Countenance.

He was desirous to observe the effect which a splendid sight might produce in
the mind of a young man who had never seen the like. Cleonice consulted
Lindamire's eyes for the same reason, and took notice that she and Lisidor
concealed one part of their surprise. That they sometimes spoke, that they
looked on the People of Quality which were in the Boxes; in a word, that they
did not like those great wonderers, whose ignorance is the only cause of their
astonishment.

As soon as ever the Curtain was let down before the Theater, Cleonice and
Belise turned themselves toward Dorante, and asked him how he liked what he
had heard and seen?


Dorante. I dare not give you my opinion of an Opera which I have but once
seen. It Is true I shall soon have an opportunity to satisfy your curiosity.
Philemon has given the first sight of this Opera to Cleonice, Lisidor shall
give the second to Lindamire; and perhaps he will admit us to bear him company.


Cleonice. Having said enough about this Opera, I would willingly have Dorante
tell us in general, whether one may reprehend any one before people; and after
what manner we may speak of a work that is criticis'd in a Company?


Dorante. I am of opinion that we ought to be very reserved in these occasions,
but seeing you will have the Conversation turn on this Subject, instead of
excusing my self, I will be the first to tell you my opinion of it.


Entertainment XIII. Whether it be fit to reprehend any one in Conversation.
Dorante. THere are every day to be seen in Companies so many persons who
commit faults, in respect of language, or good manners, that it will be an
endless work for any man to set about correcting them. Were it not better for
men to be easy in Conversation, to speak, and to let others do so too, than to
be perpetual dictators, to quarrel with people about words, to top every body,
and strive only to run all others down? I should be greatly troubled, should
Lisidor (he will let me cite him) fail in any essential point in Conversation;
and my Remedy would be to take up the discourse, to enter on the opinion which
he should be of, or to mention the expression which he should have used; yet I
would not direct my discourse to him, lest I put him in confusion, and make a
Fault observable, which perhaps one part of the Company took no notice of.


Cleonice. If one of your Friends, talking in Company, should use a manner of
speaking little exact, or contrary to Custom, would you rather choose to leave
him in his error, than make him know it?


Belise. For my part I believe it were fit to reprehend him.


Dorante. You might do it, yet with great caution, and moderation. If the
Friend, you suppose, had a mind to buy Horses, and that he said, I desired
Erastus who knows Horses -- I would not interrupt him, and demand pertly of
him, what Horses does he know, Coach Horses? On the contrary, I would make him
note his fault, in saying thus; You cannot do better than to address your self
to Erastus, no body understands Horses better than he does.

Should any one interrupt me unseasonably, and with little Civility, in these
terms; What is that you say there, I do not know what you mean, and yet I may
say I understand English well enough?

I do not speak as I should do then, would I answer him, without showing any
discomposure; or I would repeat again the same thing more at large, and in a
clearer manner. I do not doubt but this moderation would produce two good
effects. It would gain me esteem, and might soften the sharp humor of the
person who controlled me.


Erastus. But should you have a work given you to examine, would not you freely
speak your opinion of it?


Dorante. You will not be against my making a distinction on what you demand.
Should I be thought able to give good advice, and a Manuscript were put into my
hand before it went to the Press, I would speak ingenuously what I thought of
it; and should think my self unworthy the confidence put in me, did I deal in
another manner.

Thus you see, I am not always so complaisant as you have taken me to be. I
will tell you too moreover, that it is not long since that an Author found me
as untractable in matter of Sonnets, as Moliere's Misanthropos. He showed me
one full of Antitheses, wherein a Lover complained of the death of his
Mistress; I could not bear with all his juglings, and impatiently interrupting
the Reader; how, Sir, said I to him, will you have this man amuse himself in
sporting with words, instead of bewailing his misfortune? This is so beside the
subject, that I doubt I shall not have patience enough to hear it out to the.


Erastus. Let me tell you a story of a young Author, who came from a (...) of
Guiea^e to Paris, (...) printing a Plice for which he thought to gain the
admiration of the Universe One of his Friends advised him to address himself to
some ingenious man, and consult (...) before he exposed his Book to be
conticis'd by the public. This Country Author would by no means yield to this
at first, thinking this advice fruitless for a Poem which had been approved in
his Country, but at length he permitted himself to be led to Chapelain,
apparently to acquire esteem for it, rather than to admit of corrections. He
told him he came to show him an Epic Poem he had made at home, and that he
would gladly hear so great a Master's opinion on his Work. To speak freely,
answered Chapelain, you are to be commended for having undertaken so difficult
a work at your Age, and in a Country so far from all assistance, which one
might have at Paris. Sir, replied the Author, I will dedicate this Poem to the
Marshall d'Albret. You cannot make a better choice, replied the complaisant
Chapelain, the Marshall is a man of wit, and he is Governor of your Province.
You will be near a Mecenas, who will relish your Writings, and give you his
protection. After these words the Manuscript was opened, and the young Wit read
about 50 or 60 Verses. This beginning was wide, and had no coherence with the
Subject, so that Chapelain telling him, I see, Sir, you have thought fit to
treat of things at first in general, to descend afterward into particulars
which more closely relates to your Subject. Ah! Sir, cried the young man, what
satisfaction there is in consulting a person like you, you know already the
scope of my Poem, as well as if I had read it all to you.

No sooner was this said, but people came in, the lecture broke off, and our
Author went out. He was so well pleased with the Visit he made, that turning
himself toward him that had introduced him, you must acknowledge, said he to
him briskly, that no first Book had so great success; I do not see how,
answered his Friend, you can say that a Poem has succeeded before it comes
abroad into the world, unless you do as the Marquess Moliere speaks of, who
liked the Play before the Candles were lighted. To speak sincerely, Monsieur
Chapelain has too great indulgence, and if you will be ruled by me, we will
consult some one that has less.

They then went to the Abbot d'Aubignac, and after the accustomed Civilities
were past, the young man told him that he had made an Epic Poem. So much the
worse, replied the Abbot briskly, for I am sure you know not what an Epic Poem
is, seeing that at your age you set about a thing which the most consummate
Learned Men dare not undertake. This boldness shows me better than your accent
from what Country you come. But, Sir, replied the Author, with astonishment
sufficient, I composed this Work only to dedicate it to the Marshal d'Albret
You could not worse address your self, replied the Abbot. Do not you know that
the Marshal d' Albret is one of the finest Wits we have? That he loves to
rally, and that he will laugh at you and your Poem? He being Governor of our
Province -- For this very reason, replied impatiently the Abbot, you ought not
to lay your self open to him, and expose your self to be the laughtngstock of
your Country, but, Sir, replied again the young man, you speak of faults,
without having seen any, hearken, if you please, and you may better judge
afterward; he took then immediately a Sheet, and read it, without allowing the
Abbot so much time as to interrupt him. But before he came to the sixth Verse
the Abbot d'Aubignac being tired with hearing it, said with some sharpness to
him, I would gladly know, Sir, says he, whether this be the beginning of a work
of Piety or of a profane piece, of an History or Fable? But, Sir, a little
more patience, till I -- Pray tell me not of patience, answered the Abbot,
Virgil, who perhaps knew as well as you the Rules of an Epic Poem, says
immediately, that he sings the great actions of that Hero who came first from
the Trojan Shores into Italy.

The young Author, being as it were Thunderstruck, goes to Chapelain to
comfort himself. Sir, said he to him, I am lately come from the most
intolerable Critic in the world, who is the Abbot d'Aubignac, who would not
so much as suffer me to read seven or eight Verses of my Work. He told me my
beginning was not worth a straw, and that it had no relation to the Subject. I
believe, answered Chapelain, that Monsieur the Abbot d'Aubinac is not wholly in
the wrong; but however, the business is not past remedy, you can make another
beginning, and keep that of your Poem for the first Work you shall make.


Cleonice. I like this management of beginnings, and I find no less agreeable
this opposition of an excessive complaisance, and a severity that proceeds to
extremity.


Philemon. I did not believe Chapelain of this humor, and I have had a very
different account of it, from that which Erastus gives us. I was told that the
deceased Count de Fiesque, coming from the Play, met Chapelain, and told him he
had been greatly diverted with the sight of a Play he named him. Is it
possible, Sir, answered him Chapelain, that so great a man as you, and who has
so great wit, can behold with pleasure a Comedy wherein the Characters are not
upheld, wherein the Actors come and speak, without knowing why, nor how; and,
in fine, wherein there is not the observation of the least Rule? The Count was
for reviewing the same piece with a greater application. He considered better
of it, and went afterward to Chapelain, pray, says he to him, restore me my
ignorance, I was greatly diverted with the Play before, but now I take no
delight in it.


Dorante. It is certain, that for our satisfaction, it is necessary we should
behold sometimes the Plays on the Theater with indulgence. Can a man divert
himself with Harlequius's Emperor of the Moon, if in entering he leaves not his
sound sense and Rules at the Door?


Philemon. Hereunto we may add, as I have already said, that it is dangerous
being too complaisant, or too severe in the advices one gives. The Abbot
d'Aubignac was perhaps the occasion of the young man's leaving Paris and his
Studies; and on the other hand Chapelain might induce him to apply himself
thereto with too great negligence, and without success.

They enlarged themselves no farther on this subject, and the company judged it
late enough to depart. Erastus, Philemon, Cleonice, Belise, and Lindamire went
out, and returned home.

A small time after Dorante and Lisidor supt, and still entertained themselves
on the care which was to be observed in reprehending and criticizing in Company.


Dorante. I believe a man should be less hasty to answer, when his advice is
asked in relation to manners, and the ordering of ones life. Besides the
presumption we show, when we give over hastily these kind of advices, it seems
as if we were sure of the Event, and that we may be justly responsible, when
the success answers not expectation. So that we must let others speak,
especially if they have more experience than we, and let us not give in our
opinions before we are asked more than once. If we be obliged to answer, let it
not be too affirmatively, let us modestly utter the reasons which uphold our
opinion, and show we not in our Countenances, nor Discourses, an air of
Considence, which may make us appear full of our selves. I know you are not of
an age to be consulted, and there is little likelihood that Old Men will need
your advice, but young Persons may require it, and others too hereafter.
Moreover I do not keep strictly to the giving you precisely the Precepts
suitable to you; it will do you no hurt to know others, to the end that minding
the persons who observe them, you will come the better to know the World. I
doubt not but you are satisfied with the Company you have seen, they are
extraordinarily well humored and ingenious. You have taken notice how free
they are, and remote from all constraint and affectation; you have seen nothing
but what is easy, natural, and ingenious in what they say; it is this Air you
must imitate, if you will please in Conversation.


Lisidor. I would willingly know wherein it consists; methinks it is very
apparent, yet is hard to say precisely what it is.


Dorante. You have reason, and I know not whether I can satisfy your Curiosity.


Entertainment XIV. Of the Air which it is fit we should have in Conversation.
Dorante. BUt instead of entering on a precise definition of a word, let us
rather examine what may ragard Conversation in general. Your principal design
is to please in the Conversation of the World, let us therefore see what may
contribute to this Design.

It is a great advantage to have a gallant Air, but it is an advantage which a
Man can acquire but imperfectly by his endeavors. Nature must begin it in us,
and we must afterward cultivate these favorable dispositions. We may pollish
them, and perfect them by frequenting persons who have already this Air, if we
imitate them in their Conversation, and manner of behavior.


Lisidor. Is it not sufficient to please in Conversation, that we are able by
our good Mien to give weight and relish to our words?


Dorante. A good Mien alone does not always produce this good effect; we see
every day Country People, who are well shaped and of a good aspect, and yet are
in no wise agreeable company. The Air I speak of, is the Soul of a good Mien;
without this Air, it is very difficult to please; it is this gallant and polite
Air, which renders every thing pleasing. It Is seen on the Countenance, in
Discourse, Clothes, at Table, House-hold-stuff, Equipage, and even in
Buildings. Most young People strive to outdo one another in Gallantry, but they
are less gallant than they think for. They do not moderate themselves enough,
and their heat makes 'em carry things too far. The air of Politeness we speak
of requires sweetness, and young people have I know not what that is brisk,
which does not agree with the Character of a gallant man. You have observed
that they are commonly too hasty in taking up what is newest in Modes, and that
they seldom fail of going beyond the bounds which a gallant man should
prescribe. Instead of a well contrived suit, they are for laying on the
heavyest Lace or Embroidery they can get. If they give a Treat, they proceed to
excess, and for their Equipage they are not contented with what is neat and fit,
they add more Splendor than their Quality or Estate requires. They think of
nothing but distinguishing themselves hereby, far from regulating their expense
by their Revenue.

Neither must a man, to render himself agreeable in Conversation, utter only
subtle things, or out of the common Road. It is not necessary to show a great
stock of Learning, and a vast deal of Wit. It is sufficient to speak with an
easy air, and that nothing savours of affectation and constraint, as I have
already recommended to you more than once. I was very glad that you saw so soon
Cleonice, Belise and Lindamire. The two first have a very ingenious manner,
which may contribute to make you get the same air and the same tour. you will
never part from them without profitting either in your Understanding or Will.

You will meet with few women whose Conversation is more agreeable, you may get
by them such an air, as the reading of the best Authors; nor the most learned
Conferences will never afford you. I likewise confess that I am not displeased
at your seeing of Lindamire; it is natural for you to wish to please her, and
it cannot be, having this design, but that you must endeavor to pollish your
mind, to make your humor sweet and insinuating, in a word, to acquire the
qualities which may gain the esteem of Ladies. Moreover, the desire which one
may have to touch the heart of a fine woman who has Quality and Merit, may
serve as a preservative against a disorder wherein Persons of your age do too
often fall. Not that I pretend you should bound your visits to Cleonice, and
that being so young you should begin to sigh in form for Lindamire. When you
have made two or three Campaigns, I will ask your sentiments hereupon, and I
will tell you mine. However, I must needs acknowledge to you, that I should
rather see you fixed on Lindamire, than any other person I know; but however I
would not have this respect for her proceed so far as to hinder you from seeing
other companies, and to make thence your observations of different humors.
However I do not mean you should go from House to House, to flatter and make
courtship to Ladies who will not be displeased with it. A man that makes this
his business, will be so far from being respected as a gallant Person, that he
will be accounted no better than an idle Fop.

Now as to such directions as concern young men in general. Have you not
observed they fall often into defects contrary to the manners of polite men?
They laugh every moment so loudly that their laughter is in no sort like the
subtle smiles observable in the Conversation of polite persons. They disengage
Friends to draw them into other Companies, and instead of living respectfully
with Women, they imagine it the best breeding to use 'em familiarly. That which
I find strangest, is, that they sometimes proceed to swearing, like the
rascally mean people.

And yet it is not difficult to avoid these faults, and I wish you at no
greater trouble in attaining the fine Air we spoke of. You have all the
dispositions which can be desired, and I hope you will cultivate them with
success.


Lisidor. I have been an hundred times surpised to hear say, that Melicrates,
whom you know, is a polite Person, yet we all agree in our Country, that he is
far from what we call politeness.


Dorante. There is much difference between a Man of great Air, and a man that
has the Air great; and I add, that we must no more confound a gallant Man, with
a Man gallant. The first has this Air gallant, so much talked of in France, and
which answers in some sort to the urbanity of the Ancient Romans; the other may
without politeness be a Woman's Gallant, or have an inclination to Gallantry in
general. An old Man may please by the quality of Gallant Man, but he would be
ridiculous if he made Gallantries in his old days.


Lisidor. I suppose that when we say that such a Man has a good Air, we praise
him less, than if we attribute to him the Air great, or the Air Gallant.


Dorante. You need not doubt of it, and it is likewise certain, that the good
Air agrees differently to the two Sexes, to all ages, and all professions. A
Sword Man, has commonly an open and fierce Air, a Magistrate is grave; a Woman
should have sweetness and modesty, but the Air great is the most rare; and
sometimes among several Princes, we see few of 'em, whose Mien does denote the
Elevation of his Rank. This is an advantage which we admire in the person of
the great Monarch, to whom you shall be presented, when I shall find you used
to Coversation, and the Manners of the Men of the World. I will carry you first
to several Persons of the Court, to the end that going afterward to
Versailles, you appear there the less surprised, and that you may find persons
to whom you may speak: It is there, more than in any place of the World, that
you will meet with persons of all Airs which we have discoursed of. It is here
that you will find more politeness and less Affectation, than in any Court in
the World. Most here have the Air gallant, and there is scarcely any one but has
a certain easy Air, which makes all the agreeableness in Conversation.


Lisidor. I profess I should have confounded this agreeableness you speak of
with the Air Gallant.


Dorante. It Is true, they are like enough to one another, and they both please
almost in the same manner. Yet what we call agreeableness is more general, it
suits with more things, it insinuates it self more sweetly, it reaches to the
Heart and touches it. The Air gallant takes another course, it seizes on the
Fancy, and gains esteem; but to speak in general, nothing can please in persons
who have not a good Air. It Is true, that one may in some sort obtain it, in
being careful that ones action be free, and in acquiring a facility of speaking.


Lisidor. I knew a man who spoke with great facility, and yet who did not at
all please. It was thought that he studied what he spoke, and I observed that
this Opinion which the World had of him, did not contribute to the procuring
him a Reputation. I would know whether you will condemn this kind of care?


Entertainment XV. Whether it be good to prepare our selves for common
Conversations.
THe Reading every day of Books, and the People whom we every moment converse
with, may serve as an insensible and continual preparation for the
Conversations wherein chance may engage us. It is by these two ways that our
Memory enriches it self with infinite notices, which she imparts to us
afterward in occasions wherein we may need them.

Lisidor. I know that the memory has been ever considered, as a Treasurer to
whom we must give a Fond, if we will draw thence the assistances we need.


Dorante. This is the justest comparison we can make of it; when we learn
things agreeable or instructive, we only entrust them to our Memories, this is
a pledge which she keeps only to restore it. She does as the Steward of an
House, who receives the Revenue of his Master, only to pay away what is
demanded. But both one and the other must be faithful, and there would happen a
troublesome disorder, if the Memory retained not enough, and the Steward
retains a little too much.

I know not how it comes to pass that I am fallen on sporting with words. It Is
not my custom to do it, and though it has come in naturally enough, yet many will
condemn it as a point of affectation.


Lisidor. The niceness of these people would be troublesome, your conception is
grounded on the truth, and the term, whose repetition makes the sport, suits
equally with the Steward, and the Memory. But to return to the question, Do you
believe it is sufficient to prepare ones self in general, as you now said; or
do you not think it good, that I should prepare my self on certain Subjects,
which are likely to be the entertainment of the Company where I may chance to
be?


Dorante. If you desire to have matters ready for all sorts of Conversations,
you will without doubt set upon Collecting all the remarkable things you read
or hear related. You will reduce these observations to a certain Order. On one
side you will set down Tragical Events. Thrones overturned, strange Deaths,
Misfortunes unforeseen, and, in general, whatever you find most Tragical. On
the other hand you will collect the happy Successes, as surprising Marriages,
unexpected Promotions, in a word, whatever has happened that is pleasing in the
Revolutions wherein Fortune has been pleased to favor those she loves. If
being well provided, you go and recount your lamentable stories in an afflicted
House; will your long Narrations be suffered in a Chamber wherein silence
reigns, wherein is nothing seen but pale Countenances, and nothing heard but
sighs and Groans? I believe they will be filled with indignation, to see you so
little sensible of the misfortune which has happened to them; and if their
grief will permit them to see you want no memory, will they not likewise see
too that you want judgment? Without doubt you will administer great consolation
to a Woman whose Husband is lately assassinated; if you represent to her, that
the first Empress of Rome suffered heretofore a more considerable loss. That it
was when Caesar was stabbed in the Senate, and that this great Man knew among
his Murderers, persons whom he tenderly loved. Should not I have made a very
diverting recital in dining at Philemons, had I set to talking of the Banquet
of the Seven Wise Men, and the Festival of Cleopatra? If we would affect
persons agitated with any Passion, we must entertain them only with adventures
wherein they may take part, and reserve Historical Events for certain
Conversations, which we may term sedate ones, or those which may be called
Conferences.

To reurn to the distinction which I am obliged to make, I must say, that in
certain occasions you may prepare your self for common Discourse, though it were
perceived that you have studied what you shall say. In effect, if there comes
Ambassadors from far distant Countries, and little known, you will easily
imagine that this will be discoursed of in Companies where you may chance to
be, and that you will not do amiss to instruct your self in a matter which will
be the entertainment of an infinite number of People. So that you will be
pleased to see in a Map, the extent and situation of the Country whence these
Ambassadors come. You will read in some Relation of Travels, the strength and
Government of the Nation, you will endeavor to find out the Interest she has
to seek our Alliance, or to have our Assistance or our Commerce.


Lisidor. May not one likewise discourse of the different Formalities to be
observed in the Reception of Ambassadors, according to the different States who
send them, or according to the higher or lower Rank of the Ambassadors? I have
heard say, that the Chief of the last Embassy of Muscovy, called himself
Prince, and even a Kinsman of the Czars. But I confess to you, I know not what
this Word Czar signifies, which yet I pronounce very boldly.


Dorante. You must know then that the great Duke of Muscovy is not content with
the Title of Emperor, but takes even that of Caesar, which the Muscovites
pronounce Czar, this suppression of a Letter is common enough in all sorts of
Languages, whether to sosten the pronunciation, or render it less languid, by
straitning the words.


Lisidor. Methinks the Name of Caesar, which gives a great Idea, is not so long
that it needs to be abridg'd, and I did not observe that we take in our French
Words the liberty you speak of.


Dorante. You have not then examined them, but you will change your sentiments,
when you will hear say, Sevrin and Merri, for Severin and Mederic. But I cannot
excuse our Tongue, when she changes or abridges fine Names to make them
disagreeable, as Thibaud of Theobald, Thierri of Theodoric, and Alix of
Adelaide. I could cite you likewise the Names of several Houses and Towns which
we pronounce otherwise than they are written, but our Business is not to enter
on these particulars, it being better to return to the Advices which I began to
give you.


Lisidor. I had already profitably used that relating to Ambassadors. When the
Algerins came to make their Submissions to the King; I sailed not to instruct
my self in what might be said of these Pirates, on their little State, their
Government, their Ships, and the Forces of their Militia, which they dare call
invincible.

I had less pains in informing my self on the Riches and Commerce of Genoa, the
Magnificence of those Palaces, which make her have the Title of Proud, and I
especially enquired into the Authority of the Doge, seeing he was the Chief of
the Republic, whom she was obliged to send into France. You may easily judge I
had not the same facility in learning of the Kingdom of Siam what I would know
of it. But the Embassy which came from so far a Country, being too
extraordinary, not to be the subject of all Conversations, I read Relations
enough, to find wherewith to make my self be hearkened to in speaking of the
Siamoises.


Dorante. I am very glad you need not much of my advice in this matter; I shall
only advise you to recall every Night the Ideas of what you have heard say, that
is most agreeable and most instructive, and to examine after what manner, or by
what discourse, certain Persons have had the opportunity of pleasing, in the
time when others could not be heard, though they were brim full of discourse.

But here is enough for to night, it is time to end this Discourse, and to leave
one another. You shall have brought you to Morrow Morning wherewith to Cloth
you handsomely, and it is fit that Erastus, who is to come to take us with him,
should find you ready to go along with him. We will go and see persons of great
distinction, and to whom I would very gladly have you go sometimes. You must be
presented to them by Erastus, he can recommend you in such a manner, as is not
proper for me to do, and I am sure he will have no less Address than Affection,
when he is to do you good Offices.

After these words Dorante left Lisidor, and went into his Chamber.


Entertainment XVI. That to please in Conversation, a Man must be Master of his
own humor.
THe next Morning Dorante was with Erastus, and Lisidor at the Prince
Viridatus's, where was commonly the rendezvous of the most most ingenious and
polite young Gentlemen of the Court.

Viridatus offered Lisidor all the Civilities which Dorante could expect, and
directed often to him his discourse, although he had a great deal of Company that
day with him. I know not, said he to him, with an obliging Air, whether you
have not left in your Province something which your Heart may regret; but I am
much mistaken, if this Country does not afford wherewith to comfort one, for
whatever he may have left in others.

Erastus. It Is certain, there is nothing which can make Life easy, and even
pleasant, but comes to Paris from all the Countries of the World, yet methinks
we must except a certain kind of Liberty which one has in little Towns for
Conversation and Behavior.


Viridatus. But what advantage can one make of a Liberty which leads to
nothing? Is it worth the constraint which contributes to our Fortune?

At these words, a person of Quality, named Pharnacius, took up the Discourse,
and answered Viridatus in these terms.


Pharnacius. I know not how a Prince of your humor can approve a way of
living, which is regarded as a continual torture. What, I shall never have the
pleasure of speaking my real sentiments? Were I grossly Ignorant, should I be
obliged to praise the Sciences before Viridatus; to declare my self against
them, how able soever I were, if I would please honest Timophanus? Is there any
grandeur, which a Man pays not too dear for, if it be bought at this price?


Viridatus. You will be more surprised, if I tell you, that this kind of
constraint, which you represent to your self so dreadful, gives more
satisfaction than vexation. And in effect, is it for the sake of Timophanus,
and Viridatus, that you commend or discommend the Sciences? Is it not for your
own sake, that you accommodate your self to the Humor of the persons from whom
you expect good Offices? Do you take for dissimulation a stroke of prudence
which requires you to seem to enter into the sentiments of a Man whom you would
very willingly draw into yours; when your interests require it? For my part I
think you have right to applaud your self, when you can insinuate your self
into opposite humors; what pleasure is it, in discoursing with a Learned
General, to cite the Instructions which Aristotle gave to Alexander, the
Elequence which made Caesar famous before his Conquests, and the Politeness of
Scipi^, to whom it is said Terence owes that which appears in his Works. When on
the contrary, we entertain our selves with a Warrier who has nothing but his
courage; do we not take a fit course in mentioning only Captains, the single
impetuosity of whose courage has made their Men victorious?


Dorante. We may call that Man happy that has this suppleness of humor, and
when Nature refuses it, we should esteem the persons who endeavor to acquire
it. Had I a Patron of a dumpish, restless, and suspicious humor, I would not
accost him with an open smiling air: And should I go to a young Prince who
loved pleasures, I would not carry a Countenance whose Melancholy and
Austerity would seem to condemn all joy.


Lisidor. I know not whether this be not an approving of inequality and uneven
tempers in maintaining such an opinion.


Dorante. A Change which is grounded on reason, cannot be called inequality; we
see every moment, that the commerce of Life requires that we speak differently
in the same day. I should be wanting in civility, if I did not go and rejoice
with a Friend who had married advantagiously, and I should yet commit a more
considerable fault, should I not appear sensible of the afflictions of one of
my Relations who had just lost his only Son. A Man that will only live for
himself alone, and take no part in what may happen to others, must renounce the
World, and retire with his indolency into solitude. Shall I go into a Company
to show there a Passion contrary to that which reigns therein? Must I discover
a mien which condemns the Sentiments with which the Company is prepossest?


Viridatus. Nothing is more opposite to the Maxims of the civil Society than
this Conduct, and a person who shall obstinately follow it, will be in danger
of never getting Friends. All the Ancients have admired the easy humor of
Alcibiades, and we still wonder that a Man could so well accommodate himself to
the different manners of Countries where he lived. Nothing was so much talked
of at Athens, as his Eloquence and Gallantry. Among the Persians he was always
feasting, and nothing was seen more splendid than his Dress and Equipage. But
he past over to other opposite Manners, when he was obliged to go to Sparta.
The most rigid Lacedemonian led a Life less austere than his Pharnacius: It Is
certain, that Alcibiades was not content with following the diverse Customs of
Nations, but he moreover distinguished himself by a more exact regularity in
practicing them.


Erastus. We may regard the Conduct of this famous Greek, as a Complaisance of
Manners, if one may speak thus. This is a quality which gains mightily on the
People. It is necessary for Persons who travel, and are designed for Embassies;
yet we may justly say, that this Complaisance of action is neither so necessary
nor of so frequent use as the complaisance of words. We have every moment
occasions of yielding to the Opinions of Persons whom we have a design to
please, and it seldom happens that we are obliged to quit our Modes and
Customs, to take those of Strangers.


Viridatus. Methinks we should not regret the time spent, in learning how to
enter delicately into the sentiments of others.


Dorante. Herein appears the address of the men of the World. They never
approve, without endeavoring to justify the approbation they have given; so
that their Reasons cannot be disagreeable to those whose side they take; they
testify to the rest of the Company that there is neither affectation nor
flattery in their discourse.


Erastus. To return to our subject, we may say, that though we be Masters of our
humor, yet we must never abuse this power, in betraying our Sentiments, in
maintaining an error, or in giving praises to words or actions which do not
deserve it.


Pharnacius. But if you follow your own opinion, if you praise only things
praiseworthy, and you take no party which you cannot justify by reasons, what
violence do you offer your self, and wherein do you appear Master of your
humor?


Erastus. When I sacrifice it to that of others, when I renounce my own will to
accommodate my self to others, to whom I am willing to give tokens of my
submission. I will undertake a Journey which shall be proposed to me, in a time
wherein I would rather choose to lie still; and I shall suffer my self to be
engaged in a splendid divertisement, which will cast me into an expense and
trouble which I should have been very glad to avoid. Thus my actions will show
the deference I have; my words, and even silence will give no small tokens of
it. If a Prince, whom I would not willingly displease, commends an ill Man,
that has disobliged me, and whom he does not well know, I will overcome my
resentment, and add to a motion of generosity, a submission which will make me
silent, when I cannot be of the same opinion of a person whom I will not offend.


Viridatus. It seems to me that it should be chiefly to Women that a Man should
subject his humor, there being many Capricio's to be born from them. As the
greatest part among them do not strive to be over Constant, so we do not make
our Court right to them, if we do not change with them; yet see how far their
lightness leads. It being to the handsomest among them to whom we chiefly
endeavor to render our selves agreeable, from them therefore we must expect to
suffer most. Besides, that they have no less inconstancy, it is certain that
the continual flatteries wherewith they are fed, make them generally more vain,
and less equitable.


Dorante. Yet I should think, that having the Charms you speak of, they should
be so well satisfied as to have their spirits less envious, and more quiet.


Lisidor. Moreover we are naturally led to use a deference to Persons that
please us.


Viridatus. I am much mistaken, Lisidor, if Nature alone has showed you that it
is of her you have the inclination you speak of. Some fine Lady or other has
opened your eyes on what you feel. However, I must not yet pretend to be your
Consident; and I well know that in the first engagements we are pleased with
making a mystery of every thing.


Pharnacius. Your Conjectures perhaps are better grounded than you think. There
is a very lovely young Woman come to Erastus, for whom already I am told
Lisidor sighs.


Viridatus. I know it, and will undertake that he will sigh no longer than
Dorante and Erastus shall think fit. You speak of a Sister of Cleonice, that is
very young and handsome. Erastus can tell us news of her, whilst we are making
ready to go to his House, to see whether he gives us a faithful relation.


Erastus. I will not tell you that Lindamire is Old, Cleonice who is her Eldest
Sister will never forgive it. Yet I will acknowledge to you she will soon be
fourteen, and I know not whether this Age can well suit with a Lover that has
seventeen, and who is not to be Married before he be twenty.


Viridatus. This agedness will be intolerable both to the one and the other;
but will you tell us whether Lindamire be as disagreeable as she is Old?


Erastus. It belongs not to me to answer this question. Lisidor can better
satisfy your Curiosity.


Dorante. Yet he has less seen Lindamire than you have.


Erastus. He has seen her less, but he has better beheld her.


Lisidor. After the War which has been made me, I dare not speak of Lindamire.
The praises which I should give her will be suspected, and if I speak things as
I feel them, I may make them be felt likewise by others, and that is what I
shall avoid, if you please.

At these words Viridatus embraced Lisidor, and spoke to him in this manner.

Viridatus. If we judge of you by the dispositions you have, and by the
continual Entertainments you will have with Dorante and Erastus, a Man needs
not be a great Divine to say you will be one of the finest Men of the Court.


Erastus. I must needs say that Dorante and I find no less our reckoning in the
conversation of Lisidor, than Lisidor can draw advantage in ours. At his
arrival from a far Country, we hear him at Paris with as much attention and
pleasure, as they would have in his Province, in speaking of a Polite man of
this Town.


Viridatus. I believe Dorante is much troubled at it.


Erastus. You may judge, and I can assure you I am so too, although I be not
Lisidor's Kinsman.


Viridatus. You respect him as Dorante's Nephew, but it will not be long before
you have other reasons to espouse his interests.

Scarcely had they ended these words but other company came in; Dorante,
Erastus, and Lisidor dexterously got away, and were no sooner in their Coach,
but Erastus demanded of Dorante, how he intended to spend the rest of the
Morning?


Dorante. In visiting the Prelate whom you know: But there are reasons for
Philemon's being of the Company.


Erastus. We need only go and take him up, we shall find him undoubtedly at
home, for he expects I should send him word whether we shall go together to
Versailles: For Lisidor we shall not consult him on the visits he would make,
'till he has acquaintances by himself, and separate from yours.


Lisidor. However the good dress I am in reproaches me, that I have not yet
returned thanks to Cleonice for the pains she has taken.

I know, answered Erastus smiling, that you are very thankful, when you have
Clothes bought you; and having a Complement in your head, which you would be
gladly eased of, I need only bid my Coachman drive home. He shall go
afterward for Philemon, and so every body will be pleased.

They were no sooner arived, but that they light at the door, sent the Coach to
Philemon, and went up to Cleonice's Apartment. Madam, said immediately Erastus
in presenting Lisidor, here is a Gentleman who tells me he is ready to dye with
desire to see you. I bring him to you, and with the less constraint, in that I
am sure he came not wholly to admire you.


Cleonice. Methinks you might have a better opinion of me.


Erastus. I confess it, but it were well if Lisidor had not so good a one of
Lindamire.


Lisidor. You see, Madam, that I am not so much as allowed the time to thank
you as I ought. I am continually set upon, to see after what manner a Man of my
age can disengage himself; however I have a better Office done me than is
imagined. The sentiments which I have are made known, which I dare not declare
my self.


Cleonice. You cannot have any that can be disapproved, and therefore the
assistance which you say is given you, is not necessary to you.

In this moment Lisidore and Lindamire could not forbear looking on one another
and blushing; Cleonice observed it, and resumed the discourse, to turn the
conversation on another subject.


Cleonice. It is not possible that you have made your visits. You have put them
off till another day, or not met with those you went to see.


Dorante. We come from Viridatus, and we expect Philemon to go together to a
Prelates, where a business which we have calls us. I am pleased to see the
surprise wherein Lisidor will be, in hearing Erastus discourse learnedly on the
most serious and important matters, having as yet only seen him in his merry
humor. I wish you had heard him the other day on the new Conversations of
France, you --


Erastus. I read, on this subject, a Manuscript, which is going to the Press,
and the opinion I had of it, made me say things which Dorante finds
extraordinary in a Man of my humor.


Cleonice. That which you now say puts me on a reflection whence I may draw some
profit. You gave some days past Maxims for Conversation, and you said nothing
of what is most important therein. Which is to know after what manner one
should talk of what respects Religion.


Dorante. You have reason, Madam, and we cannot better spend the time we have,
than in making some observations on so considerable a matter.


Entertainment XVII. That we must speak reverently of Holy Things.
Erastus. I Know not any man that loves mirth better than I do; I will have it
reign in my House, and I endeavor to inspire it whithersoever I go, and I
every where affirm it to be the best and most universal remedy that we can use
in our misfortunes. Yet I may say there is no body has more aversion to
libertinism I look on it as a Rock that we must avoid, and I shun a Libertine,
as a man infected with the Plague. Not that I fear his pretended reasons will
make any great impression on my mind, but that I scorn them, and am ashamed to
be seen with them, as imagining them worse than Beasts.


Cleonice. I believe that those who speak little respectfully of Religion, and
who scoff at the things they ought to reverence, are led to this extravagance
only by a ridiculous vanity. I believe they would distinguish themselves, and
that they intend only to show their wit in maintaining particular opinions,
contrary to such as are generally received. Yet perhaps this irregularity
passes not over into their Morals.


Erastus. However this is true, that there is no better preservative against
all sorts of irregularities than Religion.

That which hinders Women from being drawn as often into this disorder as Men,
is, that they do not so soon lose the impressions of Piety, which we all
receive in our Education.


Cleonice. The ignorance wherein we are kept, the modesty which is every moment
recommended to us, and the continual submission wherein we spend our life, are
advantageous to us, in that they contribute to what we ought to believe, and
therefore thank God it is not us that are charged with being the Authors of
Heresy.


Lindamire. I have heard talk of a Sect lately discovered at Rome.


Cleonice. I have always had a desire to entreat Dorante to relate to me the
chief particulars of it, but I forgot till now to mention it to him. This
occasion of doing it offers it self too naturally to neglect it. Will you
refuse Dorante to let me know wherein this Heresy consisted?


Dorante. You well judge, Madam, that I will do what you please, yet you must
permit me not to enter on particularising the errors which the Quietists
followed.

For thus were those called who embraced this Sect. They drew this name from
the Rest they pretended to enjoy when they had raised their Souls to
contemplation by the means of a Prayer they recited. They held it was
sufficient for them to make an Act of Faith, and set themselves in the presence
of God, and to rely wholly on his Providence. This was methinks a good way to
draw abundance of People; whether that being lazy they choose rather to yield
themselves up after this manner that they may not act; or that they had the
vanity to believe themselves capable of well contemplating. If Women, as you
now say, are not the Authors of Heresies, yet we see 'em ready enough to follow
those they are taught, as either being desirous of new things, or suffering
themselves to be taken with the fine appearances wherewith the Errors which are
proposed be generally disguised. However it be, several Persons of your Sex
followed the opinions of Molinos the chief of the Quietists. It is true this
Spaniard passed for a Saint before he was discovered to be an Heresiarch. You
know, Madam, that he has abjured his Errors, and that he is shut up for the
rest of his life.


Erastus. One may in a Conversation relate the History of an Heresy, recite
the establishment of it, the progress and decay of it, for there is none but we
have seen destroyed in the end.


Dorante. However we should never mix with these relations, any thing which may
make these Novelties relish. They are sometimes more dangerous than the
opinions of Libertines. To convince these latter, I need only entreat them to
consider the course of the Sun, the motions of the Stars, and the productions
of the Earth. They will see that Man could not set that Order which we admire
in the Universe, he that cannot regulate so much as a simple digestion in
himself, and who has been so long ignorant of the circulation of the blood in
his own Veins. Must it not be acknowledged that he who so well governs so vast
a Machin, must needs be a wise and infinitely powerful Being; and if he be such
a one as we say, can we refuse him our adorations? I would willingly know after
what manner we should regulate the worship which should serve to testify our
acknowledgment and our submission? Must this be the fancy of some frantic
Enthusiast, or by the Pious Maxims of great and holy Personages which have been
always in the Universal Church? This matter is too fine and large to be
included in our Entertainments. Instead of engaging our selves therein, it is
sufficient to make known to you in few words, that it is no hard matter to shut
the mouths of the Libertines, provided they prefer not their obstinacy to the
reasons wherewith one may convince them.

However I would not have those who maintain the right side to appear puffed up
with their advantages; they must speak with good sense, with respect, and
without sharpness and ostentation.

Whilst Dorante ended thesewords, Erastas's Coach was heard to come before the
Door, and presently Philemon and Belise entered into Cleonice's Chamber.


Philemon. You expected me alone, and I bring my Spouse with me. She comes to
stay with Cleonice, if we go to Versailles, where I know that Dorante and I
shall meet with a Prelate whom we design to see this Morning.


Erastus. We shall do better to eat what may be presently ready, and to go all
together. I will leave you to do your business, and make your Court as long as
you please, and I will take care to satisfy the curiosity of Lisidor, and
Lindamire.

The Company having consented to what Erastus proposed, such orders were given
as were fit for so small a journey.


Philemon. I must tell you, that Belise's coming has occasioned me to make you
stay so long, and I entreat you to pardon me, if I did not know that as long as
you be together we shall never believe you in danger of being weary.


Cleonice. It Is true that Dorante has entertained us in an elegant and easy
manner, on a very nice and important subject. He has showed us in what terms
and after what manner we may speak of our Religion, and I am so satisfied with
it, that I wish Belise had had her share in the Entertainment.


Philemon. Perhaps she would have had less pleasure than you imagine: For it is
certain it is not for discourses of this kind that she has the greatest
curiosity.


Belise. My ignorance is the cause. I am ever afraid that it would cast me into
errors, however good my intentions may be. But you know I am not so fearful in
other matters. I speak with a tone of assurance of the Customs of People, and
the Government of States, when I enter on the politic humor you so often twit
me with.


Cleonice. Ah, Belise, you are then bolder than I am; for I confess, that of
the three sorts of distinct Governments, I dared never speak of any but the
Monarchical. Neither would I hazard my self in pronouncing the names which
relate to the different Republics we know.


Belise. And I say audaciously Aristocracy and Democracy, and without Vanity I
have not been four months a learning these two words.


Cleonice. For my part I should be three years on resolving whether I should
speak them, and after so long a term, I believe I should remain still
irresolute.


Erastus. Let Us leave these jests, if you please, and whilst Breakfast is
getting ready, let us entertain our selves with a Science which Belise and all
great Persons prefer before others.


Belise. Rally as much as you will; but if Dorante will take my part, I will
consent that he shall talk alone, and you will see whether my opinions be ill
maintained.


Cleonice. We like this expedient well, and Dorante, never refusing to comply
with his friend's proposals, he will accept your offers, and we shall thereby
be gainers.


Entertainment XVIII. That State affairs must be discoursed of with great
reservedness.
Dorante. I Will speak then, seeing you enjoin me, and will first say that I
put a great difference between Foreign affairs and those which relate to us. We
may speak our opinions touching the Government of other Nations with as much
boldness as Belise does, supposing we understand the Interests and Maxims of
them. But when we are pleased to discourse on the State under which we live, we
should never extend our conjectures too far, nor affect to appear too
penetrating. You know nothing does more contribute to the happy success of an
enterprise, than the secrecy observed therein. The Captains themselves whom the
King chooses to execute his designs, commonly know what they are going about,
and learn it only by the Orders which they must not open, but at certain times,
and in certain places. After such exact precautions, can our affairs be
mentioned with an affirmative tone? Dare we reason on uncertain conjectures?
Persons of good sense never talk of these matters but with great modesty, and
for my part I can only forgive this imprudence in Persons who are incapable of
making any reflection. How many do we hear every day censuring that Government
which they do not understand, they make War and Peace according to their Fancy,
and wholly busy themselves in hearing News, and modelling the affairs of
State, when their Families at home are perhaps ready to starve for want of
Bread.

It Is true, that since the King has so considerably increased his States, the
Government is not so much spoke against.


Philemon. I would willingly know whether there can be found any appearance of
reason for the not admiring it. Foreigners are no less surprised than our
selves at what passes every day in this Kingdom. We may cite, as a kind of
Miracle, the Conjunction which we have seen made of the Canal of Languedoc with
the Sea: The stately Building in the Plain of Grenelle deserves no less our
admiration, than the magnificence we see at Versailles, and the security which
is now at Paris and all the rest of the Kingdom.


Dorante. Whereunto we may add those incomprehensible Machines at Versailles
which triumph over Nature, and force Rivers to take Beds where the imagination
cannot conceive they can ascend.


Belise. I will tell you then, that if the King was not our Master by the right
of his Birth, and that it was permitted us to choose a Sovereign, his merit
would immediately claim the Scepter which he holds from the Salique Law.


Cleonice. What a pleasure you have done me in citing this Law, which I have
heard termed a fundamental one of the State. It is so often mentioned, that I
would willingly know what may be said particularly of it.


Erastus. I believed, Madam, that having read the History of our Nation, you
are sufficiently instructed in this matter.


Cleonice. I know that this Law takes its name from the Saliens, a considerable
People among the Ancient French; or that it is called Salic, because it was
published near the Banks of the River Sala. I have also observed, that this Law
has three parts relating to the Government: The first requires the State to be
Monarchical. The Second, that it be successive. And the Third, at which I am
not a little grieved, deprives the Persons of our Sex of the succession to the
Crown. It Is said 'twas Pharamond who instituted this Law, but I wish any one
would tell me the reasons he had thus to regulate the Sovereignty of our
Nation; to the end that if I should speak of it before Belise, she might not
laugh at my ignorance.


Erastus. I am to tell you, Madam, that Belise, and the rest of the Politicians
of our time, are persuaded that the Salic or Ripary Laws respect only the
Justice and Policy which is to be observed among the French, and that they
speak in no sort of the Sovereign administration of affairs. They affirm, that
the Law, which requires the State to be Monarchical, and to be ordered in the
manner we now related, was never written but in the hearts of the People. They
pass farther, and believe there never was any Pharamond. They ground themselves
on that Gregory of Tours, who wrote the History of the French, speaks not a
word of Pharamond, and it is certain that he would never have failed to mention
a Prince, who was the first King of the Nation, of which he had undertaken to
leave us the most considerable adventures. Belise will inform you of several
other particulars.


Belise. What can I not say? However I am willing you should treat me as if I
were not knowing, and you should tell me the reasons which Cleonice requires of
you, that I may see whether you can justify what so famous a Law enjoins.


Philemon. Have you not apprehension that your Policy will make us exceed the
bounds which our Entertainments prescribe?


Belise. Why fear it? Do we not grant the liberty of talking on all sorts of
subjects? And would you have the principles of a Science omitted, which places
a man above multitudes of others? I hope the Company will punish you, and
oblige you to speak the first your opinion on the Monarchical State. Do you
prefer it to other Governments?


Philemon. I find you very forward, in that you will not expect till the
Assembly authorizes what you enjoin; but I see it is time ill spent to correct
you, and that it it is better submitting to you. I will tell you then, Madam,
that one may soon determine ones self on this subject. We must be for Monarchy,
and consider there is more ease and security in obeying one Master, than if we
were constrained to acknowledge several.

It is certain, that Divisions do easily get among persons who share the
Soveraignity, and that it is very difficult keeping a secret among them; judge
then what we may fear from one and the other. Moreover, a King is too much
accustomed to grandeur, to appear giddy headed with it; whereas it is but too
often seen, that Citizens, who are immediately Exalted to the Throne, become
intolerable through their pride.


Belise. Well, you have said enough, pray now let us see whether Erastus will
declare himself for the Regal succession, or for Elective Kingdoms. What say
you, Sir, do you judge the People in a better condition who have a right to
choose their Sovereigns, than those who are obliged to receive them, for better
for worse, from the hands of Nature?


Erastus. You do not consult me on a Matter difficult enough to gain me any
credit, and there is no body but may easily determine himself herein. We see it
seldom happen, but that the presumptive Heir of a Kingdom is Educated according
to the Rank which he must one day possess. Such sentiments of Clemency and
Equity are inspired into him, as may contribute to the Peoples happiness;
whereas the like Education is not bestowed on particular persons, who are too
far distant from the Throne, to make it thought that they will one day possess
it. Judge of the Factions which are formed for an election of this importance;
and into what wars these factions may draw the People. These troubles are not
feared in successive Kingdoms, therein happens no change. If a King dies, his
Son takes his place, and several Reigns appear but one continued Reign.

It is not to be supposed, that only persons remarkable for their virtues are
chosen, and in whom there can be found no fault, seeing these persons use all
their industry to dissemble and hide their Vices, and to adorn themselves with
qualities becoming their ambition: But when they have gotten their aim, and
have nothing more to desire or fear, they then throw off their masks, and
abandon themselves to all manner of dissoluteness. I could give a great many
Examples of this, but you will find enough in the Roman History, if you will
take the pains to read it.


Belise. You see, Dorante, that I have reserved the difficultest partion you,
according to my mind, seeing it now lies upon you to tell us by what reasons
the Salic Law could exclude Women from succeeding their Fathers, and deprive
them of what Nature allowed them.


Dorante. It troubles me, Madam, that I am not so sensible of the honor you do
me, and to tell you that the Salic Law had an admirable foresight in this third
part which you condemn. If this Kingdom should fall into the Feminine Line, and
we saw a presumptive Heiress of the Crown, to what misery should we not be
reduced? In effect, should it happen that the Princess would choose a Husband
among her Subjects, those who expect this honor, would make strong Parties,
and carry things to a greater extremity, than in Elective Countries, seeing the
prize is no less than a Crown, which would pass to their Descendants, and
remain for ever in their Family. He that has the good fortune to be preferred,
will be so unhappy as to be hated of his Rivals, the greatest Men at Court, and
who will never faithfully serve him. If on the contrary, the Heiress of a
Kingdom should cast her eyes on a neighboring Prince, to bestow on him her
Heart, and her Scepter; we should fall under the domination of a stranger, our
Monarchy would become a Province of his States.

Thus, Madam, you see you have no reason to complain of the injustice done your
Sex, you must rather think this was ordered for the best; seeing hereby is
prevented all those dismal Revolutions which I have now denoted to you.


Belise. I must needs acknowledge you have satisfied me with your Reasons,
although they be not very favorable to Ladies. I believe that Cleonice is in
the same sentiment, and that she is not troubled that I have been so curious.


Cleonice. You shall see that I will not be behind hand with you in another
kind. You have declared your self an able Politician, and I must declare to
you, that I have particularly applied my self to the study of Morality.
Moreover, I will be no less complaisant, than you: I consent that Dorante,
Philemon, and Erastus tell us after what manner we should speak of Passions,
Vices, and Virtues; and I offer to show you afterward, whether their Opinions
be conformable, or contrary to those I maintain.

The Company having laughed at the pleasantry of Cleonice, it was granted that
there was no matter which oftener fell into Conversation, than that she came
from proposing, so that it was resolved on, that some time should be spent in
discoursing on that subject.


Entertainment XIX. That to speak justly of the Passions, of Vices and Virtues,
we should ordinarily descend from a general discourse into particular
distinctions.
Cleonice. BEfore we enter on the subject we are to treat of, I would willingly
know what it is to speak justly?


Philemon. I can boldly say I understand the justness which is found in an
expression, but I acknowledge I should be puzzled to say wherein it consists.
Dorante can clear up this point.


Dorante. I am persuaded that what does most contribute to the justness of a
discourse is, when there happens a real relation, or a real opposition between
the terms, and between the things which are put together. Thus I should not
speak justly, should I say that Lisidor is of Provence, and Philemon an Officer
of the Kings; seeing there is no relation, nor opposition between a Country and
an Office. Neither should I any more speak justly, if being willing to testify
my acknowledgment to Cleonice, I should explain my self in these terms. I
return Graces to a Person who has 'em infinitely. This is properly what we may
call a Galamathias, and it is very hard to understand two words which are tied
together without any relation. In effect, in the first place the word Graces
signifies only thanks, and the other word which is understood, is only taken
for some agreeableness of the Countenance, or of the Person. I might moreover
give you infinite Examples on this defect of justness, but I shall content my
self with telling you, that it is chiefly in comparisons, where it is to be
chiefly avoided.

I should speak ill, should I say that the Barbe Isabella of Philemon is as
fine as the Diamond which Erastus wears, though it be permitted me to esteem one
as much as the other, and to offer an hundred Lewis's for the Horse as well as
for the Ring. But we should not compare the beauty of a Stone with that of an
Animal, which is to say, two things which have neither any relation or
opposition between them.


Erastus. I found yesterday Juvenal lying on one of my Friend's Table, I opened
it, and 'twas exactly on a passage of his sixth Satyr, where he speaks of the
manner after which the women of those times coifed themselves. He describes the
bucklings and coiffings several Stories high which a wanton Dame wore, and says
that her Size was so tall with them, that she might be taken for another
Andromacha, in beholding her bebefore; but if you viewed her behind, she
appeared only to be a little Woman. Now let it not displease Juvenal, if I say
he did not speak justly, he had cited Andromacha, he should then have opposed a
Woman famous for her little Stature.


Cleonice. Whence should he have taken it? Perhaps History mentions none.
People do not usually take notice of a Quality so little recommendable.


Erastus. Juvenal should then have chosen a tour which might furnish him with a
just opposition, and have said that this Lady might have been taken for a Giant
before, though she appeared but a Dwarf behind.


Belise. I now understand what is contrary to the justness of an expression,
and you imagine well that the rest of the Company comprehends it yet better.
And therefore we may speak of the matter which Cleonice has given us, and
acknowledge in the beginning, that there is nothing so dangerous as the
passions. For my part I am persuaded, that could our hearts free themselves
from their Tyranny, we should enjoy a serene and happy life.


Cleonice. It Is true, that the greatest part of the World regards Ambition,
Love and Hatred as the Springs of all Evils, and it is commonly their violence
which leads to the committing of the injustices which we see in the World.


Dorante. We grant you that the impetuosity of the passions hurries but too
often to the committing of crimes, but can she not likewise be of great use in
the leading us to Heroic Virtue? Without Ambition we should see no Conqueror,
hear nothing of Alexander nor Caesar, and none of those glorious Actions would
be performed which procure an immortal Reputation. So that instead of
condemning the passions, I rather wish a good use were made of them, and that
they were rendered profitable. We love the effects of Clemency and Compassion,
we admire that which the love of Glory produces, and the sequel of Infamy. And
however decry'd Fear is, yet in a thousand occasions she makes up one part of
Prudence. It is from her that we foresee evils, and avoid them. What may we not
moreover observe, if we examine the other passions?


Erastus. It seems to me that we have only the passion of Love to examine,
there being scarcely any other but it. It takes different names according to
the difference of its objects. Ambition is only the love of Greatness;
Covetousness the love of Riches; and Hatred, which appears so opposite to Love,
is, to speak properly, only a disguised Love; seeing we have only aversion for
that which is offensive to us, because we love our own preservation.


Philemon. When we had only to explain what Love is, do you think we should be
without perplexity? Although it be so natural and general a passion among an
infinite number of Persons which feel it, you will find few that can tell you
what it is. You may be persuaded of what I say by this Philosopher, who says
that Love is I know not what, that comes from I know not where, and goes away I
know not how.


Dorante. We are so little accustomed to enlarge our selves on the subjects we
speak of, and to engage our selves in subtilties which serve only to tire the
mind, that I do not think we ought to discuss the nature of Passions. Those who
are minded to inform themselves farther, may read the works we have on this
subject, and in the mean time content themselves with the distinctions which we
have promised to bring. It must be acknowledged that we are to blame in
condemning the passions, and in being afraid of them. They are indifferent in
themselves, and if it happens they sometimes disturb the tranquillity of our
life; there are other occasions wherein they are of great help to us. Men
without boldness, would they march to Glory through Fatigues and Dangers? Let Us
make another distinction, shall we call a man valiant who has done a great
Action by an impetuosity of boldness, and shall we accuse of Cowardice a Person
that a panick terror has seized in some occasion? True Valor is when in every
rencounter our Courage disposes us to vanquish the obstacles which oppose our
designs; as a man must not pass for a Coward, but when it is his custom to avoid
Danger. Thus we may reason on the other Vices, and on the other Virtues. A
Magistrate is not to be praised as just, for having done justice once. To merit
this commendation, he must be in a firm and constant disposition to render to
every one what belongs to him.


Cleonice. I have for this quarter of an hour had a desire to ask you the
reason for the calling passions, those emotions which agitate the heart.


Erastus. It is because they make the body suffer through their violence.


Belise. I return then to what I have ever said, that the passions are Monsters
which are to be rooted out.


Philemon. Are you willing to begin with shame? Women will be very much obliged
to you. You will free them from a passion which keeps them in a strange sort of
Bondage. Were they once without shame, they would have the pleasure of doing
what they liked, without troubling themselves about what the World calls
Reputation.


Erastus. It Is true that shame serves as a Guard for our Women, and there are
other passions which are necessary for the commerce of life. The compassion we
have for the miserable, leads us commonly to succor one another in our
misfortunes.


Dorante. Does not emulation excite to obtain the advantages we want, to raise
us to the Persons we see above us?


Cleonice. But is there not a mixture of envy in emulation?


Erastus. Nothing is more different than these two passions. Emulation is
lively and generous, and Envy base and malicious. The first is a regret at our
small desert, the other a vexation which arises from the Merit of others.
Emulation would raise us, and Envy would abase what is above us. In fine,
nothing is more worthy of our contempt than Envy, nothing is more commendable
than Emulation. It made Caesar weep at the sight of Alexander's Picture, and
hindered Themistocles from sleeping near the Trophies of Miltiades. You know
what Caesar and Themistocles afterward executed.


Philemon. As to what regards Vices and Virtues, I would speak differently of
them, according to the different circumstances thereto joined. There was seen
heretofore in Greece a Republic wherein Theft was pardoned, provided it was
committed dexterously; and you know well that Robbery found not the same
impunity in any other Country.


Erastus. We have at this day Neighboring Nations where the Customs are very
different. If Dorante would be praised for his temperance, probably he would
not go to search applause on the banks of the Rhine, as you would not advise me
to go toward the Tyber, if you proposed excessive drinking.


Cleonice. Are distinctions to be made when we speak of Virtue in general, is
it not equally reverenced by all Nations?


Dorante. Every body does not regard it in the same manner, and I know not
whether it will not puzzle us to say precisely what it is. It Is true there is a
natural equity which is generally approved; but it is not less certain that it
is diversely practiced. There never was any obligation more indespensable, than
that requiring Children to serve those who brought them into the world,
especially when they are grown old, and find themselves afflicted with
diseases. All the People of Europe observed so just a Maxim, and yet the
Scythians, who possessed more Country than Europe comprehended, accused those
Children of inhumanity who let their Parents live under an incurable Malady.
For their parts they gave the fatal blow as a stroke of Grace, and thought it
just to terminate thus their Parents misery. They extended further their
pretended Charity. They eat their bodies instead of burning or interring them,
imagining nothing more Pious than to give this Sepulture to their Parents, for
to change them into their proper substance, and make them live again in
themselves as far as it was in their power. Consider this well. The Scythians
commend a man who comes from committing a Parricide, and other Nations punish
him as the greatest Criminal.


Erastus. In speaking of the different manners of People, we may cite the
Punick Faith, which is to say, the little fidelity the Carthaginians observed
in their promises. It Is certain the Romans had more probity, and I should have
more relied on the word of Regulus, than the Oaths of Hannibal and all his Army.


Philemon. I think it more usual to distinguish the Vices and Virtues according
to the professions of Persons, than according to the Customs of their Country.
A Virtue renders us recommendable only according as it is suitable to us. A
Person consecrated to the Service of the Altar should prefer the knowledge of
Religion to all other Sciences, and his Piety must be so great as to make his
words and actions exemplary. A Soldier must glister after another manner,
Valor should be his Virtue; and what regards Military Discipline, or the Art
of Fortification, should be his chief study.


Cleonice. But can I not be told precisely what this Virtue is in general, so
much talked of?


Dorante. It is not an easy matter wholly to satisfy you on this Subject, so
diversely has the virtue you speak of been considered. I know not whether you
will approve of an Opinion which I find the most plausible. I am persuaded that
this Virtue, of which we form so fine an Idea, and which is believed so proper
to make us live happily, is properly what we call Justice.


Belise. But is not Justice the particular virtue of Magistrates?


Dorante. It should be the virtue of all People, and had we all that stock of
Equity necessary for the commerce of life, we should need neither Law nor
Magistrates. Men would render whatever they are obliged to render, and they
would begin by the Worishp due to God. Subjects would obey their Sovereigns,
Children their Parents, and as no body would claim what does not belong to him,
there would be no Mention of Thefts nor Murders; even detraction would be
banished all Societies.

Whilst Dorante ended these words, word was brought, that the Meat was on the
Table, and Erastus being risen up; you must acknowledge your selves, said he,
greatly surpised at the novelty of my Compliment; for I know not whether I
shall begin with Gentlemen, or Ladies; you must draw me out of this perplexity,
and for the rest, I know it by heart.

The Company having laughed at the serious air wherewith Erastus spoke this,
answered, that he might use his liberty, so that he reassumed the discourse in
these terms.


Erastus. Come let us end at Table this Discourse of Distinctions. You Will soon
distinguish between the wretched Treats I give you, and the delicate
Entertainments you give. What say you of these Antitheses?


Dorante. That they are admirable, although we are on the point to convince
them of falsity.

After these words they eat, and bad the People who were to set out with them
to make have; and they returned to Cleonices Chamber.


Belise. I always go to Versailles with a great deal of pleasure, but at my
return I am strangely importuned by Arsinoa, she will have me to describe new
Magnificences, or new Rarities, and puts such questions to me as are strangely
troublesome.


Cleonice. I am yet more troubled with Celisira, she asks news of me with the
greatest earnestness, and will have me give her an account of all that passes
in the whole world. She has given me such a great aversion for what we may call
news, that I neither have asked nor told any for this Twelve Months.


Dorante. But, Madam, hereby you deprive your self of a very considerable
diversion, and hinder your self from learning important matters, wherein an
infinite number of People are concerned. And therefore, Madam, I must beg your
favor for News. They are an innocent cause of the vexation which Arsinoa gives
you, and it is not just you should for this reason extend your resentment so
far as to hate them.


Philemon. But should we not seek some means to make them agreeable, to
reconcile them the more easily with Cleonice?


Entertainment XX. After what manner we should t^^^ News.
Erastus. I Cannot so far interest my self in the quarrels of Cleonice as to
take her part against News; however I must preser those which divert before
others. I am very earnest to tell of a Marriage lately made between two persons
who sincerely loved, and were much traverst in their design. I am pleased to
describe a gallant and magnificent Feast, or a famous Action performed at the
head of two Armies. And I must acknowledge I am no less delighted in telling
with what subtilty a covetous Hunks has been put upon, or by what address the
precautions of a jealous Person has been rendered fruitless. You see I discover
my defects to you, and that I am not exempt from Malice, nor an Enemy to
pleasant Relations. It Is true, there are very few Stories that please me. If it
be an adventure, I would have it surprising; if the News respects only those
ready and lively answers which we call pleasant Repartees, I require a great
delicateness in the tour of expression.


Belise. I am not of Erastus's mind in point of News. The gay please me less
than the sad; and my Spouse must pardon me if I say that I love to have my
heart lively touched with compassion.


Cleonice. There is indeed I know not what kind of sweetness in being touched
with pity. Other passions are more violent and less agreeable. Experience shows
it us in the representation of a Tragedy. Infinite numbers of People are drawn
to it by the tenderness of their sentiments, and do not part wholly satisfied,
if they have not been forced to weep.


Erastus. The Tragedies you speak of, and the sad News which please Belise,
have a farther good effect, which apparently you have not thought on, which is,
that we cannot see a Person of great merit fall into a great misfortune, but
that we feel a secret mitigation of our evils. Can we justly reproach Fortune
in giving us a moderate stroke, when we see what cruel pains she inflicts on
Persons of an extraordinary Virtue.


Philemon. Do not you think that the News which War furnishes you with, ought
to carry it before all other sort of relations? Can one better draw the
attention, than in describing a great Battle, the taking of a considerable
Place, the conquest of a Country, or the revolution of a State?


Cleonice. Were I a Lover of News, I would only recount such wherein those
should be Interess'd that heard me; and if this News were News of that part of
the Town where I live, they would please me better than the News Philemon
commends.


Belise. And I must declare my self for that kind of News which is instructive,
and it is of that sort methinks wherewith we should entertain our selves.


Dorante. I know not, Madam, whether there be News which may in particular, be
called instructive, but I may say that all News in general may become
instructive, when they are related by an able man. He can render the
circumstances thereof useful for manners, for the administration of affairs,
for the Government of People, and for the ordering of Armies. If a Siege or
Battle be set forth to us in their proper colors, we shall observe the defects
or the good conduct of the Generals, and thence make our advantage. If we be
told of the consternation wherein the Ottomans were, we shall see that we must
lay aside Pleasures, when business requires a constant attendance. We shall
accuse Mahomet IV. of blindness, in going to divert himself in hunting, when he
should be at the head of his Armies.

We shall observe that things are generally preserved by the same means as they
were acquired, that Valor is necessary to keep a Sovereign on the Throne; that
Cowardice draws only the contempt and indignation of the Soldiery and Subjects.


Erastus. That which passes at Court serves still more for our instruction. We
see that all People must do their duty under a Master who is never deceived,
and who only recompenses Merit.


Cleonice. What you say would give me a great desire to inform my self on the
Affairs of the Court of Rome, did I believe we might entertain our selves with
that sort of News, as well as with those we now spoke of.


Philemon. I do not believe it unlawful for to speak our sentiments on things
we see printed, and posted up; provided it be rather to instruct us, than to
make our selves busy bodies, who fancy we must decide all things.


Dorante. We can add nothing to what was said on this matter by a great
Magistrate, whose Learning and Eloquence has long since been admired by all the
World. The force of his Reasons and his Citations have encreast the
astonishment wherein I was before, at the usage was showed our King's
Ambassador.


Erastus. Yet the Law of Nations, which requires that the Person of an
Ambassador be sacred, is known by all the World, and every body has seen after
what manner we have received the Embassies which were sent us from Infidel
Kings. They have dealt in a different manner at Rome, toward the Ambassador of
the Eldest Son of the Church, the most Christian King, a Monarch whose
Predecessors have protected and defended the Holy See.


Dorante. Will you believe me, instead of wading farther into this matter, do
as I have done, buy the Book we have already hinted at, read it more than once,
and you will have the pleasure of profiting by the labors of a great man who
knows more of it than we shall ever know.


Belise. Return we then to what we are to say of other News. Do you think we
may draw any instruction from the little Relations Erastus has declared himself
for?


Dorante. We need not doubt thereon; for when we are told with what dexterity a
jealous or covetous Person has been imposed on; we are instructed how to make
use of the like subtilties; and the Covetous and Jealous are hereby taught to
take better care. In fine, Cleonice must permit us to say that News may render
a Conversation agreeable; That a Polite Person may recount them, provided he is
sure of what he says, and that he does not wholly set up for a News-monger.


Cleonice. I find nothing so ridiculous as to apply one's self to the telling
of News from Morning till Night to all those we meet.


Philemon. It Is true, there are People who have no other business. As soon as
they are seen, they are immediately asked how many Bassas are strangled at
Constantinople, or in the Turks Army. They are questioned on the manner after
which the Imperialists live in Transylvania; they must know whether the King of
Poland pretends to make himself Master of Caminec; and what design the General
Morosini may have.


Dorante. A News-monger can answer all questions; if he has any knowledge in
Maps, and the interests of Princes, he may return probable answers, otherwise
he pays for his boldness. For if there be any News-mongers who guess right,
there are others who speak confidently without knowing what they say. These
last sometimes bring themselves into trouble, and imagine thereby to make
themselves famous.

As Dorante ended these words, they were advertised that every thing was ready,
and this agreeable Company parted for Versailles.


FINIS.
Some BOOKS Printed for R. Bently.
Folio.
1. BEaumont's and Fletcher's Plays in one Volume, containing 51 Plays. 2. Mr.
William Shakespeare's Plays in one Volume. 3. Towerson's Works complete in one
Volume. 4. Dr. Allestry's Sermons in one Volume. 5. Dr. Comber's Works, the
four Parts in one Volume. 6. The Council of Trent; By Father Paolo. 7.
Toriano's Italian Dictionary. 8. Mr. Milton's Paradise lost, with 13 Copper
Cuts finely engraven, to express the whole Poem. 9. Milton's Paradise regained;
in the same Volume, Paper and Print, to bind with it. 10. Fodina Regalis; or,
the History of the Laws of Mines. By Sir John Pettus. 11. Bishop Brownrig's
Sermons.
Books in Quarto.
1. The Burnt Child dreads the Fire. 2. A Treatise of our Sangninary Laws
against Papists. 3. Dr. Whitby's Answer to S. Cressy. 4. Mr. Nathanael Lee's
Plays in one Volume. 5. Mr. Thomas Otways Plays in one Volume. 6. Panegyric on
His Grace the Duke of Schonberg. 7. Mundus Muliebris, or the Ladies
Dressing Room unlocked, and her Toilet spread.
Books in Octavo.
1. Dr. Whitby of Idolarry. 2. Dr. Whitby of Host-VVorship. 3. The Life of the
Marshal Turenne. 4. The Secret History of the House of Medicis. 5. Cornelius
Agrippa, of the Vanity of Arts and Sciences. 6. Mauger's French Grammar. Edit.
13. 7. Lipsius of Constancy. 8. Agiates Queen of Sparta. 9. Nicorotis. 10.
Plurality of Worlds, Translated by Mr. Glanvil. 11. Boylo's Art of Poetry;
Translated by Mr. Soames. 12. Poems and Songs, by Mr. Cuts. 13. Sir James
Chamberlain's Poems. 14. Mr. Coppinger's Poems. 15. Madam Colonna's Memoirs.
16. Hudibras complete, in Three Parts. 17. Seneca's Morals: By Sir Roger
L'Estrange. 18. Comber's Companion to the Altar. 19. Godfrey of Boloign; A
Poem. 20. Plato's Apology of Socrates. 21. Natural History of the Passions. 22.
Mockclelia, or, Madam Quixote. 23. Toriano's Italian Grammar, with choice
Dialogues and Phrases in Italian and English. 24. Covent Garden Drollery.
Books in Duodecimo.
1. Present State of England. 2. Enter into thy Closet. 3. Moral Essays, in
Four Volumes. 4. A perfect School of Instructions for the Officers of the
Mouth. 5. A prospect of Humane Misery. 6. Vanity of Honor, Wealth and
Pleasure. 7. Bishop Andrew's Devotions. 8. Zelinda; A Romance. 9. Happy Slave.
10. Hatige, or the King of Tameran. 11. Homais Queen of Tunis. 12. Triumphs of
Love. 13. Obliging Mistress. 14. Unfortunate Hero. 15. Countess of Salisbury.
16. Count Teckely. 17. Essex and Elizabeth. 18. The Pilgrim. 19. The Emperor
betrayed, by whom, and how. 20. The Character of Love. 21. Don Henrick. 22.
Princess of Fez. 23. M. Christianissimus. 24. Gallant Ladies, in two parts. 25.
Victorious Lovers. 26. Love in a Nunnery. 27. Duke of Lorain. 28. Minority of
St. Lewis. 29. Queen of Majorca. 30. Count de Soysons. 31. Clytie. 32.
Dialogues of the Dead; in Two Parts. 33. Neapolitan; or, the Defender of his
Mistress. 34. Instructions for a young Nobleman. 35. Five Love Letters from a
Nun to a Cavalier. 36. Five Love Letters from the Cavalier in Answer to the
Nun's. 37. Religio Laici, in a Letter to Mr. Dryden. 38. Count Gabalis. 39. The
chaste Seraglion. 40. Rules of Civility. 41. The Extravagant Poet. 42. New
Disorders of Love. 43. Ottoman Gallantry; or, The Life of the Bassa of Buda.
44. Revived Fugitives. 45. Tamberlain the Great. 46. Court Secret, in two
Volumes 47. The Duke of Mazarine's Memoirs. 48. Gallantry a la Mode; or, Women
in their proper Colors 49. Fortune-telling Cards.
FINIS.

