AGIATIS, QUEEN of SPARTA, OR, THE CIVIL WARS OF THE Lacedaemonians, In the
Reigns of the KINGS AGIS and LEONIDAS.

In two Parts.

Translated out of French.

Licensed. Sept. 11. 1685. ROGER L'ESTRANGE.

LONDON, Printed by R. E. for R. Bentley and S. Megnes, in Russel Street in
Covent Garden, 1686.

AGIATIS, Queen of SPARTA.
WHILE the Commonwealth of Lacedemon was divided by the Factions of its Kings,
Agis and Leonidas, the City of Sparta was the Scene of a most bloody War.
Nothing was so visible there, as Treasons and Murders; all were put to the Fire
and Sword; Infancy, or Old Age, found no Mercy; nor was any Respect given,
either to the Rights of Blood, or the Personage of Kings. Even the Women were
not there secure of their Lives, and they were frequently exposed to Injuries
more grievous than Death it self. So strange a Disorder proceeded from a Cause
which was not less extraordinary.

Agis, the Chief of the Royal Family of the Agiades, and descended from the
famous Agesilaus, was no sooner come to the Crown, but he endeavored to
re-establish the Ancient Lacedemonian Discipline, and to make the Laws of
Lycurgus to be observed. The principal of them did ordain an Abolishment of all
Debts, and a general Partition of all Estates, to the end, that by reason of
that equality of Fortune, all the Citizens might have an equal Interest, in
what had relation to the Public. Agis was not above twenty years old, when he
framed so great a Design; he had also been brought up in Luxury and Plenty, by
the Queens Archidamia his Grandmother, and Agesistrate his Mother.

These two Princesses were possessed of an infinite Wealth, and, either because
they were desirous to retain it still, or because they were solicited by some
Citizens, who were unwilling to renounce their Riches, they, at first, opposed
Agis's Intention, and conjured the Prince to change his Mind. For God sake,
said Agesistrate to him, consider the Consequences that are to be feared, and
you will find, that your Resolution can be no otherwise than disagreeable to
the Spartans. Do you believe they will be able to endure the Government of a
Young Man, who, from the very first moment of his Reign, applies himself only
to their Ruin? To what Extremities will they not be carried against you, if,
instead of complying with the times, you endeavor to bring them under an
Austerity of Life, that cannot be grateful to them? They are now more Gallant
and Magnificent than their Ancestors; and, if it be a Crime, at Sparta, to love
Ease and Luxury, you will find few who are not Guilty. I know, Madam, replied
Agis, that Men do not, without difficulty, pass from a looseness of Manners, to
the practice of an exact Virtue; but also, we shall not, without Glory,
overcome those Difficulties. And, I pray, Madam, by what means would you have
Agis render himself considerable among Kings? Is it by Treasures? The
Treasurers of King Ptolomy, and the Lieutenants of Seleucus, have much greater
than it is possible for a King of Lacedemon to have. No, it must be by the
Contempt of those things, which other Princes most affect. It must be by
Moderation, and Continence.

He added so many other Reasons, and argued with so much Solidity, that
Archidamia and Agesistrate were Convinced, and abandoned to him their own
Riches, to be disposed of according to his Will and Pleasure.

Agis employed all that the two Queens had put into his hands, for the Ease
only and Succor of the Miserable and Distressed; and his Liberality, together
with the Resolution he had taken, drew almost all the People to his Party.

On the contrary, the principal Spartans sided with Leonidas; they remonstrated
to him, that he being the Elder King, and having the Honor to fetch his
Original from Hercules, it would be disgraceful to him, to suffer himself to be
supplanted by a Young Man. They pressed him to oppose Agis's Resolution, and
assured him, that that Prince hid an effectual Tyranny under an appearing
Generosity, and that he desired to win the Peoples Favor, only to possess
himself of a single and independent Sovereignty.

Several Women embraced this Party, and engaged themselves in it with much more
concern, than they were used to do upon the like occasions. They had their
Reasons for it. The Lacedaemonians having never meddled with any thing, but what
related to the War, had always left the Administration of their Domestic
Affairs to their Wives. So that they became Mistresses of the Money, and could
not consent to lose that which rendered them considerable. Neither did they
forget any thing that could augment the Power of their Faction. Some did
purchase Suffrages with ready Money, others paid dearer for them; but the most
discreet did quit a City, wherein they saw themselves exposed to a thousand
dangers.

Gilipus, a Prince of the Blood of the Agiades, was strangely disquieted for an
only Daughter he had, whom he most tenderly loved. It was the admirable
Agiatis, whom History describes unto us for the Fairest Princess of those
times. Agis was upon the point of Marrying so Charming a Creature; and Gilipus,
that he might set his Heart at rest, was very desirous to hasten the Marriage,
or to send Agiatis into a place of Safety. Before the Execution of either of
these Resolutions, he advised with a Lacedemonian, called Democares, who was
absolutely at his Devotion. Are not you of an Opinion, said he to him, that I
send Agiatis far from a Country -- How, Sir, interrupted Democares, with
trouble enough in his Countenance, would you -- Be not allarmed, replied
Gilipus smilingly, the Fair one, whom you love, shall not follow Agiatis; and I
can, by the consent of her Mother, dispose of her in your Favor. Sir, replied
Democares, I speak on another account. I apprehend you may shake the Courage of
our Faction, if you make it known, that you are in fear for the Princess. Well
then, replied Gilipus, I will take other measures, and the King by espousing
Agiatis, shall charge himself with the care she may give me. Ah, Sir,
interrupted Democares, that way is much more dangerous. Will you give a
Princess, who is so dear unto you, to a Prince whose undertakings may produce
lamentable Consquences? For Gods sake be not too hasty, and dispose not of the
Princess, but according to the success which our Civil Wars shall have.

Democares continued his Discourse; and as he was one of the most violent Men
of Sparta, he represented so livelily, what might be feared for Agis, that
Gilipus changed his Resolution, and grew more Melancholy. He judged that the
most considerable among the Lacedaemonians, would never suffer the Dominion of a
Prince, who would deprive them of their Estates; and he applied all his Cares,
not only to strengthen the League of the Agiades; but his curiosity carried him
so far, as to desire to be instructed, in what was to be the Destiny of the
King and Princess. He consulted a Learned Man of the Isle of Andros, whom
several Predictions had rendered famous over all Peloponesus, and he conjured
him to work upon his Question, with all the exactness his Art required.
Corymbas, that was the Stranger's Name, applied himself; according to the
Intentions of Gilipus, and afterward went to give him an account of the
Observations he had made. What can you inform me, said the Prince to him, of a
Daughter's Fate, whom I love with tenderness? That, according to the Rules of
my Science, replied he, Fortune will not be her Enemy: But, Sir, I am obliged
to advise you, that this fair Princess is in danger of being Ravished. I see too
plainly, replied Gilipus, our Civil Wars are the Constellations that threaten
us with that Misfortune; but, Corymbas, I will use Precaution. In the mean
time, to ease my Melancholy, let us discourse of the King, and tell me whether
Heaven does promise him as much Happiness, as his Virtue gives him Reputation.
The name of Agis, replied Corymbas, shall, without doubt, reach the utmost
Posterity; but may I tell you, that the Prince is in danger of ending his Life,
by the most deplorable Death that ever was heard of: That which will be most
strange in his Fate is, That he shall be drawn to it by those Persons, in whom
he shall have a most entire Confidence.

Gilipus, frightened with this Prediction, went immediately to Agis, related to
him what he had then learnt, and conjured him never to make any particular Bond
of Friendship, for fear of putting some secret Enemy in a Condition to betray
him. The King heard him, without being at all moved; and after he had thanked
him for his obliging Fear: Sir, continued he, I had rather dye, than live in a
continual distrust. All I have to do, is to resign my self up to the Protection
of the Gods, and to act nothing that may make me deserve the misfortune you
apprehend for me.

The Prince gave not over acting as he did before, in order to put his Designs
in Execution; and it was about this time that Lysander the Ephore, who was of
his Faction, accused Leonidas of being Married in Asia, contrary to a Law which
did forbid the Princes of the Race of Hercules to take strange Women to their
Wives.

Leonidas feared the Consequences of that Accusation so much, that he fled away
with the Princess Chelonise his Daughter, and went to Tegeum, where the Queen
Cretesilea had already taken refuge with her Son Cleomenes. This young Prince
being, as yet, not above fifteen or sixteen years old, would fain have returned
to Lacedemon, to revenge the King his Father's Quarrel. Leonidas represented to
him, that the time was not yet ripe for it. He told him, that his Faction was
weak, and that therefore such an enterprise, must of necessity be delayed. Sir,
replied Cleomenes, if your Friends are not numerous enough to follow me openly,
I will attack your Enemies after another fashion; and possibly their Chief
shall find but little safety in a City where he may be met with by Cleomenes.
Son, replied Leonidas, Civil Wars are subject to so many Changes, that you may
well reserve your self for a more favorable occasion.

Cleomenes was with much a do Convinced, and Leonidas, having reflected upon
his Humor, thought it convenient, that this young Prince should, for a while,
reside a little further from Sparta. He resolved to send him a traveling, and
trusted him to the Conduct of a Lacedemonian, called Xenares, with whose
Affection and Experience he was well acquainted. They departed in a few days
after; and Xenares studied by what means he might preserve, in safety, the
Pledge put into his Hands. He thought of no better or securer way, than to keep
Cleomenes from being known. He made him change his Name, and it was under the
borrowed one of Themistides, that the Prince saw Argos, and passed even to
Epidaurus. He had a mind to go to Sea, in order to visit the Islands of the
Aegean Sea, when he heard news that made him change his intention, in hopes of
some opportunity to signalize himself. He was told that Aratus, the Captain
General of the Achaians, intended to make War in Aetolia; that he levied Troops
about Corinth; and that he had writ to the Lacedaemonians to send him the
Succors they were obliged to give him by a Treaty of Alliance.

Cleomenes rejoiced at it, and told Xenares, that he need no longer trouble
himself about Embarking. It is not fit, continued he, that we go now out of a
Country, whereunto we must have returned to seek out the War, had we been
already departed. The greatest of my Ambition shall always be to satisfy you,
replied Xenares, especially, when you will have such generous Resolutions; but,
Sir, to speak unto you sincerely, you confound me upon this occasion: For I do
not perceive, it will be easy for you to resolve what Party you ought to take.
You still love Lacedemon too well, to go and put your self among the Etalian
Troops; and, on the other side, you cannot remain long among the Spartans,
without discovering that you are the Prince Cleomenes. We will find a Mean
between these two extremes, replied Themistides. We will serve under Aratus,
for the Allies of our Country, as ordinary Lacedaemonians; and there is little
probability the Achaians should know me. Do you think, replied Xenares, on the
continual Communication that there will be between the Army of Agis, and that
of Aratus -- No Contradiction, I pray you, interrupted Cleomenes, let us go to
Corinth; there we may examine matters a little nearer, and take juster
measures. Xenares consented to it, and away they marched toward the City,
whereunto Cleomenes had a desire to go.

They lodged with one Neranthus, a Friend of Xenares, and they applied
themselves immediately, with all Care, to be informed of every thing,
concerning the preparations of War that were made. They understood that the
Achaians had already fifteen or sixteen thousand Men; that they expected the
Troops promised them by Corinth, and a Re-inforcement of two thousand
Lacedaemonians, which King Agis was to lead. Will it please you, said Cleomenes
to Xenares, that I satisfy the desire I have, of seeing the General of the
Achaians, I have been always touched at the Reputation of that Great Man; and
I fancy that I may one day, either follow him near at hand in Battle, if we
fight for the same Interests, or dispute with him a Victory, if we chance to
break with Achaia. I doubt not, Sir, replied Xenares, but that you may in a
little time, do both the one and the other; and I hope, that then Men will wish
as much to know the Illustrious Cleomenes, as you show earnestness now, to see
the Famous Aratus. But I think you may satisfy your Curiosity, without going
to the Camp of the Achaians. I have heard it reported, that Aratus often comes
to Corinth, which we will know more certainly, as soon as you please.

In that very moment Neranthus came to present his Son Philistion to Xenares
and Themistides. Philistion was a handsome young Man, and had already acquired
some Reputation in the War. He was surpised with the good Mien of Themistides,
and testified to him, that he would be very glad to be his Guide, to show him
the Rarities, and to introduce him into the best Societies of the City. I
would, in the first place, entreat you, answered Themistides, after he made all
the Compliments to which Philistion could pretend, to tell me, whether Aratus
does not come sometimes to Corinth? He comes hither as often as he can, replied
Philistion. But at present we judge, that it is not always to confer with our
Magistrates; it is rather to visit a young Lady, named Cylesira, who is the
most Charming, and the most accomplished Beauty of Greece. Is it possible,
interrupted Cleomenes, that a Man of that Age, and of that Merit, can be
capable of such a weakness? Many Men have been surprised at it, as you have
been, replied Philistion, but their wonder ceased, as soon as they have seen
Cylesira, and yours also shall cease to morrow morning, if you please to go to
the Temple of Neptune, at the hour I shall call upon you. What! I go so far as
your Isthmus, in search of a Temple, to see Cylesira, replied Cleomenes
smiling! I assure you, I shall not do it, I had rather a great deal keep my
wonder. You will be happy, replied Philistion, if you always preserve that
indifference: it cannot be said that you resemble a Nephew of Aratus's, named
Teleander, who is in Love wherever he finds amiable Persons. He is lately come
to Corinth, where Cylesira, who Charmed him presently, has made him forget a
young Athenian Lady, whom he would fain have Married. I do not understand, said
Themistides, how a Man can proceed so soon from one Engagement to another.
Several Men, replied Philistion, do less understand how it can be possible to
be always constant to the same Person; but instead of disputing on the
difference of Humors, I will tell you, that Feasts and Divertisements, are the
only Discourse of this Town, ever since the Arrival of Teleander, and his
Sister Ariamite in it. I know, replied Xenares, that Teleander is the Son of
Onecrysa, the Sister of Aratus, and Widow of the Prince of Erymanthus; but I
confess I never heard of that Cylesira, whose Beauty you so much applaud. I
know her little better than you, replied Philistion She has not been long at
Corinth, whither Leriana, her Mother, has brought her to a Brother's House,
which she has, called Leosthenes.

This Conversation ended, Philistion carried Xenares and Themistides to see
several Works, in that Corinthian Brass which was so much esteemed by the
Ancients; and on the morrow he being informed that Aratu^ was newly arrived, he
failed not to give Themistides notice of it. Without doubt you know, pursued
he, that we are very suddenly to celebrate our Istmique Games; and since they
are usually frequented by an infinite number of Strangers, it is thought
expedient, to send away some Troops which we have about the City, in order to
free the high ways. Aratus is now with our Magistrates, considering into what
Quarters to dispose of them; and I am told he will come afterward to take the
Air in a Garden, which our famous Timoleon caused to be beautified, for the
Divertisement of the People. Were it only in consideration of that Great
Captain, whom you named, answered Cleomenes, we will go as soon as you please,
into a place of which he was pleased to take care. Philistion led him thither,
and showing him an Alley on the left hand; There, said he, Aratus usually
walks. The Multitude, you see, is come hither upon the same design as you are.
But when we shall have seen the General of the Achaians, we will go and view
the Waterworks, the Grotto's, and Statues. With all my Heart, replied
Themistides; those are the Ornaments that please me best in a Garden.

He had hardly ended these words, when he saw several People mend their pace,
and overheard them whisper among themselves, that Aratus was stopped in the
Street, with Cylesira and Leriana. How, said Themistides, that Cylesira, whom
you esteem so Charming, will not she come to take the Air? I do not believe,
replied Philistion, that she will come, and show her self in these walks; she
avoids occasions of showing her self, as carefully, as other fair Ladies are
earnest in seeking them: But, added he, advancing toward the Gate, you had
better come and see her, than I speak of her.

Cleomenes followed him out, and had no sooner cast his Eyes upon Cylesira, but
he was as it were dazzled with her Complexion. But if the luster of that
admirable Person did at first surprise him; the Beauty of her Stature, the
flame of her Eyes, the regularity of her Features, and a certain agreeableness,
which Youth spreads over the Face did in a few moments after produce a much
more powerful effect. Cleomenes felt the secret Charm, and it was the first
time that his Heart was moved by an unruly Joy, with which he was not then
acquainted. He was tied as it were with a Chain to Cylesira, and followed, with
his Eyes, that fair Creature, as far as it was possible for him, when she went
away with Aratus and Leriana. Philistion, who did not observe his attention,
proposed to him to go and see the Waterworks and Statues. We shall see them
when we please, replied Themistides. They stand still, Aratus goes away, and
possibly I shall never see him more in my Life. After these words, he cast his
Eyes speedily upon Cylesira, and beheld her with extreme application. As soon
as he had lost sight of her, he fell into a fit of Musing, and returned home,
without speaking one word. This silence continued so long after his return,
that Xenares taking notice of it, said, I cannot think that you come from
seeing Aratus, since you tell me nothing of him. Have you experienced this day,
what I have a thousand times observed, That the Reputation of a great Man, is
not always supported by a good presence? I do not wonder, replied Cleomenes, at
what you have so frequently observed. Those who describe unto us some
extraordinary Persons, take delight in amplifications, on purpose to attract
our Admiration; and on our side, the Imagination carries us yet farther, than
the Recital which we hear. Young as I am, I, my self, have observed, that the
greater part of those things, which Fame has made me desirous of seeing, have
afterward appeared not so fair, as they were represented to me, whether they
were Houses, Statues, or Pictures. You will not fail, in a little time to cite
the Women also, replied Xenares, smiling, and I am persuaded, you will not
esteem those over Charming, who pass in the World for accomplished Beauties. I
should be apt enough to believe the contrary of the Women, replied Cleomenes,
blushing; for methinks their presence can create an emotion of the Heart, which
the bare relation of their Beauties cannot make a Man feel. Ah, Themistides,
replied Xenares with Vexation, I plainly perceive that you have much more to
say of Cylesira, than of Aratus, and I am no longer ignorant of what (...)

Gods inexorable to your Prayers, as long as you are so to Teleander 's. She
answered him with a firm voice. Sir, I know not what design has brought you
into this Temple, but, for my own part, I am come only to Pray unto that God
who is here adored, and you will pleasure me not to interrupt me. Teleander
durst make no reply; the Victims were brought, and the Sacrifice was made.

When Leriana and Cylesira departed, Teleander led them to their Chariot, and
Cleomenes followed them with his Eyes, as far as he could. He having observed
Cylesira, with attention, when she spoke to Teleander, said to Philistion:
Either I am deceived, or Cylesira is very disdainful. She is possibly much more
so, than you imagine, answered he, and you may guess, by the way wherewith you
have seen her treat Teleander, whether she would be more favorable to Lovers
of a lower form. I have already told you, replied Cleomenes, that I have not
the same Pretensions, as the Prince Erymanthus; and that I do not desire to
subject Cylesira's liberty. But may not that fair Creature, and Themistides,
have a Complaisance and Friendship for each other. Considering how you two are
made, replied Philistion, I confess, it would be no difficult task for you to
love each other; but I question, whether it would be easy for you, to content
your self with that tenderness, without desiring to be united; and it is for
such an Union that you would find the greatest Obstacles. For your part, you
are too young to be Master of your own will; and you seem to be born of
Parents, who would not be over-well pleased with you, if you should make such
an Alliance. On the other side, Cylesira, whose Heart is above her Condition,
would not possibly be very forward to give you her consent; and perhaps she
would answer you after a manner, not to be expected from Leriana 's Daughter.
Cleomenes mused for some moments; he could not forbear sighing, and afterward
renewing the Discourse, he said. I plainly perceive, there is but too much
truth in what you say of Cylesira; and that I had better not affect a Person of
her humor. I can also assure you, that I will never yield my self without
resistance, and that I will do my utmost endeavors to defend my Heart against
a passion that would fain be so much Mistress of it.

Instead of continuing this Conversation, he went to walk all alone, and after
changing, an hundred times his Resolution, he still repeated to himself, that
he should be the happiest Man of the World, if he could win the Love of
Cylesira. He believed that Philistion could serve him profitably, and he
thought there was no better way to gain that young Corinthian, than to discover
to him, that he was the Son of Leonidas. He went immediately to find him out,
and looking on him with an Air, which made him expect something extraordinary,
he said to him: I must entrust you with an important secret; and you must
promise me your assistance. Then he declared unto him what was his Birth, and
confessed, that he felt a most violent Passion for Cylesira. Sir, replied
Philistion, I am not surprised to understand that you are a King's Son. A
certain Character of Greatness, which I observed in your countenance and
behavior, has always persuaded me, that your Birth must of necessity have been
Illustrious: But, Sir, will the Prince Cleomenes pardon me the Faults, which my
ignorance has made me commit against Themistides? You have been far from
committing any, replied Cleomenes. I entreat you to observe the same Conduct,
lest you should raise in others, a suspicion of the truth I now tell you. But
above all things, my Dear Philistion, you must obtain for me an absolute
permission, to go sometimes to Leosthenes 's House. Ah, Sir, replied
Philistion, give me leave to render my self more worthy of the Confidence you
have been pleased to place in me, and let me not endeavor to unite the Son of
Leonidas, to Leriana 's Daughter. Let us not talk of that Union, replied
Cleomenes, I never think of it without a mortal vexation. I am sure she would
make my Life happy; but when I consider wherein, and upon whom I do depend, I
know neither what I would, nor what I could do, nor what I ought to do. How,
Sir, replied Philistion, is it difficult for a Prince, who, one day, must reign
over the Lacedaemonians, and whose Family wants a powerful Alliance -- No
Reflections, I entreat you, interrupted Cleomenes. Young as I am, I can make
them my self; and look upon things as they are. But I shall only tell you, that
the Counsel you are about to give me, is not so necessary, as the assistance I
demand of you. Grant it me, unless you would have me be the most unfortunate of
Men, and do not amuse your self to combat a Passion, which neither you nor I
can overcome.

He continued to urge him still with so much earnestness, that at length he
obtained what he desired; and Philistion did not depart from him, without
resolving to seek out some means of satisfying him. He at first perceived very
great difficulties. Leriana and Cylesira did not care to make new
Acquaintances, and it was not very probable, that in a time wherein they
refused the visits of some of Leosthenes's Friends, they would receive any from
a Stranger.

Philistion took another course; he was of opinion, that it was best to present
Cleomenes to the General of the Achaians, as a young Cavalier, who had an
Ambition to serve under him. He judged it would not be difficult, to introduce
him afterward into Onecrysa's Family; and he could not miss there of
opportunities to see Cylesira. This way of bringing Cleomenes acquainted,
seemed to him very natural, and not at all likely to create any suspicions in
Leriana.

He had not thoroughly resolved upon this, when Chance offered him another
expedient, which he made choice of without delay. One of his Friends came and
proposed to him, to make one at a Feast which Teleander would give Cylesira. He
told him, that the fair Lady was to depart from Cor^nth, before the beginning
of the Istmique Games, and that the Prince of Erymanthus was desirous to show
her, as it were in little, what there was most beautiful to be beheld in those
Games. He also acquainted him, that Onecrysa would give a prize for the
Courses, and that afterward there would be a Ball at her House. Consider then,
added the Corinthian, whether you will make one or no. I engage, at least,
replied Philistion, to give my place to a Man, that will supply it better than
my self; and I am mistaken, if the World will will not be of my Opinion. It was
Themistides he meant, to whom he had hardly told the news, but the Prince was
at first troubled with the thought of Leriana's departure; but imagining they
would make no secret of the place, whereunto she would go, his vexation gave
way to the Joy he conceived, for being a Party in the Divertisements that were
designed for Cylesira. He prepared himself for that occasion, when Xenares, to
whom he was obliged to speak of it, opposed his Design; though he was as yet
ignorant to whom that Feast was intended. He represented to the Prince, that he
would expose himself to be known, if he should appear in those Courses. I
confess, answered Cleomenes, that you would have reason to fear such a thing in
the Isthmick Games. I know, that several People may come thither from
Lacedemon, as well as from other parts of Greece. But in the Divertisements we
speak of, there will be only some Gentlemen of Corinth, who see me every
minute in the Temples and Streets. Sir, replied Xenares, I consent to what you
desire, provided that we afterward depart from Corinth, and that you ask not
to see those Games, wherein you your self confess, you may be in danger of
being known.

Cleomenes promised to depart, and Xenares thanked him for it, and said, You
cannot please me better, than to show that you are Master of your Heart, in
spite of the fire of your Youth and Temper. You are willing to remove from
Cylesira; that is to say, to renounce the sight of a Lady that pleases you, and
is the first that ever pleased you; and since in this your Age, your Reason is
so much above your Passions, we may well hope it will always maintain that
Empire.

Cleomenes received this piece of Applause so coldly, that Xenares believed he
knew the reason of it. I perceive well enough, Sir, said he, that, to satisfy
you entirely, I must write this news to the King. Be not in two much haste
Xenares, replied the Prince, know first whether I deserve the Praises you give
me. I never studied to gain them, neither can I leave you in the Opinion
wherein you are. Were I capable of holding my Tongue upon this occasion, I
should look upon my silence, as a dissimulation, which I could not pardon in my
self. Know then, that I am willing to depart, only because I am assured, that
Cylesira is not to stay at Corinth any longer, than to see the Feast that is
prepared for her. You see that I do my self no great Violence, in quitting a
Town wherein Cylesira will not remain.

Xenares concealing part of his Displeasure, replied, I am at least contented
with your sincerity, and I hope I shall be thoroughly satisfied with your
Carriage, when you will be at some distance from Cylesira. This was the Answer
he thought fit to give, without expressing any Vexation, after the frank
Confession which the Prince had made. He was willing that Cleomenes should
appear at the Turnament, as he himself pleased. He did not omit to procure
every thing for him, that could be useful, either in setting off his good Mien,
or assisting his Dexterity. He believed that the Complaisance he should now
show, would give him right to exact others upon more important occasions.

The Divertisement of these Courses was upon the Isthmus. There were several
Scaffolds Erected for Persons of Quality. And Onecrysa's was spread with rich
Tyrian Tapistry; but it may be said, that Ariamite and Cylesira were the
principal Ornaments. They were hardly seated when Teleander appeared with ten
other Cavaliers; some of them were of the most considerable Families of
Corinth, and the rest were chose out of the principal Officers of the Achaians.
They were all very well mounted, and sumptuously habited. Teleander's Horse was
one of the fairest that Spain ever brought forth upon the Banks of Betis. The
Prince managed him gracefully, and having saluted the Ladies with a very good
Grace, he was strangely surprised to single out Philistion in the Crowd a foot,
in his ordinary Habit. He cried out to him, Is it possible that you are not yet
ready? Sir, replied Philistion, without any concern, you may begin when you
please; I have given my place to a Man, with whom you will be better satisfied
than with Philistion. He had no sooner ended these words, but they saw the
Prince of Lacedemon appear. The whole Assembly cast their Eyes immediately upon
him, and sixth them with a kind of astonishment. Cleomenes was mounted on a
Barb, the handsomest and proudest that had in a long time come from the Coasts
of Africa. An hundred fair Plumes waved up and down upon his Cask. He had a
Coat of Mail, of a Carnation Color, and enriched with embroidery of Gold. He
carried a Spear in his right Hand, and his left Arm was covered with a Shield,
sparkling in several places with rich Gems. He advanced with a noble and easy
Air toward Onecrysa's Scaffold, and having bowed to her with great respect, he
addressed himself to Teleander in these terms. Sir, I am doubtful whether you
will pardon Philistion, for having given me his place. The Prince of
Erymanthus, after having attentively beheld. Cleomenes, made answer. I think
indeed, that Philistion will have done us an Injury, but it is after a manner,
that you would be unwilling to own. In the mean time, Sir, instead of entering
into Contestation, we had better wait for the success of the Courses, thanto
talk upon Conjectures. If you please to drive a Chariot, there are twelve
prepared for us. He showed them. Cleomenes accepted of his proffer, and
advanced with the Cavaliers to the end of the Career. Though all the Chariots
had four Horses a piece in a Breast, almost all of an equal goodness; yet they
did not forbear to draw Lots for them. Every Man took that which Chance gave
him; and having made trial of it, the whole Company joined again together, and
started away with Fury, as soon as the Signal was given. Cleomenes did at first
curb in his Horses; but he was hardly in the middle of the Career, when he gave
them a loose, and drove them on so vigorously, that he left the rest of the
Cavaliers far behind him. The swiftness with which he ran, did not at all
disturb him. On the contrary, there appeared in his Countenance neither
Constraint nor Confusion. He was observed to carry himself with as free and
easy an Air, as in ordinary walking. The whole World applauded so fair a
Course, and Teleander not being able to endure it, challenged Cleomenes to
break a Spear. Onecrysa was not wanting to oppose his desire; but Teleander did
so stubbornly insist upon it, that Cleomenes looked upon the Princess of
Erymanthus, as it were, to testify unto her, that it was with regret he saw
himself obliged to displease her. He alighted from his Chariot, took his Horse,
and marched toward one end of the Career, whilst Teleander advanced toward
the other. Presently after they set out at the sound of the Trumpets, and met
each other with so much impetuosity, that their Spears broke upon their Shields
into several Splinters. Nevertheless the advantage was not equal. The Prince of
Lacedemon finished his Career with a good Grace, but Teleander was so shaken,
that he had much ado to recover his first seat. The second Course had a success
more different than the former; Themistides was shaken in his turn; but the
Prince of Erymanthus lost his Stirrops, and staggered, almost thrown back upon
the Crupper of his Horse. The whole Assembly cried out, it was enough; the two
Combatants were parted, and there appeared others in the List, whose Actions it
is not necessary to describe. 'Twill be sufficient to say, that Teleander
overcame two of them, and that Themistides gained a clear advantage over four
others. In the end, Cleomenes was proclaimed Conqueror with Applause, and they
led him, as it were in Triumph, to Onecrysa's Scaffold. As soon as he was come
up to the Princess, he would have kneeled, but Onecrysa, opposing it, rose up
from her seat, and presented him with a Bracelet of Diamonds. Receive, said she
to him, after a most obliging manner, the recompense you have deserved with a
general Approbation. Since you command it, Madam, answered he, I accept of a
Priae, which Address and Dexterity would have given the Prince of Erymanthus,
if Fortune had not concerned her self in our Courses. However, replied
Ariamite, it seems that Chance had no great share in what you have done, and I
know not whether your Air, at your first appearance, did not promise the
Victory you have obtained. In saying this, she attentively beheld Cleomenes;
and Cylesira, her self, cast her Eyes more than once on this Prince.

This Conversation did not continue longer; for several Persons of Quality
passed from their own Scaffolds to Onecrysa's, and Aratus did entreat the
Cavaliers to go and disarm themselves, and to come afterward to his Sisters
House. The Princess of Erymanthus gave this numerous Company an Entertainment,
admirable for its Delicacy and Abundance. Afterward Dancing was proposed, and
it was resolved, that Themistides and Cylesira should have the Honors of the
Ball. Teleander was vexed at it, and addressing himself to the Prince of
Lacedemon, said to him, Confess, Sir, that you are much happier than you
expected; but perhaps you being unacquainted with the Charming Cylesira, are
not so much moved with the good that is designed you, as another Man would be.
You are deceived, Brother, replied Ariamite, Cylesira and Themistides have
already seen each other; and Cylesira has some time since told me, that she saw
Themistides, the other day, in the Temple of Neptune. How, Madam, said
Teleander to Cylesira, did you single out Themistides in a Crowd, that assisted
at the Sacrifice, and have you preserved the Idea of him so fresh in your
Memory, as to know him again this day, in spite of the alteration which his
Arms and differing Habits might occasion in his Air and Visage. Cylesira
blushed, and Cleomenes having taken notice of it, believed that he was obliged
to answer, in order to deliver her out of her Confusion. Methinks, said he, my
being a Stranger, was cause sufficient, to make me to be observed among those
People who are used to be seen every day. It may be also affirmed, replied
Cylesira to Cleomenes, a purpose to give Teleander a little vexation, that we
see few such Strangers as Themistides. That is the reason, interrupted
Teleander, that you so well remember him. I have possibly a better memory than
you imagine, replied she coldly, and as a further mark of it, I have not
forgot, that that very morning you would neither suffer me to Pray, nor Pray
your self. They could not continue this Discourse, being come into the Hall.
The Ladies took their places; the Music began to play, and Onecrysa entreated
Themistides and Cylesira to begin. They Danced, the Assembly admired them; and
it was declared with one general Voice, that there was never any thing seen
finer in all Greece.

Cleomenes could not lead Cylesira, without relishing a certain sweetness,
which he esteemed above all Pleasures; and he had hardly finished his Dance,
when, looking upon that Beautiful Creature, after a tender and respectful
manner, he said, This second happiness, which I owe to my success at the
Courses, is infinitely greater than the first; and I had much rather give my
hand to the incomparable Cylesira, than have received from Onecrysa 's the
Diamonds which she gave me as a Present. Nevertheless, I think there is a great
difference between them, answered she smilingly, and how dis-interessed soever
you may be, you will, within this two or three hours perceive, that the Bull
will be at an end, and that the Bracelet will still remain with you. But,
Madam, replied Themistides, does the Honor I have depend so absolutely on the
Ball, that I may never pretend unto it otherwise, than by a means which Fortune
so rarely offers?

Cylesira could not answer him. Teleander approacht, and interrupted a
Conversation, which he could not endure without trouble. On the other side,
Ariamite addressed her Speech to Cleomenes, and praising the goodness of his
Dancing, said, How! Themistides, must you carry away all the Prizes? It may be,
pursued Onecrysa, most obligingly, he will make a Conquest, that will be more
agreeable to him than his other Victories. I assure you, Madam, replied
Cleomenes, it would be much easier for me to lose on that side, than to win. I
think he is in the right, replied Aratus, and that it will not be easy for him
to depart free from a place, where there are so many Charming Objects. This was
the way they spent the rest of the Evening, but it was by fits and at several
times, as Cleomenes, Cylesira, Teleander, or Ariamite were drawn out to Dance,
or returned from it.

On the morrow morning Xenares came into Cleomenes his Chamber, and after he
had Congratulated with the Prince, the success he had had at the Courses, he
added, Sir, it is high time that you keep your word with me, and that we
depart. However, I could wish, answered Cleomenes, you would stay two or three
days longer. I would consent to it with all my Soul, replied Xenares, were it
to see any thing that were worthy of your Curiosity. Let us go this Afternoon
to the Citadel. You know it is called Acrocorinth, and there is no place of
such importance in all Europe. Philip, the Father of Alexander the Great,
called it the Fetters of Greece. When you shall have considered its Situation
and Ramparts, you will see, that it effectually holds several Provinces, as it
were, in a Chain. It stands upon the famous Isthmus, that joins Peloponesus to
Beotia and Attica. That is a thing that a Prince of Lacedemon should examine
with Application, instead of sighing for the first Lady whom he finds
Beautiful. Since your Intentions to me are no other than good, replied
Cleomenes coldly, I will not take ill the Reproaches you make me. But, Xenares,
will Decency, after what past yesterday, give me leave to depart, without
paying a visit to Onecrysa and Leriana? Well then, replied Xenares, I allow you
a day to do it. I pray let us afterward depart. But would you not have me,
replied the Prince, take a view of Acrocorinth, and make my Court a little to
Aratus, under whom you have consented I may serve. Take then four days,
interrupted Xenares, with vexation, but let us afterward depart, if you
please, without delaying one moment.

While Themistides was thus grieved, to see his Passion condemned, his Rival
found no better treatment at Onecrysa's. Aratus could not suffer his Affection
for Cylesira. I would fain know, said he to him, what Pretensions you have upon
Leriana's Daughter? If it be to take her to Wife, you had better depart
immediately for the Camp, and return no more to Corinth. It is not out of ill
humor, that I talk thus unto you. You saw I did not desire to break your late
match of running. I considered it was Customary for Men of your Age and
Quality, to give such Feasts and Entertainments; but I declare unto you, I
cannot endure that you go continually to Leosthenes's, or that you think of
Marrying your self there. No! I would not have even Cylesira make choice of a
Man of so rude and undiscreet a Conduct. These last words provoked Teleander to
the quick, and blushing both with Anger and Jealousy, he replied, I perceive
plainly enough, what Husband of less Youth, and more Moderation, you would give
Cylesira; but it is well for her, and Teleander, that we do not depend upon
Aratus. I will let you see the contrary, in what concerns you; replied he with
a threatening Voice: Then he went to Onecrysa's, and reproached her with the
excess of her Indulgence to Teleander. The Princess of Erymanthus did at first
approve of Aratus's Reasons; but in a few moments after, Teleander did efface
all the impressions they had made. He came to Onecrysa's Chamber, his Face
being quite changed, and his Eyes wet with Tears. Madam, said he, I cannot
believe that you approve of Aratu's proceedings toward me. He uses me, as if I
were the lowest of his Slaves; he would put a constraint even upon the
inclination of my Heart. He cannot endure, that, at my Age, I should have a
Passion, which he permits in himself, when he is so far stepped in years. I doubt
not, but that he has prepossest you against me; but he has discoursed unto you,
much less like the Princess Onecrysa's Brother, than like Teleander's Rival. To
be convinced thereof, you need only examine, what Aratus does every minute for
Cylesira. You need only observe, that he was well enough contented, I should
contribute to the divertisement of that Beautiful Creature, by a Ball, and an
imitation of our famous Games, and yet, that he cannot pardon in me the Passion
I have for her. I assure you, replied Onecrysa, I have already made some of
these Reflections; but after all, Teleander, you must have some Complaisance for
Aratus. You know how great his Power is in Achaia; you stand in need of his
support, to render you considerable; and you may also think of making a much
more important Alliance, than that with Leosthenes and Leriana can be. No, no,
Madam, replied Teleander, very much troubled, I will never love any other than
Cylesira, and if I lose the hopes of Marrying her, I shall fall into a
Languishing that will become fatal to me. If you would have me live, it must
be, if you please, with Cylesira; you must consent to it; and you must even
dispose that admirable Person, whom Aratus renders Cruel, to be favorable to
me. Onecrysa did, at first, with obstinacy enough, deny what Teleander
requested of her; but the Prince having cast himself at her Feet, did entreat
her in such pressing terms, that she promised him, at length, to do what he
desired.

In a little time after, Leriana and Cylesira came to visit her. Onecrysa left
Leriana in her Chamber with Ariamite, and took Cylesira aside into her Closet,
upon pretense of letting her see some Pictures that were lately brought her
from Sycion. But instead of showing her what was beautiful in those pieces; she
looked upon her with attention, and addressed her speech to her after this
manner. Fair Cylesira, answer me sincerely, I pray you; How do you like the
Gentleman, that diverted you yesterday with the Races and Tournaments? He is
such a one, replied Cylesira, as very well deserves all the tenderness you have
for him. Do you think, replied Onecrysa, that he can render himself worthy of
yours, and that you can be happy with him? Since, it may be, that I am not so
much Mistress of my own will, replied Cylesira in blushing, as you believe I
am, it is not necessary, Madam, that I explain my self -- Ah, Cylesira,
interrupted Onecrysa spightfully, you explain your self but too much; I clearly
perceive what induces you to Contemn Teleander. How! Madam, interrupted
Cylesira in her turn, do you believe me to be so unjust, as not to have an
esteem for the good Qualities which all the World attribute to the Prince of
Erymanthus. That word Esteem is not at all disobliging, replied Onecrysa, but
it contains a certain reservedness, with which I cannot be satisfied upon this
occasion. I know whence your Sentiments of Coyness do proceed; you flatter your
self so far, as to be persuaded, that the General of the Achaians will Marry
you, and that is the reason you scorn what I offer you; but disabuse your self,
Cylesira; a Man, who has been for so many years covered with Glory, will never
think of matching himself to so young a Lady as you are. He would lose his
Reputation thereby, and you would not preserve yours. Men would believe that
you had been very Complaisant to establish your Fortune; and besides, what
pleasure could you relish with Aratus? You might perhaps have for him such a
respect, as is due to a Father; but could you have that Charming tenderness,
which, with delight, is felt for a Husband? Cylesira heard the provoked Mother
without any emotion; afterward she answered her in these terms, with all the
marks of a real sincerity. I protest to you, Madam, that Aratus's Intentions
are very different from those, whereof you believe him capable. We are indebted
for the good Offices he does us, to the Recommendation of a considerable
Friend, which he has in Peloponesus; and Leriana owes so many, and so great
Obligations to that Friend of Aratus's, as that she cannot dispose of me
without his Consent. If you doubt of this, Madam, you need only wait until our
departure from Corinth, to see, that what I tell you is true; and in the mean
time I promise you, that Leriana shall not engage me, either to Aratus, or to
any other. Nevertheless, I know not, replied Onecrysa sorrowfully, whether
Teleander will be able to approve of your reason, and to moderate his desires.
He has in his Heart the most violent Passion that ever was. He has not had one
minutes rest since he saw you; and for my own part. I fear his disquiets will
shorten my days. I am very sorry, replied Cylesira, that my presence has
produced so ill an effect; but Madam, I shall depart within a very few days,
and you shall see the cause of this disorder removed. I had much rather,
replied Onecrysa, see you touched with some kindness for my Son.

The Princess, taking notice that Cylesira was in a most grievous perplexity,
thus continued her Discourse. I see well enough that this Conversation is not
agreeable to you, and that it is not very likely to create in your Heart such
Sentiments, as I would have therein for Teleander. I leave you Cylesira, and
hope you will be more favorable to us, if you make any Reflections on what I
just now said unto you. After these words she left Cylesira with Ariamite and
Leriana, and went down into the Garden, where Teleander waited for her with
extraordinary impatience. She was far from relating to him any thing that might
increase his Melancholy; she assured him only, that he had a share in
Cylesira's Esteem; and that he must not think, that so reserved a Lady, could
be pressed to make, at the very first, a more obliging Declaration.

At this very moment Onecrysa was advised, that Themistides desired to see her;
she received him with all the civility she was capable of practicing at such a
Conjuncture; and expressed to him, that she had a very earnest desire he should
be her Son's Friend. You are very generous, Madam, replied Cleomenes, to desire
that the Prince of Erymanthus may contract a Friendship with a Stranger, who
may stand in need of his support, upon a thousand occasions, and in whose Power
it can never be to make any other requital, than by having good intentions
toward him. I have had too much experience of what you can do, replied
Teleander with a behavior sufficiently cold, and the Princess Onecrysa plainly
sees, it would be dangerous for me to have you my Enemy. Let us talk no more,
if you please, replied Themistides, of what passed yesterday. I have already
protested to the Princess, that Fortune, according to her Custom, was not
favorable to Merit; but, Sir, she is inconstant; and I am very glad that the
Amity, by which the Princess would unite us, may secure me from her Changes.
You fear her less than you express your self, replied Teleander; and, for my
own part, I am not over apprehensive, that she will always declare her self
against me. Onecrysa perceived that there remained still some bitterness in
Teleander's Spirit; so that she desired to turn the Discourse to some other
subject, when luckily Ariamite, Cylesira (...), and Philistion entered the
Garden. They did not dare at first to approach Onecrysa, having observed that
there was something serious in her Countenance: but in a few moments after,
Ariamite coming up to them, said, Do you think it would disoblige Themistides
and Teleander, to carry them along with us? I believe they would not be very
sorry to quit the Princess Onecrysa 's Company, for Cylesira 's. Madam, it is
yours, replied Cylesira, that is only capable of making them amends, for what
they lose in leaving the Princess. She had hardly ended these words, when
Onecrysa dismissed Themistides and Teleander. You would not love me too well,
said she to them, if I kept you any longer with me. Go your ways along with
Cylesira and Ariamite. The company of People of my Age cannot long be pleasing
to you.

At the very moment that Themistides and Teleander departed from Onecrysa,
Leriana and Philistion came up to her. The two Princes accosted Cylesira and
Ariamite; and Teleander presented his hand to the former. You will be pleased,
said he, addressing himself to Cleomenes, to let me lead the admirable
Cylesira, and to let the Walking be as favorable to me to day, as the Ball was
yesterday to you. Themistides not being Master of the motions of his heart,
appeared surprised, and looked upon Teleander and Cylesira with a blush.
Ariamite cast her Eyes upon Cleomenes's Countenance, and having observed it
changed; I see, said she to him, you are not over-well satisfied with this
partition. You might easily imagine Teleander would not choose a Sister. After
these words she began to walk, and in a lower voice continued, I know not
whether your loss be so great as you imagine it is. I confess that Cylesira has
a great deal of Merit and Beauty; but she is very Proud, and it may be even
said she is Unjust. She uses my Brother after a manner, able to make any other
take good heed; and there is mingled with her Modesty a certain Air of
greatness, for which I know no reason. She was going on with her Discourse,
when Cylesira, turning to her, said, Madam, will you be pleased that we repose
a while on this seat of Turfe, which offers it self so opportunely? We have
walked so little, answered Teleander very roughly, that you can be tired with
nothing but with hearing me. That is as you please, replied she, I will let you
believe what you will, provided you will let me sit down. One need be no great
Conjurer, said Ariamite to them, to know that there is some Contest between
you. If we knew the reason of it, we would possibly endeavor a reconciliation.
But, Madam, replied Cleomenes with a smile, I know not whether your endeavors
would be successful, and whether it would not be believed, that you are too
much interessed for the Prince of Erymanthus. It Is better -- And he was going
to propose the giving his Hand to Cylesira, but judging Decency would not
permit him to do so; It Is better, pursued he, that we advance toward the
Princess Onecrysa: the Conversation will be more peaceable in her presence. By
that means he would prevent Teleander from entertaining Cylesira with his
Passion. Ariamite was also of the Opinion to join with Onecrysa; and in going
toward the Alley where that Princess walked, she discoursed again to
Themistides of Cylesira's humor, in these terms. Have you not observed that
Lady's Pride? The Princess Onecrysa has given her Consent for my Brother's
Espousing her; yet I know that Cylesira tells her, she is under an engagement,
which hinders her from accepting of Teleander. I confess I do not understand
her Conduct, or rather her Blindness. It must be that Cylesira pretends to some
King, since she refuses such a Prince as Teleander. But, Madam, replied
Cleomenes, is it not possible for Cylesira to be engaged in an Alliance, far
less considerable than that which you speak of, and yet keep her word, to the
prejudice of her Fortune? I will believe that Cylesira may have less Ambition
than Generosity, replied Ariamite, but you must then confess, that her Lovers
are not the happier, if they attempt a Heart so constant and immovable. These
words struck Cleomenes with a sorrow, which he would have had much ado to
conceal, if at that time he had not found himself near Onecrysa; and as that
Princess, and the People with her, were all sufficiently melancholy, the
Conversation was neither very diverting, nor very long, but in a few moments
after the whole Company divided themselves.

On the morrow morning Xenares proposed to Cleomenes to go wait on Aratus, and
told him he would be glad to bear him company. You may be assured, said he to
him, I shall approve of this Visit, as much as I have been troubled at those
others I have seen you make, since they might have been dangerous unto you. You
are pleased, replied Cleomenes with impatience, that I never see any thing, but
old Generals, old Princes, or old Magistrates. Be not passionate, I pray,
replied Xenares, I know what Complaisance is due to young People; but also I am
not ignorant with what Precautions their want of Experience ought to be
governed. However, let us lay aside a Discourse, which would not be very
agreeable unto you. I am unwilling to say any thing that may give you vexation,
since I shall see you but one day longer, in the same City as Cylesira. They
arrived at Aratus's, who received Cleomenes with several marks of Esteem.
Xenares addressing his speech to the General of the Achaians, said, My Lord,
Themistides will not fail to make use of the advantage which Fortune offers
him, to make his first Campaigne under the Great Aratus. I assure you, I shall
be very glad of it, replied that famous Captain; and if Themistides can find my
Instructions to be of any use unto him, I will impart them to him with
pleasure. I shall soon be glad that he will do me the same good Office; for I
am mistaken, if he will not proceed far in a little time. Yes, Sir, replied
Cleomenes, if he can but follow the famous General of the Achaians; but that is
a Glory wherewith he ought not to flatter himself, to what Presumption soever
his Youth may transport him.

In a few moments after, the news that were brought, became the subject of the
Conversation. They were informed, that the Etolian Army were preparing to enter
Peloponesus, through the Lands of the Megarians. I think, answered Aratus,
without being moved, that they will let us see the Isthmick Games, and that
King Agis will be come with his Lacedaemonians, before the Enemies make the
Irruption with which they threaten us.

Cleomenes was no sooner gone from Aratus, but he thought on the Visit he did
design to make to Cylesira; nevertheless he thought not on it without a fear,
which inclined him to take Philistion's Advice. I wish with all my Heart, said
he to him, that you knew whether Leriana and Cylesira would take it ill, if I
should visit them this Afternoon. Leosthenes will be able to tell you their
Sentiments, and I will gladly govern my self according to his Answer. Sir,
replied Philistion, it is not necessary to consult Leosthenes; you may go visit
Leriana; nay after what is passed, you cannot decently dispense with your self
from going. But consider that Leriana departs within these two days; and that
if she were to remain longer at Corinth, it would not be very easy for you to
make her a second Visit. Ah, Philistion, replied Cleomenes, permit me to relish
the sweetness which you promise me this day, without mingling therewith the
bitterness you make me fear. We shall, perhaps, hereafter find out some trusty
and cunning Fellow, who shall depart with Leriana, and come and tell us the
place of her retirernent. Philistion promised to find but such a Fellow, and in
two hours after he went with him to Leosthenes's House.

Leriana was at that time in her Closet, regulating some Affairs that concerned
her departure; so that it happened Cylesira received Cleomenes and Philistion.
They were handly seated, when she addressed her speech to Themistides, and
asked him whether he did not find that Corinth was one of the fairest Cities,
he had seen in all his Travels. I think, however, added she, that you are not
generally beloved in this place. The young Gentlemen here cannot bear it, that
a Stranger should come and rob them of all the Prizes. I confess, Madam,
answered Cleomenes, that I have not been unfortunate; but the Gentlemen, you
speak of, esteem themselves vanquished less by Themistides, than the fairest
Ladies of the Town see themselves obliged to give place to the incomparable
Cylesira. These last words having made that modest Creature blush, Cleomenes
examined her Countenance, to see whether he could make discovery of any thing
in it, which he might have cause to fear. Philistion perceiving them both to be
in a little Confusion, began to speak, in order to deliver them out of it. I
see but too plainly, said he to them, as it were in Anger, that you both are in
the right, and that you both do effectually obscure the finest and the most
excellent we have in Corinth; but my Consolation on my Countries account is,
that both the one and the other are going away. Is then Themistides about to
leave this place? interrupted Cylesira, not being able to endure those Praises,
wherein she had a share. Yes, Madam, replied the Prince, and if Fortune would
once more dispose of me into the same place as you, I should esteem my self
more indebted to her for it, than for all the Favors it is in her Power to do
me. If that should happen, replied Cylesira, with a smile, she would render you
a worse Office than you imagine. But there is no great probability that
Themistider, who, in all appearance, travels only through the fairest Cities of
Greece, can meet Cylesira in the Solitude whereunto she intends to go. Ah,
Madam, replied Cleomenes, how Charming would that Solitude be with Cylesira;
and how much more pleasant would I esteem, than the most beautiful Courts of
the World. He could not go on, because Leriana entered the room; but Philistion
immediately took a pretense to lead her toward the Chamber Windows. Cylesira
was afraid lest Themistides should continue a Discourse, to the consequence
whereof she durst not hearken; and casting her Eyes on Leriana and Philistion,
she called out to them; What! do you leave us? There was no necessity, replied
Cleomenes, of letting me thus know, that my Company alone was not sufficient to
divert you. I was, Madam, already convinced of it. But why, replied Cylesira,
could not I apprehend that mine might be disagreeable unto you, without the
assistance I now called for? Leriana and Philistion being thus drawn near, they
entertained each other with public News only, until Decency constrained
Themistides to depart. On the morrow Xenares carried Themistides to the
Citadel; he made him examine its Fortifications, and in the Evening proposed to
him to go to Athens. Methinks, replied Cleomenes, that, according to what we
have been informed of, cancerning the Etolians, we ought not to go too far from
Corinth. It Is requisite that we be in a place, where we may have constant
notice of Aratus 's designs, and from whence we may be in a possibility of
joining with him, as soon as there shall be occasion. Well then, replied
Xenares, we may pass over into the Isle of Egina, from which we are divided but
by so short a passage. You know how famous it is, as well for the mischiefs,
wherewith it is said that the hatred of Juno has afflicted it, as for the
wonderful change of Pismiers into Men, which Jupiter made there, at the
entreaty of his Son Eacus. In the mean time Philistion shall write daily unto
us, what it will import us to know. I pray, replied that Corinthian, let some
Friend of mine take upon himself that charge, and let me not forsake you.
Themistides and Xenares accepted his proffer with great acknowledgments, and
Philistion being mindful of what he promised Cleomenes, instructed one of his
People, according to the Princes Intentions. He gave him order to enquire at
Leosthenes's, what way Leriana was to take, and commanded him to come with all
expedition to give him notice of it, to the Isle of Egina, at the Town of
Palenis.

Cleomenes, Xenares, and Philistion went to embark, followed only by two menial
Servants, Erantor and Nicidas, whom Xenares had chosen out to serve the Prince.
While they delayed setting Sail, and the People, who were in the Ship, began to
murmur, one came to advertise the Pilot, that he might depart when he pleased,
for that the Ladies, whom he expected, would not pass into Egina until to
morrow. At the very same time Philistion saw the Man arrive, to whom he had
given the Order that is mentioned above; and he was informed that Leosthenes
did intend to carry Leriana and Cylesira into Egina, to a House which he had at
Palenis. Philistion approacht Themistides, and imparted to him the News he had
heard. Then looking upon him with a merry Countenance, said unto him, Well,
Sir, will you now say you are unhappy? Will you now complain, when Cylesira
comes in search of you? I confess, replied Cleomenes, that I am well enough
contented with this adventure; but, Philistion, since Fortune intermeddles to
oblige me, why did she not finish her work? Why did she not render my
happiness complete, by placing me in the same Ship with Cylesira? What delight
it is to be in a possibility of beholding every moment what one loves; of
conversing with the Charming Cylesira; and of being shut up with her in the
same place! When I think on the Joy I should have had, my heart tastes but an
imperfect Pleasure for what you now tell me. It has even a greater inclination,
to regret what it loses this day, than to flatter it self, with the good
Fortune, which you make it hope for to morrow. In fine, Philistion, we have
been too forward in our departure; and there is, in the unseasonableness of it,
something, I know not what, that promises no great good. Is it possible, that
Love makes a Man always look upon things on the worst side? Must you needs be
melancholy at so fortunate a Chance, because it wanted some one particular
which you could have desired? Ah, Sir, if you continue in this humor, you will
have many vexatious minutes, during the course of your Passion.

After this manner they discoursed together, while they Sailed over the
Passage. As soon as they were Landed in Egina, Philistion showed Cleomenes and
Xenares the way to the Town of Palenis, and took a Lodging near Leosthenes's
House.

On the morrow he proposed to Cleomenes to go a walking in a Wood, Consecrated
to Thetis, which he pointed to with his Hand, it being not above a Bow-shoot
off. Do you not observe, replied Cleomenes, that this Wood advances toward the
Coast, that lies over against the Port of Pyreum? We had better turn toward
Corinth. You having seen that way yesterday, replied Philistion with a smile, I
was now willing to lead you another. Let us take that which will lead us
toward Cylesira, replied Cleomenes impatiently, and confess that you have made
no good Choice. I know not whether you make a better, replied Philistion, with
a tone more serious than before; for, indeed, Sir, if you see Cylesira come
ashore, you will, in spite of your self, show a certain eagerness, mingled
with Joy, which will give Leriana some Jealousy, and make her very cautious.
It Is better that the first time you meet should be by chance. In fine, Sir,
consider whether you will let me manage your Interests, or follow a Passion
that never is a good Guide.

Cleomenes suffered himself to be governed, and Philistion carried him through
Thetis's wood into a Vale, where several Brooks joined together, and made a
River, whose Banks where shaded with large Trees: Well, Sir, said Philistion,
what say you to this Landscape? That I should prefer it before the delicious
Temple of Thessaly, answered Cleomenes, if I saw here Cylesira: But I cannot
regard any thing with Pleasure, when I am away from her I love. Therefore
Philistion let us approach her, I entreat you; she may possibly be already
arrived: We cannot do better than return to Palenis.

Philistion consented thereunto, and they were hardly within the Town, when
they saw Leriana and Cylesira going into Leosthenes's house. Philistion
counterfeited a surprise, nevertheless he advanced forward, and without saying
many words at the first Salutation, he gave his hand to Leriana, while
Themistides took Cylesira by her hand. They were no sooner in the Hall but
Leriana blushed; and seemed to be in some con^usion. I cannot, said she, express
the astonishment I am in, to find you in Egina; but cortainly you came hither
only to take the divertisement of Hanting, and you will depart from hence in a
very few days. I being unwilling to be far from Aratus, replied Cleomenes,
intend to stay at Palenis, until I must march along with him against the
Etolians. But for your part, Madam, I believe that Leosthenes 's business will
detain you here much longer. I think the contrary, replied Leriana, That I
shall depart from hence very suddenly: I am not come hither to divert my self,
and possibly I shall neither visit nor see any body, so that my stay will not
appear pleasant enough, to keep me here any longer, when once my Brother will
have given Orders for a Boat that is now repairing.

These words, and decency, that required them to leave Leriana to her repose,
did not permit Cleomenes to stay any longer with her. As he returned, he was
met with by an Achaian, who had followed and observed Cylesira by Teleander's
order.

On the other side, Xenares was informed, that Themistides came out of
Leosthenes's House, and having saluted him with an Air, which sufficiently
expressed his trouble: How, Sir, said he, do not you let Cylesira take Breath
after her arrival? I perceive, to my deadly sorrow, that you are fallen into a
weakness, which you have a thousand times condemned. Do you think it strange,
replied Cleomenes, that I should be susceptible of a Passion which is so common
to young People? No Sir, replied Xenares, provided it were with a Person that
were not below your self. You see how those Great Men are blamed, who have
loved with that inequality. You hear what reproaches are made upon that account
against the Great Hercules, whom you acknowledge the Author of your Race.
Propose to your self the imitation of his brave Actions only, and never mention
his faults, to authorize your own. I agree that a King may be allowed to raise
to his Throne, a Person, whom Beauty and Merit are able to supply her want of
Noble Extraction. But Sir, is this privilege to be allowed You, during the
unhappy condition of Your Family? You ought as yet to have no other thoughts,
than the re-establishment of the King Your Father; and when you will be a
little more advanced in Years, you should choose an alliance, that might
strengthen your party. I think, replied Cleomenes coldly, I have not yet told
you, I would marry Cylesira. I know that I ought not to pretend to it; and that
is likely to be the cause of the unhappiness of my whole Life. For to confess
unto you ingeniously, I have a violent passion, without any hopes of overcoming
or satisfying it. But Sir, replied Xenares, can the Son of Leonidas condescend
to love Leriana's Daughter? Is it my fault? The Prince mournfully replied. Can
a man love or hate as he pleases? And besides, have you not observed how a kind
even of Fatality has drawn me into this unfortunate Engagement? You know I went
into Timoleon's Garden, with no other intention than to see Ardtus, when
Destiny brought thither the most admirable Creature in the World. I am Young:
You confess that my Temper is hot, and that I loved nothing. Are you then
amazed that a Heart not yet possessed with any Passion, should receive with joy
one so Charming? Nevertheless assure your self, I depend upon a Father, and the
War is going to separate me from Cylesira. Only I could wish, that I were
allowed sometimes to visit that fair Lady, while we shall stay at Egina. I
shall not give you often that vexation; for Leriana is not of an humor to
receive too frequent visits. Xenares mused for some Moments, and afterward
consented to what Cleomenes desired. But, Sir, added he, it is upon Condition
that we depart within a Week for the Camp of the Achaians. That diligence does
become very well Persons of your Age. And besides, it is convenient, that when
Aratus shall arrive at the Army, he finds you already accustomed to the
fashions of Men of War.

He said no more; but left Cleomenes, without staying for his Answer. The
Prince entreated Philistion to see Leosthenes, and believed that leave might be
obtained from him sometimes to go to his House. Leosthenes gave it; but he was
surprised when he spoke of it to his Sister. I entreat you, said Leriana to
him, never to refolv^ upon any thing, for the future, that may concern
Cylesira. I have some important reasons, that oblige me to be thus cautious.
Leosthenes replied, that he would willingly consent to do whatever she should
think convenient; but that he did not believe there had been any mystery in
receiving those Visits in the Country, which had not been refused at Corinth.
Believe me, Sister, added he, you ought not to affect these Singularities upon
occasions, which the commerce of Life renders so usual; otherwise it may be
said that my Nieces Beauty makes you too proud and disdainful. At length
Leosthenes persuaded Leriana, and Cleomenes visited Cylesira. He was over joy'd
to give her the little Testimonies of his Complaisance and Submission; to look
upon her with a passionate Air, to meet sometimes her Eyes, and never to see
any mark of Aversion! upon her Countenance. In the mean time Teleander was
informed that Themistides and Cylesira were in the Isle of Egina: He did not
doubt, but that their meeting there was concerted between them, and ceived the
upon a mortal Griel. He failed to be present at a Horse race, wherein he had
promised to make one. For the violent agitation of his Heart put him into a
Fever. He was forced to betake himself to his Bed, and Oneerysa, upon her first
hearing the News, ra^^ unto him all in a fright. As soon as Title ander saw
her, he addressed his speech unto her, saying; Ah! Madam, I must dye, unless I
will see. Themistides the Possessor of Cylesira. But, Son, replied Onecrysa,
what assurance have you of his good Fortune? Will you, upon some simple
Conjecture, abandon your self to despair? My unhappiness is certain, replied
Teleander. Two Persons, such as Cylesira and Themistides, have not left Corinth
to go into Egina, without having some considerable reason for it. Xenares and
Leriana have not managed that Voyage with so much mystery, without some design,
that could have merited such a Conduct. No, no, Madam, I have no room to doubt
of my misfortune; but instead of spending my time in unprofitable Lamentations,
I must go and pierce my Rival's Heart, and take away Cylesira from him by
force. In fine, there is no resolution that I will non take, in order to unite
my self to the fairest Creature that ever was.

He would afterward have given some orders, that concerned his departure, when
Onecrysa, not judging that he was in a Condition to undertake a Voyage, did at
first oppose his Intentions. But at length she was constrained to consent to
them, nevertheless upon Condition, that she should go along with him, being
unwilling to abandon Teleander, in the condition and resolution wherein she saw
him. Ah, Madam, cried he out, how much should I be obliged unto you, if you
would grant me the assistance you can give! My Life and Death are in your
hands. It is in your Power to give me Cylesira. In mine! replied Onecrysa with
amazement. Even in yours, added Teleander, for indeed there is nothing easier
than for you to carry out Cylesira to take the Air in your Chariot, to remove
her far enough of from Leriana and Themistides, and to carry her into a place,
where I may be able to move her heart by my submission and Complaisance. How!
interrupted Onecrysa would you carry away Cylesira by force and dare you
propose to me to be the Accomplice of your Crime? When I desired you would be
present, replied Teleander, have I pretended to commit any action, that you
could dis-approve of, and of which Cylesira her self could have reason to
complain? We should constrain only to accept of an advantage, which Fortune
offers her. If at first she may utter a few Complaints against us, we shall
hereafter receive nothing but thanks. Nevertheless, replied Onecrysa, you had
better make a Trial of some other ways: They would be too far about, replied
Teleander, I do not see they could bring me to the place I would go to, before
Themistides arrive there. But who has persuaded you, that that Stranger is
beloved? replied Onecrysa. I never perceived Leriana and Cylesira entertain him
too favorably. A Man must be in love, replied Teleander to have Eyes quick and
penetrating into these kinds of occasions. However, if I am mistaken, I am
willing to act no otherwise, then according to your Orders. But, Madam, if I
let you see that I am in the right, will you then refuse me the assistance
which I desire of you? I am so thoroughly persuaded, that your Conjectures are
false, replied Onecrysa, that I run no manner of hazard, in promising to
comply with this that you now desire.

She departed from him, and thought that the promise she had given, had engaged
her to nothing; but Teleander was not of the same Opinion. He felt a great part
of his disquiets growing calm, now when he began to imagine, that by Onecrysa's
support, he should have yet time enough to overthrow the Project of Themistides
and Cylesira. This thought having set his Heart something at rest, put him in a
Condition to depart on the morrow.

Onecrysa, instead of contesting with him to no purpose, left her Daughter
Ariamite with Aratus, and told them both, she was very desirous to visit
Leriana and Cylesira in their Solitude. I assure you, continued she, that I am
weary of these Festivals and Holidays; and besides, I shall be very glad to
carry Teleander far from these violent Exercises, which he loves a little too
well for his health.

Aratus did not disapprove of this design, and Onecrysa put it into Execution.
During their Journey Teleander thought of nothing, but on the means of finding
out the certainty of his Conjectures. He being in the Coach with Onecrysa, and
consequently having an opportunity of discoursing every minute with her, said,
Madam, if you would conceal, for a little while at the first, your arrival at
Egina, Xenares and Leriana would let Themistides and Cylesira act with less
Circumspection, and it would be easier for us to discover that which we have a
mind to know. But if, on the contrary, you go presently to alight at Leosthenes
's House, they will not fail to renew their Cautions, and to continue the
mystery they have begun. Son, replied Onecrysa, I am very willing to comply
with you in that matter, and even to leave entirely to you, the Conduct of a
Journey, I have undertaken only for your sake. But once more I tell you, your
suspicions are ill grounded; and I am much mistaken, if Cylesira loves
Themistides. I wish, with all my heart, replied Teleander, that I might see my
self in a mistake; but instead of flattering my self with that hope, I had
rather, without any delay, take such measures, as may make my design succeed. I
have heard it said, that there is a pleasant Wood near Leosthenes 's House, you
may repose there an hour or two, and hear a great deal of news in a little
time. You need only send, on several pretenses, some Inhabitants of Palenis to
the Domestic Servants of Xenares and Leriana, and they will not fail to inform
you of every thing that passes amongst them.

While Teleander is thus preparing to go through with his Resolution,
Themistides is far from enjoying that good Fortune, which gives so many
suspicions. All the advantage he has, is that of being in the same place as
Cylesira; yet he is not much the happier for it. He very seldom obtains
permission to see the Object of his Love. Leriana makes it known, that she is
not come to Egina to be seen by every body. On the other side, Xenares, instead
of opposing Cleomenes directly in the first transports of his Passion, resolved
to address himself to Leriana, to entreat her not to receive any Visits from
Themistides.

On the morrow, as he sent to ask whether he might wait on Leriana; she
answered the Man who brought the Message; I pray tell Xenares, that I have no
less desire to speak with him; and because we may not be interrupted, we had
better meet in Thetis 's Wood in the great Walk there. It was just at that nick
of time that Onecrysa arrived near Palenis, and having left her Chariot and
Attendants, at an house some distance off the Town, Chance brought her to that
part of the Wood, where Xenares and Leriana were to meet. Teleander met with a
young Fellow, whom he found serviceable for his Design. He gave him the
necessary Instructions, and sent him to Cylesira's and Themistides's Lodgings.
This Messenger acquitted himself dexterously of his Commission, and in a few
minutes after brought back notice, that Leosthenes was gone to Athens, and that
Xenares and Leriana were just a coming into the Wood, to discourse together of
some very considerable business. Ha! Madam, said Teleander, hide your self, if
you are seen, you may say laughingly, that you had a mind to surprise Leriana;
and if we escape without being perceived; we shall possibly be informed of the
mystery which we desire to know. Onecrysa consented to it, and Teleander
searched for some place, that might favor his Intentions. He had hardly found
one, when Xenares and Leriana came into the Wood by two several ways, and
advanced toward one another. Teleander could not look upon them without an
extraordinary emotion of Heart, and what added very much to his vexation was,
that Xenares and Leriana were at some distance from the place where he was, and
turned their backs toward it, so that he could neither over-hear them, nor
consult their Countenances. In the mean time Xenares beginning the
Conversation, said, Will you, Madam, be pleased, before I tell you the cause
that brings me hither, inform me, what Commands you have for me. I am willing,
answered Leriana, to explain my self first; and that I may lose no time in
making vain Apologies, I shall only entreat you to hinder Themistides to come
to my House. I have very forcible Reasons that forbid me to suffer it. I have
also very important Reasons, replied Xenares, which inspire me with the same
Sentiments. Themistides must return free into his own Country, and it would be
difficult for him to preserve his Liberty, near such a Person as Cylesira is.
How glad am I, replied Leriana, that we have the same Interests; by acting thus
unanimously, we shall prevent Themistides and Cylesira from being in love with
each other, and if they are already in love, their engagement will not be able
to hold against the measures we shall take.

In ending these words she found her self at the end of the Walk, and took
another that led directly toward Teleander and Onecrysa. Her mind being then
at rest, as well as Xenares, the Prince of Erymanthus failed not to attribute
the satisfaction he observed in their Faces, to the Cause his Jealousy
suggested to him: So that his despair augmented in a strange manner; especially
when he heard Leriana go on with her Discourse in these terms. I am very glad
we are of the same Opinion: We shall have no more of those disquiets, that we
have had upon Themistides and Cylesira 's score. But, Madam, replied Xenares,
let us say nothing, I entreat you, of the Resolution which we have now taken.
It Is very material, that none should know it. Rely on my Discretion, replied
Leriana, and be assured, that Cylesira will follow my. Sentiments. Yes,
Xenares, I will answer for her; methinks this is enough to send you back
contented.

After this, they parted, and went out of the Wood, and left Teleander in a
mortal Melancholy. The Prince turned himself toward Onecrysa, and beholding
her with Eyes, that sufficiently denoted the trouble of his Heart, he said,
Well, Madam, will you still affirm I am mistaken; and that they do not intend
to rob me of Cylesira? I confess, answered Onecrysa, that my surprise is
extreme. I could never have believed that Cylesira had been thus engaged, as
Leriana lets us understand she is. However, replied Teleander, it shall not be
easy for her to unite her self to that Unknown, whom she prefers before we; or
at least I will not be so unhappy as to see that Union. It shall either cost me
my Life, or I will reach Themistides 's Heart. I will attack him even before
Cylesira 's Eyes. But, replied Onecrysa all in a fright, what necessity is
there that you expose your self after that manner? If you chance to overcome
your Rival, do you think you shall be received with the greater favor, by the
Person who loves him? And if your self be overcome, will you not give your
Enemies a fresh cause of Joy and Triumph? You had better, Teleander, you had
better take a way more pleasing, and less dangerous. Let us seize Cylesira, as
you at first proposed unto me; I consent to it. You will be every minute
furnished with means to make your self be beloved by her, when her dependence
shall be on us, and she removed from Themistides. If you cannot gain her Heart,
at least she shall not have the liberty to give her self to another.

They then consulted of the means how to execute their Resolution. They re-took
their Chariot, and went directly to Leosthenes's House, as if they had but just
then arrived at Palenis. Leriana and Cylesira received them with Civility,
accompanied with Friendship and Respect, and gave them very quickly an
Entertainment, wherein they saw plenty of Dainties, proper to good Country
Towns.

While Teleander enjoyed the pleasure of eating with Cylesira, of looking on
her with Eyes full of Passion, and of finding her all Mild and Complaisant,
Themistides was disturbed with cruel disquiets. Besides his being informed that
his Rival was with Cylesira, Xenares told him News much more vexatious. He gave
an account of the entreaty Leriana had made him, and assured him he would
disoblige Cylesira, if he desired to see her any more. The Reasons she has to
forbid your going to her House, pursued he, are possibly greater than I
believed them at first to be. Not to flatter you, Sir, I doubt that Onecrysa
and Teleander would not, during the Games, have quitted Corinth, to come into
Egina, if they had had no other business, than to make a formal Visit. That
which confirms me more in my Conjectures is, that they oblige me to make you
this disagreeable Compliment, precisely at the time your Rival is expected.
Will you then, after this, delay one minute, to disingage your self? Will you
not open your Eyes, to see that Teleander is preferred before you? But, should
Cylesira do otherwise, what advantage could you reap from it? Would you marry
an unknown Woman? You, Sir, who one day are to reign over the fiercest Nations
of the World? Court some Alliance that may contribute to the Peace of the
Commonwealth, or else strengthen your Party. Join Ambition to your Love.
Consider, that the Princess Agiatis is a most accomplished Beauty, and that your
marriage with her would unite the two Royal Families of Sparta. I know very
well she is designed for King Agis; but, Sir, that Prince is your Enemy, and it
would be an action worthy of your greatness, to attempt to win of him a double
Victory; I mean to vanquish him at the head of a Powerful Faction, and in the
Heart of a Charming Princess. This indeed is to require very much from you, but
is it too much for a Prince, that derives his Original from the great Hercules?
No, Xenares, replied Themistides animated with a Noble Ardour, it is not too
much for Cleomenes, to attack Agis, though supported by a Party much stronger
than that of Leonidas, but never expect that I will endeavor to rob him of
Agiatis. For besides, that the Princess would never favor my enterprise, and
Gilipus would be much more averse unto me; I, for my own part, confess unto
you, that I should not care to combat with those Sentiments of aversion,
wherewith they have inspired Agiatis, for every thing that has relation to the
House of Leonidas. You know, Sir, replied Xenares, that Great Men change their
Love or Hate, according to the change of their Interests. It Is not the
pretended Aversion of Agiatis, that creates in you that indifference for her; I
know the real cause of it. You no longer remember who you are; and I perceive,
with a feeling sorrow, that it is Cylesira who has made you forget your self.
But, Sir, make a generous effort, and forget even her. Rouse up in your Heart a
just resentment, for the Prohibition I made you in her behalf. Master your self
so far this day, as to be able to go and divert your self with Hunting, without
any regret for her: To morrow you shall make some other progress, and so, by
degrees, free your self of a Passion, which otherwise would be fatal to your
Repose, to the re-establishment of your House, and to your Glory.

Themistides sighed instead of answering. His Love was too violent; and
Xenares's Arguments were a little too strong, not to give him most severe
Torments. He was, for a while, as it were buried in a most profound
Melancholy; but at length he made this answer. I have hearkened to your Advice,
with all the acknowledgment that I ought; but, Xenares, I know not whether I
shall be capable of following it. Methinks I should not go to divert my self
out of Palenis, since even Decency requires that I make a visit to the Princess
Onecrysa. Ah! Sir, answered Xenares with vexation, do not cover, under that
pretense, the desire you have to see Cylesira. Do you believe, that, after what
I told you, you would do Onecrysa or Leriana any pleasure, by going to
Leosthenes's House, at a time when your presence there is the most apprehended?
Is it after that manner that you pretend to make your self be beloved? In the
name of Heaven, think of gaining the esteem of the World, and never show your
self incommode. I leave you with Phililistion, added he, seeing that Corinthian
enter, and go to give some necessary Orders; for the matter I proposed unto you.

He was hardly gone out, when Themistides related to Philistion his misfortune
in a few words, and going on with the Discourse. Can you, said he, be of
Xenares Opinion? Ought I to remove from Cylesira, at the very minute, on which
her Destiny and mine will possibly be decided, For, indeed, my Lot is affixed
to that Charming Creatures. I will never love any but her. All my Passions are
so subjected to my love, that I more ardently wish for the re-establishment of
the King my Father, and have a greater desire, than ever, to signalize my self,
only that I may be more worthy of Cylesira. I confess answered Philistion, that
the fair Lady deserves the Esteem, and even the Admiration of all the Earth.
But, Sir, is a Prince of your Rank allowed to take to Wife the first Lady that
pleases him? Is he not obliged to regard his Interests, rather than the
satisfaction of his Inclinations. I know, interrupted Cleomenes, with
Impatience, that Morality and Policy would furnish you with much more advice to
give me; but I do not, at this time of the day, desire Counsel of that nature.
Tell me freely, Philistion, what can I promise to my self from your Friendship?
All things, replied he; and if I find an opportunity to expose my Life for you,
I shall do it more joyfully, than render you the little Services, wherewith
your love is satisfied. Cleomenes embraced Philistion, and thanked him. I must,
said he, know what is done at Leriana's, and whether it be true, that Teleander
is come to marry Cylesira. You may be assured, I shall attempt all ways that
will be possible to cross his design.

He had hardly finished these words, when the Prince of Erymanthus passed
before his House in Onecrysa's Chariot. He desired to show himself to his
Rival, on purpose to allay his suspicions. When Cleomenes saw him, he was very
much surprised, and being less melancholy than before, he cried out; How! can
it be possible that Teleander should be returning back again? It Is apparently
so, said Philistion. I effectually believe, that the Prince of Erymanthus was
desirous of accompanying Onecrysa to visit Cylesira, and finding that fair
Creature no less severe at Palenis, than she had been at Corinth, vexation
makes him go and cross the Water back again. What you tell me is very probable,
answered Cleomenes; but shall not I have a certain and more clear Information
of it? Cannot you go and visit Onecrysa? I will go, if you command me, replied
Philistion. Nevertheless, Sir, I am unwilling to do it, until I have put you in
mind of the Prohibition they have made you, and the match of Hunting, Xenares
even now proposed unto you. Those prohibitions, replied Cleomenes, have no
relation, either to Onecrysa or your self, and as for the divertisement of
Hunting, wherein Xenares does pretend to engage me, nothing is so easy as to
defer it for some moments.

Philistion, without any more ado, went to pay the Princess of Erymanthus a
visit, and being informed that she would go a walking with Cylesira alone, into
the Wood, he departed, and went to give Themistides an account of it.

In the mean time Xenares had given order to Erantor, to lead three Horses to
Cleomenes, and to carry with him Bows, Arrows and Javelines. The Prince mounts
on Horseback, and takes the Arms that were presented him, and, followed by
Philistion and Erantor, he entered into the Wood, as i^ were to divert himself
with Hunting. As soon as he was in the most unfrequented part of the Thicket,
he alighted, and gave the Horses to Erantor to hold, and walked on foot with
Philistion, to discourse of his Passion and Misfortune. He went toward those
places, where he believed he might chance to see Cylesira, and looked every
where with so much care, that at length he discovered on the outside of the
Wood, two Women discoursing together, and sitting upon the Grass. He advanced
toward them as softly as he could; and notwithstanding their backs were
toward him, yet he did not fail t^ know them for Onecrysa and Cylesira. He was
sufficiently moved at this sight, and approached near enough to over-hear them.
He heard the Princess of Erymanthus going on with her Discourse after this
manner. Fair Cylesira, I conjure you not to think strange, what I am going to
tell you, neither give me any interruption. It Is not without an infinite deal
of trouble, that I shall see the Execution of a design, which you will at first
condemn, and yet, in the Consequence, it will possibly make your Fortune. But,
indeed, Cylesira, I was in that extremity, that I must either have seen a Son,
who is dear unto me, languish and die, or else have overcome the reluctance,
which I had for an enterprise he proposed unto me. I did, indeed, esteem it
Criminal at the first; but I have afterward considered it, as the only remedy
that could be applied to Teleander's Despair. That Prince has not been able to
endure the indifference you have had for him, and has taken notice, with a
double augmentation of sorrow, that Themistides was entertained after a more
obliging manner. In the mean time, a Man unknown; did not, perhaps, deserve
that preference; but you will be more just, when Teleander shall have removed
you from his Rival.

At these words Cleomenes felt a strange Emotion. He whispered Philistion, that
he should go, and cause the Horses to the brought to him; and afterward he
hearkened with the same attention, as he did before.

However, be not afraid, said Onecrysa, tha^ any violence shall be done unto
you. I will not forsake you, and no Man shall pretend to move your Heart,
otherwise, than by an entire submission. Madam, is it possible; replied
Cylesira then, with surprise; that it is the Princess Erymanthus, who talks
thus unto me? Is it the Sister of the Illustrious Aratus, that is become an
Accomplice of Teleander's Extravagances? It Is a Mother, that would save a Sons
life, replied Onecrysa; for indeed, Cylesira, I know more than I could wish I
did, and than you imagine. In the mean time, I love you still enough, to render
you happy in spite of your self. Is it, by depriving me of liberty? replied
Cylesira, with a Voice something louder: Is it, by making me Teleander's Slave?
Teleander's Slave! cried out that Prince, in discovering himself, all on the
sudden, You know, Madam, that you shall be absolute Mistress every where, where
I have any Power. You have nothing else to do, but to ascend into that
Chariot; added he, in showing Onecrysa's Chariot, that began to appear. How,
Telander! interrupted Cylesira; are you not afraid to provoke the Great Aratus?
I am afraid of nothing, but of losing you, replied the Prince; and provided I
be near you, and you far from my Rivals, I know no reason I have, to fear any
thing. But, Madam, continued he, in giving her his hand; ascend if you please,
and do not make me lose a Time, which it imports me very much to use well. I
mind you once more, O Prince, replied Cylesira, to consider thoroughly with your
self, that this Action does offend me, and casts a blemish on your own Glory. I
pray do not complete your Crime, and I pardon you all that you have done to
this Hour. I will restore you my Esteem and Friendship: I will even add
thereunto, a sense of gratitude, for the Complaisance you shall have toward
me. Upon all other occasions, Madam, replied Teleander, I am ready to follow
your Sentiments; but you shall, if you please, follow mine upon this. In ending
these words, he took her by the hand, and with the assistance of his two
Gentlemen, he made her ascend the Chariot, and sit near Onecrysa. Cylesira was
not transported with any Passion, but having looked fiercely on the Prince of
Erimanthus, Teleander, said she, you know not whom you have to deal with, and
were I of a humor to threaten, I could make you fear -- Whom, Madam,
interrupted he, your Themistides? If Themistides were here, replied Cylesira,
you would not possibly put into Execution this your enterprise, against a
helpless Woman. These words being heard by Cleomenes, gave him a sensible joy;
and doubled the fervency he had to deliver Cylestra. In that moment, Teleander
begins to march forward, followed by the Chariot; and Themistides is upon the
point of dying, with impatience and despair. But at length he found his most
violent Torments grow easier. His Eyes being continually turned toward the
Place, from whence Themistides was to return, he perceived him presently
through the Trees, he runs unto him, leaps a Horseback, and pursues after
Teleander with so much speed, that he soon overtakes the Chariot. Hold, cried
he out immediately to him who drove it. Hold, or thou drivest to thy death.
That Man frightened with these threats, did not fail to obey him, when Teleander
being turned about, and knowing Themistides, advanced toward him, with his
Sword in his Hand, and said to him, hold your self. Set then at liberty,
interrupted Cleomenes fiercely, a Person, whom all the Earth ought to respect.
Instead of continuing their discourse, they began a Combat that soon became
bloody. The four Horsemen ran to Teleander's Assistance, and Philistion and
Erantor ranged themselves by Themistides side; Onecrysa, allarmed for a Son
whom she tenderly loved, cried out, that they should carry back Cylesira to
Leriana's, and alighted out of the Chariot, to part so dangerous a fray.
Cylesira would also have alighted, when she saw Teleander falling suddenly
before her, with little probability of life, and Themistides, all covered with
Blood, advancing toward her, with a greater fear of displeasing her, than he
needed to have had, after having rendered her such a piece of Service. Madam,
said he unto her, very respectfully, the prohibition that was made me in your
Name, would have hindered me, from presenting my self before you, had I not
believed, I should have been in some measure serviceable unto you on this
occasion. She made answer, How generous are you, Themistides? And how
unfortunate am I? She added these last words, in a lower Voice, not to be
heard; and at the same time looked upon Cleomenes, with eyes fully expressing
her acknowledgment. Themistides, perceiving nothing, but what was very
obliging, in Cylesira's Countenance, felt a kind of joy, whereof his heart had
never before been sensible; and what added yet to his pleasure, was, that he
saw himself in such a Condition, as to be able himself to carry Cylesira back
to Leosthenes's House, and to restore her to Leriana, of whom he had reason to
complain. In effect, he alighted from his Horse, and in spite of two wounds he
had received, he went up into the Charioteer's Seat, and took the way toward
Palenis. Ah Themistides, what are you going to do? cried out Cylesira; is it
thus you take care for your own preservation? Have you not put your self into
enough of Danger? Must you again expose your life? I could not lose it, with
greater Glory, than in serving you, replied Cleomenes; and since it is so,
Madam, what care ought I to take of it, when it is desired I should pass it
without seeing you? As soon as Themistides and Cylesira were arrived at
Leosthenes's House, Leriana beheld them with a surprise impossible to be
expressed. She could not comprehend how Cylesira, who went out on foot with
Onecrysa, should come back in a Chariot with Themistides. She knew not why the
Chariot, which she thought Teleander was to make use of in his return, should
come back with that Prince; why Themistides drove it himself; and in fine, why
he was wounded and covered with Blood. But her wonder augmented in a very
strange manner, when they related to her what had happened. She could not forbear
fretting at the Attempt, and as she was sensible, that the Obligation she had
for Themistides, was much greater than that Prince could imagine, so she gave
him more marks of acknowledgement than he expected from her. Generous
Themistides, said she to him, if Glory, the follower of all brave Actions, were
not the surest reward of them, you would find but an ill recompense for this
that you have now done: For indeed, what is it I can do for the man, who
restores to me Cylesira? Permit him to come sometimes to your House, replied
Cleomenes, and then Themistides himself will be your Debtor. He pronounced
these words with an air so tender, and respectful, that Leriana began to grow
melancholy upon them, fearing lest they should make some impression in
Cylesira's Soul. Nevertheless, instead of making any demonstration of her
disquier, she endeavored to put an end handsomely to the Conversation.
Themistides, said she to him, go and take some repose, take care for nothing,
but for the recovery of your Health: I shall perhaps do more than you expect
from my Gratitude.

Cleomenes, satisfied with this hope that was given him, returned home, and
Xenares had no sooner observed that he was all bloody, but he felt a sorrow for
it, that came very near to despair. While he was sending for a Chyrurgeon,
Philistion arrived, followed by Erantor. They were both wounded, but their
Wounds, as well as Cleomenes's, were not dangerous. Xenares did then moderate
his affliction, and writ to Leonidas to give him an account of what the Prince
had done.

On the other side, Leosthenes arrives, and he is hardly informed of what had
passed, but he testifies his surprise, and his vexation to Leriana. How Sister,
said he, do you refuse Cylesira to Teleander, and do you reduce that Prince to
the necessity of carrying her away by force? You are pardonable, if it be for
King Seleucus, that you keep your Daughter; or if King Ptolomy would make her
Queen of Egypt. I entreat you to tell me, what are your intentions, and impart
unto me a Secret, wherein you know I ought to have some interest? I confess,
dear Brother, replied Leriana, that you have reason to make me this reproach,
and according to all outward appearance, I am very much in the wrong. But I
think you will not long condemn my Conduct; and that there is nothing easier
than for me to justify my self. After these words, which promised Leosthenes
the information he desired; Leriana mused for some moments, and afterward
began to speak in this manner.

You know, dear Brother, that I was very happily martied: That Lycirnus had an
entire Complaisance for me, and that having carried me to Megalopolis, where
the greatest part of his Estate lay, he endeavored to sweeten the regret I
might have conceived, for leaving Corinth. You remember, without doubt, that my
good fortune lasted but a little while, and that I lost Lycirnus in a little
time after Cylesira's Birth. At that time I cared for nothing so much as my
Daughters Education. And Prince Gilipus, having heard in what manner I applied
my self thereunto, had a great mind I should bestow part of my Cares on the
Princess his Daughter. Agiatis was much of an age with Cylesira, and Prince
Gilipus caused her to be brought up in a fine House he had near Megalopolis, on
the Bank of the River Alpheus. He drew me to that agreeable place, called
Erabeus, and promised me to make Cylesira's Fortune, according to the pains and
care I should take with the Princess. He never came from Sparta, without making
me rich presents; and the Lacedaemonians, whom he brought along with him, began
very early to admire Agiatis's Beauty, and were also used to show some little
Complaisances to Cylesira. Democares, a Man of great courage, and very
considerable among the Spartans, was the most assiduous at Erabeus, and Gilipus
resolved to give him Cylesira in marriage, at the same time as Agis should
espouse the Princess. We made a Voyage to Lacedemon to that purpose, but the
Civil Wars did occasion the delaying of Agiatis's marriage; and Gilipus
fearing, in the Princess's behalf, the threatenings of a certain Astrologer,
desired that she should remove to some distance from Sparta. He returned to
Erabeus, and having called me, together with Agiatis, into his Closet, he told
me, that he would entrust me with that which he esteemed dearest in the World.
I cannot suffer, pursued he, my Daughter to stay in a Town where so great a
Division reigns. Go, and seek out, along with her, some place, where you may
live at peace and quietness. Ah Sir, interrupted Agiatis, being very much
surprised, what Peace or repose would you have me find, when I shall be out of
your sight? Shall I not be doubly disquieted, if I leave you in those dangers
which I shall not share with you? But Daughter, replied Gilipus, what necessity
is there, that you should incur those dangers? Glory requires that I expose my
self to them, and Decency permits you to avoid them. Obey me then, on this
occasion, as you have done in all others. And you, Leriana, I pray remember,
that I put into your hands all the comfort of my Life. I have given all
necessary orders concerning your departure. Democares shall command your
Convoy, and you may be sure he will not be wanting to pay a deference to your
desires. Let Corinth be the place of your retreat; for besides that it is your
Country, you will find there one of my Friends, the famous Aratus, General of
the Achaians. His Troops are to encamp about Corinth and Sycion, until such
time as they be obliged to march against the Aetolians; so that, according to
all appearance, you will have Aratus's support, as long as our disorders will
continue. He afterward took such measures, as might be necessary for the
execution of his design, and, notwithstanding his own and Agiatis's grief, that
Princess's departure was appointed to be on the morrow. There happened to
Cylesira a fit of sickness, which retained her at Erabeus; and Agiatis was no
sooner on this side the River Alpheus, but she borrowed your Nieces Name, and
told me, she would pass for my Daughter. I shall find so little difficulty in
obeying you, continued she, that you will do me a great favor in speaking to
me, and acting like a Mother, without any longer delay. With all my heart,
Madam, I answered, since it is for your Interest. I will take upon me, before
the World, the seeming Authority you give me, and I will not treat you with as
much respect as I ought, but in the presence of those Persons to whom you shall
have imparted the secret.

We observed this Order most exactly; and Democares, for his part, acquitted
himself admirably of his employment; he never stirred from the Princess, and
had not much less Complaisance for me. You saw with what reluctance he parted
from us, and how he protested, that he would not have returned, if the
Interests of Gilipus had not called him to Sparta. In the mean time, you
admired your pretended Niece, all the World was touched with her Beauty, and
desired leave to come and visit us.

Agiatis could not live in such a Crowd, and having entreated me to deliver her
out of it, you should have brought us to Egina at that very time, if the
General of the Achaians had not come to Corinth. I delivered him a Letter from
Gilipus; and you know, he so much concerned himself in every thing, that had
any relation to Agiatis, that it was soon believed, his Heart was not
insensible of that Princess's Beauty.

Aratus knew they had that Opinion of him, yet did not give over to continue
his cares of her. He testified to Onecrysa and Ariamite, that he would be very
glad they should make a particular bond of Friendship with Cylesira, and in a
few days after these two Princesses did confess, that it was with much pleasure
they had followed Aratus's Advice. You have seen, as well as I, every thing
that has afterward happened; and to give you an account of what concerns your
Niece, I will tell you, that Democares has an affection for her, and that
Gilipus thinks sit she should entertain him, as a Man to to whom he had
designed to give her in Marriage. He was also willing she should answers his
Letters; but Democares never received any answer to them with too much haste.
Cylesira never fails to send them me, and I make such returns as I think fit.

Thus, dear Brother, you have a short Belation, which justifies my Conduct. I
would not have failed to give you this Information, whenever the Princess would
have been going away; and if you think you have reason to complain, because I
have kept it secret to this day; I must tell you, that I did not do it, because
I thought you could have wanted Fidelity or Discretion. It was rather because I
was not Mistress of a secret that concerned Gilipus and Agiatis; and because I
had rather see you carry your self without any constraint before the Princess,
as if she really had been your Niece, than discover her to you, without any
necessity for it.

Leosthenes, surprised at what he had heard, cried out, as soon as Leriana had
given over speaking, Is it possible, O Sister, is it possible, that it is the
Princess Agiatis, who is at my House? You must obtain my pardon for the Faults
you have made me commit; and far from giving you any reproach for your Conduct,
I shall always applaud a silence, which few other Women would have kept.

He afterward desired to make his Reverence to the Princess; Leriana presented
him to her, and he was received after the most obliging manner he could have
desired. Nevertheless, their Conversation did not last long. Leriana writ to
Gilipus, to give him an account of what had passed; afterward, discoursing
with the Princess about it, she said, What a misfortune, Madam, would it have
been, if Teleander had carried you away to Erymanthus? What would have been the
affliction of Prince Gilipus, and King Agis? I must confess, replied Cylesira,
it is a most grievous matter for a Father, to see his only Daughter stole from
him; but I did not expect you would place Agis in the same degree of vexation,
as Gilipus. How, Madam, replied Leriana, do you believe that Agis would not be
very sensible of your loss? He who knows you so well, and is designed to be
your Husband? It Is true, replied Cylesira, there is a resolution to match us to
each other; but since it is only to fasten, by that Alliance, the knot that
ties our Party, I think the Heart has no great interest in the Treaty, and that
neither of us would find any great difficulty to comfort our selves, should it
chance to break. In truth, Leriana, we have not the one for the other, more
than the Friendship of Kindred, and I very much doubt, whether one can proceed
from that sort of Affection to tenderness. I have, nevertheless, observed,
replied Leriana, that Agis 's admiration of you, was always accompanied with
eagerness and fervency. It Is true, the esteem you have for that Prince,
proceeds more from a sense of Equity than Inclination. I have wished an hundred
times, that, for the Peace of both Families, and of the Republic, Agiatis were
married to Cleomenes. That young Prince is, as I have heard, endued with a
thousand good qualities. He is of a Noble Deportment and great Courage. I
agree, said Cylesira, that all the World reports very well of Cleomenes; but,
Leriana, do you judge they have bred up Leonidas 's Son, and Gilipus 's
Daughter, to be each others? By what I perceive, Madam, said Leriana, looking
attentively upon her, you have a great stock of indifference in your Heart. I
have at least aversion enough for Marriage, replied the Princess. Ah, Madam,
pursued Leriana, I know from whence that aversion proceeds; it is because you
find your self disposed to love a Man, whom you cannot Marry. I perceive well
enough, replied Agiatis, and blushed, that you mean Themistides; but should my
gratitude render me more sensible for him, than for a Kinsman, or a Prince whom
I never saw, would you think it very strange? But, Leriana, know me perfectly,
and re-assure your self, I have a Father, whose Will and Pleasure shall always
regulate mine; and should Agiatis be in a capacity to dispose of her self, she
would rather die, than fail in any thing her Quality or Honor required from
her. After this, take what measures you please, and be not apprehensive I shall
oppose them.

As soon as she had made that Protestation, Leriana set her mind at rest. She
sent to Themistides, to enquire after his Health; and as soon as she was
informed he could receive Visits, without being incommoded, she went to see him
with Cylesira and Leosthenes in her company. You see, said she to him, that I
am as good as my word; and that, in coming to visit you, I grant you more than
you have desired from me. You do too much, Madam, answered Cleomenes; and you
judge aright, that I would have by no means have desired, what I ought not to
obtain. He had hardly ended these words, when Leriana was advertised, that
Aratus and Ariamite were just arrived; that the Princess was gone to
Onecrysa's, and that the General of the Achaians was come into Xenares's House.
Leriana, Cylesira, and Xenares immediately arose, and having left Leosthenes
with Themistides, they went to receive Aratus, whom they met at the
Chamber Door. He said to Leriana, Madam, must your Friends have no other
information of what befalls you, than what they gather from common report? Sir,
answered she, you know apparently the reason which has not permitted me to
give you an account of this adventure. Yes, Madam, I know it, replied Aratus,
and that not without a great deal of sorrow; but will you give me leave, added
he, advancing toward Cleomenes 's bed, to thank the generous Themistides, who
has so fortunately prevented the mischiefs that were to be feared from that
attempt. Sir, replied the Prince; as there is never any judgment to be made of
our Actions, but according to our intentions, so you may easily perceive, that
you are no ways obliged to me. I was not studious of serving Aratus, but of
delivering Cylesira. Well then, replied the General of the Achaians, since you
are unwilling that I express my gratitude unto you, I have nothing to do, but
to chide Leriana, for coming to Egina. Sir, answered she, My Brother's House,
and Cylesira's humor, made me fix upon that choice. You might have, replied
Aratus, preferred Scycion before this Desert; I should have rendered your
dwelling there agreeable. But, Sir, replied Xenares, why should so fair a Lady
leave Corinth, at a time when people flock't thither, from all parts of Greece?
She would have been the joy of an infinite number of Gentlemen, and those
Gentlemen would have contributed to her divertisement. Since I think you speak
of me, answered Cylesira, though what you say suits not with me, I must tell
you, that I find much less pleasure than trouble and confusion, in great and
public Feasts; and that I would constantly avoid them, if I were Mistress of
my own Will. Is it possible, replied Aratus, that you are of that humor? You,
Madam, who are not Created, but to be the admiration of all the Earth. But,
Sir, replied Cleomenes, is it not also necessary, to have an entire
complaisance for her, as well as an admiration, which is due to her, from all
the World. Cleomenes, out of a little emotion of jealousy, could not forbear
being contradictory, and Xenares taking notice of it, said to him, I doubt you
do not mind who it is you contest with? It Is, replied Cleomenes, with the
famous General-of the Achaians; but fince the question is not about the
rangeing of an Army in Battle; I hope I may, without offense, deliver my
Opinion, although it be different from his. On the contrary, pursued Aratus; it is
that liberty of contradicting, that creates all the pleasure of Conversation;
without it, our discourse could neither last, nor have any Wit or Spirit in it.
Moreover, continued Leosthenes, after the Glory Themistides has gained, has he
not reason to rejoice, that Cylesira came to Egina? As he is Generous, replied
the Princess, I am persuaded, that he does not repent the incurring a great
danger, for the doing a brave Action, but I am very sorry, I was the cause --
Ha Madam, interrupted Cleomenes, had I lost even my life upon this occasion. I
had been sufficiently rewarded, with the good Fortune I have had of being
serviceable unto you. Aratus, observing that Cleomenes spoke with some trouble,
said to Xenares, Do you believe that Themistides 's health will allow us to
stay any longer with him? Methinks, that in the Condition wherein we see him,
nothing is so necessary for him as repose. How, Sir, replied Cleomenes, can you
believe -- I believe, interrupted Aratus, that a longer visit would be hurtful
to you, and that we ought to hearken to you no longer.

In that moment, a Servant of Onecrysa's desired to speak with him, and said to
him, Sir, the Princess is fallen into a deadly melancholy, being informed you
are no less enraged against her, than against the Prince. They both desire to
justify themselves, and humbly entreat you would do them the honor, to visit
them before you return to Corinth. Tell your Mistress, replied Aratus, that she
ought not to entreat a visit, with which she would be less satisfied than she
believes. The Mother is more criminal than the Son; and I fear, lest the blind
Indulgence and Complaisance she has for him, will, in the end, create her many
troubles. He sent away the Servant, and departs with Cylesira and Leriana. He
was no sooner arrived at Leosthenes his House, but he spoke to Cylesira in
particular. Madam, said he, we will carry you back with us to Corinth? The
Princess studied a while, instead of answering, and finding a secret reluctance
in her self to depart from Egina, said, Sir, since Leosthenes has not finished
his business that brought him hither, and since there is still at Corinth an
infinite number of strangers, by whom I would not willingly be seen; I had
best, in my Opinion, stay seven or eight days yet longer in this Isle. Aratus
consented to it, and leaving behind some Officers for the Princess's security,
returned back to Corinth.

He was hardly departed, when a Gentleman from Ariamite came to Leosthenes's,
and told Leriana and Cylesira, that his Mistress was in despair for what had
happened. She entreats you, added he, that you would not let the resentment you
may have for the Brother, reach the Sister. We are not so unjust, replied
Leriana, as to hate the Princess Ariamite, for a Crime, whereof she is no
Abettor. Will you then be pleased, Madam, replied the Gentleman, that she
should come and see how much the Prince Teleander had offended her. I consent
to it, replied Leriana, and I would even prevent her, if I could. But though
Generosity requires us to pardon Teleander; yet Decency will not allow us to go
to a Prince's Lodgings, who has so lately affronted us.

In a few moments after Ariamite entered, and testified the displeasure she
conceived for what had passed. I assure you, said she, that Teleander is in a
condition more proper to beget your Compassion, than your Anger. He has four
wounds dangerous enough. He was carried to his Lodgings on a Hurdle made with
boughs of Trees, and covered with his Clothes and Leaves. Judge also in what
affliction a Mother ought to be, who tenderly loves her Son. Nevertheless she
does not fail to think, that you have reason to complain of her; and I am
ordered to protest unto you, in her behalf, that she is extremely sorry for it.
She entreats you to consider that Teleander has offended you, only out of an
excess of Love, and that he had no other design upon Cylesira, than to make her
Princess of Erymanthus. But you know, Madam, replied Leriana, that violence is
never to be made use of in such designs; Men commonly take a contrary Method.
However, we are sorry Teleander is so ill as you tell us. I wish he may gather
some advantage from this Adventure; that he may moderate the impetuosity of his
Humor; and that the Princess Onecrysa may, for her part, be no longer
Complaisant to favor his unjust enterprises.

While they were entertaining each other after this melancholy manner,
Themistides talked very differently to Philistion. This Corinthian, not being
much incommoded with his Wounds, had passed from his own Chamber, to
Cleomenes's Apartment. The Prince had no sooner perceived him, but stretching
out his Arms toward him, called out with a passionate voice, My Dear,
Philistion, I have seen Cylesira; I have seen her in my Chamber, and I conceive
a Joy for it, greater than I can express. Can you go to morrow to her, to
acquaint her of it? Yes, Sir, answered he, I will go. But, Philistion,
interrupted Themistides, can you express all that I am sensible of? Have you
never been in love? Do you love me enough to paint to the Life, in Cylesira's
imagination, what I would be glad should be represented to her? Wo' not you
pardon me, if I add a Billet to the Commission I give you? Sir, replied
Philistion, in the Condition wherein you are, you can hardly write, without
doing your self harm. On the contrary, replied the Prince, my Heart will
receive thereby so much comfort, that it will contribute to my Health. Give me
some Paper, Pen, and Ink, let me make use of an opportunity that now presents
it self, to return my thanks; let me, I pray, employ this minute of Liberty,
which Xenares's absence allows me.

Philistion consented to it, and, on the morrow, he carried Themistides's
Letter to Leosthenes's House. He was a great while there, before he could
deliver it; but Leriana being at length gone into her Closet, he said to
Cylesira, Madam, I am come to render you thanks, in behalf of Themistides. He
could not, before all the People, who were in his Chamber, thank you in such a
manner as he desired. Do you, Philistion, think, answered Cylesira, that it is
Themistides's part to give me thanks? No Man knows, better than your self, the
difference there is between what we have done for each other. However, replied
Philistion, Themistides believes he is in your debt, and that the Service he
has rendered you, does not deserve the recompense it has received. But, Madam,
added he, presenting to her the Letters he was charged with, Themistides
explains himself, without doubt, in this Billet, better than I can do. How! a
Letter, replied Cylesira, with a surprise, and blushing. Ah, Philistion, do not
oblige me, I entreat you, to receive it. You may do what you please with it,
replied Philistion; but if you refuse this Letter, you will reduce Themistides
to despair. You will soon see, that his Wounds will not be the most dangerous
of his Evils. I should be very sorry for it, replied Cylesira, but you give me
no small displeasure, in constraining me to a Complaisance which I ought not to
have.

Philistion gave not over thus, but still continued to press Cylesira, and
represented to her so effectually, the Condition wherein he left Themistides,
that the Princess at length received Cleomenes's Letter. She opened it with a
trembling hand, and read in it these words, with signs of Bashfulness, which
gave her fresh Charms.

To the Admirable Cylesira.
HOW happy should I be, Madam, if I were in your debt, for a part of that visit
I have received; and if I were not altogether obliged to Leriana 's Gratitude
for it. But, Madam, nothing can equal my unhappiness, if you only followed, and
that unwillingly, a Mother, whom you would not disobey. I entreat you to let me
know what have been your Sentiments, to the end I may regulate my own
accordingly; and that I may either preserve or renounce my Life according to
the interest you take therein.

Themistides.


As soon as Cylesira had read it over, she turned toward Philistion, and said,
Themistides is so little acquainted with me, that I will easily pardon him the
injustice he does me. You may tell him, that being neither blind, nor
ungrateful, I perceive what his Merit is, and I resent, as I ought to do, the
effects of his Generosity. Methinks, Madam, replied Philistion, that two words
under your hand would tell it better than I. Is it possible, interrupted
Cylesira, with some emotion, that you are not satisfied to have obtained even
more than I ought to have granted? Would you have me engage my self insensibly
to entertain a Correspondence by Letters? Not that I may make any scruple to
write to Themistides upon some other occasion; but I entreat you, press me no
more to do it upon this.

She pronounced these words with so firm and resolute a tone, that Philistion,
for fear of displeasing her, held his Tongue, and went away. He gave
Themistides an account of what he had done; and if the Prince was overjoyed to
understand that Cylesira had received his Letter, he was no less sorrowful,
when he heard, that she had been unwilling to make him any answer.

Two days after he told Philistion, he had resolved to leave his Chamber, and
go out. But, Sir, replied the Corinthian, is your Health so well recovered, as
to give you leave? You know, replied Cleomenes, my Wounds trouble me but a
little, and I assure you, they are not to be feared so much as my Melancholy.
I shall dye with Grief, if I be any longer so near Cylesira, without going to
visit her. These last words were Pronounced with so steady and firm a voice,
that Philistion retired, judging it would be to no purpose to oppose the
Princes resolution.

The End of the First Part.
AGIATIS, Queen of SPARTA.
The Second Part.
THE Prince of Lacedemon passed the Night with an Impatience, that hindered him
to Sleep, and he failed not to get up, as soon as he saw the day appear. He
took a Javeline in his hand to lean upon, when he should find it necessary, and
he went to walk all alone, being unwilling to cause Philistion to be awaked so
early. He searched for the most private places in Thetis's Wood; that he might
meditate at more repose, on the engagement, whereunto he had been, as it were,
drawn by his Fate; and of which he had the affliction, not to dare to hope for
a favorable success. Alas! said he to himself, can I hope to move Cylesira's
Heart, if after what has now passed, she will not daign so much as to answer
her Defenders Letter? Was ever such a severity known? What, to resolve
obstinately not to write.

He could not go on, by reason of a noise he heard; he stood up and cast his
Eyes on every side. He perceived a Wolf tearing a bag of Flesh, and eating what
he took out of it. Themistides lift up his Javeline, and being no less expert
at darting, than at his other Exercises, he failed not to hit the Wolf in the
Body. That Animal went twenty or thirty paces from his Prey to dye, and
Themistides coming nearer the Bag, saw some Letters fallen out of it, that were
unsealed by some violent accident. He took them up, and he had hardly looked on
the Superscriptions, when he was surprised in a most strange manner. He knew
them to be Letters, which Leriana and Cylesira directed to a certain
Lacedemonian, called Democares. He was extremely desirous to see what two
Persons, so severe, could write to that Man, and to overcome a scruple that
opposed his Curiosity, he imagined with himself, that Fortune did not offer him
these Billets open, to any other end, than that he might read them without
reluctance. He pursued a sentiment more conformable to his Passion, than to his
Humor, and beginning with the Letter that went nearest his Heart, he found it
was in these terms.

Cylesira to Democares.
HOW pressing are you Democares? Is it not made known to you, that I submit my
self to Leriana 's Will without any reluctance? What would you desire more?
Nevertheless, since you would have me explain my self more precisely, I will
tell you, that I should not be glad to be disposed of to any other. Guess now
at the violence you have done my Humor, and yet I have not the Power to
complain of it. Examine this confession, and be as sensible of it as you ought.

Cylesira.


Themistides had no sooner read it over; but he became as immovable, as if he
had been Thunderstruck. Is it possible, said he to himself, that a Person who
has so much modesty, or so much disdain, according to to the difference of
occasions, should write so tenderly to Democares? Must my destiny let me see
what there is most Charming in the World, and make me affect it with so strong
an Inclination, when there no longer remains any hopes for me? How! is Cylesira
engaged, that Cylesira, whose behavior and fashions had so seeming a Character
of Liberty and Indifference?

This Lover was so filled with his sorrow, that he hardly remembered he had
another Billet to read over, and that he might find therein some further
Information. It contained these words.

Leriana to Democares.
I Send you the answer you wish, and I think you will be satisfied with it. I
know that Cylesira has some Sentiments for you, for which you are not
altogether indebted to the deference she has for mine. So that I can tell you,
Democares, it will not be her fault, if you be not united, as soon as I shall
arrive in a Country, into which I most passionately long to return.

Leriana.


Cleomenes is confirmed in the knowledge of his unhappiness; he sighs, and
lifts up his Eyes to Heaven. O ye Gods, says he, after this, that I have now
seen, what is not to be believed of Women's dissimulation? He afterward calls
to mind, that he had heard talk of Democares, as of a Lacedemonian in Agis's
Party, and wonders that the same Cylesira, who has so much haugtiness in her
Countenance, should have so little in her Heart, as to prefer a simple Citizen
of Lacedemon, before the Prince of Erymanthus. In that moment, he excites
himself to scorn her; he considers her as a Person, who esteems it the highest
pitch of her happiness, to follow the Fortunes of a Man, who will one day be
his Subject. But that fierce disdain lasts but a little while, and the Idea of
the Charming Cylesira soon recovers its former power. It may be said, he feels
even an addition of Love, and that there are some Instants wherein he mingles
Joy with his Disquiets. He imagines with himself, that since Cylesira is
sensible in respect of Democares, she may hereafter become the same for
Cleomenes, when she will know his true condition. Neverthess, this Opinion,
wherewith he flatters himself, is only grounded upon Conjectures, and cannot
hold out against an unhappiness, which he finds but too certain.

He returns home, and goes to find out Xenares. I would fain know, said he to
him, who is that Lacedemonian called Democares, of whom I have heard so much
discourse? I can easily satisfy you, replied Xenares; Democares is of a
considerable Family in Sparta, and it may be said he has made himself terrible,
during our Civil-Wars. He is of a very tall Stature, and of a Strength and
Courage much more extraordinary. He has thrown himself into Agis's Faction, and
it is said, he is altogether at Gilipus's Devotion. Amphares and Arcecilaus,
whose Names, you know, are linkt with him in a very straight bond of Friendship
-- But have you not heard it said, interrupted Cleomenes, that Democares is
Amorous of some Charming Person, whom he is upon the point of Marrying? Xendres
answered, that he never heard any discourse of it. However, the Prince was
still sensible of a sorrow, which was too well grounded to quit it easily.

As soon as he had dined, he went to Leosthenes's House. Leriana and Cylesira
testified to him, that they were very glad to see him, and observing that there
was some marks of sadness in his face, How! Themistides, said Leriana to him,
are you allowed to be melancholy, while you are recoverring your Health? A Man
cannot, replied Cleomenes, have a Mind too well satisfied, when he is upon the
point of losing you. You judge aright, replied Leriana, we ought not to make
our Residence in this Isle: And it may possibly be reproached unto us as a
fault, that we have staid here one single moment, after what has happened to us.
Nevertheless, methinks, continued Cylesira, that we may now do it without
danger. We need no longer fear Teleander, since we have Themistides for our
Defender. You are going to leave that Themistides, replied Cleomenes, to return
into a Country, where there are Men who are better known unto you, and more
agreeable. I assure you, replied Cylesira, that I do not understand you; and
you will pleasure me, added Leriana, to explain your self a little better. I
will then tell you, Madam, replied Cleomenes, you will soon go into a Town,
from whence, in all appearance, the Civil Wars have caused you to remove, and
where you are to complete the happiness of a Lover, to whom the Charming
Cylesira is appointed. Ah, Themistides, replied Leriana, you know too much, and
I should conceive a mortal displeasure for it, if I were ignorant of your
discretion. She could say no more, Ariamite entered, and Cleomenes, having no
longer the freedom of discourse, departed in a few moments after, with despair
in his Heart. He went again into the Wood, to abandon himself to his
Melancholy, and walked until his weariness constrained him to sit down. Then he
would read over again Leriana's and Cylesira's Letters, on purpose to augment
the vexation he had conceived already; and when his Mind was no less tired than
his Body, he fell insensibly into a slumber, holding in his hand the Letter
that had instructed him in his misfortune. In the mean time Ariamite and
Cylesira went to take the fresh Air into the Wood, and Chance conducted them to
the place where Themistides lay asleep. They stop, look upon the Prince, and
observing that he had let the Letters fall, Ariamite takes them up, and casts
her Eyes upon them. As soon as she saw Cylesira's Letter, she could not forbear
to cry out, so much was she surprised at it. Themistides awakes, rises up, and
they look all three upon each other, without saying one word. At length
Cleomenes cleared the doubts of the two Princesses, and related to them his
adventure in the morning. Ariamite was over-joyed at it, and beholding
Cylesira, said unto her with a smile, By what I see, those People that are
haughty, know better how to love, and are more dissembling than I imagined. But
to be more serious with you, I confess unto you, that I have reason to complain
of the little Confidence you have in me. And if you will not discover to me
what your engagment is, I will never pardon you, for keeping it secret from me.
You would be, Madam, very much surprised, replied Cylesira, if I should tell
you there is a greater mystery in these Letters, than you imagine, and in my
Heart a less tenderness for Democares. Then she cast her Eyes upon Themistides,
in a way that made it sufficiently known, that she said these last words, but
for his sake only.

In that moment, a Man, in whose Face there appeared trouble enough, advances
toward Cylesira, and says unto her, Madam, there has an accident happened to
me, that puts me in a strange confusion. Leriana sent me into a distant
Country, with strict orders to make extraordinary haste. She had given me two
Letters, and one of my own Friends was to bring me a third. I waited for him in
this Wood, not daring to show my self in Palenis, for fear Leriana should know
that I was not yet departed. In the mean time I fell asleep, and having put in
the same Bag with Leriana 's Letters, something to eat, during my passage in
the Ship, a Wolf, that passed very near me, scented out my little Provisions,
and carried them away Bag and all, as a young Shepherdess, who saw it, just now
informed me. So that, Madam, I am not in a condition, either to pursue my
Voyage, or to return to Leosthenes 's. You may do either the one or the other,
replied Cylesira, your Letters are not lost, and I think that Themistides will
not refuse to restore them. You need only relate your adventure to Leriana, she
will pardon you, seal again her Letters, and dispatch you away. Well then,
Madam, replied Cleomenes with a Sigh, I will restore what Fortune has made to
fall into my Hands. I plainly perceive that you are unwilling I should keep the
Letters, that are to give Democares so much Joy, and which others were not able
to read without Sorrow. The Persons whom you mean, replied Ariamite in losing
all hopes, ought to have banished another Passion from their Heart.

This Counsel that Princess gave by the By to Cleomenes; and Cylesira, who had
already a strong inclination for the Prince, did not comprehend this Discourse,
without a vexation which she could not dissemble. You shall attribute to what
Sentiments you please, she replied, the transports of Teleander, and the
generosity of Themistides; but for Democares, I will once again tell you, that
I shall never be his, and that the Letters, which seem to persuade the
contrary, are less Intelligible than you believe them to be. I will believe
what you have a mind to, replied Ariamite coldly, when you will have made what
you say, agree with what you write. But, in the mean time, you had better do a
thing that will be easier for you. It Is to make that Man's Peace, who is still
in great Affliction. As soon as she had ended these words, they all three took
the way toward Palenis, and returned, without going on with any Discourse; so
much were they busied in their thoughts. Ariamite was very glad, that
Themistides had seen how Cylesira was engaged to Democares, and yet she felt a
secret vexation, to find that Themistides did not give over appearing as
Amorous of her, as before. Cleomenes was, for his part, agitated with a mixture
of Love and Sorrow, which would not allow him to express his Sentiments, so
much by his Mouth, as by his Eyes; and Cylesira did not consider, without an
extraordinary displeasure, that the important secret, which she was obliged to
keep, did not give her leave to disabuse Themistides. They arrived at Palenis,
and said very few words at parting.

Cylesira's thoughts ran on nothing more than on the Opinion they might have of
her pretended engagement with Democares. She was so vexed at it, that she
immediately seeks out an opportunity to disabuse that Themistides, for whom she
is already sensible of a tenderness, which she takes for an inclination
proceeding from Gratitude. She is willing to discover to him, that she is
Agiatis; but when she is upon the point of making that Declaration, as she does
not believe that Themistides is a Prince, she cannot resolve to tell him, that
she is a Princess, and to let him know that their Conditions are unequal.

In the Evening Xenares and Cleomenes received some Letters from Leonidas. That
which the King writ to Cleomenes, was in these terms.

The King Leonidas to the Prince Cleomenes.
IT IS with much Joy, my Son, that I have been informed of what passed in the
Isle of Egina. The manner of your signalizing your self for the Unknown Ladies,
lets me see what I am to hope for from your assistance. There will be a
necessity that you give it me very suddenly. Our Faction gathers strength, and
our Enemies are about to execute an enterprise, which is odious enough to cause
their ruin. Come to me then, Cleomenes, come to me, as soon as your health will
give you leave. I expect you at Tegeum; begin your Journey as soon as possibly
you can, and remember you are called to Lacedemon, no less by your own Glory
and Interests, than by my Orders.

Leonidas.


The Prince could not read it over without sighing. He saw that he must go to
Sparta, when a violent Passion would stay him in Egina. Xenares perceiving his
disquiet, guesses at the cause of it, and asks Cleomenes how soon he will
depart. As soon as my Health will permit me to undertake a Voyage, answered he.
But the Prince being melancholy, Xenares withdraws, instead of continuing the
Conversation.

On the morrow in the morning, Leriana and Cylesira received the answers they
expected from Gilipus. That Prince expresses to them, that he was glad to see
that the misfortune, with which Agiatis had been threatened, had not found those
Consequences which he had apprehended. He entreats Leriana to thank Aratus, to
deliver him a Letter he had writ to him, and to depart in a few days after, in
order to return to Erabeus. So that Cylesira repasses immediately to Corinth,
together with Leriana and Leosthenes, and those Officers that Aratus had left
to guard her.

Cleomenes is informed presently of their departure, and tells Xenares that he
would fain go to Corinth, to accustom himself to those Fatigues, which a
greater Journey require. Xenares sees the reason of this change, but seeing
also that the Prince is going to remove far enough off from Cylesira, and that,
in all probability, for the remaining part of his days, he opposes not his
intentions, and departs along with him, in order to repass to Corinth.

They are no sooner arrived there, but Cleomenes and Philistion go to
Leosthenes's House, and are informed that he is gone to Aratus's along with
Cylesira and Leriana. Leriana testifies to the General of the Achaians, the
acknowledgments of Gilipus, and delivers him a Letter from that Prince.

Aratus offers the Princess every thing that could render her Journey more
Secure and Commodious, and in a moment after, he is interrupted by one of his
Officers, who came to give him notice, that Teleander was just arrived. But,
Sir, pursues he, this is not all. The Princess Onecrysa desires to see you, and
says absolutely, that you must pardon her, for the Complaisance she had for the
Prince of Erymanthus. Agiatis, for her part, says, that she should have a
sensible displeasure, if Aratus refused to receive Onecrysa 's visit; and as
soon as she is gone out of the room, the General of the Achaians consents, that
they should call his Sister in. That Princess observes, that there is something
severe in Aratus 's Countenance. I plainly perceive, Sir, says she to him, that
you are still angry with me. Have I not reason to be so, replies Aratus? Would
you have me be pleased with your being an Abettor of a Rape, with your acting
jointly with a passionate young Fool, to offend a Person I respect? You must
indeed, replied Onecrysa, have a very great consideration for Cylesira, since
you prefer her before all your Kindred. You ought not, methinks, be in anger
with Teleander for any thing, but for desiring to marry an unknown Woman, whose
Alliance would have done you but little Honor. You shall soon know, replies
Aratus, that there is no blood more Illustrious, than is that of the Unknown
Lady's, and you shall see, that Cylesira would be matched as much below her
self, in marrying Teleander, as Teleander believed he should have raised her,
by making her Princess of Erymanthus. In effect, Madam, I shall in a few days
be permitted to discover to you the whole Secret. In the mean time, I declare
unto you, that Cylesira is a Princess, and that she is shortly to be a Queen.
Judge then, if Teleander 's enterprise could have happy Consequences, and if
the execution of it would be left unpunished. Be not astonished at this
Confidence, which I make you by halves. Since Cylesira is upon the point of
departing, I can without doing her any Prejudice, give you an advice, that may
be serviceable to a Son's repose, who is dear unto you. You see in what manner
he is come from Egina, in spite of the incommodiousness of his Wounds. Hinder
him from following a Person, who is recalled into her own Country, for nothing
less, than to ascend a Throne, and you will spare him the vexation, which the
ill success of his Passion will certainly give him. Onecrysa thanks Aratus,
promises to follow his Counsel, and returns home with that intention. She finds
Teleander dressed, and not doubting but that it was in order to go out, and to
endeavor to see Cylesira, she spoke to him with greater vehemence than usual.
Do you consider well what you are going to do? says she. Would you, without
any reason, expose your self to death? Do you pretend to go and see Cylesira,
whom you have offended, and should you even chance to meet her in some Temple,
or a walking, would you accost her to be ill used? In effect what design can
you have? Not to stay any longer in my Chamber, replies he, but to go and take
the Air, and leave the rest to the Conduct of Fortune. Son, replies she, I
penetrate but too far into your Intentions: It Is time you disabuse your self.
Should that which you have done in the Isle of Egina, not deprive you of all
hopes, I now understand, that Cylesira is engaged, and that there is appointed
for her an establishment, much more considerable than that which you would give
her. Teleander surprised with this Discourse, stands like one struck with
Thunder: Afterward he so earnestly presses Onecrysa not to conceal any thing
from him, of what she knows, that the Princess relates to him the Conversation,
she had just then held with Aratus, nevertheless, upon condition, he should
never speak of it to any Body.

In the time that Teleander revolved in his memory, all that ever he had heard
reported of the fairest Princesses of the Age, to try if he could guess of what
Country Cylesira might be, Chance brings in a rich Athenian Merchant, who
desires to speak with Onecrysa. Madam, says that Stranger to her, since you
were not in Town, during the Games, which brought me hither, I would not go
away without showing you some Rarities, which possibly you may not find
elsewhere. I have some Jewels of great price; and I have also some Pictures in
little, that are of a much greater value than my Jewels. I will let you see
several of the most Illustrious Persons of Greece and Italy. If you have,
interrupts Teleander, the Pictures of the most Charming Princesses of these our
Countries, you need not doubt but that I shall look over them with pleasure. I
wish, replies the Athenian, I could satisfy your Curiosity. But, Sir, the
excellent Painter, with whom I deal, never cares to draw a fine Woman. He looks
on that Undertaking as a dangerous Rock. Men of his Calling, are indeed
constrained to flatter, if they would please those Women for whom they work,
and if they do flatter, you may be sure they do not make a Picture very like.
You may then, replies Teleander, carry your Great Men, and Old Women whither
you please. My Daughter may fit her self with some Jewels, says Onecrysa to the
Merchant, and you will pleasure me to see her. The Stranger passes to
Ariamite's Appartment; he exposes to Sale what he has most precious; and the
Princess, after having bought some Bracelets of Ruby, desires to see Aratus's
Picture, that she might guess thereby, what resemblance the others might have.
The Athenian shows her the General of the Achaians, and Ariamite is so
satisfied with it, that she immediately desires to see the rest of the pieces.
The Merchant is not of an opinion to choose out the Portraictures of Old
Captains, or Philosophers, for a young Princess; but he searches for those of
Ptolomy King of Egypt, Agis, Cleomenes, and of the young Perrhus King of the
Epirots. Ariamite had no sooner cast her Eyes on Cleomenes's Face, but she is
surprised and blushes; afterward showing the Picture, which attracts her
looks, Is not that, says she, the Pourtraict of a young Cavalier, called
Themistides? There is nothing easier, than to inform you, answers the Merchant,
You need only read the Characters that are about it. Ariamite reads them with
an eager haste, and sees these words: Cleomenes, Son of Leonidas, King of
Sparta. How, added she with astonishment, is that the Prince Cleomenes, of whom
I have heard so much Discourse. There is nothing more certain, Madam, replied
the Athenian, his Picture was drawn at the desire of Queen Cretesilea, and the
Painter has kept this Copy of it.

Ariamite meditates for some moments; she afterward affects to look upon
several other pieces, which she was in no very good Condition to examine; and
that she might not make any discovery of the particular interest she takes in
Cleomenes, she buys two or three Pictures more, besides his. She feels a secret
Joy, to know the real Condition of Themistides, and to imagine, that Leonidas
will never consent, that his Successor may marry Cylesira.

Ariamite conceives a longing desire to come to the clearing of this matter
with Cleomenes, and goes to walk in Timoleon's Garden, believing to find him
there. She meets him indeed, and as she perceives him withdrawing himself, in
order to enter into a little Grove. How! Themistides, says she to him, do you
fly from me? Do you forget that I am one of your Friends, by remembering only
that Teleander is my Brother? Madam, answers Cleomenes, a sentiment of respect
did forbid me to present my self before you, and to let you see a Face, which
the Interests of the Prince of Erymanthus might render odious to you. Ab,
Themistides, replies she, with an obliging languishing, you know that you are
not hated, and if you would have me give a public Testimony thereof, I consent
that you may walk with me. That proffer puts Clomenes into a Confusion great
enough, nevertheless he did not omit bowing, by way of acknowledgment, and
giving Ariamite his hand. The Princess walks some steps without speaking,
afterward, looking Cleomenes in the Face; Confess, says she to him, that this
Garden seems to you a very Desert; and that you would give all the People you
see here, for one Person, whom you have not found. As I cannot dissemble,
replied the Prince, I confess unto you, Madam, that I would have been very glad
to see Cylesira; but it is a desire that many others may have, as well as I.
Perhaps they have not one so strong, replies Ariamite in smiling: In the mean
time, added she with a more serious Air, I am amazed, that you should be so
affected with a Person, whom the great inequality of Condition will never
suffer you to take to Wife.

She could not continue her Discourse for Vexation. Cleomenes, for his part,
was not very much at ease, to hear any more of it. But, in that moment, three
or four of the principal Ladies of Corinth advanced toward Ariamite. The
Princess failed not to receive them in a most obliging manner, and to walk
along with them. Themistides did likewise continue to lead Ariamite, and
several, who saw that Prince with Teleander's Sister, were so surprised at it,
as to talk of it in the Houses, whither they afterward went. So that those
News arrived at Onecrysa's before Ariamite went out of the Garden; and in the
Evening, when she retired home, Teleander, being outrageous with resentment,
was staying in her Chamber to chide her. I would fain know, says he, if you
have the baseness to fear Themistides, and what reason obliges you to show him
any respect, when you ought to look upon him as our greatest Enemy? Ariamite,
who expected this Discourse, found her self well enough prepared to answer it.
You are so impatient, said she to that Prince, that you well deserve to be left
in your Error. How! replies Teleander, much more enraged than before, dare you
say that I am mistaken? Don't you come from walking with a Man, who would have
killed me, who would have wounded me, who has taken Cylesira away from me? I
confess it, replied Ariamite, and I do not pretend to make a secret to you of a
thing, which all the World might have seen. I am willing even to inform you of
some Circumstances, which no body else can do. You shall know, that I met with
Themistides in Timoleon's Garden; that I called him to me in an obliging
manner; and that by some little marks of Complaisance, which I thought fit to
give him, I have kept him with me all the rest of the day. He seeing himself
very handsome, knowing himself brave, and believing that I have some Esteem and
Consideration for him, may, perhaps, flatter himself so far, as to pretend to
my Affection. But if my Cares had the success you ought to wish, would you
still be so unjust, as to complain of my Conduct? Would you fancy that I desire
to give my self to a Man unknown, and that I act, rather to render him Master
of my own Destiny, than to deliver you from a formidable Rival. Teleander,
instead of answering, made Reflections on what he heard; and Ariamite renewing
her Discourse, said, If I go yet further, and let you believe, that I do not
hate Themistides, should you be tormented at an Inclination that would unite
our Interests, that would make us act unanimously together, and that would give
me a greater earnestness to take off. Themistides from Cylesira?

Teleander, then looking on Ariamite with a little more moderation, answered; I
confess you might have been a very great assistance to me; but after all, what
advantage can you gather from a Walk, which has done you an injury, and given
me so much vexation? I have discovered an Obstacle, that will hinder your Rival
to marry Leriana 's Daughter, replied Ariamite, and I need say but one word to
Cylesira, to render her unfavourable to Themistides. Ah, Sister, cried out
Teleander, if that be so, Fortune ceases to be my Enemy. I am just now
entrusted with a Secret, which assures me, Cylesira can never be for
Themistides, and I shall only need to discourse with that Stranger, to make him
turn his pretentions another way.

Teleander and Ariamite desired to declare separately to Themistides and
Cylesira, that which they had learnt of them both; and Chance had almost
brought them to act against their own Interests. In effect, they are laboring
for the Union of two Persons, whom they have resolved to separate; for they
still kept as a secret what they had learnt. Teleander durst not so soon fail,
in what he promised Onecrysa; and Ariamite, for her part, would not tell her
Brother, that he had a King's Son for his Rival. They did not desire from each
other any clearing of the matter, for fear of seeing themselves obliged to
render Confidence for Confidence. To hope for a Fortunate success, was enough
to make them contented.

Ariamite went to visit Cylesira, and having carried her to her Bedside, to
speak to her more privately, said, I come to discover to you a Secret that I am
entrusted with, and which it concerns you to know. I do not ask you if you love
Themistides. I am persuaded, that the Complaisance he has for you, that his
Mien, his Valor, and the Service he has rendered you at Egina, will never let
you hate him. So that I being your real Friend, am obliged to give you notice,
that if you give him your Heart, you will undergo most severe vexations.
Themistides can never be yours. I know that you are of no obscure Family; I
know likewise that you have all the Fashions of a Person of an Illustrious
Birth: But, Cylesira, when you shall know Themistides, I think that you will
not flatter your self so far, as to pretend that he should raise you up to his
own Rank.

Cylesira heard these last words with an emotion of Joy, which she could not
master; and Ariamite, who perceived the signs of it in her Face, is surprised
at it, holds her Tongue, and repents of having said so much. Then changing all
on the sudden her Intentions, and even the tone of her Voice, Before I make an
end of informing you, added she, I may, methinks, ask you, what concern do you
take in the News I bring you. I assure you, replied Cylesira, you cannot please
me better, than by telling me, that Themistides 's Merit is supported by a high
Birth. I am very glad, replied Ariamite, to find you of that Opinion, and I
should be much more glad, if what I said, had any other Foundation than my own
Conjectures. But, Cylesira, to speak sincerely to you, I am not, as yet,
confirmed in them, and you will be pleased that I inform my self better, before
I make you Confident of a matter, that is not not, perhaps, too true. She
afterward calls Leriana, tells her that she may approach, and says, that the
Company will be better, than if it consisted only in those trifling Maiden
secrets, that usually signify nothing. She continues to hide her vexation, and
soon after goes away, because she would not constrain her self any longer.

Teleander, for his part, gave his Gentleman Order to visit Themistides, and to
entreat him from himself to come and walk in Timoleon's Garden. The Gentleman
entered into some suspicion, and before he went to Cleomenes, he gave Onecrysa
notice of the Commission, wherewith he was charged. The Princess of Erymanthus
was allarmed at it. She ran to Aratus, and conjured him to be himself present
in the same Garden, and to prevent those Rivals, from proceeding once more to
some dangerous debate.

In the mean time the two Princes met in a Green-Arbour, and after having
saluted each other with an Air sufficiently cold, Teleander began to speak
after this manner. I do not know, Themistides, what thoughts you believe I have
of you. The advantages you have gained over me, may persuade you, that I regard
you with envy, and that there is still some resentment remaining in my Heart.
But I suppose that you have Generosity enough to believe, that I do not
altogether want that Virtue, and that I can show a just esteem for Valor, even
when it ruins my own undertakings. Nevertheless, let us talk no more of what
has passed between us, in a time, when we are likely to see the Cause of the
aversion which we have for each other cease. You shall no longer see in me the
same earnestness after Cylesira, and I dare say, that for your part, you are
about to moderate your Passion, in renouncing your Hopes. I perceive well
enough, that these News are not very pleasing to you, but since they may cause
you to avoid greater Sorrows, you will not be troubled, that I deliver them.
Know that Cylesira is not designed for you, and that she is very suddenly to
complete the Happiness of another. Ah! Sir, interrupted Cleomenes with a Sigh!
it is the thing, I fear, and by reason thereof, I have despair already in my
Soul. You are then better instructed, than I imagined, replied Teleander, in
what Concerns Cylesira; and you know, probably, that she is of a descent, that
places her above your Pretentions. These last words were so little suitable
with the suspicions, which the first had been capable of giving upon the
account of Democares, that Themistides was by them reassured in his mind, and
renewed again the discourse according to his real Sentiments. How joyful should
I be, says he, to see Cylesira, in the Condition, which her Charms and Merit
seem to exact from Fortune.

As they were going on with their discourse, the General of the Achaians, who
was in search for Teleander, entered into the Arbor, and seeing no mark of
Animosity in the Faces of the two Princes, he said, I am very glad to see you
together, and I do not doubt but you have changed the sentiments you had for
each other. And indeed you have no other resolution to take, since Cylesira is
upon the point of departing, never to return any more into this Country. But,
believe me, and comfort your selves, by courting a Mistress that will be more
grateful than Cylesira can be. She, I mean, recompenses all her Lovers, and if
they die for her, they receive a Price of greater value, than the Life they
lose. You will be of my Opinion, when you judge that I speak of Glory, and of
the Immortality which she bestows. Sir, replied Themistides, I confess, that
the Mistress whom you mean, has a great Splendor; neither do I wonder, that
the Illustrious Aratus, who is one of her Principal Favorites, has a desire to
attract all the world to her Service. However, I do not believe, that you
doubt, that the Prince of Erymanthus and my self are already touched with her
Charms. But Sir, added Teleander, it is not forbidden to have a particular
Mistress, together with that almost universal one; and if Themistides and my
self were not afraid of some great Obstacles to our pretentions on Cylesira,
nothing would be more pleasant to us, than to love that fair Lady with Glory.

Aratus judged by that answer, that Onecrysa had discovered too much to
Teleander, and that even Teleander had already told The mistides Cylesira's
Descent. He was vexed at it, and feared, lest the secret, which concerned the
Princess, should chance to be entirely discovered, before her departure.

In the Evening, Teleander went into Ariamite's Chamber, and asked her if she
had spoken with Cylesira. For my own part, continued he, I have been
interrupted by Aratus, but I want only the saying of two words, to take off
Themistides. Those two words, replied Ariamite coldly, must be of very great
Efficacy, if you hope from them such an Event. Since you have a share in my
Concerns, replied Teleander, I will not keep them secret from you. Know then
that Cylesira is a Princess; and that she is very speedily to ascend a Throne.
You see I need only give this notice to Themistides -- Ah! Dear Brother,
interrupted she, do not discover that Secret, otherwise you may render
Themistides a better Office than you imagine. Know in your turn, that your
Rival is himself a Prince, and that it is Cleomenes, the Son of King Leonidas,
whom we see every day, under the borrowed name of Themistides. If you doubt of
it, added she, in showing Cleomenes Picture, see here, what will convince you.
-- Teleander looked upon it with wonder; he felt new disquiets, and agreed,
that Themistides and Cylesira must by no means know, that they are of an equal
Condition.

On the Morrow Aratus went to visit Agiatis, and advised her to depart as soon
as she could. The Princess consented to it, in spite of the Melancholy she
had in her Heart. She was amazed at her own disquiets, and forgot nothing to
appease them. She said within her self; that she was going again to see Prince
Gilipus; but if in that moment she durst say, she was going to remove from
Themistides, she became sensible of sorrow, which she could not overcome. At
length she follows a secret movement, that inclines her to comfort her self,
and imagines, that being so highly obliged to Themistides, she could not with
decency part for ever from him, without giving him some mark of her
acknowledgment. She took in hand Pen and Paper, but as that Novelty perplexed
her, she was at some loss in seeking out expressions, that without either
having too much force, or being too weak, might precisely answer her intentions.

She had hardly ended her Letter, when Leriana came into her Closet, and said
to her, Madam, You are not ignorant of what Sentiments Themistides and
Teleander have for you, and you have seen with what haste they are returned
from Palenis, in spite of their Wounds. I question not, if they can but know
what way you will take, but that they will take the same themselves, and follow
you to Erabeus, and even to Lacedemon. Consider, whether they are in a
Condition to undertake that voyage without danger, and even whether they are
not likely to be carried to some extremity, in order to oppose the intentions
of Prince Gilipus, and the happiness of King Agis. Be, I entreat you, cautious,
and assure your self, that I shall not be wanting on my part. Agiatis approved
of Leriana's Reasons, gave her Letter, together with an Order that it should
not be delivered until two days after her departure, and on the morrow very
early in the morning shedeparts from Corinth, together with Leosthenes,
Leriana, and some of Aratus's Officers. The Report was at first spread, that
Leosthenes was returned to Palenis; some Domestic Servants, whom he left
behind in his House, confirmed those News, and said, that their Master was to
return in two days. But Cleomenes, walking in the evening in Timoleon's
Garden, was informed, that Leriana's Chariot took a way very different from
that toward Egina. He was so displeased at it, that Philistion grew
apprehensive, it might create vexatious consequences. Sir, said he to him, have
you a mind, that your disquiets be more fatal to you, than your Wounds have
been? You are not yet thoroughly cured, but if you had recovered strength
enough, to go in search of what you love, would you, through Grief, cast your
self into a dangerous relapse? These words made some impression, but
Cleomenes's trouble was not so appeased, but that there still remained some
marks of it in his Countenance. Ariamite accompanied by a certain Woman of
Quality, who was her Confident, met the Prince, and observed the Melancholy he
had in his Eyes. I do not doubt, said she to him, but that it is Cylesira's
departure, that makes you sad; but give me leave, Themistides, to wonder at it.
For indeed, added she, most dexterously, if that Stranger has for you those
sentiments of esteem, which no Person ought to deny you, and if she has
retained a true Gratitude for the service which you have rendered her, she has
told you in what place you may find her. But if on the contrary, she has failed
to give you this advice, should you not regard her as an ungrateful Creature,
who renders her self unworthy of your tenderness? But, Madam, replied Clomenes
modestly, I do not see that Cylesira is so much in my debt, as you imagine. I
only gave her an assistance, which she might expect from any other besides
Themistides. I believe, replied Ariamite, that any other would have less
exposed himself, than you, and that even you would not have fought with so much
ardour, for any other than Cylesira. But after all, Sir, if Themistides blindly
loves Leriana 's Daughter, it is time that the Prince Cleomenes, that the Son of
King Leonidas should open his Eyes, to see, to what, a more Glorious Destiny
calls him. How, Madam! do you know me? interrupted the Prince with surprise.
Yes, Sir, I know you, replied Ariamite, and have even some concern for you. You
know that there is a strict Alliance between the Spartans and the Achaians, and
that Aratus has some considerable Friends in Lacedemon. If his mediation be
necessary to you, I will forget nothing that way incline him to make an
accommodation that may be for your advantage. Indeed, Sir, added Ariamite 's
Friend, if you have some merit, it must be also confessed, that you have a great
deal of good Fortune. To be convinced of it, you need only examine the Words,
and Eyes of this fair Princess. Observe her Charms, and if I may presume to say
it, added she in a lower Voice, addict your self to her. Possibly you shall
see, that she will not want acknowledgment for the Prince Cleomenes. So that,
Sir, the Princess Ariamite, may easily comfort you, for the loss of Cylesira,
and the King Leonidas will be better satisfied with an Alliance with Aratus,
than with that with Leriana. These words made Ariamite blush, add a new luster
to her Complexion, and render even her Air more moving. That Prince, who was by
Nature Sprightly and Bold, appeared Timorous and Bashful on this occasion. She
cast down her Eyes to the ground, and impatiently expected Cleomenes's answer.
Themistides was too sincere, he was too much taken up with Cylesira's Charms,
to give cause of believing that he would change his Passion; but he was also
far from having any thing that was disobliging in his Humor; He answered with
all the Signs of Respect and Gratitude he could give. I know, said he, how much
I am bound to so fair a Princess. And with what Sentiments I ought to remember
her all my life. Nevertheless since she is no longer ignorant who I am, she
sees, that it belongs to Leonidas, to dispose of Cleomenes 's Destiny. Then he
thought it proper, to show her the Letter he had received from the King his
Father. He was willing to give Ariamite this Testimony of Confidence, and to
spare her the double vexation she would conceive for his departure, if she
should believe, that he left Corinth so speedily, to no other end, than to run
after Cylesira. The Princess had no sooner read over Leonidas's Letter, but,
looking on Cleomenes with an obliging languishing, she said to him, Then you
are, Sir, going to leave us, and in all probability you will never be seen more
in this Country. Yet if you chance to return, with the Succors with which your
Republic is bound to furnish us, you shall see what Consideration we shall
have for you. We shall possibly render you good Offices, over and above those
that are due to your Rank and Merit. Cleomenes was moved with these words of
Arimite's, and he was even sensible of some Regret, in parting from her.

Nevertheless he did not fail to propose a speedy departure to Xenares, and
believed that he was called to Tegeum, no less by his Love, than by the Orders
of Leonidas. He was in hopes, that he needed only send to Lacedemon, to be
informed, where he might see that fair Cylesira, who was appointed for
Democares. He went to take his leave of Aratus, Onecrysa, and Ariamite. The
General of the Achaians caressed him, according to the Merit of Themistides,
and paid him all the Honors that were due to Cleomenes. Ariamite could not
with dry Eyes see that Prince go out of her Apartment, and Teleander, who was
vexed to see him depart so soon after Cylesira, was willing to avoid the bidding
him adieu, and was therefore gone a walking to the Castle of Acrocorinth.

In the Evening Cylesira's Letter was delivered to Themistides. The Prince
kissed the Paper, opened it with a joy he never felt before, and found in it
these words.

Cylesira to Themistides.
OUR Journey was so speedily resolved upon, that I had not time to speak to you
of it. I assure you that I am displeased at it; and when we were in Egina, I
should have discovered to you some important matters, that concern my self, if
I could have done it without giving you some disquiet. You will soon be
informed of this Truth, and at that time, you will believe me much happier,
than I shall really be. This is all I can tell you, unless I add, that I am not
designed for Democares, and that there is a great difference between the
Sentiments I have for him, and the Esteem and Gratitude I shall all my Life
preserve for the Generous Themistides.

Cylesira.


Cleomenes had no sooner made an end of reading it, but he read it over again,
to renew his Pleasure. He then grew a little Melancholy, because he could not
understand the whole meaning of the Letter. But that he might be in a better
Condition, to resist the Fatigues of his Journey, he endeavored to appease all
the troubles of his Mind. He hoped that Cylesira may entrust him at Lacedemon
with the secret, which she had so much a mind to discover to him at Egina.

He departed. Philistion followed him, and promised never to part from him. The
Prince was overjoyed at it, and expressed so much to him, by caressing him,
while he waited for an opportunity of bestowing on him other marks of his
Gratitude. He applied his first cares, to learn what way Cylesira had taken. He
instructed Erantor, and sent him away to that purpose; but Leriana had taken
such heed, by the continual changing of Roads, and Chariots, that it was
impossible to trace her. Cleomenes was very much troubled at it, and Philistion
was forced to represent, that he would infallibly hear some News of her, by the
means of Democares.

At length the Prince arrived at Tegeum, he found there a great number of
considerable Citizens, who had withdrawn themselves thither, to be near
Leonidas Cleomenes was received by Cretesilea his Mother, and Chelonisa his
Sister, with tears of Joy. The King would at first, have concealed part of his
tenderness, but he was not master of the movements of his Heart, at the sight
of a Son, I say of a Son, so handsome, and who already did so well answer, by
his actions, the expectations that were had of him. He pressed Cleomenes
between his Arms, and afterward received Xenares and Philistion, with all the
Honor they could expect, and asked them some Circumstances of what had passed
in Egina. Cleomenes blushed, and Xenares smilingly answered, I can tell you
better than the Prince, the Beauty of his action; but he will tell you better
than I, that the Lady whom they would have carried away, is the most Charming
Creature he may have ever seen. I understand you, replied Leonidas with the
same Air; but, Prince, added he, addressing himself to Cleomenes, I am very
much mistaken, if I do not suddenly make you forget what you have seen in
Egina. I have framed a great design, which I hope to execute, and I promise
you, that the success of it will give you the Possession of a Princess, who
deserves the admiration of all the Earth. Sir, replied Cleomenes, I am, as yet,
to think of nothing, but of serving my King. You shall see, interrupted
Leonidas, that what both you and I desire, are not incompatible. In that moment
Leonidas saw one of the most Zealous of his Faction enter, who was come from
Lacedemon, he advanced toward him, and took him aside. Then he said to him,
Well, Megabates, what have you to tell me of Agis? Are you informed of his
Designs? Sir, answered he, Agis will at present put nothing in Execution, but
what relates to the suppressing of Debts: He has put off the making a Partition
of Goods, until he returns from Aratus 's Army, whither, you know, he is to
lead the succors, which we have obliged to give the Achaians. This first
Enterprise does not take away from the principal Citizens of the Republic,
either their Lands, or Houses, and seems only to tend to the ease of the
People. So that your Faction, who are spoiled less than they apprehended, will
not possibly be enraged enough to take up Arms, and I know not whether you had
not better wait for a more favorable occasion. I believe, as well as you,
replied Leonidas, that Matters are not yet well enough disposed to bring me
back; but I would not have the two Branches of the Family of the Agiades unite
by this Marriage, upon which they are resolved. I do not know that I can
undertake any thing more advantageous to my House, than to make Agiatis enter
into it. I should deprive thereby the Prince, to whom she is designed, of a
great reinforcement; and he who would espouse her, should, at length, have the
Wealth and Friends of Gilipus. I know that Agiatis is returned to Erabeus, and
that Gilipus is, in a few days, to carry her to Lacedemon, in order to be
Married. He little imagines, that I am so perfectly informed of every thing,
that relates to his Daughter; but I have always had my mind so firmly bent upon
the design I am now declaring to you, that I have forgot nothing that may make
it succeed. I have gained an Inhabitant of Megalopolis, called Crantippus, who
is almost every day at Erabeus, and he gives me an account of every thing that
passes there. As soon as Agiatis was returned thither, he did not fail to send
me the news of it, and I, for my part, redoubled my Liberality, because I
perceive, that it is now that I have the greatest need of his assistance. It
would not be difficult for you, replied Megabates, to take away the Princess
from thence by force, whilst that Agis and Gilipus are busied with their
Friends at Lacedemon. That is it, replied Leonidas, that I have a longing
desire to do, and to speak unto you freely, you would do me an infinite
pleasure, in being willing to be the Chief of that enterprise. I will give you
the Command of my Guards; you shall take such a number of them as you think
fitting, and having caused them to enter separately into Megalopolis, you shall
take such measures with Crantippus, as you shall judge necessary for the
Execution of my design. Megabates did let him know, he would omit nothing that
might tend to the successful accomplishment of that important Commission; and
Leonidas, relying upon his Conduct, thought of nothing, but how he should
testify to Cleomenes, with what Care and Pains he labored for his Interests.
He enquired after the Prince, and was informed, that, after he had entertained,
for some time, the Queen with the particulars of his Journey, he was gone out
to walk with Philistion.

It was that he might talk with him about Cylesira. My Dear, Philistion, said
Cleomenes, I entreat you to depart to morrow for Lacedemon, to go to Democares
's House, and to enquire there, in what place I may find her I love. You have a
pretense to ask that question, without saying any thing contrary to the Truth.
You may say that you are of Corinth, that you have known Leriana there, and
that you would be glad to see her again in that Country, into which, you have
been told, she is returned. Yes, Sir, replied Philistion, I will go to Sparta,
and I will see Democares, and it shall not be my Fault, if I get not from him
the information you desire.

He departed at the hour that Cleomenes ordered him to do; and as soon as he
arrived, he learnt that Democares was not in Lacedemon, and that none knew,
either where he was, or when he would return. Philistion was troubled at it,
and he gave an account thereof to Cleomenes in a Letter. While he staid at
Lacedemon for an answer to it, the Prince found himself in a strange perplexity
at Tegeum. The King, his Father, declared to him the design he had of taking
away Agiatis by force, in order to bestow her on him; and even told him the
particulars of those measures which he had taken with Megabates. Cleomenes, who
had an aversion for Injustice, and could love no other Woman than Cylesira,
did, at first, oppose Leonidas's Intentions, and throwing himself at his Feet,
said to him, In the name of Heaven, Sir, let not the Goodness you have for me,
transport you to act violence. For God's sake consider, that the Princess
Agiatis would hate me mortally, and that she would always regard me, as the Son
of her Ravisher. Does it belong to you, replied Leonidas severely, to make such
Remonstrances to me, when I take care of your Interests? Shall we ever have
such an opportunity as this is, which you would have us lose? Is there so fair
a Princess in all Greece? Can you make a more important Alliance? But, Sir,
replied Cleomenes boldly, who can assure you that this Rape will not arm all
the Agiades against you, instead of uniting them to you? I will once more
answer you, replied Leonidas, but, after that, I command you to hold your
Tongue, and withdraw. You apprehend that Agis and Gilipus may become our
Enemies. Are they not already so? Have we not room to hope, that their
resentment will have no consequence; that they will consent to a Peace, and
that they would be very loath to ruin a Family, to which Agiatis will give
Heirs and Successors. Cleomenes did not approve of these Reasons, but since
Leonidas had stopped his Mouth, he durst say no more, but retired with a most
sensible displeasure. He resolved not only never to Marry Agiatis; but he did
even believe that he should be on Accomplice of the Crime, which they would
have him commit, if he did not do his endeavors to prevent the Execution of
it. He secured to himself secretly some People, and makes himself ready to
march to Agiatis's assistance, as soon as it would be time convenient.

On the other side, Democares arrived at Erabeus; he had told Gilipus, that he
went to Megalopolis, and that he would visit Agiatis in passing by; in the mean
time he had left Lacedemon, with no other Intentions, than to see that
Princess. He had a violent Passion for her, and did only counterfeit a Love for
the true Cylesira, Leriana's Daughter, that he might be the more agreeably
received by Gilipus. But, in this last Journey, he found Agiatis's Beauty so
increased, that he was no longer Master of those Sentiments, which he had
always, till then, concealed. The Princess was alone in her Chamber, and the
sweetness with which she entertained Democares, finished his ruin. You cannot
believe, said she to him, how kindly I take it from you, that you are the
first, that comes to visit us. It Is true, Cylesira's obliging answer, which we
sent from the Isle of Egina, did well deserve that you should make such haste
to thank her. I know, replied Democares, what are my Obligations to Leriana and
Cylesira; but, Madam, they will be pleased, before I return them my thanks,
that I express to you the Joy I receive for your return, and for seeing you
more Charming than ever. He accompanied these words with a look passionate
enough, to explain the whole sense of them; and the Princess having
comprehended Democares but too well, answered imperiously. 'Know, that I am no
longer called Cylesira; I have quitted that name in entering Erabeus, and you
will not do ill to observe, that it is to Agiatis you speak. Nevertheless, I am
willing to forget, or even not to have understood what there was offensive in
your Discourse; provided you have for Cylesira -- For Heaven's sake,
interrupted he, do not go through with your Command of the only thing in which
I cannot obey you. Though I should offend you by a Declaration, which Goddesses
themselves do not always receive as an Affront, yet I will not delay one moment
from telling you, that I am the first, whom your budding Beauty has made to
sigh, and that I will love you, during my whole Life. Since you have lost your
Reason, replied Agiatis, more enraged than before, be gone, and never presume
to see me more, unless you will have me complain of your insolence, to some
persons, who will be able to punish you for it. I understand you, replied he,
but tell Agis and Gilipus what you please, I fear their Power less than your
Anger. I confess that I am no King; but I have Courage; I have Friends; I live
in a Free State; I can be Ephore; and by consequence I can raise my self to
Charges, whose Authority is above that of Kings. After this, Madam, I withdraw,
but remember that you have scorned Democares, and that I will attempt so many
ways, as not to despair to see you one day depend on my Will. Then he went
away in Fury, and even with a Threatening Mien.

Leosthenes, Leriana, and Cylesira, whom Agiatis had sent for, entered the Room
within a Minute after, and observed with surprise that the Princess's
Countenance was extraordinarily moved. Their astonishment was increased, as
soon as Agiatis related what had passed. You know, Madam, said Leriana to her,
by whose Order we suffered Democares's Visits. 'Twas that I might not displease
Prince Gilipus, that I my self inclined Cylesira to show him some Complaisance,
and to make him the last answer, which you saw in the Isle of Egina.
Nevertheless I had some Reluctance, to give my daughter to a man whose Humor I
knew better than Prince Gilipus. I was more concerned to examine him, and
Democares constrained himself less before me. I perceived him to be Restless,
Ambitious, a lover of Novelties. I knew also that he was Bold, and Undertaking,
and that he had but little Judgment, with a great deal of Courage. I am
therefore very glad that I am delivered from the continual fear, wherein I
should have been, if Fortune had matched my Daughter to Democares. But I am
very sorry to understand, that he has those Sentiments for you which you say he
has. I know that his Audacity is extreme, that his Friends are not few in
Number, and that there is nothing as yet peaceable in Lacedemon. I see that, as
well as you, replied the Princess, and I perceive that I shall never be very
happy. But indeed, I can take no other Measures, than to conceal from Prince
Gilipus, that Democares has offended me, for fear of dividing and weakening Our
Party in so dangerous a Conjuncture. Since it is not Democares, who has reason
to complain, we need fear nothing for the present, and we will be less afraid,
when Agis's Authority shall be better established.

While Agiatis was thus discoursing about Democares, that Lacedemonian, grown
outrageous with his Resentment, studied nothing but Revenge. His first
intention was to throw himself into Leonidas's Party, and to draw into it
Amphares, Arcecilaus, and all the rest of his Friends. He took Pleasure in
showing the Princess what he could do, and what a man she had lost; he imagined
he could occasion a Change great enough in Sparta to make Agiatis repent. But
in a few Moments after, his love more violent than before, would not permit him
to break with Gilipus, and to renounce for ever a Lady's sight, with whom he
was Charmed.

He went as far as Megalopolis, and was very glad to show himself there to some
people, who might tell Gilipus of his Journey. He being acquainted with
Crantippus at Erabeus, went to his house, talked to him of Agiatis, and could
not forbear to complain of her. When you shall see her, pursued he, you will do
me a kindness, to appear surprised at the Manner wherewith she entertained me,
and to let her understand, that there may proceed terrible consequences from
that Affront. Crantippus promised to do him that good Office, and to talk to
the Princess very earnestly in his behalf.

In the Evening, Megabates arrived at Megalopolis, saw ^rantippus, discovered
to him the design that brought him thither, and consulted with him how to put
it in Execution. Crantippus went on the Morrow to Erabeus, told the Princess of
Democares's Resentment, and gave her to understand that a man of his Humor
might be transported to some violence. Agiatis answered, that she was far from
fearing him, since it was in her power to make Democares repent, that he had
given any offense to a Person of her Rank. Crantippus, who was very desirous to
divide Agis's Party, told the Princess, that he did not doubt but that she had
already given notice of it to the Prince Gilipus, and represented to her that
she ought not neglect the doing it. He remained the rest of the day at Erabeus,
and in the Night he set on Fire a part of the House. Those whom he had gained
to act jointly with him, gave the Alarm, said that Democares would have burnt
Erabeus, and that he appeared in the Neighborhood with a Body of Horse, Ah!
Madam, cried out Crantippus, I was very much in the right, when I said that you
were to fear every thing from that desperate Man. Save your self, Madam, come
to Megalopolis with Leriana, I will conduct you with a small Train, the better
to conceal your flight, and Leosthenes shall amuse Democares, either by some
resistance, or by some kind of Composition. Leosthenes approved of that
Expedient, and the Princess was hardly two Leagues from Erabeus, when Megabates
accosts her at the Head of twenty Horsemen. Madam, said he, you do not fall
into Democares 's hands. I have Orders to carry you to a Prince who will regard
you more as his own Daughter, than as his Enemy. It Is to King Leonidas, added
Crantippus, and I am sure you will have no reason to complain of what he
designs for you. Agiatis perceived that Crantippus had laid the Snare for her,
into which she was fallen, and not being able to hear him, she interrupted him
with Indignation. Perfidious Wretch, said she, do thou believe that Heaven
will suffer thy Treachery to go unpunished? She had hardly finished these words,
when she saw ten or twelve Horsemen appear, who came from the Coast toward
Alpheus. He, who seemed the Chief of them, rode up to Megabates, and entreated
him to set the Princess Agiatis at Liberty. Megabates considered the Cavalier,
entered into some suspicion, and contented himself with answering in these
Terms. If you are of the Princess's interest, you will not oppose our March.
The liberty that you require for her, would be less advantageous to her than
you imagine. It Is not so much your part as her own, to judge of her advantages,
replied the Cavalier, and since I am persuaded she will please her self better
in her own house, than in the place into which you pretend to carry her. I
desire she may be conveyed back to Erabeus. However she shall take another way
now, replied Crantippus. If she had no other Conductors than such as you,
replied the unknown Cavalier, I do not think you should carry her far. In that
very moment they took their Swords in hand, and began to fight. Crantippus made
at him with a thrust, but the unknown Cavalier discharged so furious a back
blow across his Head, that he made him fall down without any Life. He
afterward threw himself on Megabates's Troop, and felled to the ground the
first he met: But having received a hurt with a Javelin, His own people could
not suffer either him to expose himself, or men of the same Party to come to
blows among themselves. They cried out to Megabates that it was Cleomenes, and
that he had better give Agiatis her Liberty, than to let the Prince expose
himself to danger.

Megabates, who had already suspected what was told him, did easily believe it,
and being careful of Cleomenes's Life. He told the Prince, that he was ready to
follow his Orders. Carry th^^^ the Princess back again, answered he. The King
my Father will be angry with none but me. He then turned toward the Cavaliers,
who followed him, and Commanded them, to guard Agiatis as far as Erabeus, and
to tell her that he himself would have bore her Company, but that he was
unwilling to trouble her with the sight of a Prince's Son, who had so lately
offended her. Agiatis returned his Compliment, bestowed a liberality on the
Cavaliers, and entreated them, to assure their Prince of her acknowledgment of
his Generosity.

In the mean time, Megabates is afraid of Leonidas, and represents to Cleomenes
that he has acted no less against his own Interests, than against his Father's
Will and Pleasure. Sir, pursues he, though your Wounds would not stay you at
Megalopolis, I doubt whether or no we should go to Tegeum. I believe that what
has now happened, will give us no very good reception there, and I confess I
had much rather write to the King, concerning the Success of this undertaking,
than go and give an account of it my self. I pray, Sir, be pleased to consider
in what Terms you would have me write. You need only tell the Naked Truth,
replied Cleomenes, you are in no fault; and for what regards my self. I can
neither repent of what I have done, nor suffer the King my Father, when I can
prevent it, to (...) any violence.

They afterward continue their way toward Megalopolis, and as soon as they
arrive there, the Prince puts himself into Bed. His Wound was searched, and
found not dangerous, and Megabates sent back his Men to Tegeum with a Letter to
Leonidas. That Prince was transported with anger against Cleomenes: He declared
aloud he would never see him: He forbid the Queen to send for him back; and yet
he recalled Megabates. Xenares departed for Megalopolis, and Philistion having
heard reported at Lacedemon, what had passed near Erabeus, did not fail to go
and join with Cleomenes.

In the mean time Democares arrived at Sparta; He saw Gilipus, and when that
Prince enquired of him what News from Erabeus? Sir, answered he, the Princess
is more Charming than I can express unto you; and as I interess my self in
every thing that has relation to you, I was exceeding glad to see that
Augmentation of Beauty. But I must confess, that I have no great reason to
applaud the manner, after which the Princess received those Testimonies I gave
her of it. I know not whether she took what I said for a piece of Gallantry,
that she ought not to suffer, or whether by Lerianas instructions she carries
her discretion even to Coyness; but be it which it will, I have been treated
with a most intolerable indignity, and I assure you that if I had not
considered that she was a Prince's Daughter. -- You strangely surprise me,
interrupted Gilipus, I never believed Agiatis was of that humor, or that she
would receive, in such a manner, the best of my friends. But we will go within
these two or three days to Erabeus, and you shall see how I pretend you should
be respected there. Ah, Sir, replied Democares, for God's sake, do not tell the
Princess that I make any Complaint against her; it would be but to exasperate
her the more, and after that, I should go to your House with an extreme
Reluctance. Gilipus promised him to do nothing in that matter, without his
Consent, and yet, having a great Esteem for him, and standing in need of his
assistance, he was sufficiently displeased at what had passed. In a few moments
after he had another Vexation given him. He was told, that it had been intended
to carry the Princess away by force; that a part of Erabeus had been burnt; and
that Democares had been wrongfully accused of having fired it. These Stories
renewed Gilipus's Fears for Agiatis, and inclined him not to delay her Marriage
any longer. He spoke of it to Agis, who was overjoyed at it, and caused it to
be published the very same day, that the Lacedaemonians were to carry before his
Palace, all their Bonds and other Writings they had to show for money owing
them. Though the most considerable Citizens were already prepared for this
loss, yet they could not forbear being afflicted at it. There was not one but
Agesilaus, the Brother of Agesistrate, who expressed the least joy for it. He
had purchased the fairest Lands of Laconia, and had not yet paid for them: So
that he persuaded the King, his Nephew, speedily to suppress all Debts, and at
the same time, he advised him to defer the Partition of Estates. He represented
to him, that he must not ruin, at once, the principal Spartans; and by these
means he pretended to owe nothing, and to remain Master of all that he had
purchased. Agis followed his first advice, without any trouble arising from it
in Lacedemon. All the Citizens quietly obeyed him, and when they had burnt the
Writings, and were returning melancholy home to their Houses, History observes,
that Agesilaus said, in smiling, that he had never seen before so clear or so
pleasant a Fire.

Agiatis was not without sorrow informed, that they would no longer delay her
Marriage; she went a walking into the Park of Erabeus with Cylesira, and as she
was used to discourse with that Lady, with an entire openess of Heart, she
found some Comfort in declaring to her the cause of her Disquiet. Ah, Cylesira,
said she sighing, they are at length, going to make me renounce my Liberty.
Every thing is peaceable at Lacedemon; nothing can any longer delay the
engagement, which you have seen me dread, ever since my return. Nevertheless,
Madam, replied Cylesira, the Prince, who is appointed for you, is young, and
handsome; his Merit is great, and his Reputation high. I have observed all that
you tell me, replied Agiatis, but I could never take any other Interest
therein, than that of a Kinswoman. Judge, Cylesira, judge if I am any longer
sensible of any thing that respects him, after my Journey to Corinth. That
Themistides, of whom you have so often talked to me, replied Leriana's
Daughter, must needs have something very extraordinary in him, since, quite
unknown as he is, he carries away a place in your Heart, which you, in vain,
endeavor to give a King who adores you. Let us not compare, I pray you inter
rupted the Princess, the Sentiments of Agis, to the Tenderness of Themistides.
Agis may have for me a discreet, and even solid Friendship. But Themistides,
being more Ardent and more Active, was animated with a Passion which I saw
sparking in his Eyes, and shining in all his Behavior. Ah! Cylesira, haost
thou seen him fighting for my. Liberty, thou would agree with me, that there
is nothing more terrible, nor more charming than Themistides, when he has his
Sword in his Hand. Yet this man so formidable, never appeared before me, but
with Submission. He was always ready to give me marks of his Complaisance and
Respect. Alas! said she, in letting some Tears run down, how happy was I, when
I bore thy Name. I saw Themistides every moment. I observed that he preferred
an unknown Cylesira, before a Beautiful Princess. I could not doubt but that he
loved me tenderly; and I had the pleasure of loving him, without knowing it.
For indeed, Cylesira, I should have been deprived of that sweetness, if I had
known the cause of it. That Joy is how past, without any hopes of return, and I
have the misfortune, of not being able to change Conditions with thee, and to
be the true Cylesira.

While the fair Princess is complaining after this manner, notice is brought
her, that Gitipus is arrived at Erabeus. She wipes her Eyes, in spite of a new
trouble she feels, and turning toward Cylesira, says to her, This is the lase
time that I will talk unto you of Themistides. Heaven, and my own Glory would
have me chase him from my Heart, and I will do all my endeavors to think only
on King Agis, for whom Prince Gilipus and Policy have designed me.

She could not end these words without sighing, and she remained silent, until
she entered into the Court of the Castle. Gilipus alighted there from his Horse,
and as soon as he perceived that the Princess came toward him, as fast as
Decency gave her leave, he advanced toward her with open Arms. He embraced her
tenderly, and his presence moderating Agiatis's sadness, that Princess appeared
with a Splendour, which Gilipus could not behold without transports of Joy. He
then infinitely caresled Leosthenes and Leriana; he enquired of them news of
Aratus, And after some minutes repose, he desired to know the principal
Circumstances of their Journey to Corinth, and the Isle of Egina.

Agiatis immediately remembers every thing that happened to her. She considers,
that she has for ever forsaken that Themistides, to whom she was so much
obliged, and with whom she was so smitten. That reflection made her relapse
into her former melancholy; and Gilipus having observed some change in her
Countenance, said to her, I perceive, Daugher, that you do not without vexation
hear talk of Egina. The name of that Isle renews your resentment, and your
displeasures, in bringing to your remembrance the attempts of Teleander and
Leonidas. But comfort your self, Agiatis, Lacedemon is at Peace; you are going
to be Queen there; and, I believe, your Enemies may never more be in a
Condition to come and give you any Affront. I think, added he smilingly, that
you will there be yet less afraid of our Friends; and that you will no longer
imagine, that Democares may have some design of offending you, when he shall
give you his Praises. Sir, replied Agiatis blushing, Democares is more Criminal
than you imagine, and I could wish that he had not come to my House, either
oftener or more familiarly, than the other Lacedaemonians, who are engaged in
your Interests. How! replied Gilipus, do you believe that Democares, who is
about to marry Cylesira, and who sees that you are going to be Queen, can have
any Pretentions that may deserve your Anger? Well then, Sir, replied Agiatis,
let Democares marry Cylesira, let him regard me as Prince Gilipus's Daughter,
and I will forget that he ever offended me. I am very glad to see you in these
Sentiments, replied Gilipus. There is nothing caster, than to give you that
satisfaction Sir, replied Leost henes, you will, perhaps, find a greater
difficulty than you believe, in managing Democares's Spirit. I perceive that he
deceives my Sister, and betrays you. He only counterfeits a love for Cylesira,
that he may be every moment near the Princess. In the meantime. I am willing to
attend, until you have made him explain himself, as to what concerns my Niece;
and if he uses her no otherwise than I expect from his Humor, I shall let him
know, that Cylesira's Alliance would have done him no Injury. It would mortally
displease me, replied Gilipus, that you should have any quarrel with Democares;
but I cannot believe that he will give us any just cause to complain of him.

During the time that they are thus discoursing of Democanes, that Lacedemonian
is agitated with most severe Torments. Decency obliges him to assist at Agis's
Marriage, and he cannot resolve, within himself, to be a looker on of that
Prince's Happiness. He loves Agiatis, and has lately offended her. Gilipus is
to make him, in Cylesira's behalf, some Propositions, which he will not accept
of and he does not knew after what manner he shall excuse himself, for breaking
the promise he had given. In effect, he sees nothing but vexation for him, if
he stays at Lacedemon, while all the Discourse there will be concerning
Divertisements. He therefore pretends, that an important business calls him to
Elis. He protests to King Agis, that he does not leave him in that Conjuncture,
without a sensible displeasure; and he departs, after having charged Amphares
to disabuse Gilipus and Leriana, concerning Cylesira's Marriage.

Agesilaus and Amphares are chosen out to go to Erabeus, to fetch Agiatis.
Gilipus receives them with an extraordinary Joy; but in a few moments after he
is exceedingly disquieted, when Amphares lets him know that Democares cannot
marry Leriana's Daughther. Gilipus resents it highly, and expresses so much to
Leriana and Leosthenes; but withal, lets them see, that he is constrained to
dissemble yet a while. He bestows on Cylesira Jewels of a considerable value,
and promises her greater advantages, than she should have found with Democares.
Leosthenes and Leriana are satisfied with his proceedings; but they never will
pardon Democares; and Leriana cannot resolve to bear Agiatis company to
Lacedemon. She is afraid of seeing every moment Democares, either at Agis's or
Gilipus's. She apprehends yet more, lest Leosthenes should have some difference
with a Man, who was no less formidable for his cunning, than for his Courage.
She discovers her Sentiments to Agiatis, and endeavors to get her approbation
of them. Methinks, says she to her, that no man will be surprised, if I
withdraw. I have remitted you into the hands of Prince Gilipus. I see that you
have nolonger need of my Advice, since you have no thing more to do, than to
follow the Will of King Agis. The Princess hears her with Sorrow, and tells her
that Democares is not at Lacedemon. Then looking on her with a melancholy Air,
I entreat you, pursues she, not to sorsake me, when I have need of your
assistance, and am less happy than you imagine. Madam, replied Leriana, I am
willing to follow you, but you shall give me leave, if you please, to depart
from Lacedemon, before Democares returns thither. Nothing would be more
disagreeable to me, than to hear Cylesira 's Name, in those reports that are
usually spread about, concerning Marriages, that are either likely to be, or
have already failed. Besides, Leosthenes would be unwilling to leave me behind
at Sparta, and if he remained there with me, I should fear, lest he should fall
into the Snares, which Democares would infallibly lay for him. Well then,
replies Agiatis, I consent to what you demand, provided that your absence be
not long, and that you return to Lacedemon, when King Agis will be gone to the
Army. Democares without doubt will follow him, and we shall be delivered from
the presence of a Man, who ought to be no less odious to my self, than you. In
that moment Agesilaus and Amphares enter her Chamber, and pray Agiatis to defer
no longer the happiness of a Prince, who languisht with an impatience to see
her. The Princess dares not testify with what reluctance she engaged her self;
and is contented to answer, that it belongs to Prince Gilipus, to dispose of
her destiny. They depart from Erabeus within an hour after, and as soon as they
arrive on the bank of Euratas, they see very magnificent Tents, out of which
Agis the King comes, encompassed with an infinite number of People. King
Cleombrotus, Husband to Chelonisa, marched by his side, who being indebted to
him for Leonidas's Crown, which he had usurped, left entirely to him the
Administration of all Affairs. The Queens Archidamia and Agesistrate, the
Grandmother, and Mother of Agis, Hypomedon, the Son of Agesilaus, Lysander the
Ephore, and several other very considerable Citizens, were in that Company. The
whole Assembly were overjoyed at this Enterview, as they were afterward at the
Alliance, which had been so ardently desired by the Faction of the Agiades.
Nevertheless the Queen Agiatis appeared dissatisfied, but they did attribute
the Melancholy they saw in her Eyes to Modesty.

Cleomenes heard with an extraordinary joy that Agiatis was Married. He
imparted his Thoughts upon it to Philistion. How glad am I, said he, that I am
in a Condition to go and seek for Cylesira, and that the King can no longer
command me to espouse a Princess, by whom he hoped for great advantages. Sir,
replied Philistion to him, the King was not mistaken in his Pretentions. Those
people, who are engaged in your Interests, ought to wish that you had not
opposed his Designs, for the love of Cylesira, whom he never will consent that
you shall Marry. I pray, Philistion, replied Cleomenes, instead of giving me
vexation in so agreeable a Conjuncture, think of nothing but of returning to
Lacedemon, to learn where we shall be able to see Cylesira again. Sir, replied
Philistion, after having discoursed unto you according to my Duty, I will obey
your Orders without any scruple, and I will go to Sparta when it shall please
you. Cleomenes would have had him gone on the morrow, but Philistion was
obliged to stay near him until Xenares returned, who thought it expedient to go
to Tegeam, to endeavor to make the Prince's Peace.

Leonidas was inflexible; he would never consent to Cleomenes's return. But
Sir, said Xenares to him, Agiatis is Married; The Prince will never more
disobey you, and your severity can bring no remedy -- And it is, interrupted he
roughly, because the mischief is beyond all cure, that I cannot pardon him. The
Queens entreaties were not more powerful, and Xenares was constrained to return
without obtaining any Grace. He was no sooner in Megalopolis, but Philistion
began his Journey. He arrived at Lacedemon at the very time that Democanes was
expected there, and within two days after, Leosthenes, Lerians, and Cylesira,
were departed from thence. Philistion visited Democares, he was informed that
the Lacedemonian no longer thought of Marriage, and that Cylesira was gone into
Egina, with Leosthenes and Leriana.

He gives an account of this to Cleomenes, and that Prince, after having heard
him with a Joy not to be expressed, has no other thoughts than of going to an
Isle, where he hopes to find what is dearest to him in the World. That he might
be the more at liberty to make that journey, he told Xenares that he was weary
of staying at Megalopolis, and entreated him to see Leonidas once more, to
endeavor to prevall with him. I promise you, pursued he, to let you hear often
from me, and you will please me infinitely, in writing to me an account of what
shall pass at Tegeum. Xenares, who was not very desirous that Cleomenes should
stay so near to Lacedemon, consented immediately to his Proposal, and they
departed at that very instant. The Prince, followed by Philistion and Erantor,
marched directly toward Mantinea, left Tegeum on the right hand, and
continuing his way with all the diligence that Love and Hope could produce, he
soon arrived in a place which inspired him with new transports of joy. He
remembered how often he had seen Cylesira there, he pleased himself with being
just upon the point of seeing her again, and without taking one Minutes
repose, he went to her House, whither he carried Philistion to entertain
Leriana. But being informed that Leosthenes was just gone out with his Sister,
he told Philistion that he would fain be alone, since Cylesira was alone. If
you enter, pursued he, Decency will oblige Cylesira to speak sometimes to you,
and you see, that all that she shall say to you, will be lost for Themistides.

Philistion returns back, and Cleomenes being ascended, sees the true Cylesira
whom he does not know. He is surprised at first, but afterward recollecting
himself, that she might be some friend of Cylesira's, he addresses himself to
her, and says, Madam what pleasure so ever there may be, in meeting so amiable
a Person as your self, give me leave to confess, that it was Cylesira I looked
for. You have found her Sir, replied she, I am called Cylesira. But Madam,
interrupted Cleomenes, very much moved, I have seen another Cylesira in this
very Chamber, and -- Ah Sir, I understand you, interrupted she in her turn, you
speak of a Person, who infinitely excells me in all things. She is a fair
Princess, who borrowed my name, and past for Leriana 's Daughter. The Civil
Wars of Sparta drove her to Corinth, to lead there a more peaceable Life; in a
word, Sir, It Is the Princess Agiatis whom you seek, and who at present is Queen
of Lacedemon. At these words Cleomenes was struck to the heart, as it were with
a Mortal blow; his Eyes were troubled, and the Prince fell into a Swoon on a
Couch that chanced to be near him. Cylesira, all in a fright, calls up some
people. They have recourse to Medicines, and as soon as the Prince begins to
recover out of his Trance, he turns his languishing looks toward Cylesira.
What do you tell me, Madam, said he to her with a weak Voice? Alas! Sir,
replies Cylesira, I did not know you, when I gave you those News; but your
Mien, and this Accident do now sufficiently instruct me that you are the
generous Themistides, to whom the Princess Agiatis was in this Isle obliged for
her liberty. Yes, Madam, replies he with a Sigh, I am that unfortunate Wretch.
By this time Philistion and Erantor came in, and the Prince returns back along
with them, after he had asked Cylesira pardon, for the disorder he had
occasioned, by not being able to moderate his sorrow.

He was hardly at home, when they obliged him to go bed, but far from being
able to take any repose there; he repassed in his mind, what there was odd and
cruel in his Misfortunes. He complained of them to Philistion, after a manner
able to move the most insensible Soul with pity. Confess, said he to him, that
Fate is very ingenious to persecute me. It brings me to Gorinth in spite of the
resolution I had taken to make other Voyages. It makes me desperately in love
with Agiatis, at a time when that Princess had changed her Name as well as I,
and that our interest obliged as to conceal our true Conditious. There was a
necessity of our being (...) to each other, to the end that there might be an
obstacle to the Union, to which I might otherwise have inetended. But that is
not all, Philistion, it is this that cast me into a despuit, out of which I
shall never recover. When King Leonidas does enterprise to get for me a Supreme
Felicity. I must my self oppose my own good Fortune; I must fight to give
Agiatis to my Rival. I must enrage a Father, who labors only for my Happiness,
in a word, I must render my self the most unhappy of all men. But I shall not
be so long; visit Cylesira from me, entreat her to tell the Queen, that the
News of her Marriage has given me my Death; and that Themistides, who has
constantly adered her, ever since the fatal Minute wherein he saw her near
Timoleon's Garden, could live no longer, when once he knew he could not live
for her.

He afterward considered whether he should not bid him tell her that he was
Gleomenes; but at length he thought it best to pass still for Themistides. He
believed that he should be hated, if he were known to be a Prince's Son, whom
the Agiades regarded as their Enemy, and against whom Agiat^l might possibly
preserve a particular Resentment. Besides he was persuaded that if he met with
some occasion, to see the Queen again at Lacedemon, Cleomenes would not be as
soon permitted, as Themistides, to approach that Princess.

Philistion, who expected not a benefit from Cylesira than from the Physicians,
returned to her House, and found her so moved with the accident that had lately
happened, that he himself was touched with a stronger Inclination for that
amiable Creature, than he would have believed. I do not doubt, Madam, said he,
but that Themistides would receive a great deal of comfort, if he saw that you
took part in his Sufferings. I can better assure you, replied she, that
Themistides would find much ease in his Calamity, if he knew that Agiatis would
be sensible thereof as soon as I shall have given her the News. I think that
even without displeasing that Beautiful Princess, I may entrust you with that
part of her Secrets, that may contribute to the preservation of that
Themistides to whom she is so much engaged.

Cylesira then related what obliging Sentiments Agiatis had for Cleomenes, but
she did not think it convenient to say any thing of her Tenderness. Philistion
could not thank her enough, and as he beheld her, he accused in himself
Democares both of Injustice and Blindness. He returned home, and gave Cleomenes
an account of all the circumstances that could moderate his Despair. And the
Prince had no sooner understood that he was beloved, but he esteemed himself
the more unhappy, for having lost a greater good than he imagined. He was
unwilling to complain of it to Philistion; but in that moment Leosthenes,
Leriana, and Cylesira came to visit him. They being ignorant that Themistides
was Cleamenes, Leriana said to him, Methinks rather than be afflicted for
Agiatis 's Establishment, you ought to rejoice that the Cylesira, whom you have
delivered out of Teleanders hands, is now in a Condition to give you the reward
that is due to you. Whilst she past for my Daughter she durst offer you nothing
for the Service you have rendered her. She knew that she could make you no
Present, but what was either below the merit of Themistides, or above the
Condition of Cylesira. You know, Madam, replied the Prince, that you have over
and above paid that Service: Oh! that I could but purchose the same
acknowledgment with the loss of my life; but I dare not promise to my self so
much happiness.

He spoke with so much Vehemence, that Leriana was afraid a longer Conversation
might provedangerous to him. She desired to be gone, nevertheless she
endeavored first to appease Themistides's disquiets. I can assure you, said
she, that the Queen would be most sensibly displeased, if she knew that you
abandoned your self to despair. She esteems you, she has a real Friendship for
you, and if you consult your reason, I do not see, but that you have greater
cause to rest satisfied than to complain. Would you have had the Princess
Agiatis prefer Themistides before the King of Lacedemon, and though you were of
a Rank capable of Espousing her, was not the engagement Gilipus lay under a bar
to your pretentions? Give me leave to add, replied Leosthenes, that you ought
not to let fall a Courage, of which we shall in a few days stand in need. It Is
believed that Agis will suddenly come to join Aratus, and if you hate your
Life, had you not better end it with Glory against an Army of Enemies, than
lose it obscurely in this Isle? Besides, do you think that Agiatis ought to
retain any sense of gratitude for you, if you dye with Grief for hearing that
she is Queen of Lacedemon? That adorable Princess, replied Cleomenes with a
sigh, will one day perhaps know, that my despair is better grounded than you
imagine. But since you assure me, that we are likely to have occasions, wherein
I shall be able to finish my Misfortunes, I consent to prolong my unfortunate
days to the time for which you make me hope. In the mean time, pursued he,
turning toward Leriana, I entreat you to let me hear some News from the Queen,
when you shall receive any. Be well assured, that the indifference I have for
all things, cannot make me renounce that Curiosity.

Leriana granted him his Request, and in a few days after they went together to
Corinth. They found there a very troublesome Division, which a new engagement
of Teleanders had lately occasioned. That Prince came to visit Cleomenes, as
soon as he knew he was arrived; and after having given him some marks of a most
sincere Friendship, Sir, said he to him, a Charming Person of this City has
made me farget the Queen of Sparta. How ardent soever I am in my Passions, I
cannot keep them, when once I see it is impossible to satisfy them; and I think
I have found, at last, what ought to make me very happy. You shall now see me
more just to the Illustrious Cleomenes; and I will, with pleasure, regard a
Merit, which Jealousy heretofore rendered unsupportable to me. I rejoice, Sir,
replied the Prince of Lacedemon, to hear of the change which you esteem so
agreeable, and which suffers me to pretend to your Friendship. But to speak
ingenuously unto you, I do not conceive, that a Man can give over loving the
admirable Cylesira. I confess, replied Teleander, that I should have found a
great deal of difficulty to break my Chains; without the assistance of some
Circumstances, which I found very moving, and of which I will, if you please,
give you an account. You know whether Lovers care for being silent upon such
Subjects, and besides I ought to let the Prince Cleomenes see, that I am no
longer his Rival.

Teleander observed that Themistides was disposed to hear him, and began his
relation in these Terms.

You shall know that Gerontilas an intimate Friend of Aratus 's, and the
Principal Magistrate of this City, has a daughter of about fifteen years of
age, whom I should call a Miracle, if I did not speak to a Prince who is quite
filled with the Idea of Agiatis, About a year since that Fair Creature lost her
Mother, and went to live in Arcadia with a Sister of Gerontilas, from whom she
expected a confiderable Estate. All the young People of Quality there, who
could pretend to Epidelia, (that is her Name) sighed for her, did assiduously
visit Gerontilas, and put him into a very great perplexity of whom he should
make choice. At length the Father came to a Resolution, about the time we
returned from Egina. He promised his Daughter to a young Corinthian, named
Zaleton, who was behind none of his Rivals either for Birth and Riches. When
they would bring Epidelia back hither, her Aunt died, and the Princess of
Erymanthus demanded that fair Creature, in order to have the same care of her
as of Ariamite, until the accomplishment of her Marriage. Gerontilas thanked
Onecrysa, gave her Epidelia with Pleasure, and that charming Lady arrived in
our House, the same day as you departed out of this Town. Her Father brought
her in the Evening to Onecrysa 's, and as I returned from a walk, wherein I had
been a meditating by what means I might see Agiatis again, I was surprised to
find a great Company in Onecrysa 's Chamber: But I was much more, when amongst
so many People, I had singled out Epidelia 's Face. It may be said that there
was something in it that dazzled my Eyes. Epidelia is young and fair, her Eyes
are blew and perfectly beautiful, her Shope is easy, and her Complexion
admirable. I fixed my Eyes upon her, and approached her. Ariamite presented me
to her, and addressing her Speech to me, said, You see, Brother, that after
Cylesira's departure, Fate has brought us another Lady, as charming as she, to
repair the loss we have suffered. Instead of making any answer, I most
respectfully saluted Epidelia. I told her that there was some injustice, that
Zaleton should be so soon happy, and I added that I knew some who would pay
dearer for the good Fortune he was likely to have, Sir, answered she with a
Smile, that which you call good Fortune is so little so, that Gerontilas was
unwilling they should wait too long for it. Possibly he apprehends they might
be weary of demanding it. Do not you take notice, said Ariamite to me, that the
Persons most capable of engaging you are engaged themselves, before you know
them. I perceive it but too plainly, replied I, and as I was going on,
Gerontilas and Zatelon drew near, and the Conversation changed. Though I felt
not my heart as yet touched, yet I could not forbear to look on Zatelon with
despite, and perhaps he did not retire over-well satisfied with a man, who
took no great pains to constrain himself. That night I dreamt a little less
than usual of Cylesira, and on the morrow moved with a present good, I went to
Epidelia's Chamber, having heard that my Sister was gone in. I found that fair
Lady in a little disorder, with which I was charmed. Her Neck was bare enough,
and as she would have taken a Veil to cover it, I hindered her with a Liberty
which Ariamite could make her pardon, and which my Age and Humor rendered in a
manner excusable. Epidelia blushed, and appeared a thousand times handsomer than
before, so that finding my self all on Fire, and not being able to moderate my
Transports: O! Heaven! cried I out, must all these Treasures be appointed to
complete the Happiness of Zatelon? I had hardly ended these words, when I saw
Gerontilas enter, I apprehended he would take it ill that I should be in his
Daughters Chamber in a morning; but instead of appearing surprised at it, he
looked upon me as a privileged Friend. Methinks, said he to me, that you spoke
of Zatelon. I did indeed, answered I with trouble enough, and I said that you
were going to make him the happiest man in the World. We ought not to hear this
flattery, replied he smilingly, from the Prince of Erymanthus. I assure you,
interrupted I, that I never said any thing I thought more really, and I would
to Heaven, I were allowed to dispute the charming Epidelia with the fortunate
Zatelon. If you speak according to your real Sentiments, replied Gerontilas
with a more serious Air, I answer you that Zatelon shall not dispute her with
you. I confess that I am as it were engaged, but I will make no Scruple to
break my word for my Daughters advantage. I was transported with joy to hear so
favorable an answer, and having observed that Epidelia seemed satisfied with
it, I went to speak to Aratus and Onecrysa. I obtained the consent I desired
from them, and I can say that from that time I have led a life pleasant enough,
notwithstanding the Ardour of my Temper, and the disquiets that are inseparable
from it. Not but that my good Fortune has been deferred. Gerontilas was forced
to create some difficulties in Zatelon's Marriage, and when it was in order to
give me Epidelia, my Rivals Kindred exhibited complaints, that Gerontilas broke
his Faith with them, in order to prefer a Strangers Alliance before theirs. One
part of the People declared for them, and we stayed to appease that Commotion,
instead of augmenting it by marrying Epidelia. In the mean time that aimable
Lady is continually at Onecrysa 's. I have every moment the Pleasure of seeing
and entertaining her, and I would be glad that you should see the cause of my
change. For your part, Sir, I observe in your Eyes a kind of Melancholy, that
tells me you have too much constancy. I fear lest you should always love the
Queen of Lacedemon, and thereby be always unhappy. But believe me, accommodate
your self a little to my humor, and let us go and endeavor to diverse our
selves.

Cleomenes would have thanked Teleander for his relation, but he had no time.
The Prince of Erymanthus, who was hasty in all his ways, took him by the hand,
and carried him to the Princess Onecrysa's. Themistides was received there with
all the joy they were capable of expressing to him. Ariamite could not behold
him without tenderness, and Epidelia told him she would be obliged to Teleander
for the Favor he did her. Sir, continued she, I confess, I had a great desire
to know the Prince Cleomenes, I never saw him but in a Picture; but the
Princess Ariamite has told me things of him, which Pictures cannot represent.
Cleomenes saw himself obliged to answer with acknowledgment. I question not,
Madam, said he to her, but that you find me very different from the Cleomenes,
which the Princess Ariamite has painted to you; but if I owe her any thanks for
those strokes with which she has been pleased to honor me, I dare say you have
the same obligation for Prince Teleander. But instead of exceeding the Truth,
in speaking of you, he could express but half the Charms which render you
admired.

He still constrained himself for some moments, and as he wished to go to
Aratus, that Great Man came to see him at Onecrysa's. They talked at first of
the Queen Agiatis, and Aratus afterward said, that Agis would already have
departed from Lacedemon, if he had not desired to assist at the Creation of the
Ephores. I think, continued he, you have no great Pleasure to hear these
Magistrates spoke of. You have but too well experienced that they take upon
them an Authority more absolute than that of their Kings, whom they force to
give them an account of the Government, and even of their own Actions. I know,
replied Cleomenes, that the Kings of Sparta have always conducted their Armies
in Person, and that the Ephores have gained the Peoples favor in their
absence; but I have wondered a thousand times that some vigorous Prince
returning to Lacedemon at the head of his Troops, had not freed themselves from
the Tyranny of those Magistrates. So great a Change, replied Aratus to him, was
reserved for Prince Cleomenes, and I do not doubt but he may one day pull down
the Power of the Ephores, to raise up that of the Kings, and to make it
Independent.

In that very Minute, Aratus was advised, that the Etolians were preparing to
pass the Strait, to enter into Peloponesus, and that a reinforcement of the
Athamans had joined them on the Banks of the River Evena. The General of the
Achaians received not those News without vexation. He perceived that the
Factions, which were formed at Corinth, deprived him of a great assistance; and
besides, he knew that the Troops which he had caused to be raised in Arcadia,
were not yet in a condition to March. He would nevertheless advance toward the
Enemy with the Body of an Army, and conferred with Gerontilas what order was to
be kept in Corinth during his absence. Cleomenes proffered his Service to
Aratus, that General gave him the Command of five hundred Horse, and Teleander,
who would also depart in spite of his Love, obtained the like Employment.

The Prince of Lacedemon, who hated life enough to desire an end to it in this
occasion, that was about to present it self, was unwilling to expose Philistion
to the same danger, and instead of desiring to carry him along with him, he
studied nothing more than how to get Preferment for him from Leoniaas. He did
also entreat him to return to Sparta. If I dye, said he, you shall see the
Queen Agiatis, and you shall make her a faithful Relation of all that has
happened to me. If on the contrary I am destined still to suffer, you shall
contrive some expedient to make me see again that adorable Princess. Philistion
threw himself at Cleomenes's Feet, and protested that he would not forsake him.
Sir, pursued he, let Leriana and Cylesira rather do you that Office, when they
return to Sparta; while I for my part, will not be altogether unuseful to you
in the Army.

Cleomenes consented to what Philistion desired, he gave Erantor Order to make
all things ready for his departure, and then he goes to Leosthenes. Leriana
told him she had just then received a Letter from Agiatis. I assure you,
continued she, that Princess is not happy. She regards Amphares and Democares
as the Kings Enemies and her own; and yet she has had the displeasure to see
Agis employing all his Credit, to make Amphares Principal Ephore of Lacedemon.
She is also going to retire to the Palace of the Queens Archimadia and
Agesistrate with an intention to see no body during the Kings absence; so that
she entreats me to take once more a journey to Sparta to comfort her during
that time. I am not disposed to it without some strange agitation, and yet what
reflection soever I make, I cannot foresee what it is either to fear or hope.
May I flatter my self so much, replied Cleomenes, as to believe that you will
not quite forget me, and that you will say something of Themistides, if you
have an opportunity to do it? I should not dare, replied Leriana. There are two
men whom the Queen will not hear named, Democares whom she hates, and
Themistides whom she fears. Possibly I tell you too much, but it is better not
to keep secret from you what concerns her repose and your own. The Queen has
such Sentiments for you as you have no reason to complain of them; and methinks
Gratitude requires that you should not any way endeavor to disturb the
Tranquillity of her Heart. Alas! replied Cleomenes with a sigh, if her Heart
enjoyes Tranquillity, it is neither favorable to Themistides, nor sensible of
his Misfortunes. That Conversation was continued with an Air melancholy enough,
while Philistion entertained Cylesira with secret Sentiments of joy, which
seemed new to him.

On the Morrow, Aratus, Cleomenes, and Teleander departed for the Camp. and
they hardly were arrived there, when they were informed that a Party of the
Etolians were come as far as Helice. The two young Princes desired to go and
drive them back, and having obtained permission for it, they departed under the
Conduct of a General Officer, whose experience was known to Aratus. They marched
along the Bosom of Corinth, and as the Enemies were pusst up with Pride for
their Success, and advanced continually, the Achaians met them near Cerynchus,
and charged them vigorously.

Cleomenes, whose great Courage was augmented by the Aversion he had for Life,
poured in with Impetuosity on the first Ranks, and broke them. He mingled with
the others with a fearlesness which amazed them, and having perceived the
Chief, he with his Sword opened a way to come at him. The Etolian for his part
provoked with so noble an Ardour, advanced toward that formidable Enemy. They
joined and began a Combat that animated both their Parties to redouble their
endeavors. Teleander who loved Glory, and found himself warmed with Emulation,
seconded Cleomenes with so much Valor, that the Etolians were beaten and put
to flight. Teleander made himself Master of their Standard. Cleomenes wounded,
and took their Commander Prisoner, and the Achaians General Officer, and
Philistion did also signalize themselves by their Actions.

Aratus received the Conquerors with a great deal of joy, and that joy was yet
augmented, when he understood that they had no Wounds but what were very
slight. He praised Themistides aloud; He caressed Teleander, and having been
informed that Clomenes's Prisoner was Eurilaus Prince of Naupactum, Son to the
General of the Etolians, he took all the care of him that was due to a Person
of his Rank and Merit. In a few days after Onecrysa came to the Camp, to
rejoice with Aratus for his fortunate Success. She brought along with her
Ariamite, Epidelia, and several Ladies of Quality; so that there was in the
Achaian Army almost the same Pleasures as at Corinth. Aratus presented Eurilaus
to Onecrysa, and 'twas observed that the Etolian Prince fixed his Eyes with some
surprise on Ariamite's Visage. 'Twas afterward said, that the young Warrior
was Themistides's Prisoner. Cleomenes then addressing himself to the General of
the Achaians, said, Sir, will you be pleased, that I resign to a Fair Princess
the right you give me in the Prince of Naupactum. She would soon overcome him,
and with less difficulty than we have done. It Is your part, Madam, added he,
turning himself toward Ariamite, to put the Valiant Eurilaus in Chains, and to
disarm all the Etolians by that Victory. You know, Madam, persued the Etolian
Prince, that I am in no very fit Condition to make pretentions, which a better
Fortune would not perhaps permit. In pronouncing these words, he beheld
Ariamite with an air convincing enough, that he followed his Conquerours
intentions. Ariamite, who for her part had with some despite heard Cleomenes's
Declaration, failed not to feel some secret Pleasure, in considering that
Eurilaus was handsome, and had appeared surprised, and concerned in speaking to
her.

In the mean time, the Etolians were preparing a great reinforcement to repair
the loss they had suffered. Eurilaus does not hear those News without Sorrow.
He cannot leave Ariamite, and refuses to return into Etolia upon his Parole,
when Aratus proffered him leave so to do. He writes to the General of the
Etolians, that there never was a Generosity like Aratus's; and he lets Aratus
know, that he wished with all his Heart he could render himself worthy of his
Alliance. Aratus hears him with Pleasure, sends him back to the General of the
Etolians, to he informed of his Will; and promises to make no attempt until he
knew the success of his Negotiation.

About that time the Lacedaemonians arrived, every body thronged about them to
admire their Order and Discipline. Agis appeared at their Head, in the same
Habit as the Soldiers he lead. He was distinguished only by a more noble Air,
and by a greater impatience to signalize himself. Aratus went to meet that
Prince, he treated him with the deference due to his Rank, and show him a
commodious Place, which he had chosen out for the Encampment of his Troops,
Agis replied to him, Sir, since I am young, and come only to the assistance of
the Achaians, it is among them that I intend to lodge, and it is their Famous
General I will obey. Sir, replied Aratus, we know that Kings are in the World
only to Command, and we should dread some ill Success, if the Illustrious Agis
reversed an Order so Sacred, and so general.

Cleomenes could not without a double addition of Sorrow see himself in the
same Camp with a happy Rival, who enjoys Cylesira. His first Transports would
have him go and attack Agis at the head of his Troops, and sacrifice him to his
Jealousy, and the interests of Leonidas. He esteems that undertaking easy
enough for an unhappy wretch who renounces his Life; but when the motions of
his despair permit him to make some reflection on his Love and Generosity, he
soon changes that thought. He regards such a design as Criminal, since he
cannot execute it otherwise than by surprise. He frets when he considers what
affliction he should give Cylesira, and thinks on the hatred she would conceive
for the Murderer of Agis. Besides, he had been informed how that Prince had
been unwilling to consent to lay an Ambuscade for Leonidas upon the way of
Tegeum, when Agesilaus and Lysander had conspired his ruin. So that instead of
fixing on his first resolution, he chose to wait for an occasion to fight like
a Kings Son, rather than perish like a private adventurer.

While the Lacedaemonians desire nothing more than to signalize themselves, the
Achaians expect with indifferency enough what will be Aratus's Resolution. They
are surprised to see that the General without any more ado resolves not to
fight. He desires not to give a decisive Battle, and to end the War so soon.
The Historians are amazed at that Conduct, and perhaps without any great
reason. Aratus would have lost his Reputation and his Credit, by the defeat of
his Army; and by a Victory, he would have constrained the Etolians to demand
Peace, and himself would have been obliged to withdraw without any Authority.
He therefore represents to the King of Lacedemon, that he had better keep the
Enemy in a continual Alarm, than to hazard a Battle, the loss of which might
draw after it that of all Peloponesus. He continued so firm in his opinion,
that it could not be comprehended why he had rendered useless an inforcement he
had so long expected. The Lacedaemonians returned home, and were angry at it;
but as soon as they were departed, the Marriage of Eurilaus and Ariamite were
openly discoursed of. That Princess was very much concerned for it, which she
testified to Cleomenes, and gave him many other marks of her Tenderness. Sir,
said she to him, is it possible that you are not concerned for a Person, that
would, but cannot be yours? My Misfortune will have it so, replied he in
sighing, and the only comfort I have, is that I contributed to a Prince's
engagement, who is not altogether unworthy of you: Heaven knows that I have for
you all those Sentiments of Gratitude, that I ought, and that I might have some
means of expressing them, has given me the advantages over the Prince of
Naupactum. I pray, Madam, give way to his happiness. You see that destiny
ordaines it by the Events it has permitted. It would have you be happy with
Eurilaus, and abandon Cleomenes to his ill Fortune.

The Prince urged this so forcibly, and with so many marks of a real Amity,
that Ariamite came at length to hear him without any reluctance. Teleander and
Epidelia then drew near, and made them change the discourse. Eurilaus arrived
in the Evening, and had procured a Truce for three Months between the Achaians
and the Etolians. So that Cleomenes thought of going to search for Wars
elsewhere, as soon as he should recover his Health, if the interests of
Leonidas would not recall him to Lacedemon.

While he is gathering strength, Agis enters into Sparta, and the Troops he led
back, seconded by the People, demand of him the Partition he had promised. On
the other side the Principal Spartans oppose it. They assemble themselves
together, and prepare to make a last Effort. Agesilaus, who is unwilling to
lose those fair Lands he possesses, goes to the King his Nephew. Sir, says he
to him, this is a nice Conjuncture; Our Enemies are more terrible than you
imagine, they have in their Country-Houses an infinite number of People, from
whom they may receive a speedy assistance. So that you had better defer a while
the Execution of your design. Stay to surprise them when they are tired out
with standing on their Guards. You shall then do what you please with their
Estates and Persons, without arming our Citizens the one against the other.
Agis weighs what Resolution he ought to take; and Democares, whose Jealousy is
by so much the more violent, in that it is shut up in his own heart, takes this
opportunity to ruin a Prince, whose Presence is become unsupportable to him.
He talks in private with the most Mutinous of the People. He seems to pity
them, for having followed the Faction of a weak Man, who dares not give them
the recompense he has promised them. Then he causes notice to be given to
Leonidas's Faction, that the People are enraged, and that it might make use of
so favorable an opportunity to recall Cleomenes's Father. The Great Men follow
Democares's Counsel, and send their Deputies to Tegeum. Leonidas returns with
some Troops, and is received as it were in Triumph by his Friends. The People
are in a Consternation. Agis runs for Sanctuary to the Temple of Juno, and
Cleombrotus seeks his safety in the Temple of Neptune. Chelonisa, who would not
leave her Father in his Misery, does not forsake her Husband in his Misfortune,
she runs to Cleombrotus to comfort him and serve him. She begs his Life of
Leonidas so earnestly, and with so much pressing, that at length she obtains
it, and follows Cleombrotus to Megalopolis whither he retires. Hypomedon, the
Son of Agesilaus, charmed with Chelonisa's Generosity, cries out, as History,
has observed, Ah Cleombrotus, thou gainest more in recovering Chelonisa, than
thou losest in quitting the Crown of Sparta.

Cretesilea and Xenares testify to Leonidas the Joy they have to see him
re-establisht with more Authority than before. Sir, adds the Queen, for Heavens
sake, render our Satisfaction complete, and give your consent that we may recall
Cleomenes. I dare assure your Majesty, pursues Xenares, that nothing can
confirm your Power better than the Presence of the Prince. Show the
Commonwealth, that the Royal Power is not likely to leave your House, should
even the Gods call you to themselves, Show the Lacedaemonians a Prince, so
worthy to command them after you. Leonidas seems to grant to their entreaties
only a return, which his own tenderness already exacted from him; and Xenares,
without losing one moments time, writes to Cleomenes, gives him an account of
every thing that past, and conjures him to come back.

On the other side, Archidamia, Agesistrate* and Agiatis, run to the same
Sanctuary as Agis, and could not behold that Prince without giving some Tears
to his Misfortune. Agis is encompassed about with Gilipus, Amphares, Democares,
and Arcecilaus. His Mien appeared so little altered by his disgrace, that he
received the Queens with the same Countenance he was accustomed to do. He
endeavors to comfort them, he represents to them the Caprices of Fortune, and
conjures them to be oversensible neither of her Injuries or Favors. Then
continuing his discourse with the pleasant Gravity that was usual to him, he
said, you saw Agis yesterday on a Throne, and to day You see him fled for
Refuge to a Temple. Testerday Lacedemon still beheld Leonidas as a banished
Man, to day she receives him with acclamations, and acknowledges him her King.
These Revolutions, and the Courage of these Generous Friends whom you see about
me, may still terrify our Enemies, and raise our hopes. But, Madam, added he,
addressing himself to the fair Princess with whom he was charmed, I confess I
have no longer any Constancy, when I behold your Affliction. It has so
penetrated me, that as long as I shall see the Marks of it in your beautiful
Eyes, I shall employ all my cares only to moderate your sorrow, instead of
thinking on my re-establishment.

Agiatis constrained her self immediately, and appeared less melancholy. Agis,
Gilipus, Archidamia, and Agesistrate, observed the Effort she made, and while
they admired so ready a deference, Democares was most extremely vexed at it. He
studied how to destroy Agis, and render himself Master of Agiatis's destiny.
Nevertheless he saw, that he could not dispose of the remaining Faction of the
Agiades, but by the absence of Gilipus. He therefore, with a seeming zeal to
the Party, said to Agis, Sir, methinks that Prince Gilipus is not safe in this
Town, and that he ought to secure himself at Erabeus. By that precaution he
would evade the fury of our Enemies, he would join with King Cleombrotus, and,
keeping Leonidas in a continual alarm, he would prevent him from making any new
attempts against your Majesty. Agis approved of Democares's Opinion, but
Gilipus, opposed it, and protested that he would not leave the King. He must
however depart. Democares's opinion was followed, and Gilipus was entreated to
stand less on his Generosity than on his Prudence, in this important
conjuncture. Gilipus had no sooner consented to depart, but Agis did conjure
him to carry the Queen his daughter with him to Erabeus. I should never be at
rest, pursued he, if she staid in a Town where our Enemies have an absolute
Power. Ah, Sir, replied Agiatis, in endeavoring to throw her self at his Feet,
for Heavens sake do not oblige me to remove from you. Madam, replied Agis in
taking her up, your Youth and Beauty may expose you to dangerous adventures,
and the Observations Corymbus made before your journey to Corinth should make
you still something cautious. Sir, replied Agiatis, since you have not yet
forgotten what I am to fear from those predictions, remember I beseech you, the
misfortune with which they threaten you. Promise me that you will take warning
your self, and I will obey your Orders with less reluctance. Depart without
regret, Madam, replied Agis, apprehend nothing on my Score. Amphares,
Democares, and Arcecilaus will not forsake me. That promise does not reassure
me, replied the Queen, I perceive with the gratitude I ought, interrupted Agis,
that nothing can appease your disquiets. Nevertheless, Madam, you shall see
that my Misfortune is not so great as you imagine. I will go to take leave of
you this Evening, and I pretend to have only my three Friends for my Guard. The
Queens then seemed less afraid, and departed with Gilipus. In a few hours after
Agis went to visit them, and saluted them with a more smiling Countenance than
he was used to have. Far from talking with them about State Affairs, he rallied
with them, and entertained them only with what he thought proper to divert
them. He kept up the same humor in returning to his Sanctuary, with Amphares,
Democares, and Aroecilaus, who bores him Company, and continued the
Conversation, with greater jollity, than was usual.

But they were hardly separated, when Democares grown outrageous with Love and
Jealousy, believed himself the most unfortunate Wretch in the World, in being
obliged to endure the Kings presence, and the Queens absence. He walked up and
down in great agitation of Spirit, and as his Passions reached even Fury, he
resolved to proceed to all extremities, that he might satisfy him seif. The
Confidence of Agis and the absence of Gilipus encouraged him in his attempt.
Besides he hoped Amphares would be very assisting to him. He knew that he was
ambitious; that he loved independency; and that he would be glad that the
Faction of the Agiades might no longer have a Prince for its Chief. He went to
him, and after having attentively beheld him, he said, Methinks that we might
talk together with an entire openess of heart, and that I need not fear to
propose to you an undertaking worthy of us. If it be to free our Country,
replied Amphares, I am ready to follow you. It is intolerable that all we do,
should be for Agis; and if we expose our lives, that he should reap the
advantage and glory of it. How glad am I, replied Democares, to see you have
such generous sentiments. I always believed that you were free from those
Scruples of which the People create Monsters to themselves, and which ought
never to trouble such men as you are. Let us think of nothing else, but how to
manage the favorable opportunity we now have. Let us shake off a Princes Yoke
who will reduce us to a strange extremity, when he will have no longer need of
us. I know that you have from Agesistrate the magnificent Furniture with which
you furnished your House, when you were created Principal Ephore, and perhaps
you are not ignorant that Agis supplied me with means to undergo the Expense I
have been at during our Civil Wars. You may be assured, we must restore all we
have had from them, as soon as the Peace shall be concluded, if we have the
baseness not to put our selves in a condition of depending no longer on them
while Agis 's destiny is in our hands. The Prince has at present no other
support than us and our Friends. Nothing is casier than for us to rid our
selves of him, nor is any thing more dangerous than to omit doing of it. You
are Ephore; make use of the Authority your Office gives you. If our Civil Wars
should continue, and Leonidas, as it is most probable should get the better,
what should we expect from a Conqueror, who will have seen us so affected to
his Enemies? And would Fortune favor Agis, should we be any gainers by it?
Should we not see our selves deprived of all that is most precious in our
Houses. It Is enough, replied Amphares, let us talk no more, but go about the
Execution of our design.

Then they contrived their execrable crime, and drew Arcecilaus into their
Conspiracy. They resolved not to delay one moment. They went and found Agis:
They rallied with him, as it had been for his diversion; they went out with
him, kept him Company to the Baths; and when he returned, they made him pass
through a by-Sreet, into which a door of the Prison opened. As soon as they
arrived over against that fatal place, Amphares in the Quality of Ephore,
seized that Prince's Person, and Democares pulled him before, while Arcecilaus
pust him behind, being assisted by other Conspirators. As soon as they were
within the Prison, they sent for some Magistrates of their own Faction, and
Amphares having seated himself, commanded the King to give an account of his
Government. Agis, instead of making any answer, began to smile; and Amphares
growing red with anger, said insolently to him, as all Historians report: Do
thou laugh, Agis? But thou shall soon see that it is rather time to weep. He
said no more, but Condemned his King to Death, and delivered him to those
People, who are accustomed to lead Criminals to their Punishment. These
Officers, less inhumane than their Superior, durst not lay their Hands on
Agis's Person, until Democares, beholding them with indignation, accused them
of Cowardice, and, to make them bold, was himself the first that seized Agis.
The Prince stayed not to have greater violence offered him; he entered the place
where they were used to put the Guilty to Death, and there ended his Life,
after the deplorable manner as is seen in History. Amphares went to show
himself at the Prisondoor, in order to prevent the People from rising, and he
singled out among the Crowd that ran together from all parts, Agesistrate and
Archidamia, who advanced crying, with their Faces all covered with Tears. These
two Princesses seemed less afraid, as soon as they perceived Amphares, and
having accosted him with some Confidence, they said, We know not what we have
to hope or fear for a Person, who is infinitely dear unto us. How, Ladies,
replied that Traitor, affecting moderation and respect, can you apprehend for
the King, as long as I live, and am in Office? If you have forgot that I am of
his Party, and that I am very much obliged to your selves, I cannot forbear to
remember it, as gratefully as I ought. You may, if you please, come in and be
witnesses of all that shall pass. These words gave same comfort to Agis's
Mother and Grandmother. The Princesses thanked Amphares: but were no sooner
within the Prison, but that perfidious Wretch beheld them with Fury, and
changed the tone of his Voice. Go and see, said he to them, in what manner they
have punished the Crimes of Agis, and since you have been Accessaries to them,
prepare your selves for the same destiny. Archidamia and Agesistrate, seeing
the unfortunate Agis still tied to the Fatal Cord, that ended his life, cried
out, Poor Prince, was that the recompense due to thy Virtue? The Executioners
interupted them, and Agesistrate lifting up her Eyes to Heaven, said, The Gods
grant that all this may turn to the advantages of Sparta. She being still
young, and beautiful enough, entreated that her body might be covered, when she
should no longer be in a Condition to take that care of it her self, and then
both she and Archidamia bravely underwent their Death.

Leonidas was no sooner informed of so strange an adventure, but he thought how
to maintain himself King alone. In the mean time he feared lest the Queen
Agiatis, by marrying again, should give him a Colleague. It was in her power to
do it as Agis's Widow, but indeed rather as the only Heiress of the Family of
the Agiades. Therefore Leonidas desired to have that Princess in his disposal,
and to forget nothing that might conduce to her Marrying with Cleomenes. He
called Megabates the Captain of his Guards. He gave him instructions, and sent
him to Erabeus with a Troop of chosen Soldiers.

On the other side Democares assembled the Principal of his Party, and spoke to
them with all the violence that Love and Ambition could give him. Friends, said
he, after this that we have dared, what may we not attempt? We are rid of Agis.
One of us must supply his place, and make himself King. Otherwise we shall have
acted only against our own interests, and put our selves under a greater
Subjection, by rendering the Power of Leonidas more absolute. Let us go and make
our selves Masters of Queen Agiatis: Let one of us espouse her, and so become
the support of our Faction. Amphares, and the hottest of his Party, applauded
that proposition: but Arcecilaus, and some others, demonstrated that it was not
yet a proper time to execute it. I would fain know, said Arcecilaus to
Democares, after what manner you intend to bring about your design? If you go
out of Lacedemon with a small number of Friends, you will be looked on as
Criminals, who fly from the punishment of their Offenses. If you lead all the
Forces you have, Leonidas will see himself Master of Sparta, and will shut the
Gates against you, when you think to return thither. Let us, I pray, defer that
attempt for a while. Let us see what Face the Affairs of the Republic will
take, and when they shall be in a settled condition, we will then seek the means
of making your Resolution succeed. In the mean time I entreat you, moderate
your selves, and consider that your particular advantages depend upon the
general Interests of our Party. To demonstrate to you, that it is a Friend who
speaks unto you, I offer my self to be the first to follow you, when a
favorable Conjuncture will give us leave; and I give, even you, my Suffrage to
marry Agiatis. The whole Assembly approved of Arcecilaus's Opinion; and
Democares replied to these last words, with marks of acknowledgment.
Nevertheless, his Temper and his Love rendered him so impatient, that he went on
the morrow to visit Arcecilaus, and he told him, that they must no longer delay
seizing the Queen. If we lee, pursued he, the first days of her sorrow pass,
she will open her Eyes, and think on her own Safety. She will be able to fly
away into some State, who' will arm for her Interests. She will possibly give
her self away, together with the Rights of her House to some Prince, who will
find no great difficulty to make himself Master of the Lacedaemonians, while
they are divided. It is sufficient, that Amphares stays in Sparta. He will
retain the People there in their Duty, and our Party in their Vigor. In the
mean time, we both will quit the Town: We will take some Horse from the
Neighboring places: We will go and surprise Agiatis, and then we shall easily
seize her. Arcecilaus consented to it. They departed, but they found an
Obstacle which opposed the Execution of their design.

Megabates was already arrived at Erabeus; but since no body saw Agiatis, by
reason of her extreme Affliction, he had desired to speak with Leriana. Madam,
said he to her, Leonidas is so far from having been concerned in the
Assassination which has been committed, that he is ready to revenge a death
which all Kings have an Interest not to leave unpunisht. This is not all,
pursued Megabates, for since the Queen's Life is dear unto you, it is time that
you think on the preservation of it. You know that neither Agesistrate nor
Archidamia, have been spared, Agiatis may be threatened with the like destiny.
The Murderers of Agis have reason to fear lest she should make some Alliance to
ruin them, and some Villains who make little Conscience of a Crime will
resolve to prevent her. The King my Master proffers her his Protection in
Lacedemon, and sends me to guard her. Consider that it is high time you take
your measures, and that the minutes are precious on this occasion. Leriana
beheld Megabates, and examined him, and then addressing her Speech to him, she
answered, I question not, but you are persuaded of what you say. Your
Countenance would deceive me, if you speak against your own Sentiments.
Nevertheless, Megabates, after the Treaehery of Amphares and Democares, what
ossurance can one have? Shall it be in the Promises of a Prince who has always
been an Enemy to the Agiades? Ha! Madam, interrupted he, open your Eyes, I
entreat you; consider if Leonidas had any interest in dispatching the Queen
Agiatis, he would never fail of means to bring it about, without being obliged
to have recourse to the Dissimulation you imagine. 'Twould be an-Artifice that
would draw upon him the indignation of all the Earth. Why then, replied Leriana
impationtly, would King Leonidas take care of a Princess whose Family he has
always hated? How, replied Megabates, is it possible that you have not seen at
the first what is Leonidas 's design? He pretends to leave the Prince Clomenes
sole King of Lacedemon, and he cannotdo it in a way, either more secure to
himself, or more agreeable to the People, than by matching his Son to the
Heiress of the Agiades. Leriana effectually saw that Cleomenes would receive
very great Advantages by this Alliance, as well as Agiatis would a
re-establishment. She could not suspect Leonidas of any Treachery; and after
having expressed her Acknowledgment to Megabates, she promised him to mediate
for the success of the Negotiation, with which he was charged. She took her
time to speak to the Queen, and forgot none of the strongest Reasons Megabates
had given, to make her depart immediately. Agiatis answers not in a long time,
but with her sighs, and at length turning toward Leriana her fair Eye, all
moist with Tears, she said, Had I not better let my Sorrow kill me, than render
Leonidas Moster of my Destiny? What! would Leriana trust my Life with my
Enemies? If I had any care remaining for my Safety, it would be far from
Leonidas that I would seek Protection. However, Madam, replied Leriana I am
persuaded that Leonidas has no other than good Intentions for you. Your Majesty
would not doubt it any more than I, if the Condition wherein I see you, did
give me leave to explain my self a little more precisely. She durst say nothing
of Cleomenes's Marriage. The death of Agis was too fresh; and a strong
teaderness, which Agiatis had not been able to banish out of her Heart, since
the Journey of Corinth, had given the Princess an Aversion for all kind of
Engagements. So that Letiana was unwilling to enter, so soon, into that
particular, and contented her self with intrearing the Queen to take a speedy
Resolution. In the name of Heaven, Madam, added she with Tears in her Eyes,
abandon your self once more to my Conduct. Agiatis perceiving how much Leriana
was prepossest in favor of Leonidas, felt a double despite against a Prince,
who constrained her, either to owe him her Life, or to deny what Leriana
demanded of her. As she endeavored to resolve on one of these vexatious
Extremities, Cylesira entered with terror in her Face, and gave them notice,
that Democares and Aroecilaus advanced toward Erabeus, at the head of a great
Body of Horse. O Heaven, cried out Leriana, will you again permit these
persidious Traitors to execute a new Attempt? Fear nothing on my score,
Leriana, replied Agiatis with a firm Voice. Those who despise Life, can, when
they please, secure themselves from all sorts of Evils. You shall never see me
in Democares 's Power.

While she endeavored to re-assure Periand, and Leosthenes gave Orders for the
defense of the House, Arcecilans arrived at the Gate, and said, with an
imperious tone, that the Queen should come down. He added, that there was not
one minute to be lost, if they designed to save her. That the Great Men of the
Commonwealth, who had lately freed themselves from a Prince that desired their
ruin, might carry, even to another extremity, their revenge, or rather their
precaution. Megabates informed of all that passed, ran thither, knew
Arcecilaus, and having fiercely beheld him, answered him. Get you back, and
tell your Accomplices, that they themselves provide for their own Securities,
by a speedy flight. Well then, replied Arcecilaus, I go back, but it is to
return again to thy sorrow.

Megabates's Troop assembled, and ranged themselves, while Democares's and
Arcecilaus's advanced on a full Trot. They were hardly in sight, when Democares
divided his into two Bodies. He kept one to himself, which he caused to alight,
and did lead it directly up to the Gate of Erabeus, with battering Rams and
Mantelets. Leosthenes received him with flights of Arrows, and commanded that
all the Javelines and Partisans they had, should be made ready, in order to
defend the Breach, in case they could not hinder the Enemies from making one.
Democares, whose Love and Ambition increased his Natural Audacity, exhorted his
Men, exposed himself the first, and threatened Leosthenes with a terrible Death,
if he continued obstinate in his resistance. Leosthenes darted a Javeline for
Answer. The Zeal he had for the Queen, and his resentment against Democares, so
encouraged him, that he resolved to dye with his Sword in his Hand, rather than
see Agiatis fall under the Power of such a Villain.

On the other side; Arcecilaus and Megabates charged impetuously on one
another. They were wounded with the first blows they struck; but if their
Combat began with equality enough, in a few moments after it took a different
Face. Leonidas's Guards being better disciplined than Men newly raised, broke
in upon their Enemies, cut some part of them in pieces, and put to flight the
rest. Arcecilaus ran before the Fugitives, to bring them back to their Charge.
He got some of them together again, and while he called out to others to rally;
he received a blow from a Javeline, which hitting a faulty place in his
Cuirass, entered into his Body, and struck him dead. Democares had no sooner
notice of it, but he remounted his Horses, threatened Leosthenes, and retreated,
facing often upon the Enemy, and discharging several flights of Arrows.

Leriana, who could not forbear looking on this action every moment, through a
little Window, saw the success of it with an extraordinary Joy. She ran to tell
the Queen the News. Madam, said she to her, the Gods have not suffered you to
fall into the hands of the Traitorous Democares; and what Megabates has done
for your Defense, ought to persuade you more than all my reasons to trust your
self to his Conduct. Leonidas is of too Illustrious a Blood, to be capable of
hiding a base Treason, under the generous proffers that are made you in his
behalf. I know well enough, replied Agiatis, what are his and your intentions,
Leonidas will not be so coutious to tell them me; but Leriana, I will not
accept his proffers, how advantageous soever they may seem to you. After this
consider whether we ought to go to Lacedemon; whether I ought to expose my self
to receive good Offices from a Prince, to whom I am resolved to deny the return
which he will have reason to pretend to.

She ended these words, just as Megabates entered, and told her it was no longer
time to consider. You must, Madam, absolutely save your self while the ways
are yet open. I have just now notice brought me, that a body of Horse begins to
appear, and that Democares goes to join it. He may possibly return with that
reinforcement. Yet if you do not delay your departure, I will carry you to
Lacedemon, through a by-Road which will make you avoid meeting with your
Enemies. Leriand added her entreaties, and accompanied them with some Tears, so
that at length Agiatis yielded, and told Megabates that she would follow his
Counsel. Afterward add ressing her self to Leriana, she continued with a lower
Voice; I perceive well enough, that I must give way to my destiny. Nothing can
prevent the accomplishment of Corymbas 's Prediction; since Leriana her self
assists to bring it to pass. They immediately prepare every thing for their
departure, Megabates and Leosthenes caused their Wounds, which were but slight,
to be dressed, and then took the way toward Sparta, at the head of the Squadron.

That was no false advice which was given Megabates. Democares had indeed
discovered a Body of Horse which marched toward the River Eurotas, and taking
it for some assistance, which Fortune offered him, he had advanced and demanded
to speak with the Commander in Chief. He had an intention to gain him by
Promises and Presents, when he saw coming up to him a young Man of a Noble
Mien, and covered with magnificent Armor. He was Cleomenes who was returning
to Sparta, followed by the five hundred Horse of whom Aratus had given him the
Command. Democares had no sooner understood he was that Prince, but saluting
him with several signs of joy in his face, said to him, Ah! Sir, Heaven without
doubt has made us meet for your good Fortune. After these words he entreated
Cleomenes to walk a little aside, and having carried him into a little Wood I
know, pursued he, that you have never cared for Agiatis; however they are going
to carry her away by Leonidas 's Command, in order to force you to marry her.
Prevent that design; Agiatis is still at Erabeus, and if you will reinforce my
Troop with a Party of yours, I will soon carry that Princess far enough from
Lacedemon. When the Prince had heard him out, in spite of his impatience, he
fiercely answered; I see by the proposition which you presume to make me, that
you know me not very well. Far from consenting that the Queen Agiatis should be
treated in such a manner, I will take her part against all those who shall have
the insolence to fail in their duty toward her. The declaration thou make,
replied Democares, blushing with anger, cannot terrify such men as I am; and I
would let thee see, that it should not hinder me from attempting -- Let us see,
interrupted Cleomenes, laying his had to his Sword, whether it would be easy
for thee to perform it. They were both exasperated, and immediately struck at
each other, and since they never thought of parrying, they were both wounded,
but in a different manner. Democares had discharged a back blow at Cleomenes's
head, and the Prince having stoopt to reach home into the Enemies body, was but
slightly wounded in the left shoulder, and he thrust his Sword into Democares's
right side. That Lacedemonian became more enraged, takes less heed, and flying
furiously on Cleomenes, lays himself so open, that the Prince failed not to run
his Sword through his Body. Democares fell down, and having cast his Eyes upon
his Conqueror, which dying as they were, did not however cease to be full of
fierceness, he said to him, Thou gainest a victory more important than thou
do believe. Thou revengest Agis. Thou deliverest Persons of thine own Rank
from a professed Enemy, who made no greater estimation of Kings than of
ordinary men. In a word, it is Democares whom thou have overcome. The Prince was
seized with horror at that Name, but when he beheld that Monster of
Perfidiousness; and since he could not insult over him in the condition wherein
he saw him, he answered him only in these few words.: Dye at least with some
Repentance for thy Crimes. Men of my humor never repent, replied Democares,
and if I feel any regret in losing my life, it proceeds from a certain fear I
have, lest thou should be the possessor of the most beautiful Princess that
ever was. After these words he looked angrily on Cleomenes, then his Eyes grew
troubled, and he dyed. The Prince rejoined his Troop, caused notice to be given
to Democares's, that it had no longer any Chief, and if it would come over to
him, he would give them very good Conditions. Those Cavaliers were no sooner
informed, that it was Prince Cleomenes who made them these proffers, but they
submitted to his Orders, and marched with him toward Lacedemon.

Cleomenes was no sooner arrived there, but after having seen the King and
Queen, he was constrained at their entreaty to put himself in bed. He remained
there with impatience. He enquired every moment after News from Agiatis, and at
length he was informed that she had just entered the City. Leonidas caused the
finest Apartment of his Palace to be given that Princess. He ordered her to be
served with a great deal of diligence; but since he had commanded also that
they should most strictly guard her, Agiatis complained of that proceeding, and
declared that it was not by such Treatment they would be able to gain upon her
Spirit.

Cleomenes no sooner understood what were Agiatis's Sentiments, but he lost all
his joy. He feared lest the Princess might hate him, as soon as she should know
that he was Leonidas's Son, so that he took a strong resolution not to appear
before her, but as Themistides, until she should be more favorable to
Cleomenes.

He arose in the Evening, he went secretly to Agiatis's Lodgings, and took some
measures not to be known there. He had hardly desired leave to enter, but that
at the name of Themistides, Agiatis appeared moved, and the Prince could not
see her without transports of joy, which he endeavored to moderate. Instead of
letting appear any marks of his Love and Joy, he endeavored to accommodate
himself to the Queens humor, and not to approach her without sadness in his
Countenance. In order to produce speedily such an Effect, he thought on the
aversion which Agiatis might have for Cleomenes, and he received on that Score
so real a sorrow, that his Air became as melancholy as decency could require.
He advanced toward her with fear, and the Queen beginning to speak after as
obliging a manner, as that conjuncture could permit her, she said to him with a
sigh, Ah! Themistides, you see Agiatis a Prisoner, and much more unfortunate
than Cylesira. I would to the Gods, Madam, replied Cleomenes, that you your
self could see how far I am sensible of what concerns you. I am so persuaded
that you take a great share therein, replied the Queen, that I am very willing
to tell you, that you have always been the person on whom I first thought,
whenever any ill accident happened to me, as if it was from you I was to expect
either the greatest assistance, or the greatest consolation in my Misfortunes.
Cleomenes bowed most respectfully in witness of his acknowledgment, and
renewing the discourse said; I still dare flatter my self, Madam, that I shall
not be altogether unprofitable to you on this Occasion. I have some Credit in
Leonidas 's Court, and if you will be pleased to inform me, after what manner
you were brought hither -- You may say, interrupted she, after what manner I
was forced hither, and do not palliate this second Affront, which the Prince
you mention has given me. But I am very much mistaken, if his Attempt will have
the success he expects. You shall see that I am no less sensible of Injuries,
than of good Offices. Themistides heard not these last words without Sorrow, by
reason of the Interest that Cleomenes ought to have in them; and looking on the
Queen with an Air more melancholy than before, said to her, Give me leave, if
you please, Madam, to assure you, that Cleomenes is not at all guilty, and that
he never had for the admirable Queen of Lacedemon any Sentiments, of which she
would have reason to complain, if she knew them perfectly. Agiatis was
surprised at that answer, and hiding the vexation which she had in her soul,
she replied coldly; I find you more generous yet, than I imagined; and since
you are a Friend to Prince Cleomenes, if you think be will come to see me, you
will do me a favor to prevent him. For your part, I have been willing to grant
you a Privilege, which I never give any: but I pray make no use of it for a
second Visit.

Themistides did withdraw in a mortal Affliction, and did not question but that
Cleomenes was really hated. He complained of it to Philistion; Have you ever
seen, said he to him, a Man more unfortunate than I? I am desperately in love,
and cannot see that I have any manner of hopes. You may well judge that the
unknown Themistides can never pretend to the Queen of Lacedemon; and I can
assure you, that the Son of Leonidas shall be yet worse entertained than
Themistides. But, Sir, replied Philistion, if in making your self known to be
Cleomenes, you repair in Themislides the inequality of your Conditions, can you
not then hope to be happy? Ah, Philistion, replied Cleomenes, Can you counsel
me to declare my self, while Agiatis shall have an ill Opinion of Cleomenes?
Shall I run the hazard of drawing on my self, during my whole life, that
Person's Aversion, wham I adore? No, Philistion, I will never do it; I had
rather renounce entirely all the advantages which my Birth can give me, than
the Friendship, which Cylesira has already expressed for Themistides. That was
the Resolution which the Prince took. Philistion still advised against it, but
he soon saw that all his Reasons were to no purpose.

Agiatis, for her part, was not disposed to pass the Night with more
Tranquillity. She caused Cylesira to be called to her, that she might ease her
Heart, by discovering her new vexation. Leriana's Daughter was surprised to see
some trouble in her Countenance, and as she was just a going to enquire the
cause of it, the Queen with a sigh said, Would you have believed that
Themistides would speak to me in the behalf of Cleomenes? Perhaps, replied
Cylesira, he would have endeavored some accommedation. How little do you
understand me, interrupted the Queen impatiently, if Themistides endeavored to
reconcile us, would he not rather endeavor to justify Leonidas, than engage
in Cleomenes 's Interests, after a manner, that could not be otherwise than
disagreeable to me? Have you ever heard me complain of the Prince of Lacedemon?
On the contrary, I praised his Generosity, when he opposed the Intentions of
the King his Father, and when he drew me out of the hands of my Ravishers: I
was pleased that he bad delivered us from Democares, that Monster of
perfideousness; and I have been informed, not without pleasure, that he was
mounded in the Shoulder in that Combat. But I find Themistides more officious
than I could wish, when he would make me comprehend, that I am not indifferent
to Cleomenes. If that Prince had those Sentiments for me, which Themistides
would persuade me he has, would he not have followed Leonidas 's Intentions,
rather than have crossed them, and thereby have angered a Father, whom I know
he had always obeyed? Let us rather say, Cylesira, let us say, that I have not
known Themistides thoroughly to this hour, that he is less capable of Tenderness
than Ambition, and that sacrificing every thing to his Fortune, he wishes to
unite Cleomenes and Agiatis, the better to make his Court to Leonidas. But
since he is so greedy of a Reward, I will that he be paid to morrow what I owe
him, and then that he leave me in repose.

While she takes that Resolution, Amphares, who foresaw the ruin of his Party,
lays aside all other thoughts, than those of saving himself. Nevertheless he
does not depart without some hopes of returning with a re-inforcement. He goes
to Megabates, where he understands that Gilipus is gone back to Erabeus, and he
promises Cleombrotus to set him up in the room of Agis. Cleombrotus, with
pleasure, hears a Man who flatters his Ambition, and takes some measures with
Amphares, to make their Enterprise succeed. They secretly levy Troops, and
Chelonisa is no sooner advertised of it, but she conjures Cleombrotus to have
no confidence in a Traitor, whom he ought to avoid with Horror. I pray,
answered Cleombrotus impatiently, do not oppose my Designs, I will not lose
this opportunity of re-establishing my self; and I am assured, that Amphares 's
Party is not so low, as that I ought, through vain scruples, renounce the
assistance I may receive from it. Chelonisa would have replied again, but
Cleombrotus entreated her to hold her peace, and to withdraw. The Inhabitants
of Megalopolis no sooner knew that Amphares was in their City, and that he
gathered Soldiers together, but they resolved to chase him out of it, and came
in Crowds to his House. Amphares, who had already armed Men about him, failed
not to put himself in a posture of Defense, believing that they had a design on
his Life. But the Gates of his House were broke open, and he was cut in pieces;
also Cleombrotus, who ran to his assistance, found no better Dessiny. The
Magistrates went to find Chelonisa in a Temple, informed her of the Death of
the Prince her Husband, and expressed to her their sorrow for it. Chelonisa,
after having given some Tears, which Generosity made her shed for a Man who
deserved them not, thought of returning to Lacedemon.

'Twas about that time that Agiatis executed the Resolution she had taken, of
breaking with Cleomenes, after having made him some considerable Present. She
called Leriana, and said to her, I pray give Themistides what Jewels I have
left. You shall tell him, that I see none; let him call to mind that I have
already advertised him of it, and that he will oblige me to come no more to my
Appartment. Leriana, who ardently desired that Agiatis should consent to
Leonidas's Design, was very glad that Themistides should see the Queen no more,
and laid aside all thoughts, but those of obeying the Order she had received.
But she was very much surprised, when the Kings Officers, of whom she enquired
after Themistides, answered her, that they knew him not, and that they had
never heard mention of any such Man. She gave an account of it to the Queen,
who was likewise amazed at it. It Is true, they did not remain long in that
uncertainty. Cleomenes, who could not live without seeing Agiatis, resolved to
discourse with Leriana, to justify himself before her; and to entreat her to
make his Peace. He went to her Lodgings, and was received with an Air, that
seemed to promise an happy success to his visit. What Joy do you give me, said
she to him, to come so opportunely. The Queen has caused search to be made for
you, and has given me a Commission, which ought not to be displeasing to you.
Cleomenes, confirmed in the hope he had conceived, waits impatiently for
Leriana to explain her self, when she takes the Jewels, and makes a proffer of
them, in the behalf of Agiatis, as a mark of her acknowledgment. The Prince
looks sadly on Leriana, without casting his Eyes on the Present. Madam, says he
to her, by what Crime, do you believe I have drawn upon my self this kind of
recompense. If you have forgotten, replied Leriana, that it is for the great
service you have done, it is just that the Queen remember it. Suffer me, I
entreat you, replied Themistides, that I complain to the Queen of an usage,
which she did not, perhaps, intend as an Affront to me. If it be to punish me
for having said well of Cleomenes, she may pardon me a Fault which I will never
commit again. Neither shall there be any more mention made of Themistides, when
once Cleomenes shall be seen to appear. How! interrupted Leriana with surprise,
is Agiatis angry with you, and forbids you to see her, for no other reason, but
because you are engaged in the Interests of the Prince of Lacedemon. That is
the subject of my Disgrace, replied Themistides. Ah! since it is that replied
Leriana, I declare my self for you, and I will lose my Credit, or I will make
your Peace.

Leriana found nevertheless a great deal of difficulty, to obtain leave for
Themistides to see again Agiatis, and if that Princess did, at last, consent to
it, it was for once only, and to force him to accept those Jewels he had
refused. Cleomenes did advance toward her with no very good assurance; and
observing that there still remained some severity in her Eyes, he conceived so
great Grief at it, that Agiatis, who took notice of it, felt her Heart growing
tender. Nevertheless she did not suffer any sign of that change to appear in
her Face; and she even resolved to renounce, for ever, the sight of
Themistides. In the mean time that Lover throws himself at her Feet; and
Agiatis endeavoring to raise him up, hurts his Wound. Cleomenes grows pale,
and the Queen having observed it, asked him the cause of it, with greater
earnestness than she would willingly have shown. The Prince had no sooner said,
that a pain proceeded from a Wound he had in his left Shoulder, but the
Princess beheld him with greater application than before. After having recalled
into her memory, all things that could confirm her Conjecture, O ye Gods! cried
she out, what is it I see? What! is Themistides interessed for the Prince of
Lacedemon, and is he wounded in the left Shoulder? It is no longer to be
doubted, Themistides is Cleomenes, as Cylesira was Agiatis. Confess,
Themistides, confess, I conjure you, and leave me not in the uncertainty
wherein you see me. Since you command me, Madam, replied the Prince, I confess,
I am Cleomenes. O Heaven, cried out Leriana in her turn, what a happiness is
this, after so many misfortunes! Ah, Leriana, replied Cleomenes, do not flatter
me with any hope, unless you would displease the Queen. I perceive plainly,
that I shall never be but unfortunate, either as I am Themistides or Cleomenes.
You know that at Corinth, and in the Isle of Egina, Cylesira took away from me
all opportunities of seeing her. I did my duty, replied the Queen, I defended a
Heart, which, I might well imagine, Prince Gilipus would never have disposed
of, in favor of Themistides. I know not, replied the Prince of Lacedemon,
whether Cleomenes shall have any better Destiny; but I have observed certain
cross accidents that presage no great good. In effect, Madam, when Leonidas
takes his measures, to carry you away, and make me happy, I oppose his Attempts
and my own good Fortune. But I do not repent of what I have done. Neither would
I have had my own Felicity have cost you one moments vexation.

The Queen hearkened to him with attention; she beheld Cleomenes with Eyes, that
seemed no longer enraged; but as she kept silence; How, Madam, said Leriana,
you give the Prince no answer, after so obliging a Protestation. I am very
glad, replied the Queen, that he has been so generous, in respect of Agiatis,
and so faithful to Cylesira. Both the one and the other deserve to be remembered
with acknowledgment. But, Sir, added she with some disquiet, addressing her
self to Cleomenes, leave me I entreat you alone, and do not oblige me to talk
any more of you.

Cleomenes was transported with joy, that he put one knee to the Earth to thank
the Queen, and went to relate to the King all that had passed. Leonidas and
Cretesilea are no less satisfied with it than the Prince, and went immediately
to Agitatis's Apartment. Though their visit had nothing in it but what was very
agreeable, yet it did not last long; for besides that it was late, notice was
brought to Leonidas, that Chelonisa was just arrived.

Cleomenes on the morrow failed not to visit Agiatis, as soon as Decency
permitted him to enter her Chamber; he told her immediately that nothing
retained her in the Apartment which had been given her. You may go out of it
when you please, continued he, the King has been graciously pleased, that I
should have the pleasure of declaring it to you. If it be my Liberty you give
me, replied the Queen, you will be pleased that I make use of it, to return to
Erabeus. Is it possible, Madam, answered he with surprise, that you would leave
us so speedily, and that you will not design to make some stay at Sparta? I
confess, replied she, here is something I sain would see. It Is Queen Chelonisa,
whose Merit and Beauty attracts the admiration of all Greece. The Princess, to
whom you give the praises that are due to your self, replied Cleomenes, would
have been already with you, if she had not granted me these moments which I did
demand of her.

He had hardly ended these words, when he saw Chelonisa enter and he went out
to give that Princess a greater liberty of speaking, being well assured that
she would not forget his interests.

The two Queens beheld each other with amazement, and having advanced the one
toward the other, they embraced with as many marks of Esteem and Tenderness,
as if they had been long since acquainted. I assure you, Madam, said Agiatis to
Chelonisa, that you should not have prevented me, if Prisoners were the
disposers of their own Wills. You know, Madam, answered the Daughter of
Leonidas, that if you were brought into this Palace, it was rather to proffer
you a Crown, than to give you Chains. Be the intention what it will, replied
Agiatis, I cannot complain of a force that brings me to see Queen Chelonisa I
would have seen you at Prince Gilipus's, replied she, if the difference between
our Families had allowed me to give my self that satisfaction. Besides, Madam,
you made a Journey to Corinth, and I for my part have always been out of
Lacedemon, either with a fugitive Father, or a banished Husband. But, Madam,
it is in your power now to unite our Houses, more than the Civil Wars have
divided them.

Agiatis blushed, instead of making any answer. 'Twas not, because she saw that
Gilipus would joyfully make that Alliance, or because she perceived even her
self inclined to it, out of tenderness. But besides, that it was not long since
she had lost Agis, a sentiment of bashfulness hindered her to declare her self
in this first Conversation. She even creates to her self a Scruple, which
permits her not to show at the first for the Prince of Lacedemon an inclination
which she had taken care to conceal from Themistides, and when she found her
self disposed to make a favorable answer, her heart reproached her, that
Cleomenes's rank might have too great a share in that secret motion.

When she spoke, it was after a manner, that without discovering too much of
the inclination she desired to conceal, failed not to give Chelonisa
satisfaction. You know, Madam, said she to her, that there is no longer any
division in Lacedemon; that the King Leonidas is sole Master there, and that we
have nothing else to do but to submit to the Will of the Conqueror. Your will
shall be obeyed, replied Chelonisa, and we have nothing more to do, but to wish
that it may not prove rigorous to a Prince who adores you. In ending these
words, she observed that there was no sign of Aversion in Agiatis's Eyes, and
she withdrew, to give Cleomenes an account of it.

In a few moments after, Leonidas was advertised that some Horse came from the
parts toward Erabeus. Sir, continued the Officer who gave him the notice,
Prince Gilipus is at the head of that body, with another man whom I do not
know. That Troop marches with a Confidence which sufficiently witnesses it
fears nothing, and is supported by others. This Report gave Leonidas some
disquiet. Agiatis appeared moved, and Cleomenes received a mortal vexation at
it. They were going to send once more to view it, when a certain Corinthian,
who was a Kinsman of Philistion's, arrived. That Stranger told Cleomenes that
it was the General of the Achaians, who was coming to Lacedemon, and who
brought Gilipus along with him, whom he had fetched from Erabeus. But this is
not all Sir, pursued he, for as Aratus is at present a friend to the two Royal
Families of Sparta, his coming is only to endeavor their Union, and thoroughly
to appease the Troubles of the Commonwealth.

Cleomenes ran to meet Aratus and Gilipus. He said to Agiatis's Father, the
most respectful things that love could inspire him with; and after having
expressed his acknowledgment to the General of the Achaians, he showed them the
way to the King his Father's Palace. Leonidas received them at the Gate with
more than extraordinary Joy. Agiatis was no less glad at the sight of Gilipus,
and after the mutual Compliments that are practiced on such occasions, Aratus
spoke of what he most passionately desired to these Illustrious Persons. He
afterward represented to them, that to confirm the Peace more solidly,
Agesilaus must be comprehended therein. He knew what were the sentiments of his
Son Hypomedon, and having brought that young Prince along with Gilipus, he
presented him to the King of Lacedemon. Hypomedon threw himself at Leonidas's
Feet, and that Prince who had always esteemed him, had no sooner taken him up,
but he tenderly embraced him, and forgot the injuries he had received from his
Father. Then Aratus said to the King of Sparta, Sir, I am so well pleased that
I have married Teleander and Ariamite in one day, that I am come with a design
of proposing to you two Marriages. The Lacedaemonians ought to wish for that
double Alliance in respect of their own repose, and I question not, but that
you will consent to the happiness of four Persons who were born only to be
united. They shall be when you please, replied the King of Sparta, provided
Prince Gilipus be not unwilling. I might possibly be, replied Agiatis 's Father
with a smile, if I would oppose my Daughters Advantage, but since I am far
enough from having any such intentions, I shall only entreat you to execute
speedily your design.

The four Lovers passed the rest of the day in delights they had never before
tasted. Clomenes and Agiatis did not forget the Establishment of Philistion and
Cylesira, and on the morrow the two Marriages were celebrated with a Joy that
made the Miseries of Sparta be forgotten.

FINIS.
A Catalogue of some Novels and Plays Printed for R. Bentley and S. Magnes.
NOVELS.
1 ZElinda, a famed Romance. 2 Happy Slave, in three Parts. 3 Count Brion. 4
Count Gabales. 5 Hatige or the Amors of the King of Tamaran. 6 Madam Lavalier
and the King of France. 7 Madam and the Duke of Guise. 8 Madam Colonna's
Memoirs. 9 Queen of Majorca in two Parts. 10 Don Sebastian King of Portugal. 11
Heroine Musquetier. 12 Princess of Cleves. 13 Obliging Mistress. 14 Fatal
Prudence. 15 Princess of Fez. 16 Disorders of Love. 17 Triumph of Love. 18
Victorious Lovers. 19 Almanzor and Almanzaida. 20 Earl of Essex and Queen
Elizabeth. 21 Neopolitan, or, the Defender of his Mistress. 22 Nicostratis. 23
Amorous Abbess. 24 Homais Queen of Tunis. 25 Pilgrim in two Parts. 26 Meroveus,
Prince of the Blood Royal of France. 27 Life of the Duke of Guise. 28
Extravagant Poet. 29 Memoires Gallant. 30 Instruction for a Young Nobleman. 31
Love Letters from the Cavalier to the Nun. 32 Gallant Ladies; or, the Mutual
Conference: In two Parts. 33 St. Lewis; or, the Politic Conduct of Queen
Blanch.

