THE Roman Catholic CONVERTED: OR A Testimony against the Papists Imagined
PURGATORY. With an EXHORTATION to them of the CHVRCH of ROME, To break off from
their Idols and Images, and to believe in the LIGHT of Christ Jesus, who
lights every man that comes into the World.

By one, who though formerly of them, is now made able through believing in the
Light of Christ to give Testimony against their Purgatory, Idols, Images, and
all their dark Inventions,

John Vaughton. He that fears Man, shall have a Fall; but whosoever puts his
Trust in the Lord, is without Danger, Prove. 24.25. They have no Rest day nor
night, who worship the Beast and his Image, and whosoever receives the Print
of his Name, Rev. 14.11.

Printed in the Year 1676.

THE Roman Catholic CONVERTED.
WOE be unto those that come not forth of Babylon, and break not off from their
Graven Images, and cease not from Man whose Breath is in his Nostrils, and that
live in Rebellion against the Lord God of Heaven and Earth; who gave unto Man
Life, Breath and Being, and has lengthned out a Day of his tender Visitation
unto the Sons and Daughters of men, whom in no wise he would have to perish in
their Sins; but his Will is their Sanctification: Now none can be sanctified,
but by Obedience to the Will of God; and this is the Will of God, That men
believe on him whom God the Father has sent a Light into the World, as Christ
Jesus said, I am come a Light into the World; and he that believes in me, shall
not abide in Darkness, but shall have the Light of Life; Glory, Honor and
Everlasting Renown be unto the Lord God of Life for evermore, who has caused
his Light to shine into the Hearts of a Remnant, and has given them the
Knowledge of himself in and by the Shinings of his own Light; and all the
Nations of the World that are saved, must walk in the Light of the Lord Jesus;
for Cleansing from Sin is known as there is a walking in the Light of Jesus
(and no where else) that is my Testimony, as I have received it of the Lord. And
therefore unto you that are of the Church of Rome, and expect Salvation as you
are Members thereof, this Word is in my Heart from the Lord unto you all;
Destruction, and not Salvation, will be your Portion, if you come not to
believe in the Light of Christ Jesus, as it appears in you, manifesting the
Evil of your Doings, and has and does often strive with you, and would gather
you, and bring you out of your own Ways and Inventions, which the Devil and
his Ministers, Emissaries and Agents have set up, and have caused all that have
believed them to bow unto the Image that they have set up, and have caused all
them who have believed their Report, to receive that for Christ which is but a
Wafer, and made by the Hands, which are Dust, and must return to the Dust; and
this is the Work of your Pope, Bishops and Priests, whom you call Fathers, and
Father of Fathers; and so, you own your selves to be the Children of them who
know not God nor Christ; but have set up a Wafer, and called it Christ's Body,
Flesh and Blood, and Compel People to receive it as such; and yet they that
received it, never knew cleansing from Sin by it, nor never will: And therefore
Woe be unto you Priests and People, which are Falling down, Bowing and
Worshipping that for God which is not God, but the Works of your own Hands:
Behold and take notice of it, You shall perish, if you Repent not; and your
Crosses of Wood and Stone, though never so finely gilded, nay, though they be
made of the Gold it self, and your Images, though never so finely drawn by the
Art of the Limner, Bow ye and Creep ye never so often unto them, nor yet your
Holy Ashes (as you call them), nor yet your Holy Water (as you call it), shall
be able to deliver you in the Day of the Indignation of the Lord, which
certainly shall be poured forth upon you: For your Water, which you have made
and washed People withal, its not the Water of Life, and therefore it answers
not the End which you purpose it for, which say you, It has Power, or there is
Virtue in it to drive away Evil Spirits from those who are sprinkled with it;
and therein you are found to be Liars; for the Evil Spirit works and bears
rule, both in you that make the Water, and sprinkle your selves and others with
it.

And be it known unto you Priests and False Prophets, who, as you say, have
received Power to Absolve from Sin those that confess their Sins unto you, and
do that Penance you enjoin them to: Behold you are found Liars, by one who in
days past, and years that are gone, Confessed unto some of you, and did those
things which you enjoined him to do, in hopes thereby he might obtain Peace
with the Lord: But behold, and take notice, I speak the Truth, and Lie not;
That notwithstanding all your Absolutions and Pennances, enjoined by you, and
by me performed, I was not Discharged from the Guilt that Sin being committed
brought upon me; and in that Day God's holy pure Spirit did condemn me for
those Sins which I had committed, and which I had Confessed to you, and which you
had given me Absolution for; and the Judgments of the Lord were then upon me,
and his holy Spirit strove with me; and many times there were strong Cries
raised in me, That I might know Power over Sin, and that I might be set free
from Sin: but in that Day I did not certainly know that it was the Lord that
strove with me, because Darkness was over my Understanding; and though the true
Light did shine in the Darkness, yet the Darkness comprehended it not; and I
being not turned from the Darkness to the Light, did not receive Power over my
Sin: But in my Distress I went to you for Help, (but it was in vain) and when I
found no Help from you, then did the Lord by his Spirit strive with me, to
bring me from amongst you; and this that set my Sins in order before me, some
of you have called it the Devil; and some of you told me, I was in a Good
Condition, and the Devil (you said) was striving to get me out of the Church;
and said you, You must believe as the Church believes; for out of your Church
(say you) there is no Salvation. But I testify for the Lord God that lives
forever, and for the sakes of those who among you may in some measure be in a
Sense of that pure Principle of Life in themselves, that strives with them
against Sin, and yet may depend upon Man, or your Church, which is made by Man,
That whilst they have any Dependency upon the Church, or any Man of your
Church, let him be called Pope, or Priest, or what Name else soever it be, or
whatever Practice he be found in, which the Spirit of the Lord leads him not
unto, he will not know Salvation, but Condemnation will be his or their Portion
forever, if they repent not, and Forsake not the Evil of their Ways, and it is
not the Priest's saying, My Soul for thy Soul, will excuse any in the Day of
Account; for the Lord is clear, and will be clear of the Blood of all men; and
Man's Destruction is of himself, but his Help is in me, says the Lord God that
lives forever.

And therefore Woe unto, you Priests, the Blood of many of the People will be
required at your Hands, because through your dark Working and subtle Inventions
you have allured many, and drawn many, and kept many from the Knowledge of the
Lord, and spoken Peace unto many when the Lord has spoken Trouble; and you
being ignorant of the Arm and Power of the Lord, that sets the Soul free from
Sin, have invented or imagined a Purgatory after Death, which say you, People
whose Sins are not done away here, must be done away in Purgatory, which
Purgatory (say you) is a Place of Fire. And O you Priests, what is the Reason
you have no more Love to People who have so much Confidence in you, and who
confess unto their Dying Day unto you, and as you make them believe, you have
Power to Absolve all their Sins, and yet you are so Cruel and so Hard hearted
unto them, that you leave a Part of their Sins unpardoned and unremitted, to be
done away in Purgatory? (A Cheat indeed!) Is not one Reason that may be given
for it, That you may have a Gift given to your Church, that you may say Mass
for their Souls many years after? And how do you know who they are that go to
Purgatory? But blessed be the Name of the Lord that lives forever, who has
opened the Eyes of a Remnant to see over and beyond all your dark Inventions
and Imaginations; and the Lord has and will open the Eyes of Thousands in this
Nation, and in other Nations, who are and shall be gathered from amongst you,
and shall give Testimony to the Arm and Power of the Lord God of Life, and in
the Strength thereof shall be able to offer up their Lives, if the Lord require
it of them, in Testimony to his Ancient Way and Holy Path, which was before
your dark Inventions were, and shall be when they are come to an End. For
behold and take notice, they had a time of Rising, and the Time of their Rising
is seen, and the Time of their Down fal^ is seen also; for all your dark
Inventions did rise when the Apostacye t^red, when the Devil (the old Adversary
of Mankind) had drawn the Mind of man from the Gift of God, from the Appearance
of Christ within, which is the Saints Hope of Glory; and so led men into
Imaginations and Inventions of Worships, out of the Spirit of God, and from the
Life of Christ; and so men being gone from the Spirit, and out of the Life of
Jesus, imagined a Purgatory after Death, and set up Worships and Services
contrary to the Worship that Christ Jesus set up, and bore Testimony unto,
whose Worship was and is in the Spirit and in the Truth, which the Devil is out
of, and has no part therein: Now they that have set up Worships and Services in
their own Wills, and in their own Times, and have compelled People to bow
thereunto, and have taken the Lives of those who have been raised to bear
Testimony against their Idolatries and Superstitions; its manifest these are
not of the Church of God, but of the Devil, who was a Murderer from the
Beginning, who moved Cain to kill Abel his Brother: So you Papists, that Murder
for Religion, see who is your Father, and what Stock you are of; and if in your
Wills you Fast and Pray, and at times Afflict your Bodies with your own Doings,
the Lord will not regard you for none of these things; for you are found
Workers of Iniquity: Therefore be awakened unto Righteousness, and turn your
Minds inward to the Righteous Principle of God; For whatsoever may be known of
God is manifested within man; for the Appearance of God is within; and he that
formed the Mountains, and he that created the Winds, and makes the Morning
Darkness, and treads upon the High Places of the Earth, and shows unto Man
what his Thoughts are, the Lord God of Hosts is his Name: Therefore fear ye
before him, and dread his Holy Name, and break off from your Idols and Images,
and from your own Inventions, and hearken unto him, in the inward of your
Hearts, that shows you when you tell a Lie, and when you swear an Oath, and
when you speak Vain Words, and when you have been sporting your selves in
Pleasures, and passing away your Times in Plays, that sometimes after all
these things meets with you, and sometimes in the midst of your Pleasures
causes Sadness of Heart; yea, and when you are from your Company, or when you
are upon your Beds meets with you, and smites you in your Consciences, and
reproves you for these things; Oh! my Cry is unto you, Turn you unto him that
reproves; for if ever you come to know a laying down your Heads in Peace, when
time in this World shall be no more, you must turn and depart from that which
he reproves you for; for the Reproofs of God's Instruction is the Way to Life;
and there is not another Way, now I know: Self has a Life in the Pleasures that
are in this World, but Self must be denied by all that will be Disciples of
Jesus; for Christ Jesus has said, He that will be my Disciple, must deny
himself, and take up his daily Cross, and follow me: This Cross of Christ is
not made with Hands, but it is the Power of God, which separates from the Evil
that is in the World, and crucifies and mortifies the Lust of the Flesh, and
leads out of the Pride of Life, which is not of the Father, but of this World;
and this World passes away, and the Glory of it. Therefore fear man no longer,
whose Breath is in his Nostrils; but fear and dread the Living God, who will
give unto every man a Reward according to the Deeds done in the Body, whether
they be Good or whether they be Evil; this was the Doctrine of Christ Jesus,
who preached himself the Light of the World: He said to the Jews, If you
believe not that I am he, you shall dye in your Sins, and whither I go you
cannot come; this was Christ's Testimony to the Unbelieving Jews. Now Papists,
what will you do? Will you believe Christ Jesus, in whose Mouth was never Guile
found? Or will you believe your lying Priests, who tell you of a Purgatory
after Death, which some of you must go into, and stay a while there, and then
go to Heaven afterward, where Christ Jesus is? lying Priests and Deceivers,
and Murderers of Souls indeed, for so I in truth can call them; they have not
known the Word of the Lord as a Fire in them, to burn up and to consume their
Sins and their Iniquities; and so being out of the Faith that purifies the
Heart (on this side the Grave) have imagined a Purgatory after Death,
notwithstanding the Spirit of the Lord through his Faithful Servants in days
past, has given this Testimony, as its left upon Record in the Holy Scriptures
of Truth, that As the Tree falls, so it lies; and there is no Repentance in the
Grave: So that it is evident, if man dies in his Sins, where Christ is, thither
he cannot come: So the Gulf is fixed, so that no unclean thing can enter the
Kingdom of God; and the Wicked, and all those who forget God (or neglect to
answer God in the Day of their Visitation, but sin out the Day of their
Visitation,) shall be turned into Hell, and the Liar shall have his Portion in
the Lake that burns with Fire and Brimstone. Oh, the Redemption of the Soul!
its very precious; but its not your Bowings to your Altars, nor Praying to
Saints or Angels, that can redeem the Soul that has been in Death, or add any
thing thereunto; if you should offer a Thousand Rams, or Ten Thousand Rivers of
Oil, nay, if any of you should give the Fruit of your Bodies for the Sin of
your Souls, it will not avail: But the New Creature, it avails; the Life of
Christ, it will avail; and the Life of Christ is the Light of men; and the
Light appears, and shines in all men, to discover and to make manifest unto all
those things that are reproved, and that is the Spirit of Truth in thy own
Heart and in thy own Conscience, O Man and O Woman, which convinces thee of
Sin, and reproves thee for doing the thing that is Evil; Oh! turn ye at his
Reproofs; why will ye Dye? his Spirit will not always strive with Man; but it
strives at one time or another with every man, that every man might be left
without Excuse And this Cry has run often through me, O Man, cease from thy own
Inventions, and from thy own Imaginations, and let the Word of Truth have a
Place in thee, that thou may be sanctified by it, and cleansed from Sin by
it, before thou go hence and see man no more: that is the Desire of my Soul for
you all, that have not sinned out your Day; for there is no Repentance in the
Grave; and if no Repentance in the Grave, then there is no Change nor no
cleansing from Sin. So away with your Imaginations of a Purgatory after Death;
for the Lord is risen, and has manifested, and is manifesting his Ancient
Power, which redeems the Soul out of all Evil on this side the Grave: And the
Church is come and coming out of the Wilderness, leaning upon the Breast of her
Beloved; and she cries, Draw me, and I will run after thee; and the Day hastens
in which her Glory shall be more and more seen, and none shall be able to
eclipse her Glory, but it shall dazzle the Eyes of many Nations, and many of
the Sons and Daughters of men, whose Region is now in the Darkness, and under
the Shadow of Death, shall behold his Glory, and shall fear before him, who is
our Strength, our Rock, and our Refuge, and the Stay of our Minds, and our sure
Hiding place in the Time of Storms, to whose Power belongs the Glory forever
and for evermore, and not to the Beast and False Prophet, for their Portion is
the Lake that burns forever; and they that give their Strength to the Beast and
False Prophet, and receive his Mark in their Right Hand or Forehead, shall be
punished together with them. And you Papists, I must deal plainly with you, and
I must tell you, That you are the People that are departed from the Faith that
was once delivered to the Saints, giving heed unto seducing spirits and
doctrines of Devils, speaking Lies in Hypocrisy, whereby many of your
Consciences come to be seared as with a Hot Iron: And you are forbidding
Marriage, which was God's Ordinance in Paradise, before man fell; and the
Priests of God under the Law were Married, and the Apostles of our Lord Jesus
Christ were many of them Married; and the Apostle Paul allowed of Marriage, and
said, Let a Bishop be the Husband of one Wife; and its better to Marry then to
Burn: And do not many of your Priests burn with Lust? Let God's Witness in your
Consciences arise and answer: And they tell you, You must Abstain from Meats on
such days as they in their own Wills have appointed for Fasting Days, and the
next day after give Liberty to Excess of Eating and Drinking, and spending much
of the Creatures out of the Fear of God, and give Liberty to Sports and Plays,
whereby Youth comes to be Corrupted, and the Name of the Lord Blasphemed; and
call those days Holy Days, and keep them as they say in Commemoration of the
Saints, whose Life they crucify; for they that live in Pleasures, crucify the
Justs: And do not your Sins exceed the Sins of Sodom, which God overthrew? And
notwithstanding these things, you would be counted the Church of Christ; but
you are seen to be of the Whore, the False Church, and not the Lamb's Wife,
your Fruits have made you manifest.

And these things were upon me, and in the Love of God sprung in my Soul to you
wards, and I could not be clear till I was made willing to give them forth unto
you: And if for my Testimony ye Envy me, or seek my Life, be it known unto you,
I am not afraid of you; for my Life is in the Hand of the Lord, who is able to
preserve me, and all whose Confidence is in him alone, to the giving up of
their Outward Lives (unto the Outward Death); and our Inward Life is out of the
Reach of all your Envy and Malice, its hid with God in Christ Jesus, who said,
Love your Enemies; and if you were his Disciples, you would obey his Commands,
and then you would kill no man about Religion; but your Inquisitions would
fall, and that Murdering spirit in you that set them up.

From him who is a Lover of all your Souls, but a Hater of all your Deceit, who
by many in Scorn is called a Quaker. John Vaughton.
London, written in the 2d Month, 1676.
THE END.
Page 2. Line 23. for purpose read propose.


