THE SPEECH OF Richard Vaughan Esquire RECORDER OF CARMARTHEN, At His GRACE The
Duke of Beaufort (Lord President of WALES) His ENTRACE into the said TOWN.
May it please your GRACE,
ALthough in this your GRACES general Visitation of the Places under your
Command, This that you are now entered into (possibly) may seem among the
Meanest; yet, by an Unanimous Voice and Consent, I have it in Charge to assure
you, That there has been None, where the Hearts of the People have been filled
with greater Awe and Veneration for your Character, greater Honor for your
Person, greater Admiration of your Perfections, nor greater Gladness at your
Arrival: Hitherto they have worshipped you at a distance, (as the Israelites did
the Mount) and now they have the Pleasure of seeing you Face to Face.

But our Joys must not be wholly laid out for your Grace: Part is due to the
additional Satisfaction we conceive at the presence of your Noble Son, who is
Heir even in your Life of your incomparable Virtues; and as that may seem a
Paradox in Law, so 'twill appear as high a Contradiction in Reason, That though
your Grace has entirely conveyed unto his Lordship your excellent Endowments,
yet notwithstanding that Bounty, your own Original stock and abundance is not
in the l^^st impaired or diminished. It Is is matter of exceeding trouble to us,
That it lies not within the Compass of our Power, to exemplify the Honor and
Service we have for your Grace, by external Demonstrations of Deference
suitable to the Quality of so Illustrious a Person. In regard therefore the
Extent of our Ability is not correspondent to the Zeal of our Affection, the
sincerity of your Welcome will be very imperfectly represented by the Solemnity
of your Entertainment. The best and most pleasing part of that will be, That
your Grace will still find our Heads and our Hearts informed and regulated by
the same Principle of Loyalty, which was our Antidote against the Poison and
Infection of those Treasonable Doctrines and Practices, which in the late
dismal Times of Rebellion (like the Frogs of Egypt) overspread the Land round
about us, but were not able to blast or corrupt our Vineyard, a Vineyard of so
admirable a Mould, that it never gave Birth to any such monstrous Production,
as a Sequestrator or Committee-man. Those Boars of the Forest invaded it, with
design to engender, and propagate their kind; They sowed their Tares amongst
our Wheat, and watered them with our Blood, but (maugre that) the Nature and
Virtue of our Soil, had so irreconcilable and aversion to the malignity of the
Seed, that it never gave them any Return; and therefore when they failed to
debauch, they destroyed and laid it waste. The same Principle and Conscience,
which (in those days of Desolation) when we were no longer able to resist, yet
supported us to weather the Tyranny and Oppressions of those Arbitrary and
Republican Hoghen Moghens, rather than renounce the Cause of our SOVEREIGN,
kindled and inflamed in us the highest Horror and Indignation, at the report of
the late infernal and execrable CONSPIRACY against His MAJESTY, His ROYAL
BROTHER, and the GOVERNMENT: A Conspiracy that was equally complicated with
Impudence and Impiety, for besides that, Sovereign Princes (being God
Almighty's Vicegerents here on Earth) are in that respect, in a more immediate
manner, the Subjects of his Care and Protection: The Plot of our Sons of Belial
carried a more particular Contempt and Affront of the Divine Power, arising
from the more particular Providence it has exerted in the preservation of the
BLOOD ROYAL of this Kingdom, even above that of any other Nation, in so many
signally repeated (I had almost said miraculous) Instances.

Add to this, That it not only flies in the face of the Oath of Allegiance, but
most impudently beards the concurrent and uniform Authority of all Laws
Natural, Divine and Municipal.

And as these Considerations, together with the Justice, Clemency and Candor of
their Administration, seem to promise a sufficient security to the Sacred
Person; so (methinks) the Beauty and Excellence of our MONARCHY (which will
appear yet the more shining, if set in opposition to the Baldness of a
Republique) should supersede the necessity of any other Guard to our
Government. A Government framed with so great Art and Curiosity, so exact a
Symetry and Proportion through all its Parts, and finally so wifely disposed,
and accommodated to the joint and reciprocal Felicity of Prince and Subject,
that there is none in the World can vie with it, either in respect of the
Gracefulness and Splendour of its outward Form, or the more real Happiness it
dispenses and communicates to all Orders and Degrees of Men living under it: A
Government (in short) that it is at once the Religion and Interest of the
Subject, to defend and continue; and as the influence of the one engages all
the good and honest to its support, so the sense of the other should endear it
even to the most knavish, and sell ended part of the People. These are indeed
plausible deductions of Logic, but plain and simple Experience (which is free
from that Sophistry and Deceit incident to Syllogism and Argument) has, beyond
Contradiction, proved, That there have been a sort of sottish and profligate
Miscreants among us, that have transgressed against all these Lights; not only
the Lights of their Consciences, but (a strange Infatuation!) their own
temporal Peace and Happiness; and all this, to reduce us again to the same
state of Captivity and Thraldom, from which we have not been so long freed. But
that it may be very well remembered, that not only our Civil, but likewise our
Philosophic Rights and Liberties suffered Shipwreck, and even that fundamental
Privilege of our Species, the free use and exercise of our Speech, our
Understandings, and all the Faculties of our Soul was under Sequestration.

And since Treason is in its Nature no less apt to be carried on by Policy,
than Power; by clandestine Council and Stratagem, than open Force and Violence;
the goodness of God has as well appeared in disclosing the Councels of our
Traitors, as if he had discomfited their Forces: Neither is our Praise and
Thanksgiving only due for the blessing of the Discovery, but the happy Effect
and Consequence thereof, which has been the undeceiving a multitude of
(probably well-meaning) Men who were misled, and imposed upon, by the
sanctimonious disguise and popular amusement of Religion and Piety.

And now there being nothing more conducive to the preservation of all Places
in their due Allegiance, than the intrusting them to the Conduct and Government
of Persons well affected, from a congratulatory Address to Providence for
detecting and confounding the Snares of the Hunters, the Transition will be apt
and natural to an acknowledgment of His MAJESTY'S great Wisdom, in settling us
under your GRACES LIEUTENANCY, who, to all the Embelishments of Art and Nature,
has the accession of that, which is the best Ornament Man is capable of, I mean
Loyalty and Affection to the KING: You derive it from your most honorable
Ancestors, it is entayled on your Family, and seems to be inherent and fixed in
your Blood. He must needs be a very great Stranger to our British Annals, that
is ignorant of the Aid they have constantly ministered to the Crown in its
distress. All their Parts and Members have in their respective Provinces moved
in subserviency to its Interest. The Wisdom of their Heads has given it mature
and prosperous Counsel in its most difficult Emergencies: The Integrity of
their Hearts has fortified it with firm and fast Friends in its Adversity; The
Might of their Hands has gained it Victory in the day of Battle. And lastly,
The fullness of their Coffers has afforded it Supply and Relief in its
extremest Exigency, in the lowest Ebb of its Fortune.

I shall trespass no further on your GRACES Patience, than whilst I conclude
with a most humble Praver to your GRACE, That you will always look on us with
an Eye of Favor; We are sensible the best Title we can make to recommend us to
your Patronage, and to the Honor and Relation of your Servants, will be, with
our wonted Constancy, to maintain our Hereditary Character of Most Obedient
Subjects, to the Common Father of our Country the KING, and of Conformable
Sons to our Holy Mother the CHURCH, and as the most prevailing and effectual
Expedient to secure us against warping from our Duty to Both, We shall always
endeavor to live in a Brotherly Love one among another.

FINIS.
LONDON, Printed for JACOB TONSON at the Judge's Head in Chancery Lane, near
Fleet Street. M. DC. LXXXIV.


