BRITISH Antiquities revived: OR A friendly Contest touching the sovereignty of
the three Princes of Wales in ancient times, managed with certain arguments,
whereunto answers are applied.

By ROBERT VAUGHAN Esquire

To which is added the Pedigree of the right Honorable the Earl of CARBERY,
Lord President of WALES: with A Short account of the five Royal Tribes of
CAMBRIA, by the same Author.

Sunt duo tresve qui revelvant*
Nostrarum tineas ineptiarum. Martial. l. 11.
OXFORD, Printed by HEN: HALL Printer to the University, for THOMAS ROBINSON.
1662.

To the right worshipful Sr. RICHARD WIN of GWEDIR Baronet, and Knight for
the County of CARNARVAN in this present Parliament.
SIR,
I Had designed this small Treatise (being the first fruits of my study in
Antiquities) for your honored Father; but failing of my purpose by reason of
his death (which was untimely to his friends, though not to himself) I thought
I might not (without being highly injurious) present a thing once devoted to
him to any else besides your self, who as his heir might lay a just claim to
it, and also to my most humble services; I promise my self you will vouchsafe
it a kind entertainment, since (I know) both your goodness and your interest
in the subject, as lineally descended from the Princes of Northwales (whose
rights are therein maintained) are more then sufficient to oblige you thereto.
The writing of it was upon this occasion: some Gentlemen of Southwales being
dissatisfied with Caradoc of Lancarvan's History of Wales, published by Dr.
Powel, in regard that therein the Prince of Northwales is held forth to be
Sovereign over the other two Princes of Southwales and Powis, as being of the
elder house, thought fit (in order to the compiling of a more exact history) to
draw up certain arguments for the sovereignty of all Wales to be in the Prince
of Southwales, and to send them also into Northwales to see what could be said
in answer to them, before any further use should be made of them. They were
delivered by Sr. Thomas Canon late of Pembrokeshire Knight. to Sr. John Lloyd of
the Inner Temple Knight. and Sergeant at Law, who delivered them to me above 40
years ago, desiring I would take the pains to peruse and answer them as well as
I was able. At his entreaty I undertook it, and, as you will find, done
somewhat in it, though in a rude manner, which I hope will be excused in a
person, whose only design is plainly to set forth the truth, which shows
always best in its own proper colors without the elaborate dress and varnish
of Rhetoric. But some men possibly may object against this undertaking of
mine, that it was needless, and that, if it had been to any end, it was no
discretion to revive and publish an old Contest long since (God be praised)
happily decided. I confess we have reason to bless God for his mercy to us in
our happy establishment under one Monarch; we may well say we were conquered to
our gain, and undone to our advantage, periissemus nisi periissemus; But yet it
must be granted, that it is no small delight that redounds from the revolving
and perusal of old records: though Troy has for several ages layn buried in
its ashes, both its glory and government being quite dissolved, though the
Athenian, Spartan, Theban, and other petit Grecian Estates have long since had
their periods, yet we still take a great deal of satisfaction in reading their
stories, how they began, grew up, flourished, strove, and decayed. Besides
there may be this good use made of it, viz, that by reflecting upon our former
miseries and divisions while we contended for sovereignty, we may be induced to
put the greater value upon our present happiness. Thus having given you an
account of the work, and what I had to say in its defense, I commend it to
your protection: and with my prayers to God for you and your noble family
remain, Sir,

Your faithful Servant at command ROB: VAUGHAN
Hengwrt May the 9th. 1662.
The state of the Question.
RODERIC the great, King of Wales, about A^: Dom: 876. did dispose the three
Principalities thereof to three of his sons, viz. Southwales to Caedelh, who is
maintained in this Treatise to be the Eldest; Northwales to Anarawd, who is
held by some late writers of Northwales to be the Eldest; and Powis to Mervyn,
who is held by some other writers of Northwales to be the Eldest: (which being
least probable, as touching Mervyn) the Question here is, Whether Cadell or
Anarawd were the Eldest son of Roderic the great, and which of them had the
sovereign power and rule over all Wales.

Arguments proving Cadelh Prince of Southwales to be the Eldest Son of Roderic
the great, (King of Wales,) and that he, and his issue after him had a
superiority over the rest of the Princes, over his two Brethren, and the
Descendants from them.
The first Argument.
THE principality of Powys after the death of Mervyn, the youngest Brother,
(who died without issue, according to the most credible writers of the
Antiquities of Wales) descended to Cadelh, as the Eldest brother and Heir, and
from him to Howel Dha his Son, and so to Bledhyn ap Convyn by due course of
inheritance from Cadelh. And for the opinion that Mervyn had a Son named
Lhewelyn, (whose Daughter and Heir was married to Mredith ap Owen, third son of
Owen ap Howel Dha, and great Grandchild to Cadelh,) and that thereby Powys came
to the line of Cadelh, it is fit the authority thereof do appear, before it
receive credit. Likewise, whereas some Writers for Northwales do allege, that
Cad^lh took Powys by force from his brethren after the death of his brother
Mervyn, it is therefore impliedly confessed, that Mervyn had no children: and
it is not unlike that he actually entered into and seized Powys as his
inheritance, and that his brethren might pretend to have portions there by
Gavel-kind upon the death of their brother Mervyn. But could he carry a
principality from all the race of Roderic (who had diverse sons, besides those
three princes) by strong hand, and without right or opposition? whereas it does
not appear throughout the whole course of the histories of Wales, that either
there was any stir or claim made by the prince of Northwales, or any of the
descent of Roderic for Powys, or any entries made by them into that country,
until after the sovereignty thereof came to the King of England, by the
conquering of Rees ap Theodor, that they made head in those parts as in other
parts of Wales against the invasion of the Lords Marchers, whereas they might
have done it most easily, seeing it wholly bordereth on Northwales, and is
farthest from Southwales, and especially being incited and warranted thereunto
for recovery of their right. And if a judgment may be made that that which is
ill gotten cannot long endure, Et de male partis tertius haeres non gaudebit,
then let the long continued descent of diverse parts of Powys in the heirs of
Cadelh, plead for him that he came justly and lawfully to it: for the Lordship
of Mowthwy being a part of Powys is enjoyed to this day, (by descent from
Cadelh.) And a great part thereof was held (until of late time) by Gray Lo:
Powys by like descent, and the rest of the possessions continued long in his
posterity and line, until by partition they were branched into diverse
families, whereof a great p^rt is now in the Crown by several means; howbeit
the sovereignty remained still in the heirs of Cadelh, as Prince of
Southwales, which appears by their chastising the defections, and taking
pledges for the obedience of the Lords of Powys, and such testimonies of
Sovereignty related by the writers of Northwales. It is alleged also by some
of them, that the possession of Powys was witheld by the heirs of Brochwel
Ysgythroc, who was Prince thereof about An: Dom. 617. If that were true, the^
Cad^lh did not take Powys by force from his brethren. But for the truth hereof
Roderic was lineall heir to Brochwel Ysgy^hroc, viz. son of M^rvyn Vrych, son
of Nest, sister and heir of Cyngen, son to Cadelh son to Brochwel Ysgythroc.
And thereby Roderic had both the Right and Possession of Powys. And therefore
until another Heir be found, or other desc^nts appear from Brochwel Ysgythroc
to Bledhyn ap Convyn, then by the line of Roderic the great, and all the
persons be mentioned that held Powys in all that time, other then the line of
Roderic; the belief of this allegation may be well suspended. And thus the way
is cleared to conclude upon this first point, that Cadelh was the Eldest and
sovereign Prince of Wales by the descending of Powys unto him.

Anarawd maintained to be the Eldest son of Roderic the great, and to have the
right of Sovereignty over all Wales, and so likewise his successors the Princes
of Northwales.
The Answer to the first Argument.
THE later Prince of Powys held that by inheritance from the third son of
Rod^ric the great, as Mr. Camden in these words declares* Powissiae principes
a tertio filio Roderici magni prognati hunc agrum (viz Mountgomerieshire) cum
aliis perpetua serie ad Ed: 2. temporat^nuerunt Therefore Cadelh prince of
Southwales (out of whose loins the later princes of Powys were descended) must
of necessity be the third son o^ Roderic the great, which degree of Birth the
white book of Hergest, Tho^ Maylor, Jo: Leland, Hum: Llwyd, Miles, and many
more both modern and ancient Authors do attribute to Cadell by name. And if to
avoid that, you will say that Camden by tertio filio did not mean Cadelh, the^
must Mervyn be the man, and consequently he must have issue, else the later
princes of Powys could not derive themselves from Roderic, and i^ he had issue,
then Cadell could not have Powys by inheritance, as being the Eldest of the 3
Brethren; what was got otherwise, is not the thing in question. And truly to
deny Mervyn's issue were injury in the highest degree offered to diverse
Gentlemen of Wales descending from him, and in particular to the reverend and
learned Judge, Sr. William Jones of Carnarvan shire Knight. and lately one of the
Justices of the Kings bench, who derives his pedigree lineally from Triffin the
son of Mervyn: and if you doubt whether Mervyn had such a son, a very ancient
parchment MS. written above 400 years ago will resolve you, O Driffin mab
Mervyn mab Rodri mawr ydd benyw gwehelyeith Riw o Leyn: that is, the inheritors
of Rhiw in Llyn are descended of Triffin the son of Mervyn, the son of Roderic
the great. Likewise in a Genealogy of the princes of Northwales, Southwales,
and Powys descending from Roderic the great, annexed to a Latin copy of the
Laws of Howel Dha, we find that Idwal voel son to Anarawd King of Northwales
did marry Avandreg the daughter of Mervyn King of Powis, upon whom he begat
Meuric the Ancestor of Lhewelin the great, prince of Northwales. But the
ancient and learned Giraldus Cambrensis in the relation of the Genealogy of the
said Llewelyn the great, has not only himself fallen into an error, but has
drawn many learned and grave Antiquaries that followed his tract into the same
snare, for speaking of this Avandreg, he says she was the Son and not the
Daughter of Mervyn, (the which Mervyn against all Antiquity and truth he
calls prince of Northwales,) and so ascends to Roderic the great by the
feminine line, making no mention at all of Idwal voel the son of Anarawd prince
of Northwales indeed, whom ancient writers term and style by the name of
Ludwallus rex omnium Wall^nsium, who also, as is said before, upon this
Avandreg the daughter (and not the son) of Mervyn king of Powis, begat the
forenamed Meurig, the Ancestor of Leoline the great. But for your better
satisfaction of the ground whence Giraldus did conceive this error, behold
these Rundlets following.

Rodric the great. Anarawd K. of North. wales. Idwal Voel K. of N.W.
Mervin K. of Powis. Avandrec daughter. Meiric.


Farther more, Caradoc Lancarvanensis a Southwales man, who lived about 500
years ago, says, that a son of Mervyn, named Haeardur, was drowned An: 953.
My last witness for Mervyn's issue will be George Owen Harry, another
Southwales man, who says, that Angharad daughter and heir of Llewelin the son
of Mervyn king of Powis was married to* Owen ap Howel dha (not to Mredyth the
said Owen's son, as you say,) his testimony, seeing he was an Antiquary of
Southwales, and a strong maintainer of Cadelh's Supremacy, ought to move you to
believe this point, especially seeing that this marriage is the only title that
the said Author ascribes to the posterity of Cadelh over Powis, which whether
it were lawful, as he is of opinion, or unlawful, as may be inferred out of
the words of the English History of the princes of Cambria, I leave others to
judge: it shall suffice me to prove that the Prince of Northwales, not of
Southwales had the Sovereignty of Powis, as does appear, when Owen surnamed the
great, prince of Northwales, having in his company Cadwalader ap Gr: ap Conan
his brother, and the Lord Rees prince of Southwales entered Powis, and chasing
Owen Cyveiliog Prince thereof out of the Country, seized upon all his
inheritance, and gave Caerenion to Owen Vachan to hold of the prince of
Northwales; the rest he reserved to himself, saving Dywalwern a little piece
of Cyueiliog, which he gave the Lord Rees, because (according to the book of
Conwey) the report went, that it stood within the confines of the said Rees his
dominions. Hereby it is manifest that the sovereignty of Powis did not belong
to the prince of Southwales; for if it had, questionless the Lord Rees then
present would have challenged the same as his right by inheritance: and that it
did of right appertain to the prince of Northwales may farther appear by an
ancient Inquisition taken at Bala before Humphrey Duke of Gl^cester, An: 6.
Hen. 6. Totum dominium de Powis tenetur de domino Rege Angliae, ut principe
Walliae per servitium Baronum, viz. de serto de Aberfro: and est in dominio de
Powis qued dam alind s^rtum vocatum Mathraval, quod simul cum omnibus terris
and tenementis eidem certo de Mathraval junctis and annexatis tenet de domino
rege ut principe Walliae per servitium praedictum in capite and de jure teneri
debet ut de certo de Aberffro praedicto. An other Inquisition found likewise at
Ba^a in the 48th year of Ed. 3. says that, Dominium de Powis iutegre ten^batur
de principibus Walliae in capite, viz. de certo de Aberffraw. Et est in dominio
de Powis quoddam alind certum vocatum Mathraval, quod simul cum omnibus terris
and tenementis eidem certo junctis and annexatis tenebatur, and adhuc de jure
teneri deb^ntur de certo de Aberffraw. And last of all, I must put you in mind,
that Cadell king of Powis, Father of Nest, Grandmother to Roderic the great,
was the son of Elisseu, and not of Brochwel Ysgithroc; for Brochwel, as you
say, was King of Powis An. 617. and this Cadell whom you will have to be his
Son, died An: 808. as Caradoc of Lancarvan affirms; so then, that one, or yet
both of them should reign very near 200 years is almost impossible, and
altogether untrue: for according to the ancient histories of Wales, Cadelh was
the son of Elisseu, the son of Cynllaw, the son of Beli, the son of Maelmynan,
the son of Selyf or Solomon, the son of Cynan, the son of Brochwel Ysgythroc:
King of Powis, and Earl of Chester. Thus you see your first Argument and
reason for Cadell's seniority and sovereignty quite overthrown, First, by the
testimony of Camden, declaring that the latter princes of Powis (the issue of
Cadell) were descended from the third son of Roderic the great, which degree of
birth the Authors above mentioned ascribe unto Cadell by name: Secondly by an
undoubted proof of Meruyn's issue: and lastly, by the sovereignty over Powis
proved to be in the princes of Northwales; all which infallibly conclude them
to be descended from the eldest son of Roderic the great.

The second Argument:
THat Southwales, which was the portion of Cadelh, was far larger then any of
the two other, almost double in quantity, containing 38. Cantreds, and 80.
Commots, whereas both Northwales and Powis contained but 29. Cantreds and 78.
Commots: and yet the Cantred of Buelht, and the forest of Dean are admitted in
that division to be in P^wis, which were part of Southwales, and assigned to
Cadelh. Southwales also was the far better Soil generally, and most
replenished with Noble men and Gentry. Therefore it was the fittest portion to
be assigned to the Eldest and Sovereign, and unfit for a younger brother upon
evident ground of reason.

The Answer to the second Argument.
TO find out the true proportion of Cadelh's inheritance, your Countryman Jo:
Asser Menevensis, that lived in Cadelh's time will with most approved Authority
direct us: Illo enim tempore and multo ante omnes regiones dextralis Britanniae
partis, ad Elfred regem pertinebant, and adhuc pertinent. Hemeid soilicet, cum
omnibus habitatoribus Demeticae regionis, and sex filiorum R^tri vi compulsus
regali se subdiderat imperio, Hovil quoque filius Ris rex Glegnising and
Brochmail atque Fernail filii Meuric, reges Gwent vi and tyra^^ide Eadred
comitis and Merciorum compulsi suapte eundem expetivere regem, ut dominium and
defensionem ab eo pro inimicis suis haberent. Helised queque filius Teudyr, rex
Brechoniae eorundem siliorum Rotri vi coactus, dominium regis praefati suapte
requisivit. Hereby it appears that Dyved (now called Pembrokeshire.)
Brechnock, Gwent and Glewising, had their several Kings in Cadell's time, so
that of a certainty his portion cannot exceed the two counties of Cardigan and
Carmardhen of old called the Kingdom of Cardigan, which country being then
the possession and Kingdom of Cadell, who was not yet in league with King
Alfred, Asserius mentions not. And Rees ap Theodor (the most powerful
prince, as you say, since Roderic the great's time) had no more in his
possession then those two counties, as Sr. Edward Stradling in the conquest of
Glamorgan makes good; all which containing scarce IX. Cantreds may seem far
inferior in quantity to Northwales, which in the days of Howell Dda contained
18. Cantreds, as Morgeneu y and and Kysnerth his son do aver in their book of
British laws. Neither will it avail you though you proved that Cad^lh's
sovereignty as chief prince of Southwales did extend to all the inferior
princes within Southwales; for so likewise did the sovereignty of ^narawd
conclude Cadelh and all Wales in general, as owing homage to him the first of
their line, by the ordiuance of Roderic the great mentioned in the Description
of Cambria, by Sr. Jo: Price, and confirmed also by the laws of Howel Dda.
Farther, I stand not so much upon the Fertility of Northwales as upon the
Situation and natural strength thereof against all invasions, being therefore
most fit and requisite for a sovereign prince in a troubled time, though well I
might call the Inland country of Northwales wherein the vallie of Clwyd
stretches it self 18. miles in length, and sometimes 4. 5. 6. and 7. in
breadth, to witness against you. Vallis haec (says Mr. Camden) a salubritate,
fertilitate, and amoenitate vere foelix; incolarum color est sanus, capitis
firma sinceritas, inoffensum oculorum lumen, and annosa admodum senectus. Ipsa
vero virentibus pratis, flaventibus arvis, creberrimis villis, and templis
spectantium oculis mirum in modum arridet, And also the I Will of Anglesea and the
vast Snowdon hills (that send so many thousands of Cattle yearly to England,
and no small number to Westwales) lest affection might overruled me Giraldus
your countryman, whose testimony you cannot except against, shall speak for me:
Est autem haec insula prae cunctis Cambriae finibus triticeo germine
incomparabiliter foecunda, adeo ut proverbialiter dici soleat lingua Britannica
Mon Mam Gymry, quod latin sonat, Mona matter Cambriae, quoniam aliis undique
terris deficientibus, haec sola gleba praepingui uberique frugum proventu
Cambriam totam sustentare consuevit. And in another place, Tantae^tiam and tam
immensae quantitatis esse perhibentur montes Eryri (that is Snowdon hills) ut
antiquo proverbio dici sol^at sicut Monam insulam h^minibus in annona, sic
Eryri in pascuis coactis in unum armentis omnibus totius Walliae sufficere
posse. Then if you look to the situation thereof, which you should have done,
together with these comparisons you shall find it to be farthest from the
English, a matter of great consequence in those days, and which is more, it
was and yet is the strongest country absolutely within the Is^ of Britain:
contrarily, Southwales is very weak in situation, and therefore open for the
invasion of all Strangers; but more especially of the Saxons, that bordered
even on the neck thereof. And yet it had another inconvenience worse then all
the rest, by reason whereof it was reputed even in those days to be far worse
then Northwales, though it were greater in quantity, and that is this:
Southwallia (says Giraldus) quanquam quantitate long major, propter nobiles
tamen qui vchelwyr quasi superiores viri vocantur, quibus abundabat, qui and
dominis rebels esse solebant, d minumque ferro detrectabant, deterior esse
videbatur. Is it likely then that Roderic the great would prefer his Eldest son
and sovereign prince of the Britains to a Kingdom that did not only want
natural fortification, but had also the unhappiness of having inhabitants,
whose condition and privileges disposed them to Rebellion. But if our opinions
in this case be conceived not authentic, as proceeding from prejudice, Mr.
Camden an indifferent person may be thought fit to decide the controversy. And
to say no more to this Argument, let your own Countryman Giraldus his
forementioned Incomparabiliter prevail upon you to be of another judgment.

The third Argument.
THat Howel Dha the eldest son of Cadelh, and succeeding him prince of
Southwales, did command the Archbishop of St. David's, and all the Bishops of
Wales, and chiefest of the Clergy to the number of 140. and all the Barons and
Nobility of Wales, and six of the most wise and best esteemed in every Commot
of Wales for the Commonalty, to assemble at his palace called Y tu gwyn ar Tas
in Dyved in Southwales, where with great solemnity he did ordain the Laws
whereby Northwales and Powis, and all the people throughout the whole dominion
of Wales were governed and ordered, until after the conquering of Rees ap
Theodor, that King Henry the first did plant the common law of England, first
in the counties of Glamorgan, and Pembrock, (which were conquered and made
Counties from that time,) and that the Lords Marchers as they won into Wales
did settle a form of Justice mixed of the common law and of the laws of Howel
Dha, yet so distempered (as justly may be said) with regal jurisdiction
permitted for the time by the King of England, that in the end it became as
intolerable to the Crown, as to the people, which laws of Howel Dha were
nevertheless entirely executed within so much of the principality of
Northwales as continued in the four ancient counties there, viz. Anglesey,
Carnarvan, Merioneth, and Flint, and in the counties of Carmarthen and Cardigan
in Southwales, until the subduing of Llewelyn ap Griffith the last prince of
Northwales, that King Edward the first ordained the statute of Ruthlan for
justice to be done in these six last recited counties (wherein all the
principality of Wales then remained,) howbeit many of the laws of Howel Dha
continued in force as well in those counties, as in the Lordships march* rs
until the Statute of Wales in 27. H. 8. even as some few do continue to this
day under the title of Customs. Upon all which it is also concluded, that to
give or ordain laws, and with these muniments of Authority, proves without
question a Sovereignty.

The Answer.
HOwel Dha prince of Southwales by reason of the incapacity (as you say in your
5th. Argument) of the Heir apparent of Northwales, took upon him the rule and
government of all Wales. Which being true, it is not to be marvelled at, if he
commanded the clergy and nobility of all Wales to assemble before him, that by
their counsel and advice he might reform the ancient laws of the Britains:
nor yet if the succeeding princes of Northwales, finding those laws good,
wholesome, and confirmed by the Sea Apostolic, and also such as did not
abrogate but confirm their Sovereignty over all Wales, embraced them, and
commanded their subjects to obey them duly, considering that his said Authority
was grounded upon his regency over Northwales, and the Heir thereof, as
manifestly appears when Howel Dha in his said laws says, that verbum regis
Aberfraw est verbum super omnes reges Walliae, and nullius verbum est super
ipsum. So that whereas you would derive a sovereignty to Howel Dha from his
power in making laws, you should first have suppressed or burnt all the Copies
of the laws of How: Dha, which give to the King of Northwales an absolute
sovereignty over all Wales.

The fourth Argument.
THat the Bishops of Northwales were created and consecrated in Southwales by
the Archbishop of St. David's, that they were his Suffragans, and subject to his
Sea. And therefore Roderic in the division, did aptly dispose the sovereign
jurisdiction temporal in the territory where the sovereign jurisdiction
spiritual was seated, which otherwise had been absurd, and would undoubtedly
have bred great troubles.

The Answer.
IN regard the Sovereignty of the Eldest son of Roderic extended over all
Wales, it is not material in what part thereof the Ecclesiastical supremacy
be seated: for be it in the territory of the third or second brother, it cannot
prejudice the Eldest that is Sovereign over all. Your Argument, did I hold it
firm, would persuade with me to make Edlstan the youngest son of Eghert to
have a sovereignty over his eldest brother Ethelwolph, as being King of Kent,
wherein is seated Canterbury, the chiefest Sea for spiritual jurisdiction: or
well might I gather that the king of Dyved, in whose Kingdom St. David's lay,
was superior to Cadelh and his successors, by reason of his good neighborhood
with the Archbishop.

The fifth Argument.
THat the prince of Southwales did seize the principality of Northwales, and
removed the princes thereof upon occasiou, or offense committed, as the said
Howel Dha did seize the same, partly by the incapacity of Meuric son of Edwal
voel, to govern and to stay the usurpation of others (upon that pretense)
whereby to preserve the general peace of Wales: and partly by forseiture, for
spoil that had been done by the prince of Northwales upon his countries of
Cardigan and Ystradgwy. This prince Howel, as the writers of Northwales do
record, was of a goodly behavior, just and discreet in his government, and
beloved of men; wherefore he obtained the attribute of Dha, which is in English
(the good,) whereby it is to be concluded probably, that his coming to the
principality of Wales was upon just and lawful grounds. Likewise Owen ap Howel
Dha his son prince of Southwales* did seize Northwales out of the hands of
Cadwalhon ap Jeuaf for usurpation and tyranny, and made Mredith his third son
Prince there, which, if it had been the sovereign seat, he would not have
permitted his younger son to enjoy it, and to become thereby his superior. And
in this point the writers of Northwales do obscure the truth with some art by
concealing this to be done by the power of the father ( prince of Southwales,)
and attributing the same wholly to the power of a third son, whereas it is
evident, that he had neither force nor authority to perform it, but as his
fathers minister and subject, whom his father thought good to honor with the
fruit of his valor and victory, being achieved propria manu not proprio
mart, more then the conquests of the famous prince Edward, called the black
prince, whose everlasting honors they are, but the possessory right of them
was to his fathers crown. And it is to be observed, that as the division of
Wales by Roderic the great did give the ground of the subduing thereof to the
crown of England, so it bred these preparatives thereunto; first the continual
usurpation of the Descendants of Anarawd upon his lawful heirs, Insomuch as
for 200 years after the division, five of that line did intermissively usurp
the government of Northwales, and only two lawful princes ruled there, and
those not past 12 years, if they be allowed to be the issue of Anarawd, which
some writers of Northwales do gainsay: in which licentious times one Aedan ap
Blegored, a mere private man, neither of the blood of the Prince, nor of the
Nobility, that any antiquity does record, intruded into the government, and
held it 12. years, until he was expelled by the prince of Southwales.
Secondly it gave the Danes and English opportunity to invade and weaken all the
parts of Wales, (who were often called in by the usurpers of Northwales to join
with them against the prince of Southwales.) By those occasions the princes of
Southwales as supreme lords of Wales, and for the general quiet and
preservation thereof, did seize and assume into their hands the government of
Northasales, wherein six of them ruled the said 200. years, which had not they
done, the government in all likelihood had been in that time translated from
the race of Roderic the great. But in the end of those 200 years, Rees ap
Theodor prince of Southwales with great valor and wisdom did overcome all
these long grown evils, and being the most powerful prince that was since
Roderic the great, and lineal heir to Cadelh, expelled Trahern ap Caradoc the
last usurper of Northwales, and placed Griffith ap Conan (who was held to be
the lawful prince of the house of Anarawd) in the quiet and settled possession
thereof: which honorable dealing was very ill requited by Griffith ap Conan
toward the son of Rees ap Theodor in his distress, as shall be after
declared. By all which may appear the general care of the princes of
Southwales over the whole dominion of Wales derived from their supreme power,
authority, and jurisdiction. For confirmation hereof, it is further to be
observed, that sithence the said division, no prince of Northwales did ever
rule in Southwales, or by any occasion did make claim to the principality
thereof: and therefore upon this disposing of the principality of Northwales by
the princes of Southwales, it is further concluded, that the princes of
Southwales were the sovereign princes of Wales.

The Answer.
IT is recorded by Caradocus, that Anarawd King of Northwales made a road into
the country of Cardigan and Ystradtywi, the possession of his brother Cadelh,
but being that the Author alleges not the cause thereof, as whether it were
lawful or unlawful, it might with better reason be said, that it was made for
the defect of Payment of the Tribute due to the crown of Abersraw from
Southwales, then such a Rebellion, as thereby forfeiture of Royalty should
ensue: and considering also that no chastisement was executed by Cadelh or
Howel Dha his son upon Anarawd, who lived long after, it may seem great rigor
and tyranny in him, and much to derogate from his title of Dha, that is, the
good, if he did deprive Idwal's son of his inheritance, for the offense of
Anarawd his grandfather, committed many years before his birth, not upon the
countries of Howel, as you say, but of Cadelh his father. Therefore if you hold
his coming to Northwales to be upon good and lawful grounds, it will be your
best course (rejecting offenses and forfeitures) wholly to stick to the
incapacity of the heir of Northwales, by reason whereof Howel's coming to
Northwales, whether it were as being next of blood, able, and worthy to
undertake such a charge, or by the appointment of his cosen Idwal, foreseeing
perhaps the weakness of his son, or else by the election of the people, was
good, just, and lawful. And in regard of his said regency over the house of
Northwales, and the right thereunto belonging, I do confess that he was the
sovereign prince of all Wales. But considering, that after his death the other
sons of Idwal Voel, and their successors the princes of Northwales recovered
and held (as I said before) as well the sovereignty of all Wales, as the rule
of Northwales, it plainly appears that the right of sovereignty belonged not to
Southwales. Moreover Owen the son of Howel Dha was never ruler of Northwales,
nor had any action against Cadwalhon ap Jeuaf, whereby to deprive him of his
Crown and Kingdom, as you say; neither is it likely, if he had so conquered
him, that he would prefer his yonngest son to the Government of that
Kingdom, lest by exalting the younger brother to honors and dignities above
the elder, discord and sedition might breed between them: and in a word, your
own countryman Caradocus, that lived about 250 years after this time,
attributes the overthrow of Cadwalhon ap Jevaf and conquest of Northwales to
the only power of Mredith ap Owen (who then in his Mothers right did rule all
Powis land, whereby his power to undertake that voyage may plainly appear) in
these words. Mredyth ap Owein a lathawdh Cadwallawn ap Jevaf drwy fuddugoliaeth
a chaffael meddiant oi gyuoeth, sef gwyneth a Mon a ddarystngawdh iddaw: that
is, Mredith ap Owen slew Cad: ap Jeuaf in battle, and seized on his dominions,
for Northwales and the isle of Anglesey submitted to him. Here is no mention
had of Owen or his power, and therefore our writers of Northwales being only
Interpreters of your Caradocus, are free from that scandalous imputation that
you charge them with. And Lhewelyn ap Seissyllt prince of Southwales, who
overcame Aedan ap Blegowryd did not challenge the regency of Northwales, (for
Jago the son of Idwal the lawful heir, as is thought, was not as yet in full
age) as appertaining any way to the crown of Southwales, as you could wish it,
but as he was next heir of blood unto the said Jago; for as Caradocus says, he
was descended from the kings of Wales by the mother side, whose name was
Trawst, the daughter and heir of Elissau, the second son of Anarawd the eldest
son of Roderic the great, and by that means according to the same Author he
claimed and enjoyed the right of Northwales; therefore his coming to the rule
of that Kindome does not at all favor or confirm your Argument. And here I do
greatly marvel who those six Kings of Southwales were, that (as you say)
assumed to their hands the government of Northwales, for Mredyth ap Owen was
neither king nor heir apparent of Southwales, when he conquered Northwales: and
Howel ap Edwyn was King of Southwales when Griffith ap Lhewelyn undertook the
rule of Northwales; and in like manner Mredyth ap Owen ap Edwym governed
Southwales, when Biedhyn ap Cynfyn received the principality of Northwales at
the hands of the king of England, doing homage for the same, whereby it is
evident that these three princes were not of the six that you mention, and
Howel Dha with Lhewelyn ap Seissyllt though they were most worthy and noble
princes, yet cannot exceed the number of two, therefore the number of six must
needs be a mistake. It is also to be observed that these princes Mredyth,
Griff: Bledhyn, and Trahayarn ap Caradoc, after they had settled themselves in
the sure and quiet possession of Northwales, seized to their hands the Kingdom
of Southwales, and held the same either by strong hand and usurpation, or by
state of inheritance, or else in the right of Sovereignty over all Wales that
belonged to the crown of N^rthwales. Usurpers they were not, if it be true,
that as you say (in the end of your Treatise) Southwales did never fail of a
lawful Prince to govern it, till the period thereof by the fatal overthrow of
prince Rees ap Theodor: lawful heirs also to Cadelh they cannot be, for the
posterity of En^on the son of Owen king of Southwales, and eldest brother to
the said Mredyth were living, and therefore they could not challenge Southwales
by inheritance; it remains then of necessity that their title to Southwales
was grounded on the sovereignty that belonged to the king of Northwales whereof
they were princes. But howsoever the matter went, it is certain that they were
kings of Northwales, and being so, they took into their hands the regiment of
Southwales, whereby I do conclude it was a gross error in you, when you say,
that no prince of Northwales did ever rule in Southwales, or by any occasion
did claim the principality thereof: seeing the examples of four princes must
cause you to confess either, your ignorance or partial censure. Lastly, you
say that Rees* ap Theodor prince of Southwales with great valor and wisdom did
expel Trahern ap Caradoc the last usurper of Nerthwales, and placed Griff: ap
Conan in the quiet possession thereof: but antiquity and the truth will inform
us otherwise; for in the life of Griff. ap Conan we may read, that when the
said Griffith with his navy landed at Portcleis near St. David's, your powerful
prince Rees had been a little before deprived of his Kingdom by Trahayarn king
of Northwales, and others, and for safeguard of his life had covertly taken
Sanctuary at St. David's: but hearing of Griffith's approach, he came with the
Bishop and all the clergy of that house to meet him, where Rees fell upon his
knees before Griffith, and acquainting him with his ill fortunes, desired his
help and aid to fight with those his adversaries, promising to do him homage,
and to reward him with the moity of his Revenues: and Griff: pitying his
estate yielded to his request, and having overthrown in battle his enemies, he
installed Rees in the quiet possession of Southwales, entered and destroyed
Powis with fire and sword, and recovered the Kingdom of Northwales his due
inheritance: here withal I find an entry made to Powys by a prince of
Northwales before the fatal overthrow of Rees ap The^dor, which you deny in
your first Argument.

The sixth Argument.
THat the kings of England did ground their title to the principality and
sovereignty of Wales upon the conquering of Rees ap Theodor prince of Wales in
the reign of Rufus, and not upon the subduing of Lhewelyn ap Griffiu in the
reign of Edward the first, as the writers of Northwales do allege: for from
the conquering of Rees ap Theodor all the withstanding of the power of the
kings of England in Wales was termed by them Rebellion and Treason, which
before always had the name of War. And thenceforth the Kings of England did
give Seigniories and possessions in Wales to their English subjects, and so the
Lords Marchers began: and thenceforth were the strong Castles, and Forts
erected, and Garrisons planted in all parts of Wales, wherein either the Kings
of England, or the Lords Marchers did set footing, which grounded in the Kings
of England a resolution to prosecute and accomplish the absolute conquest of
Wales. And thereby the bishopric of St. David's, and by that sea all the rest
of the Bishoprics of Wales were brought under the jurisdiction of Canterbury.
And thereupon Griff. ap Conan, and the rest of the princes of Northwales
succeeding, yielded to the kings of England submission for that principality,
and to hold the same of the crown of England, and gave them pledges to abide in
their peace. And the kings of England were stayed from the absolute conquest of
Northwales, chiefly by their unsettled state in England, being full of
troubles, especially by the French and Barons wars, which were no sooner ended,
but that King Henry the third, and his son Edward. 1. took Northwales from
Lhewelyn the last, yet adding thereby no more to his former possession of the
principality of Wales (as the statute of Ruthlan does show) but terram de
Snowdon, and accounting Lhewelyn not an Enemy, but a Rebel, as appeared by
fixing his head on the highest turret of the Tower of London, and executing his
brother David for Treason, whereas the English did deliver the slain body of
Rees ap Theodor to a decent and honorable burial in the Abbey of Ystradflwr.

The Answer.
ALthough the Kings of England after the overthrow of Rees ap Theodor did term
the withstanding of their power in Wales rebellion and Treason, it cannot be
conceived that should be a sufficient ground for their title to the
principality of Wales: for what are those terms, but the hard censure of their
utter and always professed enemies in their greatest anger and indignation,
peradventure after some shameful overthrow and loss received, and therefore
not much to be regarded. But it cannot be granted they gave such names to those
wars; for the wars between King John (with his Successors the Kings of England)
and Lhewelyn the great, David his son, Owen Goch and Lhewelyn ap Griffith,
Princes of Wales, are always termed Guerrae, as it appears in the submissions
of David ap Lhewelyn, An: 1240. and 1241. of Owen Goch and Lhewelyn, An: the
adward of Ottobonus the Pope's Legate, An: 1268. and the agreement between
Edward the first, and the said Lhewelyn prince of Wales, An: 1277. do likewise
call those wars Guerrae, which does not in any Author signify Rebellion, as
must needs be acknowledged. Now that the kings of England thenceforth did give
Seigniories and possessions in Wales to their Subjects, who did erect strong
Forts, and Castles therein, it is confessed, as touching some part of the
inheritance of Rees ap Theodor; and it is also true, that before and after the
death of Rees ap Theodor, the Kings of England did vex and molest Griff: ap
Conan (as the Author of his Life averreth) and his successors the princes of
Wales, sometimes by craft and deceit, and sometimes with unjust wars; insomuch
that to purchase their peace and quietness, and not otherwise, the princes
were often content to yield up unto the Kings of England four Cantreds. This
with other hard dealings has been noted by diverse writers, and Henry the
second did not stick to confess the same, when he said, as Giraldus affirms,
Per vires nostras magnas injuriam and violentiam irrogemus Cambris, to which
force and violence, and not to any new sovereignty gotten by the overthrow of
Rees ap Theodor must be attributed what submission or acknowledgment of
sovereignty, that Griff. ap Conan and his successors the princes of Wales, did
to the kings of England, if any was demanded or performed over and above the
wonted and usual. It is also manifest, that the Archbishop of Canterbury did
obtein a supremacy over the Bishops of Wales shortly after the overthrow of
Rees ap Theodor, yet not by reason of this said overthrow, but of the
suggestion of false witnesses before Pope Eugenius in the Remensian Council,
whose Apostolical decrees all the churches in Europe obeyed in those days.
Moreover you urge out of the statute of Ruthlan that king Edward 1. added no
more to his former possessions of the principality of Wales by the conquest of
Leoline, but only Terram de Snowdon, whereas it does not so appear in any copy
of the said statute that ever I could find, and yet I have seen diverse in
Wales anciently written on parchment, both in the Latin and British tongues.
As concerning the dishonor done to the prince after his death, by fixing his
head on the highest turret of the Tower of Lond^n, Examples of this kind of
dealing with Princes we have frequent in histories: Tigranes King of the
Armenians, who lived under Tiberius Caesar, could not with all his kingly
titles, as Tacitus says, escape the common death of a Roman. Tacitus speaks
also in the 2d. book of his Annals, of Artavasdes King of Armenia, whom
Antonius having by treachery got into his power, loaded with chains, and
afterward put to death. Cyrus that great monarco of the Persians who being
overthrown and slain by Tomyris queen of the Scythians, had his head cut off,
and in great contempt and de^ision flung into a vessel full of of man's blood.
Ptolomy Ceraunus King of Macedon was in battle vanquished and slain by Belius
(a Britain as some are of opinion) who caused his head to be cut off, and
carried before him on the point of a spear round about the field in token of
victory and triumph. There be many the like examples in histories of Kings and
Emperors, whose bodies have been coursely handled by their enemies, who de
facto use them so, as being in their power, though de jure they ought not to
deal so with lawful princes. And here I may not pass over how that the Abbey
of Ystratflur, wh^re you say that the body of Rees ap Theodor was decently
buried, was not founded before the days of the Lo: Rees ap Griff. ap Rees ap
Theodor Prince of Southwales, as appears by his Charter made presently after
the foundation. Ego Rhesus Southwalliae proprietarius princeps venerabile
M^nasterium vocabulo Stradflur aedificare coepi, and aedificatum dilexi and
feci, res ejus auxi, and possessiones in quantum suffragante Deo volui, amplam
and omnem donationem quam eidem monasterio antea contuli, Anno iterum ab
Incarnatione Domini, 1184. scilicet praesentis scripti memoria stabilivi, tres
etiam sel^i scilicet Gruff. Rhesus, and Mredith candem donationem eodem tempore
and loco in manu Abbatis de Straflur obtulerunt. And in the year of our Lord
1164. (just 20. years before the date of the former charter,) as witnesses
the book of Conwey, it was first covented: Rees ap Theodor was slain Anno 1091.
whereby it appears that your Abbey was not founded 73 years after his death.
It remains now that I speak somewhat of the true and undoubted conquest of
Wales achieved by Ed. 1. as it appears by the power that he assumed over all
the inhabitants of Wales, after the fatal overthrow of Leoline the last prince
of the British blood; for of all the Kings of England he was the first that
altered the form of Government in Wales, he was the first that made the
statute of Ruthlan as a Law to govern the people of that country by; he also
created Edw: of Carnarvan his eldest son prince of Wales, who according to Mr.
Camden, and diverse more ancient writers, erat primus ex Anglico sanguine
Walliae princeps. Hereby it appears that W. Rufus was not the conqueror of
Wales, nor Rees ap Theodor the sovereign prince of Wales; for if Rees had been
the superior Prince, King W. Rufus, having learned of his Father the lesson of
a Conqueror, would in no case have omitted to accomplish those rites of a
Conqueror. Neither did the kings of England challenge the principality of Wales
by the conquest of W. Rufus, but by the achievement of Ed. 1. as it appears
first of all by the words of the statute of Ruthlan: Divina providentia (says
Ed. 1) quae in sui dispositione non fallitur, inter alia suae dispensationis
munera, quibus nos and regnum nostrum Angliae decorari dignata est, terram
Walliae cum incolis suis prius nobis jure feodoli subjectam jam sui gratia in
proprietatis nostrae domini^m obstaculis quibuscunque cessantibus totaliter and
cum integritate convertit, and corenae regni praedicti tanquam partem corporis
ejusdem anne^^ it and univit. Henry the fourth gives the title of Conqueror of
Wales to Ed. 1. in his laws against the Welshmen, made An: 2. H. 4. thus,
Nulle-Gall^is ait chastel, fortress ne maison defensive de son propre, ne de
autre agardere, autrement que n^scoit us^z en temps le Roy Ed: conqueror de
Galez: that is, No Welchman shall have castle, fortress, nor house defensive
of his own, nor of other to keep, otherwise then was used in the time of king
Edward Conqueror of Wales. The title of those Petitions made at Kenynten do
aver the same: Peticones de Kenynton factae apud Kenynton per homines
Northwalliae tam pro communitatibus comitatuum quam pro singularibus personis
exhibitae domino principi filio regis Ed: conquestoris Walliae, Auno regni
praedic: Ed. 33. And John de Delves in the 8. year of Ed: 3. lays open the
King's title to the principality of Wales in these words: Terra Walliae est
terra conquesta and conquisita fuit per dominum Edwardum nuper regem Angliae
proavum demini principis nunc per quem conquestum tota terra tam de dominio
quam in servitiis injuncta fuit and annexa coronae Angliae.

The seventh Argument.
AFter this conquest of Wales by the overthrow of Rees ap Theodor, and the
expulsion of his son Griff: ap Rees, who was forced to fly to Ireland, Griff:
ap Conan being then prince of Northwales, and of greatest power of any prince
there, sithence the said division, never stirred for the principality of
Southwales; which, if he had been the supreme Prince of Wales, by this occasion
he should most properly and justly have done; neither did any of the Princes of
Northwales succeeding him to the last prince Lhewelyn ap Griffith make claim
thereunto: Albeit they were all of them, one after the other, the most
powerful, worthy, and fortunate Princes that had ruled in Northwales since the
division, as Owe^ Gwyn^th, David ap Owen, Lhewelyn ap Jorwerth, David ap
Lhewelyn, and that they had the advantage in their times of the alteration of
seven Kings of England, and a troubled state there to have attempted it. But
Griff: ap Rees returning from Ireland (to recover his patrimony) in the
weakness of his fortunes retired to Griff. ap Conan then prince of North
wales, whose daughter he had married, and had by her worthy sons. Of whose
return and purpose Henry the first King then of England understanding, knowing
him to be the undoubted heir of Wales, and that he would be received by the
people, sent for the prince of Northwales, and drew him in, to yield to the
delivery of Griff: ap Rees into his hands, which the Prince attempted, and had
effected accordingly, but that Griff: ap Rees (upon some notice thereof) hardly
escaped into the Sanctuary of Aberdaron, whence the prince would have forced
him, but that he was rescued by the whole clergy of the country, and thence
conveyed to Southwales, whereupon it is evident, that if Griff. ap Conan had
been sovereign prince of Wales (de jure) first no necessity compelling him, he
would not have been so undiscreet as to have put himself into the King of
England's hands (who claimed the sovereignty thereof,) neither would the king
have suffered him to depart, seeing by detaining him he might more easily have
compassed his end. Secondly, the Prince of Northwales would not have been so
injurious to himself, as to have delivered Griffith ap Rees (if he had been his
homager of Southwales) whereby to divest himself of his right thereunto by his
own act. But it is plain that the prince of Northwales in respect of the
conquering of Rees ap Theodor, having submitted himself to the King of England
(as his homager,) and to his peace, came to the king at his sending for him,
knowing well that the King was careless of him as touching the right of
Sovereignty of Wales. And so he yielded (to make his peace the firmer with the
King) to the betraying of his Superior, of his guest and son in law, and the
son of him who got him the possession of the principality of Northwales.
Hereupon Griff* ap Rees put himself in arms, and so held himself during King
Henry's time, and a part of King Stephens, recovering a great part of
Southwales, and died, leaving his troubles and possessions to his son, called
the Lord Rees, who in the end made peace with king Henry the second, and
surrendered to him his title to the principality of Wales, bringing the chiesest
of the Nobility and Gentry of Southwales to Gloucester, where they submitted
themselves to the King, and received their lands and possessions by the Kings
grant, to hold of him. And the Lord Rees accepted of the King to be his Justice
of Southwales, which office continued until 27. of King Henry the 8. and ended
in the Lord Ferrers of Chartley.

The Answer.
FOr Answer hereunto, you must first conceive that Griffith ap Conan at the
time of Rees ap Theodor's death, was not so powerful as you make him to be:
for as we read in the Author of his life, he was then but newly escaped out of
the Earl of Chester's prison, where he had remained 12. years. Secondly, that
notwithstanding his unsettled state in Northwales (by reason of his said
imprisonment,) and the King of Englands displeasure conceived against him, he
joined forces with Cadwgan ap Bledhyn his son in law, and entering Southwales,
after they had slain in battle a great number of Normans, a great part
thereof though not all became subject to Cadwgan, as the British history of the
Princes relates; wherein also we find, that afterward Griff: ap Conan sent
his sons Owen and Cadwalladr twice to Southwales, being one time accompanied
with 6000 Footmen, and 2000 Horsemen, they took the Castles of Walter Espec,
and Richard de la Mare, and also the Castles of Aberystwyth, Dinerth, and
Caerwedros, subduing the whole country to the town of Cardigan; and after the
slaughter of 3000 Normans in the field, they chased the rest out of the
Country, restoring Griffith ap Rees to his father's inheritance, and the
ancient inhabitants to their former dwellings. Which is sufficient evidence
that they made claim to Southwales as sovereign Princes. And Griffith ap Conan
cannot be imagined to interest himself in the cause, (especially in his
weakness) by sending his subjects to the field, but that he challenged the
sovereignty thereof as due by inheritance, and his son Owen Gwynedd prince of
Northwales would not have entered Southwales, in the first year of his reign, as
the Chronicle witnesses, overthrowing the Castles of Ystratmeuric, Stephens,
and Hwmphreys, and burning the town of Carmarthen, and compelling part of Dyved
to pay tribute unto him, (as Gwalchmai ap Meilir that lived in that age has
recorded) retaining most of Cardigan in his own hands, without claim or
pretense of title. Likewise when Henry 2. King of England made his third
Expedition against Wales, the Lord Rees and the power of Southwales, and all
the other Lords of Wales with their forces marched against the King under the
conduct of the Prince of Northwales, which directly proves his sovereignty
over all Wales. After these tumults and turmoils, Lhewelyn ap Jorwerth Prince
of Northwales, to prevent all doubt that might arise concerning his right, made
all Southwales and Powis swear fealty unto him, as the book of Conwey makes
good, wherein we read that they acknowledged the like fealty to David his son,
and Lhewelyn the last Prince. But as concerning the unkind dealing of Griff: ap
Conan with Gr: ap Rees, and Gr: ap Conan's going to the King of England, I
cannot see how that deserves an answer as an Argument for the sovereignty in
the Princes of Southwales. Lastly you affirm that the Lord Rees surrendered his
title to the principality of Wales to the King of England: which seems unto me
most improbable, considering he would not voluntarily depose himself of such
royal pre-eminence and sovereignty, without he were brought to such extremity
that there were no other remedy; whereas it is evident that the Lord Rees was
in great favor with King Henry the second at the time you mention, and had
been for many years before; witness the Office of being Justice of Southwales,
which the King had given him three years before that peace at Gloucester, as the
book of Conwey mentions: then also that he brought to the King's peace at
Glecester no lords of Northwales or Powis, but few of Southwales, such as had
formerly offended the King; whereby it appears that his said resignation, if
there were any such, extended no farther then his title of Southwales only, and
yet in regard that all the English writers do term and style the said Lord
Rees King of Southwales, even to the last period of his life, I cannot readily
believe that there was any such surrender made, until the same do appear by
some Authentic record.

The eighth Argument.
THat the Princes of Northwales (though some late writers of those parts call
them Princes and Kings of Wales) did not write themselves so, nor were taken to
be so in their time, when there was fit occasion to set forth their title. But
ever since the conquering of Rees ap Theodor they did acknowledge this title
from the Kings of England, as may appear by the said submissions and
transactions between the kings of England and the Princes of Northwales, from
the death of Rees ap Theodor to the death of Lhewelyn the last prince, even as
they are related by the writers of Northwales. And which makes it more
evident, when the Pope did absolve Lhewelyn ap Jorwerth from his oath of
obedience made to King John, and David ap Lhewelyn from his oath of obedience
made to King Henry the third, he gave them the title of Princes of Northwales
only, whereas both the Princes would have sought, and the Pope would have
yielded them the title of Princes of Wales, (in that case especially for the
larger extent of their absolutions) if there had been ground for it. Likewise
it appears by the excommunication of Lhewelyn ap Iorweth, when as he
persisted in action against King John, after the Pope had made his end with the
King, that the Pope styled him Prince of Northwales only: and the color that
those writers do take to term them of Northwales Princes of Wales was, for
that after the subduing of Rees ap Theodor, the people of Wales had no other in
their distresses to resort unto for protection but the Princes of Northwales.
And in that respect, and not otherwise, there being then no Princes of
Southwales, Lhewelyn ap Iorwerth Prince of Northwales being incited by the Pope
and Barons against King John, did assume a command in most parts of Wales: but
it ceased in short time, and he submitted himself and his country to King
Henry the third.

The Answer.
IT it is certain, that the Princes of Northwales, howsoever they did lay down
their titles, were always reputed and taken to be the sovereign Kings of
Britain, and Princes of Wales, for Caradoc Lancarvan in Glamorganshire
speaking of Anarawd prince of Northwales, gives him the title and honor of
King of the Britains, and chief King of Wales, as is manifest in the ancient
copies of his History, Idwall oel his son is called by William Malmesbury and
others, Rex omnium Wallensium. The same style, or the like in effect, Caradocus
attributes unto the sons of Idwal, Howel ap Jevaf, Meredith ap Owen, and
Bleddyn ap Cynvyn, Princes of Northwales. Trhayarn ap Caradoc is called King of
Wales by George Owen Harry, a Gentleman of Southwales. Griff: ap Conan, whom
Mr. Camden calls princeps Walliae, was acknowledged by Rees ap Theodor
himself to be Brenhin Brenhincedh Cymru, that is, King of the Kings of Wales,
as the Author of Griffiths life averreth; whereby it clearly appears, that the
said Rees prince of Southwales pretended no right to the Sovereignty of Wales.
And Caradocus also says that Griff: ap Conan prince of Northwales was p^nna
brenhin ac amdhiffynnwr a thangnefedhwr Crmruoll: that is, the chiefest King,
defender, and peacemaker of all Wales. Leoline the great also is by Matthew
Paris, Mat: Westminster, Polidor, and all our British Antiquities termed prince
of Wales, and sometimes king of Wales, as in an old British Ode dedicated to
Lhewelyn, by one Encon wan, a Bard of that age, is extant, wherein he is called
Gwir frenhin Cymru, that is, the true or natural king of Wales. And David
Benvras a Bard of great estimation in his time, in the funeral Elegy of David
Lhewelyn's son, calls him mab brenhin Cymru, that is, the son of the king of
Wales. In like manner Prince David, and Leotine the last, are termed most
commonly Princes of Wales by all Authors. And here I may not pass how that our
great Antiquary Mr. Seldom in his notes upon Mi: Draiton his Polilbion, gives
our Princes from Anarawd to the last prince the name and title of princes of
Wales: adding withal, that after the division among Roderic Mawr's sons, the
principality was chiefly in Northwales, and the rest as tributaries to the
Prince of that part. Seeing therefore that the princes of Northwales, even from
Roderic's time to Lhewelyn ap Griffith, were reputed and taken to be the
undoubted Princes and Kings of Wales, I cannot be induced to change my opinion
upon bare pretenses, be they never so specious. Furthermore it is confessed,
that the Princes of Northwales did acknowledge as well the principality of
Wales, as the title thereof to the kings of England, yet not only after the
death of Rees ap Theodor, but many hundred years before, as it appears by
tribute paid by our Princes unto the kings of England in acknowledgment
thereof: for in the days of the old Britains, Tair talaith (as we find in an
old British Manuscript, and in the British Triades) a dheleid y dala wrth goron
Lundain, un ym-Henrhyn Rhionydhyny Gogledh, ar ail daleith in Aberfraw, ar
drydedh in Gerniw: that is, three Coronets ought to be held of the Crown of
London, the one was the Crown or Coronet of Penrhynrhionydd in the North, the
second was of Aberfraw, and the third that of Corawall. And touching the Pope's
absolution of Lhewelyn ap Jorwerth from an oath of obedience to the king of
England, by stiling him Prince of Northwales; whence you infer, that he was not
Sovereign of any other part, else the Pope would have given it him in his
style, it concerns you, before you make good your conceit herein, to propose
unto us the Pope's own words in the Original, and then to show your self to be
of his Counsel, that when he named Northwales the chiefest seat, you might be
sure he did thereby intend to take away the Sovereignty over the rest of Wales.
And that Northwales exceeded Southwales in respect of supremacy, you may be
easily convinced, if you look back into those times when the Britains lost the
crown and scepter of London, (as we find in Prawf Ynad, being an ancient MS:
containing the old laws of the Britains;) Then by a general assembly of the
men of Gwynedh, Powys, Deheubarth, Evas, Morganw^, and Sersyllwe, it was
ordained, that Aberfraw in Northwales should be the chiefest seat, and the king
thereof the sovereign King of all the British Princes. And King Howel Dha in
his Laws mentions a tribute due to the king of Northwales from the kings of
Southwales and Powis* whereby, and by the inquisition before specified, it is
apparent, that the title of Aberffraw or Northwales in effect is as large,
ample, and honorable as the title of all Wales.

The ninth Argument.
IF King Edward the first of England had not accounted Wales to be his by the
conquest of Rees ap Theodor, he might have assumed against Lhewelyn ap Griff.
the title of M^rtimer his subject in the right of Gwladice his wife, sole
sister and heir of David ap Lhewelyn, the last lawful prince of Northwales,
(for Griffith ap Lhewelyn his eldest Brother, father to Lhewelyn the ^^st
Prince, was base born:) But neither did the King think good to borrow that
title; nor did the Mortimers (albeit they were raised to be Ear^s of March, and
becoming the strongest subjects in alliances and kindreds, augmented the same
by marrying the sole daughter and heir of the Duke of Clar^nce, whereby they
had after the crown of England) ever claim the principality of Wales; yea
though they were in disgrace with the state of England, and were in action
against Henry the fourth, which such mighty persons would hardly have omitted,
if the house of Northwales had had good right to the principality of Wales.
Neither would the policy of the State of England have suffered the rising of
that house, which by an undoubted right to Wales, might have bereaved them
thereof; yet such right as they had is now lawfully vested in the crown by king
Edward the fourth, as heir to Mortimer.

The Answer.
IT appears in the statute of Ruthlan, that Edward 1. did not claim or
account the principality of Wales to be his by the overthrow of Rees ap
Theodor, for the assumes the glory of the conquest of Wales to himself, as is
manifest before in my answer to the 6. Argument, whereunto for your better
satisfaction in this point I remit you. And the reason that he borrowed not the
title of Mortimer his subject, (although it be a thing seldom or never heard
of, that the titles of Kingdoms should be borrowed or lent,) and that his said
subject himself did not seize upon the said principality from Leoline the last,
as his right by inheritance, was, because that Mortimer had no right thereunto:
for Gwlades his wife was the sole sister of Griffith, the eldest son of
Lhewelyn the great, who left behind him diverse children, and not of David,
according to your allegation, as by most strong arguments and ancient authority
shall appear, I doubt not, but to your full satisfaction. And first of all
Ralph Lord Mortimer of Wigm^re the husband of Gwlades dhu did procure with all
his might the deliverance of Griffith out of his Brother Davia's prison, and
also labor for his installment in the principality of Wales, as is apparent in
Matthew Paris, which he would never have done, it his wi^e had been the sole
sister and heir of David; for by the raising of Griffith to the throne of
Wales, he should not only depose David, but also most indiscreetly exclude
himself from being heir apparent to the principality of Wales, and next to
rule after David, who had no issue. Secondly, the Lord Mortimer, after the
death of prince David, made no claim to the principality, which in no w^se he
would have omitted, if he had been his heir apparent, and the king of Englands
nephew, as you pretend, who for the recovery of his right would minister unto
him sufficient aid both in men and money. But this neglect infallibly denotes,
that Gwlades with her posterity was not the heir of David, seeing that Leoline
held that peaceably with the consent of the King. And in an old book written
above 200 years ago, I found the pedigree of Richard Duke of York, father of
king Edward the 4. wherein the Dukes descent is first brought to the Mortimers
by Anne his Mother, and from the Mortimers to the Princes of Wales by the said
Gwlades, as being sister and heir of Griffith and not of David, even thus:
Leolinus fuit princeps Walliae, and pater Gladys ddu, haeres suus fuit
Griffinus princeps Walliae, qui habuit quatuor filios, Lew^linum (ille fuit
ultimus princeps Walliae,) Owinnm, David, and Rodri, qui decesserunt sine
haered bus: ideo revertamur ad Gladys Dhu, quam Radulphus Mortimer duxit in
uxorem. Lewelyn was Prince of Wales, and the father of Glaays ddu, his heir was
Griffith Prince of Wales, who had 4. sons, viz. Lewelyn the last Prince of
Wales, Owen, David, and Rodri, who dyed without heirs; therefore let us come
back again to Gladys ddu, whom Ralph Mortimer married. Hereby it appears that
Griffith was L^welyn ap Jorwerth's son and heir, and therefore born in Wedlock,
and that his four sons leaving no Heirs (as that Author says,) the right of
the principality descended to the posterity of Gwladus, which directly proves
she was sister of the whole blood to Griffith, and not to David, of whom the
Author makes no mention at all; accounting him and his sisters (some of whose
posterity live at this day) no better then Bastards. Thirdly our ancient books
of pedegrees do with one consent affirm that the children of Leoline ap Jor:
were Griffith and Gwlades dhu, whose mother was Tanglwyst the daughter of
Lhowarch goch of Ros: David Prince of Wales, Gwenlliant, Angharad, and Marvred,
whose Mother was Joan, the Daughter of King John. The white book of Hergest, a
very fair and ancient parchment Manuscript, says, that prince Lhewelyn wedded
one Tanglwyst the daughter of Llowarch Lord of Anglesey, and begat by her
Griff. and Gwladys dee. Gwilym Tew that flourished in the days of Henry 6.
has written that Leolin ap Jorwerth begat Gwladus ddu upon the daughter of
Llowarch goch, which was the mother of Griffith. And last of all I find it
noted in an old manuscript thus* Lewelinus Gervasii filius princeps Walliae,
primo desponsavit Tanglwyst filiam Lhowarch Vychan, de qua genuit Griffith and
Gwlades ddu quondam uxorem Radulphi de Mortuomari, post mortem dictae Tanglwyst
idem L^welynus desponsavit Joannam filiam Johannis regis Angliae, de qua genuit
David principem, and Gwenlliant uxorem Jo: Lacie comitis Lincolnia, and
Angharad primo desponsata Johanni, de Brewys domino de Brechon, post cujus
decessum desponsata fuit Malgoni Vachan ap Maelgon ap Rees, and ex eadem uxore
genuit filiam quae maritata est Johanni Scotico comiti Cestriae qui fuit nepos
Ranulphi comitis Cestriae ex part sororis sui. Here is (you see) most
infallible proof, that Gwlades was not the sole sister and heir of David, but
the only sister of Griffith (Lh^welyn the great his eldest son) who by equity
should have succeeded his father in the principality of Wales; although you and
others do aver that he was a Bastard, but how truly, I appeal to the
judgment of impartial Antiquaries: for do but equally consider whether a
Bastard would offer to disquiet his father and Prince, because he intended that
his lawful heir should succeed him in his dominions; or presume to bandy with
the legitimate heir for his due inheritance; or whether the King of England
would maintain such an execrable quarrel against his (natural) nephew, or
the Lords of Wales against their true and legitimate prince in a Bastard's
behalf. These circumstances might satisfy, that Griffith was not only born in
wedlock, but also the right and proper prince of Wales by inheritance. Consider
likewise how Lhewelyn called all the Lords and Barons of Wales before him to
Ystratflur, and caused them to swear to be faithful subjects, and to do homage
to David his son, and that long before his death; which had been needless and
frivolous, if David had been his heir, and Griff: his bastard: consider I say,
how that Henry the third immediately after the death of Griffith, assuming* the
title of his said prisoner into his own hands, entitled his eldest son Edw: to
the principality of Wales, accounting David no lawful prince, as it appears
thereby: yea and how, that neither the Bruses Lords of Brechnock. Lacies Earls
of Lincoln, nor any other that married Prince David's sisters of the whole
blood, pretended any right to the principality of Wales after his death, though
he left no issue or his body to survive him, which such mighty persons would
hardly have omitted, if David had been the true heir of Leoline the great, and
lawful prince of Wales, ^urthermore David Benvras in a funeral Elegy to
Lhewelyn and his two sons, gives them in general the name of Princes, and
prefers Griff: before David. Whereupon I do conclude, that if Griff: had been a
bastard, in all likelihood the Bard would not presume to prefer him before
David, being legitimate; neither have given him the title of Prince, but that
it was his Birthright. Again Polydor Virgil in the 16. book of his History of
England, denotes that Griff: was his fathers lawful heir, and that David was
an usurper of the principality upheld by the King of Englana's favor in these
words. Id temporis Lewelinus Walliae princeps e vita migravit, deinde inter
Gruffinum and David filios ejus de principatu disceptatum est; quem ad ultimum
David, etsi minor natu, favente Henrico, assecutus est: and a little after:
multos Wallorum miserebat casus Griffini, qui per proditionem avito principatu
fraudatus in carcere esset, insidebatque in illorum animis tanti facinoris
memoria. Add hereunto how Leolinus Gerva^ii filius desponsavit Tanglwist, de
qua genuit Griffith, as I said before: add I say the testimony of the book of
Hergest before mentioned, with the which agrees John Griff: Eyton, an Author of
above an hundred and fifty years antiquity. Here I might cite the opinion of
Guttun Owen and the Bards, who with one consent do testify, that Gr: was his
fathers eldest son and heir apparent, whose testimonies, seeing their function
was nothing else but truly to decant the famous deeds and true pedegrees of the
Princes and Nobility of Wales, I hold it good reason that we follow and
prefer before the traditions of Strangers, who most commonly being enemies to
the Welchmen were careless of their affairs, and therefore apt to err in
relating their histories, especially since they looked upon it as their
interest to conceal or extenuate, rather then declare their glory. And the
Translators of the Chr^nicle of Wales, tracing their steps, and forgetting the
fidelity of Translation, added at their pleasure* that Griffith was a Bastard,
and that Gwlades was the sister of David going besides the old text wherein you
shall find no such matter. Also Bastards by the laws of Howel Dha were
excluded from any share of inheritance with their Brethren legitimate, but
Gruff: as Dr. Powell out of Math: Paris relates, claimed a portion of his
fathers inheritance according to the customs of Wales, even so much as of
right ought to appertain unto him. Which words do insinuate that he was ready
to prove his Father and Mothers marriage lawfully consummated. And David
confesses a portion due to his Brother, when in the third article of his
submission to H. 3. he says, Item I, and the said Griffith, and either of us,
shall hold our portions of land of our said sovereign Lord the King in capite.
Lastly, the Bastards of the Princes of Wales were not tolerated to bear their
fathers Arms; and if permitted, yet not without difference, as may be observed
in the Coats of Madoc the son of Gwenwynwyn Lord of Powis, David goch the son
of David Lord of Denbigh and Fradhsham; Eneon and Cynwric twins, the sons of
Mad: ap Mred: Prince of Powis; and Tegwared y bais wen being the Bastard of
Prince Lhewelyn ap Jorwerth had therefore a peculiar Coat of Arms given him and
his posterity, to wit, Ar. a cheveron S. charged with 3. Mullets pierced: But
Griffith father of Llywelyn the last Prince, gave his fathers Coat without any
change or difference at all, and so did his progeny after him, which proves
that he was lawfully born. These reasons and testimonies do persuade me to
think that Griffith was unworthily defamed of Bastardy, and de^eated of his
Birthright under that pretense. But in regard herein I thwart the judgment of
good Antiquaries both ancient and modern, I leave the matter to a farther
debate.

The tenth Argument.
THE late writers of Northwales cannot agree whether Mervyn or Anarawd were
elder. Mr. Humphry Lloyd following Giraldus, prefers Mervyn; Doctor Powel,
Anarawd. How can they then fitly decide this point, or conclude against Cadelh
to be the eldest? It is probable that Giraldus living in Henry 2ds. time, being
a native of Wales, and best seen of any (as his works do show) in the
antiquities thereof, and living in a time when there were more store of them
then now are, or have been in this last age, and otherwise a great learned man
and Bishop of St. David's, had as good grounds and helps to prove for Mervyn, as
any later writer for Anarawd. Therefore upon this doubt and uncertainty, which
of these two were elder, it is safest for the truth to agree upon so good
authorities and grounds of reasons for Cadelh to be the eldest, which is
confirmed also by the authentic Authority of a country man of Northwales,
David Nantmor, the famous Bard, who was and still is of such estimation in
Northwales, as none will contradict any thing written by him. Neither would he
have declared the truth so plainly, if there had been any doubt in the matter.
And thus he writes:

Tri meib i Rodri meun tremyn i keid
Cadelh, Nerawd, Mervyn.
Rhannodh of yr hwn oedh un
Rhodhiad holl Kymry rhydhyn.
Rhannodh a gadodh er gwelh, dawn, yfydh
Dinefwr i Gadelh
Ymab hynaf oi stafelh
Pennaf o wyr pwyvn welh.
Nerawd wr gwastawd dan go, in gyfan
A gafas Aberffro
May dayoni Duw yno
Fe biau i bryniaw ay bro.
Gwir gwir a dhoydyr i dhyn, paen ifank,
Powys cafas Mervyn
Lhymar modh yr adrodhyn
Ytreir rhwyng y trywyr hyn.
In English thus.

Three sons we find were unto Roderi,
Whom Cadelh, Nerawd, Mervyn men do call,
Divide he did, that was a Monarchy
Of Cambria a gift between them all.
Divide and leave for best (O justly done!)
Dinevowr unto Cadelh did he then
Within his bower the first begotten son,
(And who so good) the chiefest of the men.
And courteous Anarawd did possess
Aberffro for his portion, mark you this,
Whom God I pray with goodness all to bless,
Both hills and dales the same his own it is.
The tale is true, yea, true it came to pass,
That Powis should young Mervyn's portion be,
And thus for truth the very manner was,
How all divided stood between them three.
The Answer.
I cannot think it reason from the doubt of Northwales writers whether Anarawd
or Mervyn were the eldest son of Roderic the great, to conclude Cadelh to be
the eldest; especially seeing neither our writers nor any else do make any
thing for Cadelh* and also that all in general do agree, that the King of
Northwales, howsoever he were called, was the eldest of the Brethren. Not only
Dr. Powel, but a multitude of most ancient writers do prefer Anarawd to the
Kingdom of Northwales, as our ancient Bards and writers of Genealogies;
Illorum enim (says Dr. Powel) constans assertio est Anaratum primogenitum
principem fuisse Venedotiae. The ancient Author of Griffith ap Conan's life,
brings the pedigree of the said Griffith lineally to Anarawd. Meilir Brydydh
(that flourished in William the Conqueror's time) averres the said Griffith to
be descended of Anarawd. Caradocus Lancarvanensis affirms that Anarawd the
eldest son of Roderic the great was King of Northwal s. And last of all Ni^nius
the old British writer and Disciple of Elv dugus, who lived in the days of
Roderic and his children, says thus: Anaraught rex Moniae (i.e.) Mon, qui
regit modo regnum Wencdociae regionis (i.) Gweinedh. Therefore Giraldus
Cambrensis with his followers Leyland and Lhwyd, must needs be in an error,
when he gives his voice for Mervyn. And truly Giraldus Cambrensis, though in
antiquity he were most expert and skillful, yet seems not a little to be
ignorant of the true history of Roderic the great and his children: for besides
the former error in the 2d chapter of his book, entitled, Descriptio Cambriae,
he avers that the said Roderic was the cause of the division of Wales into the
three kingdoms of Northwales, Southwales, and Powis, whereas it is apparent,
that the said three kingdoms had their several Kings many years before his
birth, as Dr. Pow^l most truly proves in his notes upon the said chapter: then
also he says, that Cadelh, to whom Roderic had given Southwales for his
portion, survived Anarawd and Mervyn, whereby he got the monarchy of all Wales.
Cadelh (says he) praemortuis frat^ibus totius Walli^ monarchiam obtinait, And
Carad^cus a more ancient writer testifies, that Cadelh died 6. years before
Anarawd, with whom agrees your countreyman George Owen Harry, and another most
ancient British Chronologer which begins thus, Oes Gwrtheyrn Gortheneu etc.
mentioned by Sr. John Prise, p. 121. defensionis Britannicae historiae. Lastly,
he faith that Cad^lh's successors even to Theodor enjoyed the said m^narchy,
whereas it is clear that diverse of the line of Anarawd ruled the Kingdom of
Northwales during that time: so that we cannot but conclude Giraldus to be in a
gross error. And as to the testimony of David Nanmor, on whom relies your
whole hope for Cadelh's sovereignty, it is answered, that his Authority (had it
been as you make it to be, which shall appear to be far otherwise, especially
in so ancient a matter as we now handle, being favored or strengthened by no
antiquity, and himself not flourishing before the middle of the reign of Henry
the sixth, would have been too weak to encounter not only Dr. Powel, but a
multitude of most ancient Anthors, well seen in antiquity, that maintain the
contrary: I cannot be persuaded that he was ever of that opinion, nor that
those verses you are pleased to lay to him are his. They do not savor of the
skill of the meanest Bard, much less of Nanmor, that sometimes contended with
David ap Edmond for the chair at the Eistedhfa in Caermarthen, and by his
Compod manuel, his Gorchestion, Cywydhau, Odes and Epigramms, is well known to
surpass most men of his time in Poetical science. They have faults as to the
measures in 4. seve^all places, such as our Bards term Twyll gynghanedh and
Twyll odl, which by the teachers of the faculty, to wit Dr. David du of
Hiradhic, Edyrn dafod Aur, Eneon yff^irad, and diverse others have been damned
for schisms and solaecismes, in the art, and so forbid to be used. It being so
as to the Poetry, the History may justly be suspected of mistakes, if not of
forgery, in order to the promoting of a small design. And there are mistakes
in the history: for Rod^ric was not the divider of Wales; and Cadelh is denied
by all writers to be the eldest of the 3. Brethren; nor was the K. of
Aberffraws name Nerawd, but Anarawd. And in the 5th. and last Stanza, which you
forbear the mention of, there is a manifest error; for therein it is said, that
Roderic made his division between his 3. sons A.D. 811. long before his reign,
and probably before he was born; for Caradocus says he began his reign A. 843.
and his father Mervyn frych but in the year 817. at which time Prince Conan
Tindaethwy dyed.

The eleventh Argument.
THese authorities and reasons are delivered simply to beat out the the truth
of this point in question, and chiefly out of a desire to clear the way for a
perfect History of Wales, if any shall undertake it; which otherwise cannot be:
for besides this evidence of the sovereignty of the Prince of Southwales (where
there never failed a lawful prince to govern until the period thereof, by the
fatal overthrow of the last and worthy prince, Prince Rees ap Th^odor) it
seems not fit to register the acts of Wales for a great part of 200. years
under Usurpers. And therefore it is desired that if any shall be disposed to
answer hereunto, or to give reasons for maintaining their allegation, it be
done without prejudice or partiality, and that they range not out of the limits
of the question.

The Answer.
WHereas you allege that your authorities and reasons are delivered simply to
beat out the truth of the point in question, I cannot conceive so, in regard
you have not been pleased to be so particular in your quotation of Authors, as
could be desired. And whereas you think it not fit to register the acts of
Wales under Usurpers, it seems you would deprive your reader of a perfect
history, and conceal such passages which are a requisite to be known, as the
lawfullest proceedings; in that a history (how rugged soever, the passages
thereof may be) ought to testify the truth by the consent of times, and
immediate succession of Princes; otherwise that will appear like a broken
chain, wanting some necessary lincks to unite the whole; neither will man's
desire be sat^sfied, until it receive instruction, who were, and who were not
Usurpers, and how their government differed, or whether Usurpers being really
possessed of the Crown, did not use the same jurisdiction which belonged unto
the right heir: and withal it is far more fit and decent that the acts of Wales
should be registered under the name of those Usurpers of Northwales, in regard
that all Wales was subject to the crown thereof, then under the princes of
Southwales, (who were, as I said, their subjects and tributaries,) though the
lawful heirs of Cadelh. And in my judgment you cannot so confidently excuse
your Southwales government from usurpation for that time, seeing Rotherchap
Jestin, and others, are acknowledged to be Usurpers within the compass of the
time limited. You may be further convinced touching the truth of our
allegation, if you do but indifferently weigh the evident proofs that follow
upon these grounds. First how the sovereignty continued in Northwales before
the days of Roderic the great. Secondly, how Anarawd Prince of Northwales was
Roderic's eldest son. And lastly how the Princes of Southwales and Powis paid
tribute to the Prince of Northwales. To the first, if you look back into the
times before Roderic's reign, you must confess Cadwalhon lhawhir King of
Northwales was chiefest of the four that bare swords before Arthur at the
triumphant feast of Caerlheon (of which number, as Galfridus Monemutensis
affirms, the King of Southwales was one:) or you must deny the testimony of
your George Owen Harry, page 26. Then afterward when the Britains wanted a
supreme governor, there was a general meeting had for the election of a King,
and a continual supply was had from the Princes of Northwales; as first it may
appear, when (after the death of Vortiporius, whom we call Gwerthevyr) the
Britains met at Traeth Maelgwn, as may be seen in those ancient British laws,
entitled Prawf ynad, Lhe y caffas Maelgwn vot in pennaf brenhin, ac Aberffraw
in pen lhyssoedh, a Jarlh Mathyraval, a jarlh Dinevwr, a iarlh Caerlh. on y
danaw ynteu: which may be thus Englished. Where it was ordained, that Malgwn
(Prince of Northwales) should be the chiefest or sovereign King, and Aberffraw
in Northwales the sovereign seat of the Britains, and that the Earls of Powis,
Southwales, and Caerlheon should be under him and obey him. And after that,
when the Princes of Southwales, Powis, and Cornwall after the battle of
Bangor, met at Chester, where with the consent of all those Princes, Cadvan
Prince of Northwales was made King of Britain; after him succeeded in their
own right Cadwalhon his son, and Cadwalader his grandchild: at which time the
Britains lost the sovereignty of the whole Isle, as Galfridus says. And yet
R^deris Molwynoc Prince of Northwales, the Grandchild of Cadwalader was obeyed
by all the British Princes as their supreme and soveraign^ Prince, and called
also King of the Britains according to all Authors: and so was his son Conan
Tindaethwy; and after him Mervyn Vrych King of Man, who in the right of his
wife Essyllt, Conan's daughter, was sole Prince of all Wales, as your own
George Oweu Harry and all other writers testify; and after them succeeded
Roderic the great their son, who, as Giraldus says, toti Walliae praesidebat.
So then hitherto, that is 300 years before Anarawd's reign, it was not
controverted who had the sovereignty; for it being most manifest, that the
sovereignty of Wales remained in Northwales, it may persuade an indifferent
Reader that Roderic would not alter the course of the Sovereignty, being a
matter of that ancient continuance, especially when it must be confessed, that
the Prince of Northwales was eldest son and heir apparent to his father Rod
ric, as both old and late writers do with one consent confess: of which (for
brevities sake) I will make choice but of few, but such as are reputed to be of
best credit and insight in Antiquity, to assist me with their testimonies. And
first of all Dr. Powel in his notes upon Giraldus, and additions to Caradocus,
proves that Anarawd was the eldest son of Roderic the great, and says
farther, that he was the right heir of Cadwalader, as is evident by all
histories. Sr. John Prise, a Scuthwales Gentleman, in his description of
Cambria, says that Rodericus magnus King of Wales gave Northwales as the
chiefest part to his eldest son Humphry Llwyd in his Breviary of Britain, and
Jo. Leyland in his notes upon his book entitled Genethliacon Edvardi
principis, and the book of Hergest written in the days of Ed. 4. aver, that
Roderic gave Northwales to his eldest son, adding withal, that Cadelh (who had
Southwales) was the third son. Cyndhelw brydydd mawr, that is, Cyndhelw the
great p^et, who flourished in the days of Henry the second King of England,
writes thus: I Rodri mawr vawr vilwriaeth Gymro
I rai Gymru h^laeth
A Gwynedh nwn gynnydh a^th
I vab hynaf y pennaeth.
Caradocus Lancarvanensis forementioned, who wrote in the days of Henry the
first testifies in some copies of his Annals, that Roderic had by his wife
Angharad diverse sons, as Anarawd his eldest son, to whom he gave Aberffraw
with Northwales. Our old books of pedigrees written on parchment above 400
years ago, do attribute the seniority of birth to Anarawd the son of Roderic
the great, and not to Cadelh. To conclude, Asser Menevensis, Bishop of St.
David's, who flourished even in the days of the sons of Roderic, says in the
acts of King Alfred, that Anaraut filius Rotri cum suis fratribus ad postremum
amicitiam Northanhymbrorum d^serens, de qua nullum bonum nisi damnum habuerat,
amicitiam Alfredi regis studiose requirens, ad praesentiam illius aavenit,
cumque a rege houorifice receptus esset, and ad manum Episcopi in filium
consirmati^nis acceptus maximisque donis ditatus, regis dominio cum omnibus
suis cadem condition subdidit, ut in omnibus regiae voluntati sic obediens
esset, sicut Ethered cum Mercis. Here your countryman gives our Anarawd a
superiority over his brethren, esteeming them no otherwise then his inferiors
and subjects, as plainly it appears, when he says, that King Alfred (of all
the brethren) honored, enriched with great gifts, and entered into league with
Anarawd only. This testimony with the rest is sufficient to prove, that Anarawd
Prince of Northwales was the eldest son of Roderic the great, and therefore
sovereign King of the Britains, which Merdhin Silvester 300 years before
Anarawds birth foretold, to wit, that he should be supreme prince of the
Britains after his father Roderic. Now time calls me to come to my last
argument, which is, that the Princes of Southwales and Powis paid a tribute to
the Prince of Northwales. Wherein (to deal briefly) I will not trouble you
here with the testimony of our great Antiquary Mr. Seldom before mentioned in
my Answer to your 8. Argument; nor with the authorities of our other late
writers, but will content my self with the ancient laws of our British
Princes, where thus we read: Try mychdeyrn dyledoc a dhylu gwladychu Cymruoll
danei thervyneu, brenin Aberffraw, arglwydh Dinefwr, a hwn Mathraval, Tri phrif
lys arbenic sydh ir tri theyrn hyn in essyddyneu breiniawl ydhynt. Un yw
Aberffraw yngwynedh, Dynevwr yny Deheu, a Mathraval wynva ym Powys: a llyma mal
y dosparthwyd eu teyrnasau hwynt in dair rhan, un bie vchafiaeth ar y dhwy, nit
amgen noc Aberffraw pie y bendevigaeth. Teir mychdeyrn dhylyet adhylyir o Gymru
olh, Aberffraw began y dhwylys hynny adhylu, un o Dhinefwr, sef yw honno melget,
pedeir tunelh o vel a gassei pedeir mu ymhob tunelh, dwy grenneit ymhob mu,
lhwyth deuwr ar drossol ym hob gren: Peillget o Wynva a ymodh hunw hefyd. Thus
Englished. Three lawful Kings ought to rule all Wales under its bounds, the
King of Aberffraw in Northwales, the Lord of Dinefwr, and this of Mathraval:
these three Princes have three principal courts for their Princely dwellings,
Aberffraw in Northwales, Dinefwr in Southwales, and Mathraval wynfa in Powis.
Thus their Dominions were divided into three parts, one has a sovereignty over
the other two, viz. Aberffraw has the Primacy. Three princely Tributs are due
out of all Wales, whereof Aberffraw ought to have from those two seats, one
from Dinefwr, which is a tribute of honey, viz. 4. tuns of Honey, every tun
containing 4. mu, every mu 4. grens, every gren as much as two men could carry
between them on a leaver: the other is the like quantity of flower, of
Mathraval wynva. This I hold sufficient proof that that Southwales and Powis
were tributaries to Northwales: and this should suffice me for this time, had
not Howel Dha a prince of Southwales and the son of Cadelh decreed in his Laws,
that as the King of Northwales was to pay a tribute to the King of London, so
should all the Kings of Wales pay tribute to the King of Northwales. LXIII
libras est mychdeyrn dyled quod rex Aberfrau reddere debet regi Londoniae semel
cum acceperit terram suam ab eo; p^stea vero omnes reges Walliae debent terram
suam ab eoaccipere, i. e. a rege Aberffraw, and illi reddere meicheerd deleet
and abediw p^st eorum mortem, and verbum illius, verbum est super omnes reges,
and nullius verbum est super ipsum: that is to say, sixty three pounds is the
Monarchical tribute, which the King of Aberfraw ought to the King of London
when once he has received his lands of him: afterward all the Kings of Wales
ought to take their lands of him, that is, of the King of Aberfraw, and to pay
him a relief after their death. And his law is a law over the Kings, and no
man's law is over him. So says Howel Dha.

The weight of these reasons makes me omit diverse others, and many
conjectures, together with the vulgar opinion; for seeing before Roderic's time
the case is made out by good proofs, and that in Roderic and his sons times,
and their posterity, it is still strengthened with the authorities of both
Southwales and Northwales new and old writers, I see no reason why you should
not conclude with me, That the Princes of Northwales had the sovereignty over
all Wales.

THE END.
A Mistake touching the Pedigree of the Earl of CARBERY corrected.
FInding a mistake in a book lately printed, called Cambria triumphans,
touching the Pedigree of the right honorable the Earl of Carbery, the Author
making him to be descended from Gwaethvoed of Cardigan, whereas indeed
Gwaethvoed of Powis was his Ancestor, I thought I should be wanting to my duty
to that Noble person and the truth, if I did not, when I had an opportunity,
endeavor (what lay in me) the rectifying of it.

The Gentleman the Author I do very much respect and honor for his love
expressed to our Country in his worthy pains to maintain the honor of it; and
do not so much impute the mistake to him, being a stranger, as to our late
unskilful Recorders of Genealogies, who by reason of their not examining
things thoroughly, and not studying Chronology better, have been the occasion of
his Error.

In their writings they deliver to posterity, that Gwaethvoed of Cardigan was
the Father of Gweristan, the Grandfather of Blethyn ap Cynvyn King of Wales,
the Earl's Ancestor; but without any grounds for it, as I shall make it to
appear, by showing 1. That there were two Gwaethvoeds. 2ly, that Gwaethvoed of
Cardigan could not be the great Grandfather of Blethyn ap Cynvyn, and so not
the Earl of Carbery's Ancestor.

That there were two Gwaethvoeds our bo^ks of Ped^grees assure us, which make
often mention both of Gwaethvoed vawr of Powis, and of Gwaethveed of Cardigan.
They are recorded as distinct persons, the one being styled of Powis, the other
of Cardigan, for distinction's sake. And they appear further to be distinct by
their distinct Coats of Arms, and distinct Pedegrees: he of Powis bears vert
a Lion rampant A. imbrued head, feet and tail; the other, Or a Lion rampant
regardant S. langued and armed G. And for their Pedegrees, books written about
400 years ago, say that Gwaethvoed of Powis was the son of Gwrhydr ap Caradawc
ap Lles Llawddeawc etc. to Beli Mawr (Belinus magnus) Monarch of Britain, the
father of King Lud, and of Cassib^lan, who was King when Julius Caesar first
entered Britain. And there are other books that derive the Pedigree of
Gwaethvoed of Cardigan to Gwythno Garanir Lord of Cantre Gwaelod, (to wit, that
large Plain extending it self between the Countyes of Carnarvan, Cardigan, and
Pembroke, long since swallowed up by the Sea) thus, Gwaethvoed ap Eunydd, as
Lewis Morgannwc says; but others leaving out Eunydd say, he was the son of
Cadivor ap Peredur peiswydh ap Eneon ap Eunydd, and so to the said Gwythno
Garanir, and in a direct line from him to Cunedha wledig King of the North and
Cambria.

That Gwaethvoed of Cardigan could not be the great Grandfather of Blethyn ap
Cynvyn etc.] for Blethyn was near of this Gwaethvoed's age. Caradoc of
Lancarvan in his history of Wales tells us; that Blethyn was slain A. D. 1073.
being born, as may be conjectured, about 1023. supposing Angharad (Prince
Llewelyn ap Sitsyllt's widow, who was slain A. D. 1021.) to marry Convyn
Blethyn's father 1022. Now Gwaethvoed of Cardigan could not be ancienter then
Blethyn, if so ancient, will appear, if we examine the 2d. book. and 4th chapter of
Giraldus Cambr^nsis his Itinerarium Cambriae; there we may find, that in the
year 1188, when Baldwin Archbishop of Canterbury visited Wales, with Giraldus
in his company, to persuade the Welsh to list themselves for the holy war
against the Saracens, that there was a son of this Gwaethvoed's (an aged man)
then living, called Ednowen, a Lay Abbot of Lanbadern vawr in Cardiganshire,
being a 115 years just after the death of Blethyn ap Cynvyn; therefore we must
needs conclude this Gwaethvoed could not live long before Blethyn, and if he
did live before him any time, he could not so long before him, as to be his
Grandfather.

Besides, that Gwaethvoed, the Earl of Carbery's Ancestor, was a distinct
person from Gwaethvoed of Cardigan, and far ancienter, may from hence further
be gathered, viz. that the generations from him to our time are more in number
then the generations from Gwaethvoed of Cardigan, as appears by this instance,
to wit, my Lord Vaughan the Earl^s son is the 21th. generation from Gwaethvoed
his Ancestour; whereas Sr. Richard Price of Gogerddan Baronet, descended from
Gwaethvo^d of Cardigan my Lord's equal in age is but the 17th. in descent from
that Gwa^thvoed. Also we read in our books of one Morvydh daughter to Yayr ddu
King of Gwent (now Monmouthshire,) who lived in King Ath^lstan's time, A. D.
921. as Rog: Hovenden has it recorded, that married one Gwaethvoed, which
could not be that of Cardigan, who, as is said, having a son living 1188.
cannot rationally be supposed to be born before the year 1000, or thereabouts,
but may very well be that Gwaethvoed of Powis, the Ancestour of Blethyn; this
Gwaethvoed might very well be Blethyn's great grandfather, there being a 100
years difference of time and above, between them.

The Pedigree of the right honorable Sr. RICHARD VAUGHAN Earl of Carbery, Lord
Viscount Molingar, Baron of Emlyn, and Lord President of the Marches of WALES.
Gwaithvoed vawr Lord of Powis. Morvydd da: and coheir of Yayr ddu king of
Gwent. Gwerystan Lord of Powis. Nest danghter of Cadell ap Brochw. l. Convyn
Lord of Powis. Aagharad Queen of Wales, da: and heir of Mredith ap Owen king of
Wales: the relict of Llywelyn ap Bledhyn ap Cy^vyn King of Wales. Haer da: and
coheir of Cilli^^ Blaidd rudd of (Seissylt. Gest. Meredith ap Bleddyn Prince of
Powis. Hunyth da: of Eynydd. Madoc ap Meredith Prince of Powis. Eva da: of
Madoc ap Urien ap Egmir ap Lles ap Idaerth Benvras of Maesbroke. ER. Gh. Enion
Evell. Arddyn da. of Madoc Van ap Madoc ap Enion hael ap Urien of Main Gwinedd.
R. C. Run ap Enion. Elizabeth da: to Jo. Lord Strange of Cno^kin Gh. ER.
Cyhely^ ap Rh^^. Eva da. and heir of Grono ap Cadwgan Saethydd Lord of Henvache
Gh. ER. Ivaf ap Cyhelyn. Eva da: to Adda ap Awr of Trevor. Gh. ER. Madoc Coch.
Lleuki da: of Howel goch ap Mared Van etc. to Bleddyn ap Cynvyn. Gh. ER. Madoc
Kyffin. -- the da: of Griffith ap Rees ap Madoc ap Ririd Ulaidd. Gh. David ap
Mad. Kyffin. Catharin da: of Morgan ap Davydd ap Madoc ap David Van ap David up
Griff. ap Jorwerth ap Howel ap Moriddig ap Sandde, Gh. RC. David Va. of
Gartheryr. Gwervyl da: to Griffith ap Rees ap Griffith ap Madoc ap Jorwerth ap
Madoc ap Ririd ulaidd. Gh. Griffith Vaugh. Tibod da: to Meredith ap Tudur ap
Gronw ap Howel y gadair. Gh. Hugh Vaughan Esquire. Jane da: of Moris ap Owen ap
Griff. ap Nicolas. Gh. John Vaugh. Esquire. Catherin da. of Harry ap Trahayarn of
Bodlysgwm. Gh: Walter Vaugh. of Golden Grove. Mary da. of Griffith Rees of
Tresnewyth in Carmartbin shire. John Earl of Carbury etc. Margaret da. of Sr.
Gely Meuric. Knight. Richard Earl of Carbury, etc. Alice da. of John Earl of
Bridgewater.

He bears Or. a lyoa rampant G. the coat of Blethyn ap Kynvyn, not the Coat
of Prince Madoc ap Meredith, being A. a lion rampant S. armed and langued G.

The 5. Royal Tribes of Cambria.
1. GRiffith ap Conan King of Northwales is the first registered in our books;
he was the Grandchild of Prince Jago ap Edwal, whose son Conan was forced to
fly into Ireland for safety, where he married Ranullt daughter of Auloedd King
of Dublin, Man, and the Isles, and the reli^^ of Mathganyn King of Vlster, and
had issue by her this Griffith. He bears G. 3 lioncels passant in pale barry
A. armed Az.

2. Rees ap Tewdwr mawr, the second Royal Tribe, who took upon him the
government of Southwales A. D. 1077. G. a Lion rampant Or. within a bordure
indented.

3. Blethyn ap. Cynvyn (the third royal Tribe) was King of Northwales and
Prince of Powis, and after the death of his grandfather Meredith ap Owen
(Prince of Southwales) he became King of all Wales, Or a Lion rampant G. armed
and langued Or.

4. The fourth Royal tribe Elystan. Glodrydd Prince of the country between Wy
and Severne. He was the son of Cyhelyn ap Jv^r by Rhi^ingar the daughter and
heir of Gr^nw ap Tuder Trevor, from whom he had derived to him the title of the
Earldome of Hereford. Athelstan King of England was his Godfather. Elystan's
two Coats quartered. A. 3 boars heads cobazed S. langued G. tusked Or. His
Mothers Coa^. Parted per Bend sinister Ermine and ermines, over all, a lion
rampant Or.

5. Jestyn ap Gurgant, the fifth Royal Tribe, was Prince or Lord of Glamorgan,
he descended from Iewdric King of Gwent in King Arthur's time. He lost his
Country to Robert Fitz hamon the Norman, and his 12 knights, whom by the
procurement of Eneon ap Cadivor ap Colwy^ he had hired to come with an army to
assist him against Rees ap Tewdwr Prince of Southwales, and Blethyn ap Maenyrch
Lord of Breeknock* a just judgment upon him for his disloyalty to the said Rees
his Lord and Prince! God being pleased suddenly to permit treachery to be
punishedwith treachery. Rees and Blethyn after a very bloody fight (not far
from Brecknock were both slain in the field. G. 3 che^onels in pale A.

Prince Griffith ap Conan, Rees ap Tewawr, and Blethyn ap Cynvyn made diligent
search after the Arms, Ensigns, and Pedegrees of their Ancestors, the
Nobility and Kings of the Britains; what they discovered by their pains in any
papers and records was afterward by the Bards digested and put into books. And
they ordained 5. royal Tribes (there being only 3 before) to whom their
pollerity to this day can derive themselves: and also 15 special Tribes, of
whom the Gentry, especially of Northwales, are for the most part descended. And
in our books we have mention of the Tribe of the Marc^^ etc. besides other
Tribes called Gwe^^lyth and Gwehelaethan.

THE END.

