PANOPLIA: Or the whole ARMOR OF GOD Explained and applied for the Conduct and
Comfort of a CHRISTIAN in all his Trials and Tentations. AS ALSO, The Dying
Preachers LEGACY in several Sermons, being the last Labors of the Reverend
Author in the course of his Ministry. TOGETHER, With certain seasonable
Considerations, proving the Lawfulness and Expediency of a set Form of Lyturgy
in the Church. All prepared for the Press by the Reverend Author before his
decease, and now made public for the Common Good.

By RICHARD VENNER, late Rector of St Mary's in Warwick.

2 Cor. 10.4. For the Weapons of our Warfare are not carnal, but mighty through
God, to the pulling down of strong holds, etc. LONDON, Printed by T. Ratcliffe
for John Durham, and are to be sold at the Rofe and Crown in St Paul's
Churchyard, MDCLXII.

TO THE Right Honorable, Right Worshipful, and others, his Worthy
Parishioners, and diligent frequenters of the Ordinances of God, of the
Parish Church in St. Maryes in Warwick, together with the whole Body of the
said Borough, Grace, Mercy and Peace from God the Father, and Jesus Christ his
dear Son.
IT was never want of good Will that hindered me from appearing to you in Print
before this time, that after my Decease you might have a more visible
remembrance of the Truths you have been taught by me; and which I hope you have
received and practiced to your own Everlasting Comfort; but other Indigencies,
or Shortness of Means, and the like, and the Incessant Exigencies of so great a
place, have prevented me thus doing; until now you know, that about a year and
six months since, it pleased God to visit me with very sharp sickness; yet
continuing me with strength for the discarge of my Place, I bethought my self
upon what fit Text I should pitch, whence I might express my Last Farewell to
so worthy an Auditory. And by Gods Providence lighting upon this, the Apostles
Farewell to his beloved Thessalonians, I was resolved to speak something of
this to you: In the perusal of which, My Labors, you will find variety of
matter suitable with the Text, and with these times: There may be some will
find more then they look for: And others, I am sure, will find those things
which will be very welcome to them: I hope all will be heartily accepted, for I
am sure it was so intended and delivered; But howsoever preaching takes with
men, yet your dying Pastor had always an eye to what might please God in the
practice of his Ministry. I do now leave this with you, as the last Legacy of
my Love; nor could it be with greater affection, and greater desire of your
good and growth in grace, If it had been from the hands of more eminent
Worthies in the Church: Elegances of Speech, and Complements in serious things,
suit not with sick beds and dying groans. Whatsoever this small piece be, I
leave it to you from the deepest bowels of my dearest love to you in the Lord
Jesus; and the good Lord crown this with my other labors, and seal them upon
you to your Eternal Good.

Your faithful Pastor and Servant in the Service of the Lord Jesus, RICHARD
VENNER.

Memorandum; A Speech made in St. Mary's Church in Warwick, the second day of
September, 1660. for the satisfaction of the Congregation there assembled, upon
my beginning to Read the Book of Common Prayer again publicly in the Church,
after sixteen years discontinuance.
BEloved, Before we begin Prayers, let me preadvise you of some things: Sudden
Changes in the Church or State have often been attended with sad consequences
and events: Many have been the sad changes and woeful alterations, of which we
of this Nation have had miserable experience for these eighteen years last
past. Amongst which, after the most execrable murder of the late Kings Majesty
of blessed memory, and with him the abolition and extirpation of Kingly
Government to the utter undoing of the whole Nation, both Church and State (as
much as in them lay) and the irrecoverable and irreparable ruin of them both:
(I say) after such a nefandum scelus, a wickedness not to be named amongst
Christians. There have befallen two other things which do much reflect upon the
Church, which are: 1. The extirpation of Episcopacy; and 2. The expulsion of
the Liturgy, or form of ( Common Prayer or) Gods public Worship and Service,
and of divine Administrations.

1. For the first: viz. Episcopaay: It is I think sufficiently proved, and may
therefore be easily granted, that there is ground enough in the Gospel and the
practice of the Primitive and succeeding Ages, for the continuance of
Evangelical, Paternal, Primitive Episcopacy in the Church to the end of the
World, so long as the Lord Jesus is the chief Bishop of our souls, 1 Pet. 2.25.
See King Charles Answer to Alex. Henderson, and to our English Divines at the
Isle of Weight. See also Bish. Bilson, Bish. Hall. Yet this Government must
down, Root and Branch without either conviction, or trial, or any consideration
of Primitive practice, and all this only to satisfy the ambition and avarice
of some men, who did eagerly desire and greedily gape after the Bishops
Authority and Estates. Which Government thus overthrown, we have been left
without any Government in the Church ever since September. 1. 1642. (just
eighteen years complete this day) to the great distraction and confusion both
of this Church and Nation. But I shall say no more of Episcopacy at this time
(of which much might be said) but I leave it to the wisdom of the King and
Parliament to settle such a Government, as shall be most conducible to the
Churches welfare, faxit Deus, Episcopacy being thus rooted out: yet the
mischief of these men is not ended.

2. The next thing which must be expulsed and quite excluded in the Church, is
the Liturgy, or form of Gods public worship, divine Service and
Administrations, commonly called the Book of Common Prayer, etc. And
nevertheless, that Set-forms of Prayer, etc. have good authority from the Word
of God. 1. God Commanded a set-form of blessing the people, Number. 6.23. 2. And
David appointed set-psalmes for several occasions, as the Titles of them do
show, Psalm 92.3. And Joel a set-form of prayers for a solemn Fast, Joel 2.17.
4. Yea, and Christ himself, that commands us to pray after such a manner, and
prescribes us a Rule of prayer, Mat. 6.9. even he commands us to use the
set-forms of words by him prescribed, Luke 11.2. Thus you have divine Authority
enough for a set-form of Prayer: yet add 5. Of all prayers, premeditated
prayers are the best, Eccl. 5.1. and of such, those allowed by public
Authority, are to be preferred before those which are to be uttered by any
private Spirit. 6. Besides all the Churches in the Christian World, in the
first and best times had their set-forms of Liturgy: many of which are extant
in the writings of the Fathers. 7. And yet more, Let our Liturgy be compared
with the Liturgies of other Churches, viz. the French, Dutch, Danish, Suevick,
or any of the Lutheran or Calvinian Churches; or with any of those of the
Eastern Churches now extant: The Armenian, Constantinopolitan, the Syrian,
Egyptick, the Greek Aeuchology: that of Cyril, or St. Ambrose, commonly called
Officium Ambrosianum or any other ancient or latter: yet ours will appear to be
the most exact and complete of any of them, and comprehensive of any thing that
is excellent in any of them. 8. Lastly, Our Liturgy it is confessed, was penned
and allowed by learned Doctors and glorious Martyrs, who sealed the truth of
the Reformed Religion with their Bloods, So than it was the truth of Religion
expressed in the Articles set forth by King Edward the sixth, An. Dom. 1552.
Collected from, and suitable to the holy Scriptures, for which they dyed,
rather then for the Liturgy of their own composing: which is a great mistake of
many, both which Articles and Liturgy (with some alterations and additions)
were again revived and ratified by Q. Elizabeth in the beginning of her Reign
(viz. an. 1. Eliz. c. 2.) and the same Articles and Liturgy have been continued
by K. James, and K. Charles the first, all of blessed memory, and so they
remain at this day. Yet quaedam in pulchro corpore sunt desideranda and
emendanda, the fairest face may have some blemish, etc. And I am sure there
have been many wise, judicious and very learned men, who have earnestly and
long desired that some few things both in Hierarchy and frame of
Church Government by Episcopacy, as also (...) the Lyturgy or Form of Gods
public Worship, etc. might (without noise or tumult) have been regulated and
altered for the prevention of inconveniences which might ensue.

But our late Reformers (as they pretended, and called themselves) were of
another strain, nothing would serve, but the ruin of the one, and the utter
expulsion of the other: For my part, 1. I should think him an evil Physician,
who to cure a Mole, a Freckle, a Wart, or small Wen in a fair face, does kill
the person to effect it. 2. And him to be as bad a Builder or Workman, who to
mend a Quarry of glass in a Window, or to put on a Tyle upon the housetop, etc.
plucks down the whole house to do it; and thus did our late Deformers deal by
Episcopacy, and the Tyturgy. But,

1. As by the Extirpation of Episcopacy was ushered in, and attended,
proceeded, and succeeded no better, then with a most terrible, barbarous, and
bloody civil War, to the amazement of wise men, the consternation of the best
men, and the astonistment of all men.

2. So the Expulsion of the Lyturgy was preceded with the death of the Arch
Bishop of Canterbury, (nothing else would serve) and attended with expunging
the clause for the preservation of his Majesty's Person, out of the Commission
of their General in the Army: These were the bad Neighbors of two things,
which were absolutely bad enough in themselves. And as the ruin of Episcopacy
did serve to enrich a company of greedy Cormorants, who Ostrich-like, could
devour any thing: Or like that foolish Aeagle in the Fable, would needs have a
Morsel, a Bit or Gobbet from the Altar, though therewith she set fire on her
own nest, and ruined her self. So the Expulsion of the Lyturgy opened a wide
gap to all the whimsical fancies, fanatiek Opinions, Errors, Heresies, and
Blasphemies that have so abounded, and so much infested the Church of God ever
since: whilst every man was left to his own abilities, inventions and
expressions; and every man that could but talk a little, and make use of any
good language, was presently cried up for a Gifted Brother, and completely
fitted for the Ministry, without any more ado.

And hence, no doubt, has been abundance of Nonsense (if not worse) uttered
by men of weak abilities, parts and gifts, in celebrating the Mysteries of God.
And hence have sprung those swarms of Sectaries that have so long anoyed us.
Yet as the best virtues are attended with a vice on each hand, as Liberality
with Avarice and Prodigality, etc. And the best men have enemies, and the best
business shall be sure of some Opponents: So the Liturgy, or form of Gods
public worship, or the Book of Common Prayer has two great enemies. 1. Those
that set it too high, and deify it. And, 2. Those that vilify it, and too much
undervalue it. Those set it too high, that make it equal in Authority with the
holy Scriptures, as if it were (...) and (...), 2 Timothy 3.16. sent by immediate
inspiration from God, as the Oracles of God were: although it be but the
composure of wise and good, but not inspired men. These people do by the Book
of the Common Prayer, as the Children of Israel did by the brazen Serpent,
(reserved and kept as a monument of Gods mercy to their Ancestors) was so doted
upon, as that they gave divine honor to it: Then did that good King Hezekiah,
2 Kin. 18.4. break it in pieces, that God might no longer be dishonored
thereby. Take heed, beloved, of perverting lawful and useful things to evil
ends and purposes. This sort of people do commit a threefold Injury; viz.
Against, 1. The Book. 2. The Composers. And, 3. Themselves. 1. Against the
Book; For God has not given us this book, but the holy Scriptures to build our
faith, and to lay upon them the foundation of our salvation: 2. The Compilers
and Composers of the Book, who, I dare say, would no more assume the honor of
immediate inspiration from God, then the Angel would accept of divine worship
from St. John, Rev. 19.10. So far were they from the error and vanity of
Anabaptists, Enthusiasts, etc. c. Themselves most of all, both in the two
former injuries now named, and especially in the misbottoming their own
salvation upon a wrong foundation, and relying upon the inventions and
composures of men, rather then upon the Oracles of God in the holy Scriptures
which were spoken and written by divine inspiration. Now is not this to for
sake the fountain of living waters, and hew us out broken Cisterns that can
hold no water. Others there be, who do vilify, and would exclude utterly all
forms of prayer; and indeed all things else, that are conducible to order and
decency, unity and peace in the Church, so much are these men taken with their
own fancies and inventions: All forms of prayer with them are carnal, formal
papal, etc. and do stint the spirit, which last is (yet) no more done by this,
then by singing of set Psalms, which they themselves do practice, and make use
of in their own Assemblies. Sure if these men be in the right, and that no
forms of Prayers are to be regarded: Then to what purpose are all those pious
helps to devotion, etc. which were composed and published for the general good
by so many worthy men who were truly learned and godly, religious and renowned
in their several generations. But these detractors are abundantly answered by
so many eminent men, and excellent pens, that I need say no more. To conclude
therefore, Beloved, be ye sure to avoid both these extremes, for they are both
very dangerous. If you rely upon the Liturgy as alone all-sufficient to
salvation, and thereupon neglect or contemn the holy Scritures, the Word of
God, you are lost for ever; for the Lyturgy was authorized, repealed and
revived again only by Act of Parliament, which may repeal it again: It is not
so with the holy Scriptures.

On the oeher fide; If men will vilify, reproach, despise, and speak evil of
the things they know not, Jude 10. and are not willing to understand aright, as
multitudes do, and thereby do tacitly condemn those Worthies, Martyrs, and
others, who were our first Reformers, and wise Compilers of our public
Lyturgy, etc. All such do but discover their own weakness, and folly, and do
expose themselves to the contempt of understanding, wise and prudent, of deeply
learned and truly religious men. Be sure that you run upon neither of these
rocks, to the splitting of your vessel, and extreme hazards, or loss of all
your precious freight, your immortal souls especially; but have an eye to the
Word of God, as 2 Pet. 1.19. as to the Pole star of perfection, and steer the
card and compass of your opinions, affections and conversations, according to
that infallible guide and unchangable diroction; so shall you be sure to arrive
at last in the haven of rest, and attain to the end of your faith, the
salvation of your souls, 1 Pet. 1.9.

Thus much I have thought good to preadvise, and pre-admonish you of, before I
was willing to enter upon the use of the Lyturgy, or form of Public and Common
Prayers after so long a discontinuance, and the rather, because (as I am
credibly informed) even this form is like to appear before long with some
alterations, which I was willing to have waited for: I having always shunned
(to the best of my understanding) such things as render a man like a
Turning-style, to be whirled about by the next Passenger, such preposterous
have and sudden changes have (I am sure) lost many (otherwise esteemed) wise
men, very much in their reputation; But the impetuousness of peoples spirits
will never give a man leave to make his own choice, norto make use of his
discretion in a convenient deliberation about things of this Consequence;
howsoever, the thing that I have spoken, I have done (I am sure) out of a true
reverential care of the honor of God, and of his holy Word. The faithful
discharge of my own conscience, who (now being aged) am going apace to my great
account; And out of the tender respect I have of your souls, that you may learn
to set a right estimate of things as they be, and may neither deifie things
humane, nor vilify things divine, but to weigh all things in the scales of the
Sanctuary, and to value them accordingly: and so the things now spoken may
serve as a common gage to direct you in the use of all, or any Lyturgy, or Form
of Prayer whatsoever; that you may avoid the extremes on each hand, which men
are apt to fall upon or rush into: that you may not turn in any thing from the
right way of the word of God, nor to any side; whether of your own inventions,
or others corruptions, but that you may depart from all evil, and be upright in
all things which God has commanded you: and that you may punctually observe
that advice of Solomon, Prove. 4.27. which is of so great concernment in all
cases concerning Christians; Turn not to the right hand, nor to the left, but
remove thy foot from evil; which the good Lord give us Grace and strength to do.

AMEN.
A Christian Warfare.
EPHESIANS. VI. XIII. Therefore take unto you the whole Armor of God, that ye may
be able to withstand in the evil day, and having done all, to stand.

(...), etc

Propter hoc, Accipite universam Armaturam Dei, ut possitis resistere in die
malo, and omnia conficientes stare. State ergo succincti Lumbos vestros in
veritate, and induti Loricam Justitiae, etc. Arias Montan.


PRovision of Armor is never more seasonable, than in, and against a Time of
War, whether Corporal, or Spiritual.

1. When many Deceivers shall come in the name of Christ.

2. And the Nations hear much of Wars, and Rumors of Wars, etc. as our Savior
fore-prophesied, Mat. 24.4. to 9. and as it is now fulfilled in the whole
Christian world.

Ap. For were there ever more Deceivers, and Dissentions at once, then now are?

1. Corporal, and External Wars betwixt Nations or Persons one with another,
fall out sometimes, but do not still continue. And for them great Provisions
may be made, and to small Effect; as Experience has often evidenced. Consider
this. But,

2. There is another Warfare; A Spiritual, and Invisible War, from which we are
never free.

And this does require our best spiritual Provision, that we may escape the
danger of it.

Ap. This is the Warfare in the Text, verse. 10, to 19.

3. Now whilst the Nations fight (incerto pede, and Ancipite Mart) with
uncertainty of Success, and Victory.

Ap. Let me from this Scripture teach you how to prepare, and provide for a
Spiritual, (and Ergo, a more dangerous) Warfare, and against an Enemy, far
beyond any earthly Army, and all the Enemies in the world besides, (though
many) with Assurance of success, and Certainty of Victory; which if it had been
well observed, might have prevented much of our public Wars, Contentions, and
Calamities.

The Apostle in the former part of this Epistle,

1. Having treated of the Life, and good manners of Christians.

2. He descends to speak particularly, and especially of the Oeconomical
Office of Husbands, and Wives, Parents, and Children, Masters, and Servants
from the 21. verse of the fifth Chapter, to the tenth verse of this sixth
Chapter.

And thus having premised his Ethics, and Oeconomicks:

3. He proceeds to this general Exhortation. 1. Of Constancy in a course of
Christian Piety. And, 2. Vigilance, and Resistance against our Adversaries: So
that in this Chapter the Apostle does three Things.

1. He concludes his Oeconomicks (which began cap. 5.) verse 1. to 10.

2. He persuades all to fight against Satan, the Capital Enemy of Mankind, that
continually seeks to devour, and to destroy, verse 10. to 19.

3. He acquaints the Ephesians with some things which did concern his own
Estate; withal, desiring their prayers for him, that he might be strengthened
in his Ministry in the Mystery of the Gospel, and that the Kingdom of God might
be promoted thereby.

OBSERVE. The besthave need of others Prayers.

This Text is a part of the second general Branch of the Chapter; viz. His
Exhortation to all to fight against Satan, verse 10. to 19. And herein the
Apostle does show and discover to us two things.

1. How necessary it is for us to be valiant, (strong, and courageous) and
furnished with good Armor against such mighty Enemies, so wily, crafty,
strong, and powerful as verse 11, 12. verse 10. to 14.

2. What this Panoply of God is, and what be the several pieces, and parts of
this Armor, both defensive, and offensive, verse 14. to 19.

Let us take a little view of the whole Text from verse 9. to 19.

1. Verse. 10. (...), Quod Reliquum est, quod superest: Finally, etc. in this
verse.

The Apostle does suggest what he had spoken before of Faith, Christian Life,
and the Duties of people in diverse Relations, and that now nothing remained for
him to press further upon them:

But, 1. To persuade them to Courage, and Constancy against the Enemies of
their Souls. And indeed when the Church is well instructed, there is then most
need of Watchfulness against the Enemy.

2. And least we should be presumptuous of our own strength, he does acquaint
us in whose strength, and aid we be thus strong, and confident to prevail, viz.
In Domino, and in potentia virtutis (vel roboris) ejus; It is in the Lord, and
in the Power of his Might; where the words Power, and Might are different, and
several, and not as if but one. For, 1. (...), noting the Faculty, or Root: 2.
(...), signifying the Virtue, or Fruit of that power which is in God, and is
manifest in us through His Grace, and subordinately does cooperate with him in
good. The like Expression is, Ephesians. 1.19. where to these two; 3. A third word
is added, viz. Energeia, which signifies, The Effect of this Power, secundum
operationem potentiae virtutis ejus. Arias Montan. according to the Working of
the Might of his Power. Energeia, Kratos, Iskus.

Ap. All three expressions giving us to understand, That all Power is,

1. Radically in God. He is the Root in which is all fullness of Power.

2. Derivatively in us; For of his fullness we receive our strength.

3. Evidently in the Effects produced, whether by the power of, 1. God
Almighty, or, 2. of Man by his Aid, and Assistance. Phil. 4.13. 1 John 5.4, 5.
This is the Victory, etc. even our Faith. Thus for the meaning of this tenth
verse.

Now because we cannot be strong to resist (such mighty Enemies as he mentions
after) but by Faith in Christ, and by his Aid, and Help.

Verse 11. He tells us how much it behooves us to be well armed, and fortified
with His Might, and bids us put on the whole Armor of God.

The whole Exhortation, is a Metaphor a Militibus, from Soldiers, who are then
said to be strong, and fit for the Battle, and Conflict, when well furnished
with all kind of Armor needful for the War, in which they are to serve as
Soldiers: And this Munition he calls a Panoply, All, or complete Armor: And
this Armor is Spiritual, (not carnal) and mighty through God to effect great
matters, 2 Cor. 10.4, 5. The weapons of our Warfare, etc. and Ergo, it is
stilled The Armor of God, because he gives it, and we receive it. 1. Although
God gives it out of his own free Grace, and Favor: 2. Yet we must put forth
our best endeavors to receive it, and therefore are commanded to put it on;
Put ye on the whole, etc.

1. And as the Apostle has persuaded us: 1. To put on this Armor: So, 2. He
tells us to what end we should put it on, that we might be able to stand
against the Wiles ((...)) of the Devil.

Where note, that Satan acts diverse ways. Sometimes,

1. Aperto Mart, with open War, as by Tyrants, Antichrist, and persecuting
Heretics. Another while,

2. Fx Insidiis, by Wiles, and Snares, as by Hyppocrates, Cujuscunque generis;
who under the pretense of Sanctity, sow tares, and so seduce simple souls, as
the Anabaptists, and other Sects have done: These had need of our best Armor:
For there is no danger greater, than of false Brethren, and the Devil in the
shape of an Angel of Light.

3. Then Verse 12. He describes the Enemies with whom we wrestle, and against
whom we fight. 1. Negatively. 2. Positively. Or, 1. Not Principally. 2.
Principally.

1. Not as Flesh, and Blood; (i. e.) Not principally. Where note,

(1.) He does not absolutely, and simply deny (and so free us from) our Warfare
against the World, and the Flesh, Men, and our own Concupiscence, and
Corruptions.

Ap. Which are mighty Enemies, and are always to be wrestled with, and resisted.

(2.) But by way of Comparison, and Antithesis.

We wrestle not, (i. e.) not alone, or chiefly against these; against frail,
and feeble men, Humane, and bodily power. Quod Diabolus excitat, adversuspios,
and contra Ecclesiam.

For Satan, (1.) does excite, and encourage Tyrants, and Heretics against us.

(2.) And does inflame Concupiscence within us, to act, and produce sin to our
destruction, James 1.13, 14, 15.

2. But principally, and chiefly we wrestle against, 1. Principalities. 2.
Powers. 3. The Rulers of the Darkness of this world. 4. Spiritual wickedness,
(or wicked Spirits) in high places. ( Ad verbum, the Spirituals of wickedness)
whether they be:

1. Wicked Spirits given to all wickedness, and tempting man thereto.

2. Or, The spiritual nature of wickedness, (as in Heresies, Plots against
Religion, etc.) which are far more odious to God, and dangerous to the soul,
then Carnal wickedness, or fleshly pollutions.

3. And that in High places; In Caelestibus, (i.e.) Arias Montan.

They fight against us, from above us,

1. In the Regions of the Firmament, and Air, called oftentimes Heaven, Psalm.
19.1. and 147.8. See Bernard. For Satan has no place, or power left him in the
true, and proper Heaven, 2 Pet. 2.4. Jude 6. Revel. 12.8.

Or, 2. Insacris, and divinis, in divine, holy, and heavenly Things, as
wickedness in the Church, and corruption in the dispensing, and Administration
of Holy, and Heavenly Things. And consider that,

1. All these Names, (or Titles) are applied to the Devils, Quia sunt
potentissimi, pravissimi, and astutissimi Inimici, because they are the most
Mighty, Naughty, and crafty enemies that we can possibly have, or deal with.

The Warfare therefore is, 1. Spiritual, because against wicked Spirits, etc.

And, 2. By so much the more dangerous, because it is spiritual. And therefore,
3. We need not carnal, but spiritual weapons, the Armor of God.

2. And these Names are given to the Devils; not because they are properly the
Rulers of the world, but because they do usurp such a Power, and Authority, and
do act as the evil Rulers of the world (Satan's Instruments) do who are ever
troubling, and vexing them that fear God.

3. And again these Names are given to them, to signify to us. (1.) Not only
Varias Vires; Diabolorum, but also (2.) Varios Ordines Diabolorum,
The manifold strength, the various Orders of Devils.

(1.) Who do act, as many kinds of Authorities, Powers, and Principalities,
etc. do here upon earth with various strength.

(2.) And amongst them there may be several Orders, and Ranks, as Beelzebub the
prince of the Devils, Mat. 12.24. Luke 11.15.

Ap. As there is also (Inter bonos Angelos) amongst the Holy, and Heavenly
Angels of Almighty God, as Cherubim, and Seraphim, Angels, and Archangels.
Zanch. in Ephesians. p. 660.661. Ezekiel. 10.1. Isa. 6.2. Michael and his Angels, Rev.
12.7. Above the head of the Cherubims, etc. I saw a Throne above the Seraphims.
The several particulars of these three verses, viz. the 10, 11, 12. might well
afford us many useful Observations, or Points of Doctrine, (all which I shall
bind up together in one general) viz.

2. A Preachers Doctrine extends to all persons, and all Duties of a Christian;
but it urges, presses, and justifies most upon the most necessary 'Truths,
that they may take the deepest impression, verse 10.

(1.) As our Apostle does here, who closes this Epistle with this necessary
Doctrine of Christian Courage. This is from the word, Finally, (...), Quod
Reliquum est.

(2) So the Apostle St. Peter also having written of diverse things, he collects
this second Epistle, with the Doctrine, concering the end of the world, and the
use that we should make of it, 2 Pet. 3.3, 7, 10, 11, 12. Though Scoffers did
deride it.

2. Christian Strength, and Courage is very needful, and useful to every child
of God.

From the word be strong, v. 10. 3. No strength, or courage can hold out, and
prevail without the Lord, and His Aid, and Help, and Assistance:

From, In the Lord, and in the power of his might, v. 10.

4. A Christian has need of a complete spiritual Armor, that he may be armed,
not only in one, or some part only, but in every part, all over, capite a pede,
(as we use to say) from head to foot.

From, Put on the whole Armor of God. verse 11.

5. Many are the Methods, Ways, and Wiles of the Devil to do mischief.

From, That ye may be able to stand against the Wiles of the Devil.

6. Doct. Eviol concupiscence, and corruption within us, and the world without
us, are very great enemies, and always to be resisted: But the Devil is the
most dangerous Enemy of all, and most diligently to be withstood.

For He, 1. Kindled the fire of Concupiscence, and Corruption in Eve, etc.

(2) And he is over ready to act, and inflame the two former Enemies within,
and without us, to work, and effect our Sin, Shame, and Destruction, Lust
within, and the world without ensnare us by his means.

From, We wrestle not against flesh, and blood, but against Principalities,
against Powers, against the Rulers, etc. against spiritual wickednesses. Verse
12.

7. The Devil is a great Usurper of Authority, and he acts as wicked Rulers
do (who are his Instruments) to pervert, and destroy both in earthly, and
heavenly Things.

(1.) In terrennis, and humanis, In the darkness of this world, ( i. e.) In the
state of Ignorance, Sin, Death, and Confusion, which are the Rulers, and do
reign in this World.

(2.) In Caelestibus, and Divinis, In the most heavenly places, persons, and
things, and in the most holy, and divine Duties to be performed by man.

1. In the Church of God, which is called Heaven, Rev. 12.1, 3.

2. In the best of Saints, whose Conversation is there, Phil. 3.20.

3. And the holiest duties, and performances, which he is most bent to hinder,
and hurt by manifold Injections, Seductions, and Temptations.

Take a Review of all these in handling the thirteenth Use, wherein the three
former Uses are Epitomized; and in the main Point of the thirteenth Verse, all
these, except the first Doctrine, may fitly be touched upon.

The Apostle having thus prepared for the acceptance of his good Counsel in a
matter of so great concernment, both from the, 1. Necessity of it. 2. and great
danger attending us, if it be neglected.

Upon due consideration of all the Premises in the 10, 11, 12. Verses.

1. The Apostle does infer, and repeat, or reiterate in this 13. Ver. His
general Exhortation propounded in the 11. Verse before: Wherefore take unto you
the whole Armor of God, etc. Which Exhortation he concludes also with another
Illative, verse 14. Stand therefore.

2. And the end why he does thus enforce it, is, That ye may be able to
withstand in the evil day: and having done all to stand, Stand therefore. (i.
e.) Courageously, Resolutely, Stoutly, Constantly, Vigilantly, and Victoriously
against these Enemies.

Exp. 1. You know what it is to stand; which does not only signify the Gesture
of the body, but also the Intention of the Mind to attend, and resist, as
occasion is.

2. In the Evil day: Not evil in it self, for so it is good, but in respect, 1.
To the whole time of man's Life, because it is always obvious to Manifold. 1.
Corruptions. And, 2. Tribulations, Perils, and Dangers. 2. The time of Satan's
being let loose, (as it were) to go about to infect, or vex the Church with
Errors, and Persecutions. As it befell, 1. Job; all his days were evil, because
no day but had his trouble; But especially that day was evil, when Satan was
permitted to try Him to the utmost, in his Goods, Children, and in his own
Body. 2. The Apostles, when their Master, the Lord Jesus Christ was taken, and
crucified, and themselves left to be winnowed by Satan, and persecuted by
wicked men. 3. The Church of God, which never yet wanted sad Times: It being
the Churches Lot to suffer Affliction, and Persecution: But especially their
Days were evil, yea, the worst of Days, when she was afflicted beyond measure;
By, 1. Tyrants. 2. Antichrist. 3. Perverse, and persecuting Heretics. Proverbs
15.15. All the days of the afflicted are evil, says Solomon.

Thus the Apostle in this thirteenth Verse does repeat, and insist upon his
former Exhortation, Verse 11.

Which is here, 1. Inferred with a double Illative; viz. in the Beginning, and
End of it, (...), propter hoc, and (...), Ergo.

2. Fortified, or preessed with a threefold Stand in the words, (...), that
they may Withstand, Stand, and Stand. 1. Implying the Courage, and strength
before mentioned, Verse 10, 11. To withstand such Enemies, Stand in such
conflicts, and to stand victorious in the end. 2. And pointing to the evil day,
[i. e.] the day of Temptation, Persecution, and Tribulation, which the Church
does endure, and undergo, in respect of the manifold Enemies before named, and
the manifold Evils by them occasioned, and inflicted, Intus, and for as, within,
and abroad, from Time to Time. No marvel therefore though he does invite us
thrice to Stand, viz.

1. Stand as Christians, and as a part of the Army to withstand the Enemy,
whether you be, 1. common Soldiers. Or, 2. Leaders, and Commanders, being
designed to such, or such Employments, either in the Church, or State.

2. Stand constantly in your condition, and Station: Be sure to keep your
ground, the ground of Truth, 1 Timothy 3.15. For Nothing is more pernicious, or
dangerous in an Army then Ataxy, and flinching, or falling off from our
Fellow Soldiers, or our places.

3. Stand vigilantly, and watchfully, as Sentinels: Be not secure, but remember
that of the Apostle, Be sober. 1 Pet. 5. 8, 9. Be vigilant, because your
Adversary the Devil, as a roaring Lion walks about, seeking whom he may
devour.

1. Thus far the Exhortation proceeds, viz. to the fourteenth verse.

2. Then you have an enumeration of the several parts of this complete Armor
in the five next verses, viz. Ver. 14, 15, 16, 17, 18. which are either, 1.
Defensive; Or, 2. Offensive.

1. Defensive; viz. 1. A Belt or Girdle. 2. A Breast Plate. 3. Shoes. 4. A
Shield. and, 5. An Helmet.

2. Offensive. viz. 1. A Sword. 2. Prayer: Both which may be styled, both
defensive of us, and offensive to the Enemy.

Of these I shall speak particularly, if God will, hereafter: at present I am
upon the Exhortation.

This Exhortation in the three former Verses, is briefly repeated, sum'd up,
and Epitomized in this thirteenth Verse, and does in the main strength of it,
affords us this.

DOCT.

The Best of Men well grounded in the Truth, most Eminent in Grace; Or, 1. The
Church of God in her best condition, when very well eastblished, and thoroughly
instructed in the Truth, etc. 2. Had great need of christian strength, and
courage in the Lord. 3. And of a complete spiritual armor. 4. To avoid, and
withstand, resist strenuously, and over come victoriously. 5. The Manifold
wiles. And. 6. Mighty oppositions, and assaults. 7. Of powerful adversaries,
and enemies that are against her on every side. 8. Environing, and invading her
every way; 1. Within. 2. And without. 9. And especially in the evil day of
Tribulation, and Temptation. 10. And That she may be able to stand, and hold
her own ground. Stand fast in the Faith, and hold firm to the Truth, and so to
become, and remain victorious in the end.

This general point does contain the strength of the whole Exhortation, and
does reach every particular of the Doctrine before named, and the proof, and
reasons of this point will be appliable to each particular.

1. The Church in her best condition, when well instructed, etc. For then, 1.
When the Field was sown with wheat, then came the envious man, and sowed Tares,
( Mat. 13.24, to 31.) among the Wheat. (i.e.) Not in the world abroad, but in
the Church of God, Vt periret dominica messis.

2. When the Churches were planted, and well instructed by the Apostle St.
Paul, in Rome, Corinth, Galatia, Ephesus, Philippi, etc.

3. So also these seven famous Churches in Asia mentioned, Rev. 2, and 3. Chap.
how fast did Heretics and Seducers start up, and step in to trouble them, and
how does he complain of them from time to time, Romans 16.17, 18.

4. The like befell in Germany, says Zanchius in Epist. p. 659. of which they
had daily and woeful experience.

5. Is it not so in England now after 100. years establishment and instruction?
and upwards in K. Ed. 6. and Q. Elizabeth's time, what a multitude of Tares have
been sown, preached and printed! and what a multitude of Errors, Heresies, and
strange Opinions have sprung up, and prospered in these sad times of Toleration!

Do but mark how apt this Field of the Church is to be sown, and overrun with
Tares: For thus has it befallen;

1. Rome once so famous ( Romans 1.7, 8.) for their Faith, etc. Is it not become
Apostatical, Antichristian, and Damnable in their Doctrines.

2. Those other Churches so much honored with the other Epistles of our
Apostle, Corinth, Galatia, Ephesus, Philippi, Thessalonica, etc. Are they not a
Den of Dragons, the seat of the Turk?

3. Those famous seven Churches of Asia brought to the liek pass, which are so
remembered, Rev. 2. and 3. Chap.

4. Germany, once so sound in Doctrine, is it not brought to Misery and
Desolation, almost, upon the like account?

5. England, once the Glory of the Islands in the Earth for Religion, etc. what
a Labyrinth and Confusion of Troubles, Errors and evil Opinions do overflow
Her, and do threaten the like Ruin and Desolation to us?

2. The Church in this Conflict had need to be strong, and, 1. Of a good
courage, and not to dread, nor be dismayed. 1. As David instructed Solomon his
Son, 1 Chronicles: 22.13. 2. As Moses, yea, and God himself instructed Joshua
formerly, Deuteronomy. 31.7, 8. Joshua 1.6, 7, 9. Great achievements must have great
strength, and courage to bring them to Accomplishment.

We are apt to be dismayed, dicouraged and terrified at difficulties, and had
need therefore to rouse up our spirits the more, as those Instructions both
Affirmative and Negative to Joshua, and to Solomon do import, viz. To be
strong, and not to fear, or be dismayed. 2. Yet this strength and courage must
be in the Lord, and in the power of his Might. As the Apostle speaks, Phil,
4.1.3 I can do all things through Christ, etc. And, 1 John 5.4, 5. This is the
victory that overcomes the world, even our Faith, viz. whereby, 1. We lay hold
on Christ, and apply his victory to us. He has overcome the world, John 16.33.
And given us victory, 1 Cor. 15.57. And, 2. Get strength from Him to go on in
this spirtual warfare, till we have fully overcome all Satan's Temptations, Romans
16.20. The God of Peace shall bruise, or tread down, Satan under your feet,
says St. Paul. Even the Devil whom you are to resist steadfast in the Faith, 1
Pet. 5.8, 9. Ap. And thus by Faith you shall be Conquerors.

1. Thus Christ in whom we believe, is the principal Agent or Efficient.

And, 2. Faith the instrumental cause of this victory. For those Saints and
Martys of old overcame Satan by the blood of the Lamb, [i.e.] by the virtue
thereof; not by any worldly power or strength, and by the word of their
testimony, [i.e.] by bearing witness to the Truth, which is called The
Testimony of Jesus, Rev. 12.10, 11, 17. because Christ was the Object of their
Confession, Constancy and Martyrdom.

1. Thus whilst others, Goliath like, strengthen themselves in the Arm of flesh.

2. The strength of the Godly is in the Lord, and in the power of his Might; as
David's was, in that great encounter with the Giant, 1 Samuel 17.4, 5, 6, 7, 42,
45. Although with a Giant of nine foot in height, and so armed, yet David the
Youth remained the Conqueror over this mighty Monster: so do the Saints over
Satan by this assistance: and the Church at the best state had need of
strength, etc. So also,

3. She has need of complete spiritual Armor, Armor of Proof that will not
fail, nor deceive Her: such is the Armor prescribed in the Text, v. 14. to 19.
Which also is,

1. Defensive; viz. 1. A Girdle. 2. A Breast Plate. 3. Shoes. 4. Shield. And,
5. An Helmet.

2. Offensive; viz. 1. A Sword. 2. Suplication and Prayer: both which may be
styled both offensive and defensive also. For with the Word and prayer we do
not only, 1. Wound our enemy: But, 2. Defend our selves also against the crafty
Wiles, and violent Assaluts of our spiritual Adversaries.

1. With this Sword, the word of God our Savior wounded the Devil, and cut to
pieces the Snares, as well as repelled the violence of his various Temptations,
Mat, 4.1. to 12. 2. And with this, The manifold Errors, Heresies, and evil
Opinions of all Ages have been refuted and ouerthrown. 3. And with this, the
Reigning and Domineering Transgressions of many a sinner have been beaten down
and slaughtered: and as it has been a sharp edged sword, to cut down such
things.

Ap. So it has been as effectual to protect and preserve the servants of God
from the danger of them all.

The like may be said of Prayer: Both for; 1. The Destruction of the Enemies of
the Church, temporal or spiritual. 2. And for the procuring of Peace and Safety
to the Church in several Exigents in all Ages. 3. And all this strength,
courage and complete Armor must be rouzed up, and put on, that she may be able
to stand: 4. To withstand: and, 5. Resist the Craftiness, Wiles and Deceits. 6.
Mighty Assaults, and also the Violence, Rage and Fury. 7. Of so powerful an
Enemy as the Devil is. 8. In both his Wiles to ensnare, and Assaults to subdue:
and to stand, holding fast the Truth, and to gain the Victory; and, 9. So to
remain in the Evil day.

1. Affliction and Tribulation which befall all in the day of this Life.

2. Temptation, when Satan is let loose to tempt, and try the most.

3. Persecution by Antichrist, Tyrants and Heretics in several ages; who have
been instigated by Satan; 1. To make Havoc of the Church as Saul did, Acts
9.1, 2. Yea, 2. To Infect, Afflict, and if it might, totally to extinguish the
Church and people of God, that Israel might be, as Psalm 83.4. forgotten. Thus
you have had the point opened, and proved to you in the several branches and
parts of it: and each Part and Explination carries sufficient reason in it
further to confirm the Doctrine: and which Reasons are suited to every
particular, and may thus briefly be sum'd up. Because,

REAS.

1. The Church in the best condition is very obvious to be sown with Tares of
Seducers.

And had great need therefore to keep strict Watch to prevent this envious
Adversary.

2. The Church at the best is but very weak in her own strength; and what
member of the Church is not sensible of this?

Had she not need then to look up to the Lord for Aid and divine Assistance?
because without him she can do nothing of her self.

3. The Armor is strengthening Armor: it does not only cover and defend, but
also infuseth Courage into the Soldier, and enables him to fight.

4. That she may Stand; For how can Nakedness withstand an armed man?

5. The Wiles of the Devil are very many; and he acts by diverse Instruments;
For he is subtle, 2 Cor. 11.3. and has snares and depths. 1. Seeming Friends;
as Psalm 55.12, 13, 14. It was not an Enemy. 2. Domestic Servants; as Judas,
Psalm 41.9. John 3.18. cited by Christ. 3. False Brethren; as 2 Cor. 11.26.
that will insinuate to know, Gal. 2.4. their mind, and then betray them: How
usual has this been; 4. By transforming himself, as Satan does into an Angel
of (2 Cor. 11.12, 13, 14, 15.) light; Either, 1. By assuming a lightsome body
like an Angel of Light: Or, 2. By suggesting such things as seem to savor of
piety, zeal and holiness, Mat. 4.

Ap. So his Ministers, deceitful workers do: By a fair outside, etc. and, 2. By
excellent pretenses of zeal, piety, etc.

6. Because Satan's assaults and temptations are very violent and impetuous; as
it appeared by their prevalency over David, Solomon, Sampson.

Ap. If such Champions fell; consider then what may befall us.

7. Satan his army, adherents and instruments are even innumerable, and
exceeding powerful, like those, Nimrod like, Anshehashem: 1. Before and after
Noah's Flood: Giants, Genesis 6.4, and 10.8, 9, 10. 2. Like Anakims and Zamzumims,
Deuteronomy. 2.10, 11, 20. Tall Giants. Noah and Aaron in Jehoshaphats, 2 Chro. 20.
Ethiopians and Lubians in Asahs time, 2 Chronicles. 14.9.3. and Assyrrians in
Hezekias, 2 Chronicles. 32 and mighty potent, as being; 1. The Angel of the
bottomless pit, Revel. 9. to 12. 2. The great Dragon, the old Serpent called
the Devil and Satan, Rev. 12.9. 3. The roaring Lion, 1 Pet. 5.8. 4. Prince of
the power of the air, Ephesians. 2.2. 5. And King of Locusts, Rev. 9.11.

To name no more besides the Title given him in the verse before in the Text:
all which do argue an irresihable strength, if we have not the aid of a
powerful hand to help us against him.

8. Because he does invade and storm us with such snares, attempts, etc. Both;
1. Within us, by inflaming Concupiscence and acting to do evil in our best
services, and in secret evil Lusts: as well as: 2. Without, storming us with
temptations to wickedness.

9. Because all this he does mostly in the evil day: 1. Of tribulation,
affliction, sickness and death.

Ap. And what work he makes then the diligent Visitors of sick beds and dying
persons, etc. can well speak by woeful experience. Or, 2. Of Temptation, when he
is let loose upon doubtful or despaiful souls: For he has his snares and
depths, 1 Timothy 3.7. 2 Timothy 2.26. Rev. 2.24.

10. Because if we stand not, but either: 1. desert our Fellow Soldiers: Or, 2.
Yield our ground. Or, 3. Neglect our watch, and lay down our resolution, we are
utterly undone, we loose the day, and our glory, as Revolters have done.

These Uses are enlarged after.

Uses are suited to the several branches of the Doctrines; and are of, 1.
Inform. 2. Reproof. 3. Exhort. 4. Comfort.

USE I.

1. Informs how watchful and careful should the Leaders and Teachers of the
Church be against those that sow Tares, Cockle and Darnel against all Errors
and Heresies repugnant to the Truth, as the Primitive Churches were in their
general Councels of Nice, etc.

2. Reproves the faults of them that neglect this, as too many do, Gallio-like,
not caring what Errors do arise, so that they may sit at ease: as the Romans,
and other Sects that leave no help either to prevent or extirpate Errors.

3. Exhorts us to do our duty herein: for how frequently is Vigilance commanded
and commended?

4. And comfort us if we do it. This first Use is from the first branch, or
particular of the Doctrine.

USE II.

The second Use is from the second Branch: 1. Informs us that we are weak, and
do stand in great need of the aid of the Lord to help us.

2. Blames us for not seeking it, but for seeking after, and resting upon other
(or Evil) things that cannot stead or profit us.

3. Persuades us to do it, as the Church and people of God have always done in
former times.

4. And this would be our comfort in the end.

USE III.

The third Use is from the third particular of the Doctrine: and it; 1 Informs
us what need we have of this Panoply of Armor.

2. It blames us for not taking up, and putting on the same, but we choose
rather to be naked amognst our enemies.

3. It exhorts us to gird up our loins, and to put on the Lord Jesus, and This
Armor of God.

4. And comfort us if we do it, for then we need not fear, though a thousand
enemies did beset and environ us.

USE IV.

The next Use is from the 4, 5, 6, 7, and 8. particulars of the Doctrine.

1. Informs us what need we have of 1. Serpentine Wisdeme against so many Wiles
and Mysteries of Iniquity. 2. And more then Sampsons strength to withstand such
violent and strong assaults and temptations. 3. Of Elishaes Army of Angels to
help us to subdue such infernal power, and Diabolical Adversaries: Spiritual
Wickednesses acting thus: 1. Within us, by evil Concupiscence, and natural
Corruptions, as Romans 7.2. Without us, by Devils and wicked men of all sorts,
ranks and qualities.

2. Blames us for not studying this Wisdom, but rather delightin in folly.

3. It persuades us to get all these, viz. This, 1. Wisdom. 2. Strength. and,
3. Army. In those ways which God himself has prescribed to us.

4. It will be our comfort if we do so:

USE V.

The fifth Use is from the ninth particular; and, 1. Informs us of an evil Day.
2. Blames us for putting it off far. 3. Exhorts to prepare for it.

1. Informs us, 1. What to give for this field of Truth, Mat. 13. which is the
Churches Patrimony, Riches and Crown. And 2. How to love and prize the
Communion of Saints.

2. Blames us for being far from this, in that we are so apt to be seduced, and
easy to entertain uncharitable thoughts of our brethren and friends.

3. Persuades us to amend what is amiss in these respects.

4. And comfort us in so doing: This is the tenth particular.

Thus you have heard the point observed from the thirteenth verse, which is
comprehensive of all the counsel in the three former verses, 10, 11, 12.

DOCT.

Viz. That, 1. The Church of God in her best condition. 2. Had need to be
strong in the Lord, and in the power of his Might. 3. And to be completely
armed, as it is here prescribed. 4. That she may be able to stand, withstand,
and stand, (i. e.) To stand courageously: to withstand, and resist strenuously,
and yet again to ^stand, remain and overcome victoriously. 5. The Manifold
Wiles. 6. And Mighty Oppositions and Assaults. 7. Of so many, and such potent
Adversaries, (as are here specified in four Titles) who do so environ, invade
and storm Her by acting and ensnaring: 1. Within. and, 2. Without her: 9. And
especially in the evil day of, 1. Our life by Afflictions, Tribulations and
Persecutions. Or, 2. Satan's loosing by his furious Temptations, to try her to
the utmost, and sift her as wheat. 10. And that yet She may Stand fast and firm
to the truth, hold her ground, and remain victorious in the end, and for ever.

Or more briefly thus. DOCT.

1. The Church of God at the best. 2. Had need to be strong in the Lord. 3. And
completely armed. 4. That she may be able to stand, and withstand. 5. The
manifold Wiles. 6. And Mighty Assaults. 7. Of so many and such potent Enemies.
8. As do invade and storm Her. 1. Within. and, 2. Without. 9. And especially in
the Evil day. 10. And that yet she may stand, and remain victorious.

1. The proof of this point both by, 1. Scripture: and, 2. Reason.

2. And the Uses of it (according to the proof of it) have been in all suited
to the several Branches and particulars of the Doctrine.

And because the proof of each particular of this point by Scripture or
Instance, does carry the strength of a reason along with it, I shall therefore
conjoyn them both together: and thus briefl^ sum them up in these ensuing Pages.

1. The Church of God in her be^^ condition: why so?

Reas. Because then when the Field is sown with Wheat, the Enemy is most apt to
sow Tares if we sleep, Mat. 13.24. etc. (i. e.) Not in the world, but in the
Church, Vt periret dominica Messis: and for instance; Do but see and consider
what is befallen:

1. Rome once so famous for their Faith, Romans 1.7, 8. Now apostatical,
antichristian, abominable and damnable in her Doctrines.

2. Those Churches planted and instructed by St. Paul in Corinth, Galatia,
Ephesus, Philippi, etc.

3. Those famous seven Churches of Asia in Rev. 2. and 3. Cap. 1. Ephesus. 2.
Smyrna. 3. Pergamus. 4. Thyatira. 5. Sardis. 6. Philadelphia. 7. Laodicea. 1.
All over-sown with Errors by Seducers, and false Teachers, which the Apostles
complain of in all their Epistles. 2. Now all overflown with the Turk, and
become a den of Dragons.

4. Those Churches of Germany, the like befell them, says Zanchius: Now how
miserable!

5. And ours of England, how overrunne with Tares in these sad times of
Toleration?

2. The Church had need to be strong in the Lord, etc. and not to dread; as, 1.
Moses. and, 2. The Lord himself entreated Joshua, 1 Chronicles. 22.13. and, 3. David
his son Solomon, Deuteronomy. 31.7, 8. Josh. 1.6.

Reas. Because the Church is but weak, and can do nothing of her self without
his aid.

What can the, 1. House do to prevent its being broken into, if the Householder
sleep? 2. The Field to prevent the sowing of Tares, if the Owner or Keeper
sleep? 3. Or the Vine do, if the hedge be plucked up? Isa. 5.

Ap. So what can the people do to prevent Errors, if the Pastors sleep, that
are the Seeds-men of the Field, the Vinedressers of the Church?

What could the Church do in Asa, Jehoshaphat and Hezekia's times, without the
Lord, against such Armies of Ethiopians, Ammonnites, Assyrians?

Ap. But in this, 1. The Church prevailed then, viz. By the help of the Lord.
2. And David brought down the Giant, 1 Samuel 17. the Impar congressus. 3. And by
Faith in Christ, (who did overcome, John 16.13. And gives the victory, 1 Cor.
15.57.) the Church overcome the world, 1 John 5.4, 5. the Devil, 1 Pet. 5, 8,
9. all Evil, Rev. 12.10, 11, 17.

3. The Church had need to be completely armed with spiritual Armor of proof.
1. Christ, Romans 13.14. 2. The Armor of Light. 3. The Panoply of the Text. Put
Christ on, (as 1 Cor. 1.30. For he is Wisdom, etc.) as, 1. Apparel, in
Wisdom, Sanctification, 2. Armor, in his Righteousness, Redemption for
safety, Romans 13.12. Arma invictissima, because of Light, within the, 1. Cause.
2. Nature. 3. Effects of it.

Of these see my Notes on Romans 23.12.

Reas. Because This Armor is of virtue and efficacy. 1. Not only to cover and
defend us from, 1. Gods Displeasure. 2. Satan's Malice. 2. But also to infuse
Courage and strength into the Soldier, and enable him to fight valiantly,
strenuously and victoriously: And who would not be so armed?

This made the Worthies of old, Heb 11.34. To become so valiant in fight, etc.
and to overcome all Miseries. 1. Job 2. David. 3. Daniel, etc. all acted with
this Armor invinceably.

4. The Church must have all this, that she may be able to stand, and withstand
etc. Great achievement had need of Courage, Strength and Armor; and we are
too apt to be discouraged and terrified with difficulties and frailty, etc.

Reas. Because Nakedness cannot stand before armed strength.

1. For Instance. 1. Upon Isreal's Idolatry, the people were naked, Exodus 32.2,
21, 25. (i.e.) without the arms of Gods protection.

2. Upon Achans trespass, Israel (the Church) flies, runs, Josh. 7.8. and turn
their backs, etc. See verse 11, 12, 13. And no marvel, for thereupon the Lord
went not with them, Ergo, they could not stand against their enemies. Such cast
away this Armor, disarm themselves, and how can they stand against such potent
adversaries?

5. Against the Wiles of the Devil: and that because,

Reas. 1. These are very many, and who can know them? He has his snares, 1 Timothy 3.7. 2 Timothy 2.26. (i.e.) Heretical Doctrines, and vicious provocations.
Annot and, 2. Depths, Revel. 2.24. as of Jezabel, etc. which teach and seduce
to fornication, uncleanness etc. and who can discover or search into the bottom
of them?

2. Besides, he has various instruments.

1. Seeming friends, Psalm 55.12, 13, 14. It was not an enemy.

2. Domestic Servants, Psalm 41.9. John 13.11 as Judas.

3. False brethren, 2 Cron. 11.26. Gal. 2.4. usually in former times.

4. And can transform himself and his Ministers into an Angel of Light, 2 Cor.
11.13, 14, 15. Either by, 1. such a shape or, 2. Pretending piety, Mat, 4. So
his Ministers: By a, 1. Fair outside of carriage: and, 2. Specious pretenses
of piety, etc.

6. And the mighty opportunities, assalts and temptations of Satan.

Reas. Now because Satan's assaults are so strong, violent and impetuous, as
appears by their prevalency at some time over;

1. Sampson by a Delilah.

2. David in matter of Vriah, and of numbering the people.

3. Solomon to an infamous Polygamy and Idolatry.

4. Yea, and St. Peter, that resolute Apostle, as to make him deny his Master.

5. And others for the faults of the Saints in all ages, do evidence this. We
had need therefore to be very well provided: for if at some times; and in some
cases, he has foiled such Champions and Worthies as are above named.

Have not we (that are so weak) great cause to mistrust our selves, and
carefully to provide that we be not vanquished by him?

All this provision the Church had need to be furnished with against the the
Wiles and Assaults of,

7. Many and such potent enemies, as Satan, his Army, Adherents and Instruments
are: For as God, Angels and Stars, and Abraham's Offspring are said to be
innumerable; as many other things also are said to be. So may we also say of
Evils and Devils, (with David, Psalm 40.12.) that they are innumerable, as the
name Legion does import: Like the Philistines huge Army against Israel, which
were as the sand on the sea shore in multitude, 1 Samuel 13.5. And they that are
to encounter with such a company, had need to be well provided.

1. Those mighty Giants, (Aushehashem of the old world, Gen 6.4. before the
flood.

2. Those Nimrod-like Hunters, the Builders of Babel after the flood, Genesis
10.8, 9, 10.

3. Those Anakims and Zamzummims: those Giant-wicked men, Deuteronomy. 2.10, 11, 20.
as their names import, as tall in Evil as in stature.

4. And those mighty Armies of, 1. Ethiopians and Lubims in Asahs time, 2 Chronicles. 14.9. 2. Moabites and Ammonites in Jehoshaphats time, 2 Chronicles. 20.3. And
of Assyrrians in Hezekias time, 2 Chronicles. 32. and all of them so furiously bent
against the people of God to destroy them, are yet as nothing, in comparison of
Satan's huge Army against the Israel (the Church) of God to devour and destroy
them all. And as the Devils name may well be called Legion, because they are
many, Mark 5.9, 15. Luke 8.30.

So also is he mighty, strong, and exceeding powerful, and is therefore styled
by diverse names, which import as much, viz. The, 1. God of this world, 2 Cor.
4.4. (i.e.) of Unbelievers which lie in wickedness, 1 John 5.19. 2. And Prince
of the same, John 12.31. and 14.30. and 16.11. and of the power of the Air,
Ephesians. 2.2. Because, 1. Of his power over, and efficacy upen wicked men, he
being the spirit that works in the children of disobedience, Ephesians. 2.2. and,
2. The observance and obedience which they do so readily perform to him again.
and, 3 Tyranny which he exercises upon the godly to the utmost, so far as God
does permit, and lengthen his chain of false Doctrine, viz. the Devil and
Mahomet in his Alcaran, introduced sinners and Sects to devour Religion.

3. Angel of the bottomless pit. 4. King of Locusts, Rev. 9.11. 5. Great
Dragon, the old serpent called the Devil, and Satan in the Heathen Roman
Emperors, the Seducer of our first Parents, Accuser of the brethren, and the
Adversary of Gods Church, Rev. 12.9. 6. Roaring Lion, continually seeking whom
he may devour, 1 Pet. 5, 8, 9. Pope or Turk, or any other instrument or means
imaginable to devour and destroy the people of God. All which (to add no more
Names) besides the titles given him in the verse before the Text, viz.
Principallities, powers, etc. do argue an irresistible strength which none can
prevail against, except he be aided by the powerful, omnipotent hand of God.

And further, the Church had need to be thus provided, because he does invade
and storm: 1. Within us; by, 1. Inflaming Concupiscence. and, 2. Secret evil
lusts which he does light (or kindle) by that tinder. and, 3. Acting in our
best Services and Duties to pervert them to evil, by withdrawing our mind: See
James 11.3, 14, 15. For the Lust conceives, the Will consents to, and delights
in, which produces acts and deeds, nay, Who can enumerate the actings, and
operations of the evil Spirit, even within us, to our exceeding great
prejudice, and hindrance in good?

2. Without us a thousand ways, by objects, allurements and violent
temptations: By the wicked of the world, whose scoffs and discouragements,
whose oppositions and persecutions do clearly evidence, that he leaves no means
unattempted whereby to ruin us.

By both these ways does Satan work mightily.

1. He kindles the first fire of concupiscence and corruption in Eve to eat of
the forbidden fruit, Genesis 3.1.4, 5, 6.

2. And he it is that stirs up the wicked, to persecute the Saints of God,
Dau. 7.21.25, as Babylon, Antiochus, Antichrist did in their times, yea he is
ever ready to act both these Enemies, viz. 1. Lust within: and, 2. The world
without as to effect our sin, shame and destruction.

Satan is a great usurper of authority: he acts as wicked Rulers do, to
pervert and destroy.

He is very bold and daring both in Earthly and Heavenly things.

1. In terrennis and humanis, in things here below, in the darkness of this
world, (i.e.) in the state of ignorance, sin, death and confusion: all which do
reign in this world, and of which he is a Ruler; what a deal of a work does he
make there! experience speaks daily.

2. In caelestibus and divinis, in things of a higher and better nature, in the
most heavenly places, persons and things, and in the most holy and divine
duties to be performed by man.

1. In the Church of God, which is called Heaven, Rev. 12.1, 3. What work makes
he both in the way of, 1. Infection by Error and Heresies. 2. Destruction by
enemies.

2. In the best of Saints whose conversation is in heaven, Phil. 32.3. What
does he not attempt, to divert them from the right way?

3. In the holiest duties and most spiritual graces and performances of a
Christian, which he is most virulently bent to hinder, infect and hurt by
manifold Injections, Seductions and violent Temptations.

What Christian, (that has a right knowledge of himself) but he has cause to
complain?

And yet again the Church had need to be thus furnished;

9. Because in the evil day, this enemy is most apt to do us mischief.

Not that any day is properly said to be evil in it self, but very good,
because it is of Gods institution and nomination, Genesis 1.4, 5. But in respect
of other things, the Day is so called: Especially of: 1. Affliction,
Tribulation, Sickness and Death, to all which we are subject every day, and so
it extends to the whole time of our life, which is obvious to so many Evils,
Corruptions, Perils and Dangers continually. 2. Temptation, when Satan is let
loose, (as it were) to vex, 1. And infect the Church with Errors, Heresies,
Corruptions, and with like things of that nature. Or, 2. To sift, and try the
Church to the utmost by grievous and terrible persecutions and distresses of
that nature; which (through his Instigation) are raised by, 1. Antichrist. 2.
Tyrants. 3. And perverse and persecuting Heretics. As it befell, 1. Job, who
might well take up Solomon's Proverb, and say as He, All the days of the
afflicted are evil, Prove. 15.15. But especially then when Satan was let loose
upon him to exercise him as he did, both outwardly; 1. In his Goods, Children
and Body. And, 2. Inwardly, in his Soul. 2. The Apostles, when their Master the
Lord Jesus Christ was taken and crucified, and themselves left to be winnowed
by Satan, and persecuted by wicked men. 3. The Church of God, whose lot is
Affliction: But her days are at the worst, when she is pressed beyond measure,
as 2 Cor. 1.8. by such enemies as are above named, Antichristians, Tyrants and
Heretics.

Now in such times as these Satan is most active to do us harm.

1. What he does in the Day of Affliction, Tribulation, Sickness, Death, etc.
let the diligent Visitors of Sick-beds and dying persons speak their woeful
experience.

2. And what work he makes in the Day of Temptation when he is let loose as
before, let doutful and despairful Souls speak: for then his wiles, snares and
depths are evident, which occasioned many fearful souls to revolt in the times
of persecution.

10. Lastly, It does behove the Church to be thus prepared and provided, that
she may be able to stand and withstand, as it is four times urged in three
verses, viz. Ver. 11, 13, 14.

1. (i. e.) To stand; 1. Courageously and valiantly in the Onset and Entrace.
2. Unanimously and vigilantly, with the rest of the Christian Army, our
Fellow Soldiers; whether we be, 1. Common Soldiers: Or, 2. Commanders and
Leaders, being designed to such and such a place and employment either in the
Church or State.

3. Regularly and constantly in our Rank and Order, in our Condition and
Station, keeping our ground, The ground of Truth, 1 Timothy 3.15.

4. Strenuously, with our utmost strength in the Combat and Conflict, till all
is done, the War ended.

5. Victoriously, and triumphing when all is done, the Enemy overcome, and the
War is ended for ever.

And thus it behooves the Church to stand, 1. Valiantly. 2. Unanimously. 3.
Regularly and constantly. 4. Strenuously, that she may stand. 5. Victoriously
in the end: and why so? But,

10. Because if we stand not, but either, 1. Fail in our Courage, which
betrays our selves: Or, 2. Fall off from our Fellows, which weakens the Army:
Or, 3. Forsake our Rank, which puts all into confusion: Or, 4. Neglect our
strength, and do not put it out to the utmost in this Exigent. 5. The Day is
lost, our Glory and Crown is gone, and vanished as a vapor: we are utterly
undone, and shall never stand victoriously; For nothing can be more prejudicial
to an Army, then for men engaged therein to fail in these things: For if they,
1. Lay aside their Resolution, and so disnerve their Courage. 2. Desert their
Fellows, and neglect their Watch. 3. leave their Ranks, and yield their Ground.
4. Abate of their strength, when there is most need of it. 5. Then you may be
sure, They shall loose the day, be subdued, captivated, and quite undone.

1. Pusillanimity and Irresolution. 2. Division and Differences. 3. Ataxy,
Disorder and yielding back. 4. And casting away their strength and arms with
their courage. Are enough, 5. To undo the most puissant Army; as often
experience does testify.

Thus you have heard the point cleared, proved both by Scripture and Reason in
all the parts and particulars of it, viz.

Doct. 1. That the Church when at the best: 2. Had need to be strong in the
Lord: 3. And completely armed: 4. To stand and withstand: 5. The manifold
Wiles: 6. And Mighty Assaults. 7. Of so many and potent Enemies: 8. As do
assault, environ and storm her, 1. Within. 2. and without. 9. And especially in
the evil day. 10. And yet that she may stand and remain victorious and
triumphant.

The point thus proved, only the improvement of it remains: and as the proof of
it, so also the Uses must be suited to the severel branches of the Doctrine,
and each particular Use suitable to each Branch, may very well bear the weight
of a fourfold improvement, viz. Of Information, Exhortation, Reproof and
Comfort. But I shall for brevity sake, fold them up close together.

Use I. Is it so then, that the Church in her best condition had need of all
this, because then so apt to be oversown with Tares, to have the wall or hedge
broken down, and this House by the Thief to be entered; surely then this first
Use,

1. Informs us how watchful and careful the Teachers and Leaders of the Church
should be, who are, 1. The Seedsmen of this Field: 2. The Vinedressers: and, 3.
The Keepers of the House by Gods own appointment, to prevent and withstand. 1.
The Enemy that sows tares in this field. 2. The Breakers down of the fence of
this Vineyard, and the wild beasts that devour this Vine. 3. And the thief that
enters this House: For when either the Husbandman, Vinedresser or Housekeeper
are asleep, how soon may the Field, the Vine or House be surprised, and
Tare-sown wasted or entered by an Enemy!

2. Exhortation; For how often are we exhorted hereunto to Vigilance and
Industry for the prevention of all Errors, Heresies and dangerous opinious
repugnant to the Truth? Romans 16.17. I beseech you mark them which cause
Divisions and Offenses contrary to the Doctrine which ye have learned, and
avoid them; for they that are, etc. and so frequently in the Epistles. And that
charge of the Apostle at his Farewell, is never to be forgotten: Acts 20.28. to
33. Take heed to your selves, and to all the flock, etc. And for instance,

1. And how praise worthy were the primitive Churches that took such care by
their great grave and general Councels, to prevent the growing and
overspreading of those Tares that began to spring in their Times: Those four
first general Gounsels especially at Nice against the Heresy of Arius, and
other Errors, Anno 330. circiter. 2. Constantinople against Macedonians, who
denied the Holy Spirit to be consubstantial with the Father, and the Son, An.
380. 3. Ephesus against Nestorius, that held two persons in Christ, Anno 431.
4. Chalcedon against Autyches and Dioscorus Bishop of Alexandria, who
blasphemously affirmed the two Natures in Christ to be confounded, and become
but one nature, after the union of the humane with the divine nature, Anno 451.
To which four Councels the Reformed Churches do adhere.

2. The like care did the Orthodox party take from time to time by Councels and
Synodes, General, National and Provincial, to crush (if it might be) Error in
the bud, and prevent it of taking Root and growth.

3. The like godly care have all the Reformed Churches of Christendom taken,
viz. 1. England. 2. France. 3. Helvetia. 4. Bohemia. 5. Belgia. 6. Augusta.
and, 7. Saxony. in the harmony of their Confessions, and in Articles of
Religion; as also by Counsels and Synodes National and Provincial: 1. To
preserve Union and Peace amongst the Churches. 2. And to prevent Schism,
Faction and Divisions which are the very Nurseries of Errors and Heresies, to
the great disquiet and trouble, and (as much as in them is) to the utter
undoing and ruin of the Church, and the overthrow of her Doctrine, Peace,
Unity and Concord. 1. Of the Rule upon which she is founded. 2. Yea, and of her
Piety, Unity, Peace and Concord, which are the Materials wherewith this House
is raised, and cemented fast together.

3. Reproof. How justly does this third Use serve to reprove the faults of all
those Leaders, Teachers, Doctors and Pastors of the Church especially that are
negligent in this case; and Gallio-like in another case, Acts 28.17. 1. Care
not what Errors invade the Church, and seduce the Children and Members of the
same. 2. Or hinder, and not admit of such means whereby the maladies of a
Church may be either prevented or cured, so that they may sit at ease, and
enjoy Immunity and Liberty without control. And the first we shall take take
to task for this fault, are the,

I. Romanists, or those of the Church of Rome (statu quo) in the state it now
stands, and that for three things especially, viz. 1. Separation. 2.
Uncertainty of, or obstinacy in their Doctrine, or Tenants as now it is with
them. 3. Their Independency and uncontrouableness admitting no means of
redress. The, 1. Began or entered them. The, 2. Enlarges them. And, the 3.
Confirms them, and makes them obstinate and incorrigible in Erronr.

1. They entered with Schismatical contentions, Excommunication and Separation
from the Eastern Churches about diverse things in which they manifested great
Pride and Arrogance: all tending to Schism and Division, as the Celebration of
Easter, etc.

2. In their progress they made a further Separation from the Truth in diverse
particulars, which are evidently known, and strenuously as well as voluminously
refuted by many Worthies: From all which Worthies they always separated and
departed.

Ap. So that nevertheless they do charge the crime of Schism and Heresy upon
the Reformed Churches: yet the truth is, that these never separated from them
in what they were right, when the Apostle left them, (till forced thereunto)
but only from their newly introduced Errors and Heresies, which in porgress of
time produced an incompatability of peace, and Communion with Rome. If they
held to the orthodox faith, and right Doctrine of the Ancients, they must
proclaim no peace with Rome.

So as that the charge of Heresy and Schism fixed and charged by them upon us,
is clearly and really found upon themselves.

II. Touching the uncertainty of their Doctrine and Tenets, and their obstinacy
in the same; it is evident and clear, that when they once laid aside the
Scriptures, and made the Popes Decrees, (or Decretals) of equal Authority with
the Seriptures, the word of God. 1. Their Tenets are marvellously varied and
altered. 2. And they are still obvious to more variations and changes, neither
can they be otherwise, whilst they do ascribe a power to the Pope to add (at
his pleasure) to their unwritten Traditions, which must as inviolably be
observed as the commands of God, and therefore it is no wonder, that they do
obstinately persist, and continue in the same.

III. Touching their Independency, it is clearly manifest, that the Pope and
the Clergy maintain themselves to be free from, (yea, and above) the control
of any Authority, whether Civil or Ecclesiastical.

Ap. And therefore they did not only, 1, Resist the pious, and grave
admonitions of the ancient Fathers of the Eastern Churches, and others of
former times. 2. But since, they would never endure the trial of an Oecumenick,
(or general) Council, though they have been often called upon to that end. 3.
Much less of any inferior Synod, or other Council, or any part of the Reformed
Churches in all their advertisements tending thereunto. So that by this means
they prevent all ways imaginable by which they may be reformed of the manifold
Maladies and Errors that are crept in amongst them, which now can no more be
concealed than Gray hairs in the head, and the oil in the hand of a man, Hos.
7.9.

2. The second sort of persons jnstly blameworthy for preventing a Church of
the means of recovery out of Errors, and Heresies, and hindering the Church of
helps in that case, are the ancient Separatists of former times, which are
guilty of, 1. Schism. 2. Heresy. And herein to let pass all those abominable
Heresies of diverse, recorded by the Ancients, Epiphanus, Augustinus, Ambros.
etc. I shall only look upon the two Sects of the fairest of them, and that
began with the greatest pretense of piety, and zeal of Gods glory, viz. 1.
Novatians. and, 2. Donatists.

1. Novatians took their name of their Leaders, which were, 1. Novatus, A
Presbyter of Carthage, Anno 250. 2. Novatianus, a Presbyter of Rome, who became
his Partner in error at the same time.

Novatus was a man of a Contentious spirit, and (assisted by his Partner) he
disquied two (then) famous Churches, viz. Rome and Carthage, by a rigid
sentence against such as had fallen through infirmity in the times of
persecution, and had denied the Faith, (though after they desired to be
received to the Church) For he taught, 1. That there was no place of repentance
left for such, and therefore such should never be admitted again into the
fellowship of the Church, although they express manifest signs of true
Repentance. Hereupon they separated from the Orthodoz party, who were otherwise
persuaded; And here began their Sehism. 2. They were called Cathari, because
they boasted themselves to be purer then others in life and manners: whereas
our Purity only is, that our sins are forgiven, and we are purged in the
fountain of Christ's blood, and sanctified by his word and spirit, John 15.3. 1
John 1.7. 3. Yet this Error continued the longer, because it crept in under
pretense of, 1. Zeal to the glory of God: and, 2. Of Detestation of sin. Beware
of such Errors as enter with the fairest pretenses. 1. Nevertheless this
Error it was against the Scriptures evidently. 2. And it produced dangerous
effects, for it advanced Satan's kingdom, by driving diverse into despair. 4. And
it was condemned by the second African counsel under Cyprian Bishop of Carthage
the President thereof. And by the second Synod at Rome under Cornelius the
Bishop there: See Eusebius, Alsted and Simpson of the Church, Page 37.421, 422.
etc.

And nevertheless these did not multiply their Errors; yet this Error was a
capital and dangerous one, and made way to others, and was obstinately
persisted in to a great Schism, and dangerous, admitting no reclaim or
amendment: such was their Independency: Though in other things they consented
with the Orthodox.

Hence they were condemned by some of Schism only; by others of Heresy: So
Schismatics they were at the best.

1. It is great Wisdom to suppress Errors betimes which Cyprian, and Cornelius
endeavored by their Colleagues, Synodes and Counsels.

2. Authors of Schism are hinderers of reviving the Union of the Church.

3. Inveterates Schisms often Turn to Heresies.

4. We should beware of such as perturb the unity of the Church under the
pretense of piety and zeal.

5. And that Invent-Remedies for the Churches Maladies which are worse then the
Disease, as the Novatians did by their opinion.

Ap. For though weakness is to be pitied, yet a devilish Rigor pitying none
that have fallen through infirmity, is a lesson that has no allowance in the
book of God.

Thus the Novatians err; 1. in Schism. 2. Obstinacy in error. 3. Independency.
2. The Donatists took their name of one Donatus, born about seven years after
Arrius in the time of Constantine. Afterward he was a Bishop in Numidia, and
proved to to be a great Disturber of the Churches in Africa: for, 1. He hatched
a bitter hatred, (though causless) against Cecilianus Bishop of Carthage, whose
cause was often heard. 2. But always the Donatists succumbed (or failed) in
proof. 3. In the end, because they could not accomplish their designs against
Cecilianus; they became enraged, and, 1. Made a Schism falling off from the
unity of the Church.

Ap. What will not Spleen do by way of Revenge, if disappointed? Thus being
become a Schismatic, next he turns Heretic, and taught diverse strange
Doctrines introductive of more, viz.

1. That only was a true Church which was spotless and without sin, and that
the Catholic Church was only in that corner of Africa with them.

2. That the efficacy of the Sacrament did depend upon him that did administer
it, and thereupon that Baptism was not available, except some of their sect
were present, and did administer it.

3. That all that came into them must be rebaptized, which they did practice
upon people, though they had been baptized before by the Orthodox: This
introduced Anabaptism.

4. They placed Religion in austerity of Life and Homicide, for they were very
cruel, Alstead, Chron. page 385.

5. That the Son was inferior to the Father, and the Holy Ghost to the Son,
says Eusebius? so they made a Disparity in the Trinity.

6. They condemned Cecilianus, though his innocence was often tried, and
himself acquitted by many Judges, and yet they had many Favorers (as any such
shall have) and friends, and were called by diverse names thereupon, as
Parmeniani, Rogatistae, Cirtenses and Maximianistae.

3. But they were learnedly confuted by Optatus Bish. of, 1. Melevitanum in
Africa, as to their two first Tenets, Simp. p. 292. 2. And by St. Augustine
mightily. 3. And they were condemned by several Synodes at Carthage for diverse
years together, viz. ab Anno 403. usque ad Annum 310.4. Yet they continued very
obstinate, and did refuse to stand to the determination of either Synod or
Council: So obstinate were they in their Errors and Heresies. Afterward

1. They became cruel Persecuters of the Orthodox, and Catholic Christians
about the year 404. Alsted Chron. p. p. 335

2. In the end they were divided into sundry factions, and so were rent and
torn to pieces, Alsted Chron. p. 385.

Ap. As it does often befall to such persons in the like cases: Thus the
Donatists also were, 1. Schismatics, then Heretics. 2. Uncertain, and
obstinate in their errors. And, 3. Independent.

In the former Presidents of Romanists, etc. you perceive that:

1. Schism does begin, and enter men into Error and Heresy.

2. Strangeness, and uncertainty of Doctrine, does continue and enlarge them
therein, specially if men be obstinate in them.

3. Independency, and uncontroulableness does confirm and harden men in error,
and makes them obstinate and incorrigible, as it did the Romanists, Novatians
and Donatists before named, whom no confutation, council, or course could
reclaim.

3. Now the third sort of persons that hinder the Church of the means of
Recovery out of Errors and Heresies, etc. are the

Separatists of latter times, (which are therein blameworthy) by what Names or
Titles soever they be called, whether, 1. Anabaptists. 2. Brownists. or 3.
Independents: or are known by any other title whatsoever, Quakers, etc.

Herein let me premise this that none mistake me, as if,

1. I had any prejudice to any man's person, or that I aim to do wrong to any
man, it is far from me.

2. I have learned to own and prize the least appearance of Grace and Piety,
and the smallest measure of the gifts of God in any persons whatsoever.

3. It is not any man, but the Way that is in question.

4. And I thought my self bound in conscience for the faithful discharge of my
Duty, to give you warning of such ways, as I cannot but deem to be dangerous
and prejudicial to the Unity and Peace of the Church of God, (as the
forementioned Errors of Rome and Africa were) and thereby obstructing the
progress of that Truth, by which we are all to be guided, and in the belief of
that Doctrine, in the practice of which we all hope to be saved. See Ezekiel.
3.17. and 33.7. I have made thee a watchman, etc. Ergo, 1. hear, etc. at my
mouth, and give them warning from me.

The Separatists of these latter times have been the unhappy Revivers of the so
long since exploded Errors of the Novations, Donatists, and others of old.

I. Anabaptism was first broached in Germany by one, 1. Nicholas Stock, (who
was a man answerable to his name, (as Ebion in his time was) Anno (circiter)
1520. 2. Tho. Muncer was bred in his School.

1. Stock affirmed that God spoke to him by an Angel, and revealed his Will to
him in dreams.

2. Tho. Muncer kept a Racket in Abset and Thuringia.

3. And after him John Leydan, Cnipperpdoling, and their followers marvellously
infected and infested Munster, Anno 1532.

The Chips of this Stock (alias Block) kindled such a fire in Germany, that by
Tumults raised by them in Germany, Holsatia, and Swethland, there were
slaughtered no less then 150000. persons within a few years. Dr. Featly against
Anabaptists, p. 182.

To Stock and Muncer you may add their other Leaders, Melchior, Georgius,
Tuscoverer, and others, who deluded the people with pretended inspirations,
visions, dreams and revelations. Idem p. 205.

1. These began with Separation, as those before named did.

2. Their Errors were many, very changeable, and many of them abominable.

3. Their Independency or Obstinacy was incorrigible, for they would be
controuled by none.

4. And their End (for the most part) miserable.

II. Brownism, (as it is commonly called) or Separatism:

1. Was set on foot by one Bolton, the first know Separatist in England, who
terrified in conscience for his Errors: He did recant his Separation, and
hanged himself Judas-like.

2. Robert Brown, Anno 1580. a rash young man succeeded, who (when most of his
separated Congregation on a sudden turned Anabaptists at Middleburg in Zeland,
whether they went over to enjoy their liberty. 1. Returned into England. 2.
Recanted his Brownism. 3. Received a Personage at the hand of a Bishop. 4.
Became scandalous in his Conversation. 5. And very careless of his charge in
his Personage. 6. So that he brought himself to prison, where he continued till
death: Baily, p. 14.

3. Barrow. 4. Johnson. 5. Ainsworth. 6. Smith. And, 7. Robinson, were all
successively Introducers, and Promoters of Brownism or Separatism; whose
abilities and miscarriages in particular to their persons, I mean not to speak
of: it being great pity, that men of such Eminency, Parts and Learning, as some
of them were, should be so far mistaken, as to fall into an Error, so
prejudicial to the Church, and to the Truth.

And Robinson the last, and one of the most grave and learned Doctors of the
Brownists, did in the end undermine his own party by a work begun against
Schism, Baily. p. 17. Then this Mr. Robinson became the Author of Independency,
or Semiseparation, which has been the Fountain of many evils, both in Old and
New England. Idem p. 17.

Ap. Thus the Brownists in their, 1. Separation. 2. Errors. And, 3.
Independency did generally concur with the Anabaptists.

III. Independency is derived from the Brownists and Anabaptists successively.
It is a Title very improper for any Creature, Man or Christian.

1. God being only Independent and of himself.

2. And having ordained all to depend on him chiefly, and Christians in special
manner upon him, one upon another in such a way of order and subordination, as
may best suit with the public good in the Civil State or Ecclesiastical: As
the members of the body natural do in their several places and offices, 1 Cor.
12.12. to 34. As the body is one, etc. as verse. 25. which if they were cut off
by a Schism, would be altogether useless and unprofitable.

Ap. And thus it is with the Church, which is either universal or national.

All congregational and particular Churches referring to the more general, as
to the body of which they are members.

This Sect (of no long standing) 1. Began (as the rest) with Schism and
Separation from all the Reformed Churches in Christendom.

2. They do generally concur with their Predecessors the Anabaptists and
Brownists in their Tenets, (and in some things go beyond them) and in the
uncertainty of Tenets and Obstinacy in contending for them with all the former.

3. They all punctually do agree in the point of Independency and
Vncontroulableness, because they do all defend this, That their Churches are
exempt from all Authority Civil and Ecclesiastical: so as that no Magistrate,
no nor Oecumenick, or General Council has any power at all to reform and
suppress any Error or Heresy arising or springing amongst them, only their
own Church must do it, which may consist of seven or three persons: And how
soon may they be seduced or quasht.

1. If there were no more but these three particulars named, viz. Their, 1.
Schism. 2. Uncertainty of Doctrine, Obstinacy and Liberty to change their
Tenets which they always reserve, Baily, p. 101. And, 3. Their Independency or
Freedom from the censure or control of any power whatsoever, Civil or
Ecclesiastical, to reform or redress any Error growing amongst them.

Ap. It might well, and justly cause any wise man or Christian to consider
seriously of such a way, and to suspect it whether it be right or no before he
enter Rashly into it.

2. But in many other things besides these, they do concur with the Anabaptists
and Brownists, which time will not give me leave to relate.

3. Besides these; 1. What Ingress or Entrance these men (the Independents) had
in Holland, and what they did there, is evident. 2. What Progress they had in
New England, and of their carriage there. 3. And now in Old England, our dear
native Country, and what they have bin doing here for diverse years last past.
Res ipsa loquitur and loquetur, Experience does, and will speak abundantly,
though I were dumb: For when were so many Sects on foot, as since the unhappy
liberty which they contend for?

A doleful spectacle it is to see Christian Nations and Churches all pretending
to the same end, and of the same Faith, thus torn to pieces with manifold
Divisions and sad Contentions, (like virulent Humors in the natural body) all
tending to Dissolution: while those errors can unanimously agree in the way to
destruction and damnation throughout the world.

But is there no Balm in Gilead, is there no Physician there? Why then is not
the health of the daughter of my people recovered? Jer. 8.22. and 46.11. Is
there no Sovereign Medicine to close these gaping wounds? Is there no wise Man
(like a skilful Physician or Surgeon) that can judge between brethren, (in
Nature, Profession, as Men and Christians) and to decide these unchristian-like
Differences?

1. Is our case just like the condition of Egypt, Jer. 46.11. so that though we
do go up into Gilead, where the best Balm is to be had, and do use many
Medicines, yet we shall still remain incurable and irrecoverable 2. As it befell
Babylon also, Jer. 8.9. So that though we do howl, and take Balm for this pain,
and would fain heal these things, yet we cannot be healed.

2. And I know we have the Scriptures, the Oracles of God, which are the best
Balsam in the world to close, and cure these wounds, if we would admit them to
be the Judge of our Controversies, and that they were rightly applied and made
use of. See Camerons Judge of Controversy.

1. Melancthon that mirror of Germany for learning and Moderation of spirit in
his Time, did mightily endeavor to unite the Romish and the reformed Churches.

2. And Grotius a man of great learning, and eminent in parts, has since, of
late, industriously labored in the same work, (to name no more) for that work.
3. Some others have endeavored an Argreement betwixt the Sectaries of these
times, and the truly Orthodox Protestant Ministers, and people of the Church of
England: Yet all endeavors in these cases have hitherto proved fruitless and
in vain. And no marvel, For (as Jehu said to Joram 2 Kings 9.22.) what peace
can there be, whilst the Whoredoms of Jezabel and her Witchcrafts are so many?
Whilst men are still so obstinate and pertinacious in erroneous ways and
opinions? Yet, no doubt, there is a way left for healing, and there might be a
cure, if all persons on each side would but patiently submit, and yield to such
things, as are to be added or abated for the union of the whole and the good
cementing of the stones of our Christian Building, till we all become an holy
Temple in the Lord, Ephesians. 2.20, 21, 22. Where you see our Foundation must be
the Apostles and Prophets, Jesus Christ himself being the chief cornerstone,
and accordingly,

Ap. 1. If Rome would be content to part with her Idolatry, Superstition and
manifold Innovations.

2. If all Sects would lay aside their unjustifiable Separation, their
censorious spirits, and self-conceited opinions, and let all be tried by the
infallible Touchstone of the Word of God; then, without doubt, we might
quickly meet and agree together; But whilst all persist in their perverse
opinions and vehement Animosities one against another, There can be no peace
amongst us, But now if at last by any good means this blessed peace might be
effected, and that all the professed Christians in the world, both of the East
and West Churches, were rightly reformed according to this rule of the Word,
and made suitable with the foundation Jesus Christ: so that we were all become
like those primitive Christians, Acts 2.46. and 4.32. Of one heart, and one
soul, of one mind, and of the same Judgment.

4. How joyfully then, and with what abundant comfort which this fourth Branch
of this 1. Use leads us to consider, might we sing that Psalm. 133. Behold how
good and pleasant it is for brethren to dwell together in unity, etc. This
would be an oil of Perfume, and the dew of fruitfulness and blessing.

2. How happily then should we live together, as the Household of Faith, the
Communion of Saints in the unity of the Spirit, in the bond of Peace, till we
all become perfect in Jesus Christ, and attain unto the measure of the stature
of the fullness of Christ, Ephesians. 4.3, 13.

1. In the ripeness and perfection of Christ's Mystical Body, which shall be by,
1. The Addition of all the Members. And, 2. The perfection of all graces in
them when they shall be joined to Christ their Head in the world to come, and
should All come to Mount Sion, the City of the living God, the heavenly
Jerusalem, and an innumerable company of Angels, Heb. 12.22. etc. And shall be
set down with Christ in his Throne, according to his own gracious promise to
his servants, Rev. 3.24. And shall Reign with him for ever and ever, Rev. 22.4,
5.

Note, That, 1. Antichrist began betime, 2 These. 2.7. 2. Novatus, Anno 250. 3.
Donatus, circa An. 320. 4 Anabaptists, Anno 1520. 5. Brownists, Anno 1580. 6.
Independents yesterday.

As for the Quarrel betwixt Episcopacy and Presbitery, I could never see other
cause, then in the Animosities of men, which if laid aside, the difference
might soon be decided, and the Controversy ended: For I could never find but
that,

1. Episcopacy is a Presbytery elevated and advanced. And,

2. Presbytery rightly managed, is an Episcopacy regulated: Nor could I ever
approve the total rejecting of the names Bishop and Episcopacy, they being so
often used in the New Testament, and the name Bishop so honored by our
Savior, that He himself is styled, the great chief Shepherd, and Bishop of our
souls, Heb. 13.20. 1 Pet. 2.25.

Thus you have heard the point, and proof thereof, with Reasons suited to the
ten particulars contained therein: We are upon Use; and you have heard the
first Use answerable to the first particular, which has, 1. Informed us, How
great care should be taken of this Field, Vine, House, the Church of God, that
it be not wronged by any Enemy. 2. Exhorted us to consider the charge often
imposed upon us to that end, Act. 20 28, to 33. And how praise worthy the
Primitive Fathers, the Orthodox party in after-ages, and the Reformed Churches
of Christendom have been, and are for thus doing. 3. Reproved, as very faulty,
all such as neglect this care of prevention, or hinder the Church of the means
of recovery out of Errors and Heresies, if the Church should be sick of such
Maladies, as often: Thus do, 1. Papists. 2. Ancient Schismatics and Heretics,
as Novatians, Donatists. 3. Modern Separatists, whether Anabaptists, Brownists
or Independents; All which do agree in the three forenamed particulars, viz. 1.
Schism. 2. Uncertainty, or Obstinacy in unjustifiable Tenets. And, 3.
Independency and Uncontroulableness. 4. Comforted us: If these great
differences could be reconciled.

To the former three, you may add a fourth Parallel betwixt Papists and
Independents, or the Papacy and Independency; viz. Their Antichristianism;
which we do not fix upon the forehead of this, or that particular Pope or
Papist, but upon the Papacy, (that status Papatus) in which is involved the
(...), that Mystery of Iniquity, that Antichrist, who in pretense is most for,
but in practice, most against the Lord Jesus Christ, according to the
signification of the preposition (...), which signifies For or Against.

Ap. And who in a special manner does act his Antichristianism in opposition to
the power of Magistracy and Ministry in the right Office and Use, Power and
Efficacy of the same to do good.

1. What they say against the Civil Power over the Church, is evident.

2. And for the Ministry, (though they may seem to advance it in external pomp,
great Honors, plentiful provisions etc.) yet they have overthrown the right
office, best Use, powerful Efficacy of it for the conversion of souls; by,

1. Concealing the Scriptures in an unknown tongue.

2. Turning the Ministry into a Sacrificing Priesthood.

3. And the power of Preaching, Visiting, Counselling, Comforting, etc. from
the infallible Rule of Gods holy Word, into a practice of telling Legends,
(Lies) and feigned stories, (which is their usual course of Preaching) and into
Confessions, Penances, Pardons, Absolutions, etc. of no value.

Ap. So does Independency, (though some persons of them do not so) For,

1. Against the Civil Power in Church Affairs, they say as the Papists do.

2. And for the Ministry, which they pretend to honor, they destroy it. 1. By
putting it into every man's hand, advancing a Jeroboams Priesthood, 1 King.
1.23. and 13.33, 34. and 2 Chronicles. 11.15. into the place and power of the
Ministry appointed by the Lord Jesus Christ. 2. By crying down all Maintenance
of God and Man for their subsistence. 3. Defaming them with the vilest names of
Baals-Priests, etc. to render them infamous and odious to all men.

I have done with the first Use from the first particular of the Doctrine,
which contains above a whole sheet of paper: The weight of the matter spoken
of, did justly occasion that prolixity) I shall be more speedy in the rest
which now succeed.

The second Use is from the second and third particulars of the point.

1. Informs us of our own weakness and nakedness. Alas, what can we do without
this strength in the Lord, and Armor of God. 1. Other strength merely humane,
though very puissant; And, 2. Other Armor of exquisite composure and strength
has often failed in wars with man.

1. As all the Routs and Overthrows of the Armies of Gods Enemies mentioned in
Scripture, as of Sisera, Ethiopians, etc. against Asa, Johoshaphat, over Edom
and Hezekiah, over Assyrrians. 2. And the Downfall of Goliath, that mighty
Champion armed with strength, and formidable Weapons, 1 Samuel 17. do evidently
testify.

Ap. But to act with humane strength, and such inconsiderable Armor against a
spiritual enemy the Devil, etc. As Hannah could say, 1 Samuel 2.9. By strength
shall none prevail: were as Ridiculous an absurdity, as an infallible
impossibility of ever prevailing at all.

2. Therefore as we are often exhorted, 1. How should we call, and cry out for
the ^id and strength of the Lord to help us in these Assaults, For he is our
strength and power, as Moses and Israel said, Exodus 15.2. and David a great
Warrior, and other Worthies do acknowledge. 2. And Gird up the loins of our
minds, and let our lights be burning, Luke 12.35. To be always ready to execute
our charge with the oil of repentance, Faith and Charity in our lamps 1 Pet.
1.23. with watchfulness, Sobriety, Hope and Truth; All which is obtained by
Faith in Christ: By which we overcome the 1. World, 1 John 5.4, 5. 2. The Devil
1. Pet. 5.8, 9. 3. All Evil, Revel. 12.10, 11, 17. By the blood of the Lamb,
and word of their testimony, and all because Christ has overcome, John 16.33.
and has given us the victory, 1 Cor. 15.57.

Ap. And by faith in him we are partakers of his strength, victory and
conquests.

3. But how faulty are we, for which we are justly to be blamed and reproved.

I. For that we neither look out, nor take pains for this strength and aid by,
1. Prayers, strong cries: And, 2. Diligent attendance, waiting, as Psalm. 40.1,
2, 3. Patiently, as the Saints did of old. The Church did so, Isa. 25.9. and
33.2. For to such is the promise, Isa. 64.4. Hab. 2.3. It will come. 1. But
rather seek to King Jareb, as Ephraim did, Hos. 5.13. 2. And rest upon others,
as too many have done, and do: 3. Or Evil things; which cannot profit us, nor
stand us in stead at our greatest need, as I have told them out of Psalm 34.8.
See the Notes.

II. Nor do we lay out for this Armor, or take pains to put it on, but rather
choose to stand naked and disarmed before our enemies, as it was, Exodus
32.1.21.25. and befell Josh. 7.8. 1. For that we will not accept Armor when it
is offered to us. 2. And are ready to cast away our Weapons and Arms when we
have them upon us, and in our hands, as Israel and Achan did by Idolatry, and
that trespass, as before.

4. But lastly, which would be our everlastling comfort:

1. Were we as careful to get the strength of God to our assistance.

Ap. As we are to gain men to aid us.

2. And to gird up the loins of our mind, and to put on Christ, and the armor
of God for our defense:

Ap. As we are to arm our selves with earthly armor against our real or
supposed earthly enemies, we were happy therein, and might take abundant
comfort in that God that strengthens us, and that Lord Jesus Christ in whom we
believe, who will save us in the end.

The third Use is from the 4.5.6. and 7. particulars of the Doctrine.

1. Informs us what need we have of Wisdom and Courage, etc.

1. Serpentine wisdom, Mat. 10.16.

2. More then Sampsons strength.

3. And of Elishaes army of Angels, 2 King. 6.16, 17. to help against so many
Wiles, such strong assaults, such infernal powers, and devilish adversaries, as
are all acting against us.

1. Many are the Wiles, and Snares, and depths of Satan; and who is it that can
search into the bottom of them to find out, and discover them?

2. Many also are the Instruments by which he works and undermines us: viz. 1
By seeming friends. 2. Domestic servants. 3. False brethren. and, 4. He can
transform himself and his Ministers into Angels of Light, to make all his
stratagems take the better effect: so that whither he do, 1. Ensnare us by
Heretical Doctrines under fairest pretenses, as to many: Or, 2. Assaults us
with vicious provocations, as with a pleasing Bait, like a Nimrod-like Hunter,
or crafty Fowler, or dangerous Fisher after men's souls to destroy them: yet
still his care is that his labor be not lost, but that all may take effect.

Instances, 1. Thus he acted of old by the Midianites, who beguiled Israel with
their Wiles, Numb. 25.27. Their pleasing persuasions to vicious actions, with
which they are said to vex them, because hereby they caused God to vex them.

2. And thus by Jezabel, that filthy Prophetess, who did teach and seduce men
to Fornication, ande. Rev. 2.20. to 25. And these practices are there called,
the depths of Satan, verse 25. But mark her doom there, verse 22, 23.

3. Like Prophets and Prophetesses have been in these times, Edwards Gangreen.
and no doubt but in due time God will reward them accordingly.

Ap. Now surely a man thus beset, surrounded with Wiles and Snares, 1. Had need
to have Serpentine-like wisdom, and more: It is our Saviors advice and council
to his Disciples, Mat. 10.16. To be wise as Serpents.

Serpents are reported to be wise in four respects, of which, 1. Two are
prudentious: 2. And other two, most pernicious.. 1. The Trudentious properties
of a Serpents wisdom, are, 1. A searching, observing, and knowing things by
experience. 2. To avoid dangers, by flying, hiding, and securing themselves.

In these the Disciples were to imitate the Serpents Wisdom; viz.

1. In wisely observing, and prudently searching out the knowledge of things by
their experiences, which though it be called Ma. Stultorum, yet may it be as
truly named Mr. and Dr. Sapientum.

2. In Flying, hiding, and securing themselves from dangers by all lawful
means. 1. Save your selves from this untoward generation, Acts 2.40. (i.e.)
perverse and wicked men. 2. When they persecute you in one City, flee into
another, Mat. 10.23. 3. Thus Christ himself did. 4. And others, Athana sius.

2. The other two pernicious properties, viz. To, 1. Deceive. 2. Wound.

1. To deceive and seduce, and so the old Serpent seduced and beguiled, 1. Eve,
2 Cor. 11.13. and in her, the root of all makind; His deceitful poison has
infected all the branches. 2. As the Crocadiles of Egypt with her tears. 3. And
other Serpents by Wiles do deceive them, whom afterward they do devour.

2. To wound mortally with a poisonous sting, as it is usual.

Ap. And in these the godly must not only beware lest they be beguiled by him,
but also act contrary to him, (since he is so wise in his generation to deceiva
and destroy) and that two ways; viz. 1. By alluring men to that which is good,
and winning them to be healed of sin, as the Apostle did, 1 Cor. 9.22. 2. Let
us undeceive, and direct men, wounding men with godly sorrow, (never to be
repented of) that they may besaved.

Ap. All these are a deadly sting to the Devil him self, and to all his Agents,
that the godly can either,

1. Know (by experience) his Wiles.

2. Or be secured from his rage.

3. Or gain men to good.

4. Or wound them for sin unto Repentance, that they may be saved, God is the
healer of Israel, Mal. 4.2.

. Thus wise had the godly need to be that must encounter with so many wiles,
and with all this wisdom they must adjoyn that foundation and topstone of
perfect Wisdom, viz. The Fear of the Lord, Job 28.28. Psalm 111.10. Pro. 1.7.
by which they shall be preserved from every evil way.

1. And as they must be wise, so had they need of more then, 2. Sampson-like
strength, and the courage of the ancient Worthies, Heb. 11.33. To wrestle with
such strong temptations, and such infernal powers. 1. So mighty, which at some
time have prevailed over, 1. a Sampson. 2. a David. 3. a Solomon. 4. an
Apostle. 5. and others in all Ages: so mighty are they, and impetuonsly
powerful in temptation: 2. and so ^any, that their name may well be called
Legion, Mark 5.9. And we may well say of our spiritual Enemies, That the Devils
and Evils that are against us, are innumerable, Psalm 40.12. See the 4, 5, 6,
and 7. Reasons before.

Let me a little explain this courage, and give you some reasons, why we should
be furnished herewith.

1. For the Nature of it, it is Aggressio terribilium ubi mors imminet propter
bonum salvandum, Aristotle.

Christian Courage is the undaunted boldness of a sanctified heart, in
adventuring upon difficulties and hardships in a good cause, upon a good
ground, when God calls us to it: Et haec fortitudo praestat Magnanimitate,
Fiducia, Securitate, Magnificentia, Constantia, Tolerantia, Firmitate, Macrobi
1 Pol. p. 1065.

Never were Joshua, and Solomon, and others, that were to undertake great
achievements, Nehemiah and Zorubbabel, etc. upon a juster cause, or better
ground called upon to be strong and courageous, and not to fear.

Ap. Then we are to be strong and couragions in this spiritual Conflict. See
Deuteronomy. 31.7, 8. Josh. 1.6, 7, 9. 1. Chron. 22.13. 2 Chronicles. 19. ult. Jehoshaphats
counsel to them, Hag. 2.4. The Lords charge to Zerubbabel and Joshua, The
Prince and high Priest to build the house of God, the Temple: and for our
charge, see 1 Cor. 16.3. and ver. 10. hujus cap. and in the Text, Watch ye,
stand fast in the faith, quit you like men, be strong. In the definition before
you hear, that this spiritual courage is, 1. An undaunted boldness, or
animosity of heart. This is the Lords gift, Ezekiel. 3.8, 9. I have made thy face,
etc. as an Adamant harder then flint. The rock fears no change of weather, heat
or cold, etc. and the horse fears no dangers, Job 29.19. to 26. Clothed with
thunder, etc. And the Lion turns not away from any, Prove 30.30.

Ap. So the Christians Courage will not shrink, nor be danted, but by the
Assistance of the Almighty, will bear up against all the storms, and most
terrible Assaults of these terrible ones, the enemies named, ver. 12.

2. The Subject of this courage, is a sanctified heart: for as the heart is the
subject of Courage both natural and spiritual, and est quasi cordis actio, for
so a valiant man is described, 2 Samuel 17.10. Amos 2.26. His heart is as the
heart of a Lion, cordatus vir, strong of heart. So Sanctification is the
necessary qualification of this heart, in which spiritual courage dwells, by
which it differs from other kinds of courage: This is the difference, and which
is caracterised by these three Notes, viz. the, 1. Root, whence it springs,
viz. Love to God, 2 Cor. 5.14.

2. Rule, by which it is directed, viz. The Word of God, 1 Chronicles. 22.12, 13.

3. End to which it refers, viz. which David charged to Solomon his son, and
God he is the Center to which, and wherein all things and undertakings of a
sanctified heart do refer and rest, as every thing rests in his own proper
Center.

3. The object of this carriage about which it is employed, is matters of great
difficulty and hard services: See Heb. 11.33, 34, to 39. Who through Faith
subdued Kingdoms, etc. Like their service, 1 Samuel 31.12. When the valiant men
of Jabesh recovered the bodies of Saul and his sons from the wall of Bethshan,
when there fastened by the Philistines Conquerors.

So have many been rescued from the mouth of Lions, and many souls from Hell by
their Christian Courage and fortitude against Satan, Jude 23. plucked out
(quasi) from the fire of Hell, pulled out of the fire.

4. It must be always in a good cause, 1. In matters of faith, 1 Cor. 16.13.
Jude 3. Stand fast in the faith, etc. and contend for it. 2. And for
Righteousness sake, 1 Pet. 3.14. Then you are happy, The cause makes the Martyr
not the punishment, Causa, non supplicium facit Martyrem.

And it is a Christian resolution, and worthy of imitation, rather to run the
hazard of whatsoever difficulties imaginable, the loss of all that is dear and
precious, life it self, rather then to transgress the commands of God, violate
my vows, wound my own conscience, and make a breach between God and my own
soul, which men care not for in these our days, so are they habituated in evil,
and hardened in wickedness.

5. And lastly, Our courage must always have a good warrant: the Call of God
must be our ground of courage in any thing, God must say to us, as he did to
Joshua, Josh. 1.9. Have not I commanded thee,? Be strong, and of a good
courage, says God.

Ap. Gods Command is our only good warrant, but we act against it, and contrary
to it.

Ap. If all these particulars had been well observed for diverse years last
past, All which we have slighted for our own profit.) viz. If our Courage had
been always seated in sanctified hearts, and employed in a good cause, and
acted with good warrant from God in all our streights and difficulties, sure we
had never fallen into the Confusion we have felt, and been ingulfed in the
Divisions that have rent us to pieces; but we have taken another course, all
for self ends, and have found cross and contrary events to our expectation:
justly so God is just.

The Reasons or Motives that should animate us to this Courage:

1. God, who puts us upon this upon this work, and is our Leader, He is the
Captain of the Lords Host, Josh. 5.14, 15. And of our own salvation, Heb. 2.10.
Made perfect through sufferings. God has appointed all Christians to be
Soldiers against the World, the Flesh, and the Devil, and this we promise, and
the Sacraments (as by an oath) binds us hereunto, Baptism and the Lords Supper.
The Apostle styles himself and Epaphroditus, Soldiers; Phil. 2.25. My brother,
companion in labor, and fellow-soldier and exhorts Timothy to endure
hardness as a good Soldier of Christ, 2 Timothy 2.4.

Soldiers we be, and Ergo must take Courage in this Warfare; Courage being as
necessary for a Soldier, as Wisdom and Eloquence for a Counselor or Orator,
and Learning for a Preacher, a Doctor to others.

2. The weighty services which God imployes us in; and Ergo as God commanded
Joshua, Josh. 1.7. To be strong and very courageous. And Joshua exhorted them
that were to succeed him, Josh. 23.6. In conquering and subduing the
Canaanites, and possessing the Land, etc. which were matters of great
importance.

Ap. The like Counsel have we need to take in the works of,

1. Mortification, which must massacre our sinful Iusts, cut off, and pluck out
eyes, hands and feet in many cases, Mat. 5.29, 30. and 18.8, 9. Mark 9, 43, to
49.

2. Demolition, etc. levelling and battering down mountainous Corruptions, and
strong holds, and fortifications of sin in our own bosoms, 2 Cor. 10.4, 5, 6.

3. Reparation of Jerusalem, and its Walls in our selves, as well as in our
Nation, personally and publikly as we ought.

See what pains they took, Nehem. 4.7, 8. All these must take courage: But what
have we done to the contrary?

3. The many Enemies we have to encounter withal, viz. three huge Armies of, 1.
Devils. 2: Lusts. 3. People in the world, all which do wage war with every
Christianin Heavens way.

1. Devils; do but consider how they are sum'd up and ranked in the Text, verse
12. especially, Principalities, Powers, of whose Wiles, Assaults, Number,
Power, mighty Opposition, and violent Temptations, I have spoken in the 5, 6,
and 7. Reasons.

2. Lusts innumerable, which fight against the soul, 1 Pet. 2.11. and strike at
the head and heart of our immortal souls, to captivate and kill us; See Romans 7.
How the Apostle complains.

3. People, Beasts in men's shapes, 1 Cor. 15.32. Dogs, Lions, Bears, Bulls,
Wolves and Tigers, etc. as David calls them, and the Scripture styles them
usually.

When Joab saw the Battle before and behind against him, 2 Samuel 10.9, 12. how
did he encourage his Army.

Ap. And is it not so with us? Ergo, we had need to encourage one another in
this dangerous War on all hands.

4. The Troubles and Afflictions we are like to meet with in this Warfare,
which we shall never be able to undergo, if we have not Christian Courage in
our hearts. What sad things may a Soldier of Christ see and feel, before we
have a full and final victory, as those Worthies did, Heb. 11.36.37, 39.

Thus does this third Use informs us from the 4, 5, 6, 7. Reasons, what need we
have of Wisdom and Courage, that we may be able to withstand such mighty and
crafty Adversaries.

2. And how this Use does serve to reprove many for their Cowardliness in
things evidently good for us and others. Like them, John 12.42, 43. For they
loved the praise of men, etc. and because of the hardship that sometimes does
attend good Actions. Like them, Numb. 21.4. Christ did not so in the work of
our Redemption, He feared not men, nor favored himself.

But these should do well to consider, what and where such fearful persons
shall have a share, as Rev. 21.8. But the fearful, etc. have part in the lake,
etc. 2. Audaciousness in evil, against whatsoever can be said to the contrary:
This is not courage, but hardness. Like them, Jer. 5.3. That made their faces
and hearts harder then a rock. Adamant, Zach. 7.12. This is contrary to
Cowardliness; yet both these are enemies to Christian courage, and justly
blamed.

David that durst encounter with a Lion, a Bear, a Giant, (Goliath) yet
trembles with fear of God, and of his Judgments, Psulm 119.120. See 1 Samuel
17.34, to 38. But David like men are dead.

Ap. The Grandees of our Age are of another mind, who neither fear God, nor
regard man: Like him, Luke 18.2. But I do leave them, and all such to their
righteous doom.

And to what has been spoken already, by way of Motive before, let me add this
Exhortation to animate us in this true Christian Courage against our spiritual
and spightful Adversary, by some Arguments, which are drawn from,

1. The Commodities accruing by Christian Courage, are,

1. The Favor of God, to strengthen you, Psalm 27.14. Be of, etc.

2. It will give heart in the hardest Adventures, as it did to Nehemiah and
Ester, whose task was hard.

3. It will make us unwearied in our works, and make them easy, as Moses in so
frequent messages to Pharaoh.

4. It will prevent sinful and scandalous miscarriages, as it did in the three
Children and Daniel, had they not been courageous, as to the hazard of life,
how had they miscarried!

5. It will daunt our Adversaries, for as James 4.7. Resist, etc.

6. And encourage others, as Paul's bonds did many, Phil. 1.12, 13, 14.

II. From the sad consequences of Cowardliness in this case.

1. Personal discredit, Nehem. 6.13. as Samballat would have done to Nehemiah.

2. It makes us unserviceable, as Mat. 25.25. as that slothful servant was, and
fore-casteth difficulties, Prove. 22.13. and 26.13.

3. It brings damage to good causes, 2 Chronicles. 32.18. so Rabshakah would have
frighted Hezekiah to that end.

4. It exposes us to Sin and Judgment, as in St. Peter's case, Jer. 1.17. The
Prophet must not be dismayed.

5. It animateth the Adversary.

6. It discourageth others.

Therefore to help us to courage in this Conflict.

1. Secure your propriety in God, 1 Samuel 30. David at Ziklag.

2. And the goodness of the Cause, as 2 Chronicles. 20.

3. And the weighty consequences of a good cause, else we shall be Slaves.

4. Have an eye upon Christ your Leader in this Conflict, Psalm 45.3, 4.

5. Keep mutual Communion one with another, as Mal. 3.16. Acts 28.15.

6. Set Faith on work, as Heb. 11.34. and the more, because of the Promises of
the Gospel, which to do, consider the promise of, 1. Gods Assistance, Psalm
27.14. 2. Good success, as John 1.6. and John 26.33. Be of good cheer, I have
overcome the world. 3. Recompense to men resolute in good.

7. Enlarge your Love, for Love works much in, 1. Feeble women. 2. In fearful
Ewes for their Children, their Lambs. 3. Jacobs hard service was short, and
easy upon this score.

8. Keep a clear Conscience, this will make a man bold and courageous.

9. Improve Experiences, these will add much confidence to courage.

10. Go on in this spiritual Combare self-denyingly, in the strength of God, as
verse 10. before. 1 Samuel 17.45. See Psalm 20.6, 7, 8. But (Psalm 68.17, 18.)
the Chariots of God are twenty thousand thousands of Angels, etc. And he has
led Captivity captive, etc.

Thus I have finished three Uses from the first seven particulars of the point.

1. Use informs us of the great danger the Church is in, because of the Tares,
Heresies, Errors and Schisms, which, 1. Apostate Romanists. 2. Ancient
Heretics. And, 3. Modern Separatists ( Anabaptists, Brownists and
Independents) have sown, and by them greatly corrupted, and disturbed the
Churches Doctrine, Unity, Peace and Concord, p. 13.2. to 22.1.

2. Use from the second and third particulars, informs us of the Churches
weakness to withstand such Adversaries by her own strength, p. 22.

3. Use informs us what need the Church has of both Wisdom and Courage, to
resist such mighty Enemies.

You may remember the Doctrine (which is comprehensive of this, and the three
former verses) as it is repeated, viz.

Doct. 1. That the Church when at the best. 2. Had need to be strong in the
Lord. 3. And completely armed. 4. To stand and withstand. 5. Manifold Wiles. 6.
And mighty Assaults. 7. Of so many and potent Enemies. 8. As do assault,
environ and storm Her. 1. Within; and 2. Without. 9. And especially in the Evil
day. 10. And yet that she may stand and remain victorious and triumphant over
all in the end when all is done.

1. This point has been fully proved by Scripture and Reason 2. And three Uses
are finished, which inform us of, 1. The Great danger that the Church is in,
because of Heresies, Errors and Schisms of Apostates, Romanists, Ancient
Heretics, Modern Separatists. 2. The Churches weakness to withstand, etc. by
her own strength. 3. What need the Church has of Wisdom and Courage to resist
so many Wiles and Assaults of such mighty Adversaries.

Now because these Enemies do storm us both within and without: Let me add a
fourth Use consisting of two Branches, viz. 1. How mistrustful we should be of
our own hearts within us. 2. How heedful against the world, and occasions of
sin without us.

4. Use (which may be prosecuted as the rest) does informs us, 1. How
mistrustful we should be of our own hearts.

Reas. And great Reason we have so to be, if we do but consider, what the Lord
speaks by the Prophet, Jer. 17.9. The heart is deceitful above all things,
and desperately wicked, who can know it? which sentence contains a lively
description of the great pravity, and deep corruption that is in our hearts.
Heart is here put for the Soul or Mind, as usually, Jer. 4.4. and 5.24. And all
its parts, Understanding, Will and Affections: For the whole inward man, the
corrupt deceitfulness of which is very hard to be discovered or known, either
by, 1. Others, 1 Cor. 2.11. None knows the things of a Man, save the spirit
of a man, etc. 2. Or our selves, Isalm 19.12. Gal. 6.3. Jam. 1 22.

The expression of the Prophet is very significant: where, 1. The heart is put
for the mind and soul, with all its parts. Hallebh guacobh. 2. Deceitful, wily,
fraudulent, prone to supplant, circumvent, and deceive, as Jer. 9.4. every
brother will supplant, or trip up his heels. And Jehu did, 2 Kings 10.10. Hence
Jacob had his name from holding his brother by the heel, Genesis 25.26. and 27.36.
Hosea 12.3. Or it signifies also perverse, full of pravity, crooked and uneven,
as ways full of windings and turnings, and Ergo, hard to find.

Ap. So it is with man's heart, full of windings, Turnings, Nooks and Corners,
Wiles and Sleights, Isa. 29.15, 16. Woe to them that seek deep, that will
pretend one thing, intend another, and inwardly purpose quite contrary to what
the tongue, and outward carriage, and behavior does pretend and promise, Psalm
31.6. and 55.13, 14.20.21.

Ap. We have had experience enough of this. 3. Above all things, (Miccol, prae
omnibus) or persons above ought: It is so sly and wily, that no creature in
wicked subtilty and dissembling, can go beyond it. 4. And desperately wicked,
(Ve Anush Hu, Et Anxium ipsum) it is but one word in the Text, and is diversely
rendered, viz. 1. Desperate: or, 2. Deadly: or, 3. (Conjunstim) desperately bent
unto, and set upon deadly mischief, and deceitfully to destroy, Psalm 64.5. As,
1. Abner did by Amasa, 2 Samuel 20.9, 10.

2. And they by the Prophet, Jer. 11.18, 19. and 12.6.

3. And Ishmael by Gedaliah, Jer. 40.14, 16. and 41.1, 2.

Ap. How many in our days have discovered the desperate wickedness of their
hearts by their practices. 5. Who can know it? Surely none but God, to whom
alone the Prophet ascribes this Excellency, verse 10. I the Lord search the
heart, Jer. 17.9, 10. Not others, 1 Cor. 2.11. Nor we our selves, Psalm 19.12.
No nor God himself, (in the esteem of wicked men) For they say as Job 22.13,
14. Psalm 10.10. Isa. 29.15. Who sees and knows, etc. So full of shifts and
fetches, so unsearchable are men's hearts.

Ap. I doubt many are of this persuasion in our days, else men would act
otherwise then they have done in these times. By this you may easily perceive,
why Satan is so intent, and indefatigably industrious to storm us. 1. Within,
i.e. in our souls, whiles we bear about us that Traitor that is ever ready to
deliver up the keys, and open the gates of the City and Fort of our Souls, our
Selves, to give him entrance and peaceable possession, that he may exercise his
Dominion in us.

Ap. In this sense our hearts are compared, and said to be,

1. A great deep, Psalm 64 6. In which men dig deep to hide their Counsel from
the Lord, Isa. 29.15.

2. And Evil, Genesis 6.5. and 8.21. in every imagination continually, like a deep
Well full of mud, and unsearchable to the Bottom, and continually foul in every
spring that supplies it.

3. A Treasury, yea the very root and Nursery of all abominations, Mat. 12.34,
35. and 15.18, 19, 20. For an evil man out of the heart, etc. and out of it,
evil Thoughts, Murders, Adulteries, Fornications, Thefts, False witness,
Blasphemies, etc. do arise and spring: and upon these grounds we are so
frequently called upon to,

1. Wash and cleanse our heart, Jer. 4.14. James 4.8. else as Pilate, for they
are very foul. as Proverbs 20 9. Who can say, I am pure, etc.

2. Circumcise our hearts, Deuteronomy. 10.16. Jer 4.4. Romans 2.24. For they are
uncircumcised, Jer 9 26. in heart and life.

3. And to have one, or a single heart, which God has promised to give us,
Jer. 32 29. 1 For our hearts are apt to be divided from God and good to Baal,
Seditions, Factions, Regicide, etc. to the ruin of the Nation, 2 Kings 15.10,
14, 25, 30. 2. To become double, Psalm 12.2. and James 1.8. and 4.8.3. Yea,
manifold, for there are many devices in a man's heart, Pro 19.21. that are
naught, and come to naught, but the device and counsel of the Lord shall stand:
This is that, viz. (this Corruption of the heart, with its manifold evil
fruits) against which David prays, Psalm 19.12 Lord cleanse thou me from secret
errors and faults Minnistaroth, ab occultis, Arias Mont. And St. Paul groans,
Romans 7.23. O wretched man that I am, etc.

And all these Corruptions of our own hearts within us, are Satan's principal
Engines, which he makes use of to the ruin and destruction of our souls and
selves.

For the discovery of which, and to do it as it should be done, were to
undertake an Indian voyage, which would require many years rather then hours:
and the Relation of which would fill many volumns, rather then the scantling of
a few Sermons.

I shall therefore at present wave this work of so large extent, having given
you this taste, that you carry in your bosoms the greatest enemy about you,
viz. The corruption of your own hearts: and this warning, That you should be
very jealous, mistrustful, and watchful over your own hearts, which are apt to
be employed to delude and deceive you to your own destruction: and this
Watchfulness be sure to perform in all places upon all occasions, viz. In your
Solitariness, Company, Business with men, Duties toward God, in either our
hearing, praying, communicating, meditating, acting, etc. Dealings with Satan,
wrestling with his Temptations, etc.

1. Always bring your hearts with all the Ebullitions, outgoings, and motions
of the same to the Touchstone of Gods Word.

2. Entertain always a sense of Gods presence, and expose all to the search of
his All-seeeing eye as David did, Isalm 139.23, 24. Search me, O God, and know
my heart, try me, etc.

3. And learn of the Apostle, and with him exercise your selves to keep a good
conscience toward God and men in all things. Acts 23.1. and 24.18. and that
always constantly and continually.

Reas. For he that is of a good heart, (or Conscience, as the Genevah) may well
have a joyful heart, as our translation has it) has a continual Feast, Prove.
15.15. ( i.e.) Much joy within.

2. Yea, he that has this, has a heaven in his heart, though he be of never
so despicable a condition, mean, and contemptible in the world.

Contra. And he that has not this, has a hell in his heart, though he has at
present his heaven upon earth, and be in never so successful and prosperous a
condition, his power and prevalency shall down to the Pit.

The second Branch of this use does inform us, how heedful we should be against
the Motions of the world, and the occasions of sin without us: These lie
abroad, 1. against the motions of the world, whether in the way of Seduction or
Destruction.

I. For Seduction; How usual a thing is it for sinners, to entice one another
to Evil, which Solomon suggesteth to us, Prove. 1.10, 11, 19. where he
instanceth in a pack of Thieves, and of men greedy of gain, ver. 9. and violent
men that entice their Neighbor into a way that is not good, Prove. 16.29. viz.
either to undo him, or to make him join with them to undo others, ut. c. 1.10.
to 20. So to Uncleanness, Exodus 22.16. So did the Prophet Jeremy, Jer. 20.10.
To draw something from him, whereby they might overreach him, and so be the
better enabled to do him mischief.

Ap. We cannot be ignorant of such practices in our times. So also to Idolatry,
Deuteronomy. 13. per totum ver. 1, 6, 12, 13, etc. peruse it.

Ap. Men are very apt to allure, entice persuade one another to evil, to every
sin their corrupt hearts are inclined; but how few will persuade one another to
Good, as they did, Isa. 2.3, 5. To learn the ways, etc. and to walk in the
light of the Lord. And they, Hos. 6.1. invited to Repentance, Come let us, etc.
This David was glad of, Psalm 122.1, 2. I was glad when they said, so for any
other, either graces or duties. It is very rare to find men that do animate one
another to good, as they did in such an Apostatizing time: Mal. 3.16. Then they
spoke, etc.

II. For Destruction: It is our Saviors counsel; Mat. 10.17. To beware of men
that are like Wolves: Verse. 16. Blood-thirsty Persecuters: None are so
mischiefvous as men; Psalm 124. per totum. The Monopoly of mischievous devices
is in men, Force and Fraud.

2. And for the Occasions of sin, (which also are without us) Beware of them,
come not too near the bank of the river, the edge of this precipice, lest you
fall down into it: Evil Company administer occasions, and occasions do quickly
produce sin. Peter was foiled by the company he was with, Mar. 4.66. to 72. And
David by an occasion committed Adultery with Bathsheba, 2 Samuel 11.2, etc. And
so Satan does always thus war against us, and storm us both within and without
by Corruptions, Temptations: So especially he is apt to do it in the evil day;
for so says the Text; and this is the ninth particular of the point; hence the

Fifth Use, which informs us, that there is an Evil day approaching even upon
the best that be, the choicest Saints, when these enemies of their souls,
before named, will be most active, and improve their greatest strength to do
them hurt, upon the advantage of such an evil day. Now Days are said to be evil
in respect of diverse things, viz. of,

I. Afflictions; Tribulations, Perils and Dangers, Old age, Infirmities,
Sickness and Death, to which we are subject, and which are obvious to us all
the time of our Life.

II. And more especially Persecutions, in respect to the time of Satan's being
let loose by Antichrist, cruel Tyrants, and perverse Heretics, to persecute,
afflict and vex the Church of God by seeking and endeavoring with all their
might, 1. To seduce and pervert the Church with Errors and Heresies, as it
has befallen in all Ages. 2. Or Else if they cannot prevail to do so, and to
effect it, then to destroy and root out the Church, and raze it down even to
the foundation, Isalm 137.7. That the name of it be no more in remembrance,
Psalm 83.4.

Ap Both of these evil days the best of Gods people are subject to, for none
are exempt from Affliction or Persecution: And in both these, the Enemy will do
his utmost to do them the greatest hurt that he can, as he ever did formerly.

Exhor. It behooves them therefore to prepare, arm, and streng then themselves
against such an Evil day. The first of these evil days we are sure will befall
us, and the last may, we know not how soon, Ergo, 1. Be sure to hold fast the
truth. 2. And keep your Consciences clean; it will stead you much in such a
day. 3 Walk uprightly, deal justly like Samuel, Dan. 6.4. And let your
Conversation be in Heaven, Phil. 3.20.

Ap. What else (think you) did support all the Martyrs and Confessors of Jesus,
and made old Jacob and others dye comfortably? Genesis 49.33.

Consol. There is a good day remains for them. 1. Redemption, Luke 21.25, 26,
28, 31. Ephesians. 4.30. To which you are sealed. 2. Salvation, Isa. 49.8.9, 10.
cited by the Apostle, 2 Cor. 6.2.3. Making them up as Jewels, or special
Treasure, Mal. 3.17. 4. A day of Christ of his power and coming, Phil. 1.10.
and 2.16. Psalm 110.3. Acts 2.20. Rev. 16.15. and 22.12. But for wicked men who
make covenant with death and hell, (the Rulers of Jerusalem Isa. 28.14, 15.
which made lies their Refuge, made this Covenant) and put the evil day far from
them, by thinking that the Judgments threatened will come: Who knows when? etc.
such a day will never come, and therefore they do strengthen themselves in
Violence, Tyranny and Luxury. Ezekiel. 12.11, 27. Ames 6.3. to 8. Mark that place,
Isa. 28.14, 15, 17, 18, to 23. Hear ye Rulers, ye scornful men that
(Shebna-like, Isa. 22.15.) Scoff at the Threatings of the Prophets, as
supposing your selves secured against all occurrences whatsoever, and bent to
ensnare City or State, as Pro. 29.8. and mock them like those Mockers, 2 Pet.
3.3, 4. That scoff at the coming of Christ. You Rulers that abuse your power,
thus to domineer at your plaesure: Jer. 26.13, 14, 15. As they did by the
Prophet Jeremy. You that deem your selves as safe and secure, as if you had
made a Covenant with death and hell, and were at agreement with them;

1. You can so comply with the deadly Enemies of Church and State. 2. And suit
so well with their Hellish practices: and you have made Lies, 3. Your Refuge,
and so hid your selves under falsehood, that no overflowing scourge or
judgment threatened by Preachers, shall reach, or come upon them. You think you
are armed against the worst of storms, by your strength and wealth, your
Treasury, Craft and wily devices, by which you have unjustly and unwarrantably
gotten them, etc. yet though by Robbery, Oppression and Fraud you have
unworthily enriched your selves, and are advanced to this height of security,
yet Judgment shall be laid to the line, and Righteousness to the Plummet, i.e.
An exact way of justice shall take place, and you shall come to a strict
account and examination, and then all your snifts, deceipts, deep disguises,
and cunning projects, your vain confidence and security, (as if by firm
covenant and unchangable agreement) shall be disanulled and wipt away as with
an overflowing stream, and a lying Refuge, like a Bed too short, and Covering
too narrow, upon which a man cannot repose himself to take any quiet rest. See
the Annotations upon the place, Isa. 28.14, 15, to 23.

2. And as for those that put the evil day far from them, as Ezekiel. 12.2 22.7,
28. tha^ say, Every Vision fails, will never come; And Amos 6.3. to the 8th.
You that put far the evil day, and make violence come never, yet they shall
find a day will come to their cost: and they shall know that God is not asleep.

For he sees that their day is coming, Psalm 37.12, 13, 14, 15. A Day of
Judgment, a time when God will recompense them, a woeful day to wicked and
unrighteous men: Isa. 5.18, 19. Jer. 17.15, 16. That say, Let him come and
hasten, etc. For then their, 1. Sin shall be discovered. 2. Conscience
awakened. 3. Confidence shall fly away, and forsake them. 4. Good men's prayers
against them shall be answered. 5. And the anger of God shall be kindled upon
them: of all which see my Notes upon Psalm 32.10. The thought of this may
justly terrify wicked men from the Unrighteousness and wickedness which is in
their ways. Thus (from this point) as I have showed them the danger of
Heresies, Schisms, and erroneous Opinions in the first Use: So also the danger
of Unrighteousness and Wickedness in their Conversations, What a woeful day will
ensue thereupon in this, that you may avoid both these extremes to prevent
destruction.

As we are warned to withstand these manifold wicked Enemies at all times, and
especially in the evil day; so in the whole progress of this Warfare, we are
exhorted to stand.

I. Now Standing is a Gesture of, 1. Attendance, as of the Priests to Minister
in the name of the Lord, Deuteronomy. 18.5, 7. 2. And as Solomon's servants did before
him, 1 Kings 10.8. to hear his wisdom. 3. And Daniel, etc. in King
Nebuchadnezzars Palace, Dan. 1.4. 4. And Esther before Ahasuerus for the Jews,
Esth 5.2. 5. The Israelites before Moses, Exodus 18.13. for execution of
Judgment.

Ap. And thus it is usually applied to the worship and service of God.

1. Prayer, as Abraham did for Sodom, Genesis 18.22, 23, to 33, 1 Kings 11.8.2.
Praising, Ezra and the people, Neh. 8.4, 5, 6. Rev. 7.9, 10. 3. Reading, Christ
himself stood up to read, Luke 4.16. 4. Preaching, Acts 2.14. and 5.20, 25.
Peter and the Apostles did so. 5. Hearing, as Neh. 8.4, 5, 6. And they, John
3.29. To hear the Bridegroom.

II. As well as of Expectance, as Exo. 14.13, 14. and 2 Chronicles. 20.17. Stand ye,
and see the salvation of the Lord.

III. And its a Gesture of Business, with the activity and industry attending
thereupon, whether it be in, 1. Serving, Psalm 134.1. 2. Resisting, Deuteronomy, 7.24.
2 Kings 10.4. Luke 21.36. 3. Enduring, Job. 8.15. Mat. 12.25, 26. 4. And
persevering and persisting (Romans 5.2.) the grace in which we stand.

IV. As well of Idleness; Mat. 20.6. Why stand ye here (etc.) idle?

Ap. Now in the sense of the Text, our Attendance, and Activity, and Victory
are all implied in this Warfare, so that as men are said to stand in any
Business: 1. Before it by preparation. 2. In it by way of Exultation. And, 3.
After it in the way of Exultation and Conquest: So in this Warfare, in
reference to all these, we should stand, 1 Couragioufly and Valiantly in the
Onset and Entrance with resolution. 2. Unanimously. 3. Vigilantly and
watchfully to see the enemy. 4. Regularly, every man in his rank and order,
Magistrate and Minister, etc. 5. Constantly, to your ground the truth, never
forsake that. 6. Strenuously, improving your courage and strength to the
utmost. 7. Victoriously and triumphantly, giving the glory to God, Rev. 7.9, to
13.

Thus Standing is a Gesture; of 1. Attendance. 2. Expectance. 3. Business. 4.
Idleness.

These things premised, and thus understood, do aford us a sixth Use, which may
be prosecuted as the others before, unto Information, Exhortation, Reproof and
Comfort; and this is from this tenth and last particular of the point, viz. To
stand.

Use 6. The sixth Use informs us, how short we be of this Animosity and Courage
of heart, the resolution of spirit which we have in other things, and how apt
to fail and be faint-hearted in the best business, if it be opposed, and easily
to yield to any Temptation of Seduction.

Exhor. This is of God, there we must seek, and the Goodness of our cause may
confirm us, and strengthen our hearts in the pursuance, as Asa did against
Idolatry upon hearing the Prophet Oded, 2 Chronicles. 15.1, 8, to 17. and Paul by
the society of some brethren, in the business that he did at Rome, Acts 28.15.

Thus we see how defective we are in setting upon this Warfare courageously.

2. Unanimously, thus we should stand against these enemies; but how far do we
fall short; nay how much do we differ from this, and walk contrary to it. 1.
How few take up arms in this case, though all are engaged thereunto in Baptism,
and many other bonds. 2. And of those few that do, (or at lest pretend so to
do) how do we differ in Opinions, and act right crosly to this Unanimity.

Ap. These Divisions in Israel, (as those of Reuben, Judge. 5.15, 16.) may well
cause great and deep thoughts, Impressions, Heb.) and searchings of heart. We
all profess to be of the Communion of Saints, and should all agree in the Unity
of the Spirit and of Faith, Ephesians. 4.3, 13. Of Love, Psalm 133.1. Of Mind and
Judgment, 1 Cor. 1.10. as members of one body, Ephesians. 4.15, 16. But it is not
so with us, but far otherwise.

3. We should stand and withstand in this War Vigilantly and watchfully, to
observe this enemies approach, 1 Pet. 5.8. This concerns us all, Ergo, let us
all say as Habakkuk, Hab. 2.1. said, I will stand upon my watch: But how apt
are we to neglect this, 1. The Pastors of the people must do this; Magistrates,
that Abuses abound not: Ministers, that Errors swarm not, Ezekiel. 3. 2. Then it
concerns all, Mat. 24.42. and 25.13. Mark 13.33, 34, 35. Luke 12.37, 28. and
21.36. And to shake off Security, 1 Cor. 10.12, 13. Luke 12.37, 38. It must be
conjoined with, 1. Sobriety, 1 These. 5.6. 1 Pet. 4.7. and 5.8. 2. Prayer, Mat.
26.41. Watch and pray. 3. Thankfulness, Col. 4.2.

4. Regularly, every man in his rank and order. 5. Constantly. 6. Strenuously.
7. Victoriously and triumphantly.

Now this Standing victoriously ushers in The seventh Use of Consolation to all
such as do overcome; for great shall be their reward: it may be otherwise with
men, but here it is sure, because it is from God. Take a view,

1. To eat of the tree of life, which is in the midst of the Paradise of God,
Rev. 2.7, (i.e.) to enjoy perpetual happiness in heaven, Rev. 22.2. to 6. Luke
23.43. Whither St. Paul was wrapped up, 2 Cor. 12.4. All which was figured by the
Tree of Life in Paradise. Those that be faithful unto death, shall have a Crown
of life, and, 2. shall not be hurt of the second death, Rev. 2.10, 11. which
death consists of the separation of the soul, and body from God, and
sequestration of them both to eternal torments, Mat 25.46 Though he must suffer
this, 3. To eat of the hidden Manna by spiritual Taste of me here, and a Feast
with me hereafter for ever in heaven, he shall have a white stone, full
Absolution from all sins in the Judgment and a new Name, assurance in this
right, and interest in these Honors. 4. Power over the Nations: Be joined with
Christ to judge them, 1 Cor. 6.2. And the morning star, the full fruition of my
self, Isa. 14.12. 5. To be clothed in white raiment, Rev. 3.5, 12, 21. Not be
blotted out of the book of Life, but Christ will confess him before His Father,
and the Holy Angels. 6. To be a Pillar, shall have the name of God, and of the
new Jerusalem, and a new Name, Everlasting happiness, be acknowledged to be the
Child of God, Be a free Denizen, and be honored for a King, and a Conqueror
like me, Phil. 2.9.7. To sit with Christ in his Throne, to reign with me in
grace here, and glory hereafter. 8. To inherit all things, Rev. 21.7.

As a Christians work, so a Christians Warfare is of great consequence, and
deserve a suitable consideration: This Epistle treats of both, this Text of the
latter, viz: the Warfare. This Scripture you know, does treat of a Christians
Warfare, Verse. 10. to 19. And the Apostle having taught the Ephesians to walk,
and live in all Christian Piety. He does here exhort them to fight courageously
against our spiritual Adversary. Now this advice of our Apostle does consist of
two parts: 1. An Exhortation to the performance of the Duty enjoined, which is
to withstand our spiritual Enemies, V. 10, 11, 12, 13. 2. An Enumeration of the
several parts of our spiritual Armor, with which we must be furnished, that we
may be able to stand in this Conflict, and to gain the Conquest in the end;
Verse. 14, 15, 16, 17, 18.

Parts. The particulars are seven: Of which, the first five are Defensive
especially, and the two last are both Offensive and Defensive.

I. The Defensive parcels of this Armor.

1. A Belt or Girdle. 2. A Breast Plate. 3. Shoes. 4. A Shield. 5. An Helmet.

II. These parcels of this Armor, which are both Offensive to the adversary,
and Defensive of our selves, are, 1. A Sword. 2. Prayer.

Ap. These particulars do exactly describe the whole ((...)) of a good
Christian, a True Believer.

Now (before I enter upon the parculars) let me premise this by way of Caution,
That we are not too scrupulously and curiously to enquire into the reason of
the similitude, why Truth is compared to a Military Belt or Girdle, and
Righteousness to a Breast Plate; and so of the rest.

It being beside the Apostles purpose and intent, so subtly to apply the
graces mentioned to such and such particulars: But the drift of the Apostle is
to teach us in general, what virtues, or rather gifts of the Holy Ghost,
Christians have need of, that they may be able to stand firm against the
manifold Wiles, Snares, Assauls and Temptations of their spiritual Enemies, and
to gain the victory at last: Let us therefore modestly and briefly, consider of
these parcels of Armor severally and particularly in their order, as they are
enumerated to us by the Apostle: beginning with the first, viz. the Girdle of
Truth.

I. Stand therefore. Now standing (you know) is a Gesture, 1. as well of
Attendance, as of the Priests to minister in the name of the Lord, Deuteronomy. 18.5,
7. 2. as of Expectance, 2 Cron. 20.17. of Salvation and Victory. 3. Of
Business, whether it be in serving, resisting, enduring and suffering, or
persevering and persisting. 4. As well as of Idleness, Mat. 20.6.

II. Therefore, (i.e.) for reasons alleged before, verses 12, 13.

III. Having your loins girt about, as Soldiers of old time had broad and
strong Belts and Girdles made of durable stuff, beset with many plates or
bosses, whereby the weaker parts of the body, the loins, and upper part of the
belly were armed both for ornament, beauty and strength: For Girding fasteneth
the body, and strengthens it; and is usually in Scripture taken for an
expression and sign of strength, vigor and prowess or puissance.

1. Job. (Job 12.18, 21.) He loses the bonds of Kings, and girdeth their
loins with a girdle, (i.e.) with strength and vigor; and God weakneth the
strength (or he loses the girdle) of the strong and mighty, as History
speaks; and now we know. 2. So Job 38.3. and 40.7. God bids Job to gird up his
loins. 3. Isa. 22.20, 21. God promises Eliakim, To cloth him with a robe, and
to strengthen him with a Girdle, (i. e.) with honor and strength.

Cont. It was otherwise with Tire; Isa. 22.10. In whom no more Girdlestrength.
And with Belshuzzar, Dan. 5.6. When the joints or girdles of his loins were
loosed, and his knees smote, etc. a strange Ague. And with a wicked Assembly or
Parliament Army, Isa. 8.9, 10. Whom God threatens to break in pieces, though
they did gird themselves.

IV. With Truth, (i.e.) with Christ, who is the Truth, John. 14.6. Whom all
that are baptized put on, Gal. 3.27. The Truth of Doctrine opposed to Errors
and Heresies, with Sincerity and Uprightness opposed to Hypocrisy, which is
the truth of our Life and actions, and makes us firm and strong, whereas
Hypocrisy enfeebleth, and makes men weak, sickly and changeable in their
actions and trials when upon them.

Ap. How few in our times have learned, believed, or once (so much) as have
thought of these things! and thus you have had the meaning of this first
expression, pointing out the first part of our Christian Armor, viz. Truth.

These things thus understood, give us this Doctrine, viz. That

Doct. All Christians (who hope to withstand, prevail against, and conquer
their spiritual enemies, the Devil, the world, etc. must be girded, (i. e.)
strengthened with truth, that is, with Christ, sound Doctrine, and sincerity of
life: This our Savior calls for, Luke 12.35. Let your loins be girded, etc.
And St. Peter also, 1 Pet. 1.13. Gird up, etc. as well as our Apostle. It is a
Metaphor taken from an ancient custom in the Eastern Country, where they did
wear long garments, which they girded to their loins to make them expedite for
travel or other service: as Elijah did, 1 Kings 18.46. 2 Kings 4.29. and 9.2.
Gehazi and that Child of the Prophets that went to anoint Jehu, 2 Kings 9.1, 2,
3, 4.

Ap. From this custom of bodily girding up garments: It is translated (or
transferred) to the mind, Luke 12.35. as Job 38.3. and 40.7. where God bids him
gird up (his mind) and their Lamps burning with Faith, Repentance, Charity and
Sanctity, which is Lumen indeficiens, as Jerome. 1 Cor. 13.8. Charity never
fails. 2 Cor. 1.12. The testimony of a good conscience is a light of great
joy and rejoicing, hope ends in the fruition, Faith perfected in the Object,
Love enlarged in heaven; you hear the point that concerns the first piece of
Armor, viz.

Doct. All Christians that would be conquerors over spiritual Enemies, must be
girded, that is, strengthened with truth, viz. 1. With Christ: 2. Sound
Doctrine. 3. A sincere Conversation.

Let me take these asunder, and look upon them several apart.

I. We must be girded with Christ: 1. God himself is said, To be girded with
power and strength, Psalm 65.6. and 93.1.2. And Christ himself is said to be
girded with his sword, of Might, Glory and Majesty, and so to ride
prosperously, Because of Truth, Meekness and righteousness, Psalm 45.3, 4, to 8.

Ap. He alludeth to Princes that in their Triumph rid in Chariots, showing,
that the quiet State (peace and prosperity) of a Kingdom or Nation, stands in
Truth, Meekness, justice and Righteousness, not in worldly pomp or vanity, much
less in Robbery, Oppression and Tyranny, as our Nation of late has done. 3. So
also we must be girded with Christ, who is the Truth: He is the first piece of
our spiritual Armor for safety, and the best apparel for our Honor, Dignity
and Beauty, both are conjoined, 1 Cor. 1.30. For Christ is made to us Wisdom
and Sanctification, as Apparel for Dignity, Beauty, Righteousness and
Redemption, as Armor for Safety, Satisfaction and Security.

Ap. If the Sanctification of Christ be our Apparel, we are so clad, that
Aarons Robes, Joshuahs Miter, and Mordecai's Royal Apparel are not like it,
Exodus 39. Zeph. 3.4, 5. Esther 6.8. to 12.

II. If the Righteousness and Redemption of Christ be our Armor, then are we
girt with Armor of proof utriusque, the armor of Righteousness on the right
hand and on the left, 2 Cor. 6.7.

1. Armor may well be styled defensive indeed by which we are saved from Gods
displeasure, Romans 5.1. and from Satan's Malice and Violence. 2. As also active
and infusive, so as that it puts valor into the man that wears it, as it did
into the Worthies of old, the Martyrs and Confessors of all ages, who could not
have stood in the time of trial, had they not been Girded with this armor. 3.
Yea it may well be said to be Offensive also, for being girded with this, we do
as easily conquer the devil, etc. as David did Goliath.

1. Being thus apparrelled, we are clothed like unto the Kings daughter, Psalm
45.13, 14. Or that woman, Rev. 12.1. with the Sun, the Moon under, a crown of
twelve stars; and who can desire better? 2. And being thus armed and girded
about with the strength of Christ, we are as safe as Mount Sion that is
environed with Mountains, and cannot be removed, but abides for ever, Psalm
125.1, 2.

Ap. It is no marvel therefore though we be often called upon, To put on the
Lord Jesus, Romans 13.14. The new man, Ephesians. 4.24 Col 3.10. 3. And on the
contrary, without this, how naked and unsafe are we? obvious to all manner of
ignominy and danger.

And as this Military Belt or Girdle does extend, 1. To Christ, the fountain of
Truth: So also does it, 2. To sound Doctrine, the Word of God, which Christ in
his Prayer, John 17.17. speaks of: The Gospel of Christ, Gal. 2.5. Col. 1.5.
This leads us to the old way, it being the old rule, and is the form of sound
speech, and the light to which we should look for our direction in all things.

III. And to sincerity of life: All which together are fitly resembled by a
Sealing; in which there is, 1. Imprimens. 2. Recipiens. 3. Sigillum impressum.
The Seal is the Word, God sets it on, and we receive the character of it; and
the more exactly we answer the print of the Seal, the Word of God, by so much
the more Truth is in us, and likeness to Christ, as Christ is of his Father,
Heb. 1.3. Who is the express Image or character of his person; This we should
buy, Proverbs 23.23. as a most desirable commodity: Reasons are, because God
loves it: It is a Ray of him, a beam of his brightness, it is our Glory to be
like the Standard, and our gain, It brings peace with it, Zach. 8.16.20. We
have need of it in such a false age, and where it is wanting, all Evils both of
sin and punishment do abound, as Isa. 59.

Use: Reproof to all such as will be at no pains or cost to get it, such as
love lying, conceal, betray, know, yet do not the truth, such as are enemies to
it, 1. in others, as Ahab, Zedekiah, proud men, Joseph's brethren, Pharisees,
the world to Christ, and the Galatians to Paul, and, 2. in themselves in
Opinion, as 1 Timothy 6.3, 4, 5. in practice, Hypocrites that dissemble it,
profane Neglecters that are careless, and graceless Contemners of the truth,
that wilfully refuse it: and, 2. And how many are very easy to part with this
Girdle of truth, either weakly through fear of persecution, as Hymeneus and
Alexander, Ecebolus, Spira, Love of the world, as Demas, Caraciolus and
Urillas, Or wilfully, as Heretics, Romanists and Separatists, etc.
Mercenarily, as Judas his Master, and Esau his birthright, Heb. 12.16. Basely
and foolishly, as those who for their vices, lusts, will sell all.

Should I prosecute these things, you shall scarce find in History an age more
false then this; Heads, Hearts, Hands, Tongues, Councels, Consciences, Designs,
and Practices: All false, etc. Of all these see my Notes upon Proverbs, 23.23.
Buy the truth, etc.

You have heard at large the drift of the Apostles Exhortation, to withstand
our spiritual Enemies, Verse. 10, 11, 12, 13. We are now upon an Information,
which contains an Enumeration of the several pieces or parts of the spiritual
Armor, with which we must be furnished to stand in this combat, and to
conquer; the particulars you know are seven, viz. Defensive and Offensive, I
have dispatched the first, viz. the Girdle of Truth.

II. I do now descend to the second, viz. The Breast Plate of Righteousness:
There is little difficulty in the words; Every man (I presume) knows what a
Breast Plate and what Righteousness is.

Exp. Only thus much let me give you notice of, viz. That a Breast Plate as it
is used in Scripture, is 1. Military, as you know it is usual for Soldiers to
arm themselves with that piece of armor, which serves for defense of the
Breast. 2. Mystical, Rev. 9.9. Those Scorpion-like Locusts, the Saracens or
Turks had strongly armed themselves and their Kingdom, that their Foes might
not hurt them. 3. Sacred, as that of Aaron, Exodus 28.15, 30. Lev. 8.8. In which
was the Vrim and Thummin, light and perfection, and which is called the
Breast Plate of Judgment, because it did denote the Light or knowledge, and
the perfection or integrity which the Priest should have, and the care he
should take to answer them in Judgment and Equity, who asked or enquired of
God by him.

Ap. This Urim and Thummin was evident in the primitive Times in the gifts of
the Spirit, in Prophecy, Tongues, etc. Acts 2. but most transendently eminent
in Christ, in whom this Mystery of Urim and Thummin was fulfilled, because In
Him, John 4.9, 17. and 3.34. Col. 2.3. are all the Treasures, and by him
conveyed to us, John 1.16. and 14.16, 17.4. Spiritual, as here in the Text;
and 1 These. 5.8. Let us be sober, putting on the breast plate of Faith and
Love; and by this breast plate is signified a Good Conscience, which is the
only fence for the heart, Hic murus aheneus esto, nil conscire sibi, nulla
pallescere culpa, Hor. as also good manners and Works of Righteousness, these
are our Lamps, Luke 12.35. To be held, 1 Timothy 1.19. as Thorax munit pectus
militis, so do these our lives that we sin not, 1 John 2.3. and 3.9. This kept
David, Psalm 119.11. Thy word have I hid in my heart, that I might not sin
against thee.

Thus much for the Explication of the word Breast Plate;

II. Now for the next word, viz. Righteousness; Observe that it is,

1. Natural; This we had in our first Creation, For God made man righteous, He
being created after Gods own image, and proportionably as Christ was, who after
God was created in Righteousness and true Holiness, Ephesians. 4.24. But this we
quickly lost.

2. Legal, the Righteousness of the Law often mentioned by the Apostles, Romans
2.26. and 8.4. and 10.5.

Ap. But this we could never perform unto perfection.

3. Civil, which is by Education and Principles in Nature, and consisting in
the just dealing among men in word and deed, and is called Equity, Honesty,
Right and Truth; and this was in, 1. Abraham, Genesis 14.23. and 23.16. in taking
and paying. 2. Jacob, Genesis 30.33. In his dealing with Laban about wages, etc.
3. Joshua and the Princes, Josh. 9 15, 18, 19, 20, 21, 26. About the Covenant
which they made with the Gibeonites; for breaking of which, and for slaying
them, Saul's bloody house smarted, and all Israel by a three years famine, 2 Samuel 21.1, 6, to 10.

Ap. But men of our times have no Conscience of any Covenant, or any branch of
civil Righteousness.

4. Evangelical, and this is either imputed or imparted.

I. Imputed, whereby Christ's righteousness is become ours; Romans 4, 6, 11. and
5.18. So by the Righteousness of one, the gift is upon all to justification of
life: and this is called the Righteousness, 1. Of Faith, Rom 4.11, 13. 2. Of
God, Romans 3.21, 22. without the Law, by faith of Jesus Christ. 3. Of God by
faith, ibid. Phil. 3.9. Not having mine own, etc. by which we are justified,
and made righteous, Romans 5.1, 19. And this is the righteousness of the Saints,
the perfect, the upright, By which the Law is fulfilled in us, Rev. 19.8. Prove.
11.50. Romans 8.4.

II. Imparted, and becomes inherent in our selves; and it is a Conformity of
our Will, Affections and Actions unto Gods holy Will and Law, according to the
measure of Grace received from Christ by the work of the holy Spirit: Thus we
become, Romans 6.18. Dan. 9.18. the servants of righteousness.

Ap. The former is Justification, Romans 5.18 Upon all men unto, etc. The second
is our Sanctification, By which we become the servants of righteousness, Romans
6.18. and both these may be said to be, 1. Privative, in the removal of sin and
unrighteousness. 2. Positive, both by imputation of Christ, and infusion of
Grace. 3. Gradual, as the measure and degrees of it come on. 4. Intensive, when
we strive for more. 5. Comparative in respect of others, as Noah, Lot, Job,
David, Daniel, etc. all which is excellently set forth, Can. 6.10. The words
thus cleared, do afford this point,

Doct. Christ's Soldiers that fight against Satan and spiritual enemies, must
have on the Breast Plate of Righteousness, i. e. they must be righteous,
upright, a sincere hearted people, keeping a good Conscience, etc:

To this point I have lately spoken something, viz. March 7. 1659. out of Isa.
57.2. at Mr. Warners Funeral, I shall therefore only name the heads and methods
of things spoken, and proceed: and this for them that heard me not at that time.

Doct. Christ's Soldiers must keep righteousness, uprightness, and a good
conscience close to their hearts: This point for the substance of it, I then
proved by,

I. Scripture, for God has often commanded it, as to Abraham, Genesis 17.1. To
Israel, Deuteronomy. 18.13. and to them again by Joshua 24.14. and commended it in
many, as in David, Asa, Nathauiel, etc.

II. Reasons, because in such Gods Image is renewed; there is a conformity to
Christ, and such have received the spirit of Sanctification, which heals
Hypocrisies, and natural unrighteousness to this proof I then added sundry
motives and marks.

1. Motives, this is heart-circumcision, the beginning of soundness, the
Moralist minds the Outside, God only cures the heart; This looks out in every
action, as a Candle in a Lant-horn at every pane. All Shwes and Pretenses are
nothing without this. The Prayers of such are acceptable, Prove. 15.8. Gods
delight. God delights in such, Psalm 51.6. Prove. 11.20. The upright are his
delight: and this will be their greatest comfort and joy, in that God accepts
our works in the quality of them, viz. uprightness, and when the world
reproacheth us, as Michael did David, 2 Samuel 6.20. and our selves in sickness
or distresses, as Hezekiah, Isa 38.3 said.

II. Marks, whereby to try your selves upon a use of Examination: 1. Make Gods
Word our Rule: this will rectify us, Psalm 19.8, 9. And they are blessed that
walk by it, Psalm 119.1, 2. a. Love all good, hate all sins as well as some:
Vprightness hides none, Psalm 32.5, 11. It bewails secret, and avoids great
sins, Psalm 19. it kills and stifleth beloved sins; 2 Samuel 22.24. and dislikes
sin in all persons, friends or foes, as Asa, 1 Kings 15.11, to 15. But loving
all good in all persons. 3. Be good rather then seem so, Proverbs 20.6, 7.
Henoch, Abraham. 4. Be humble, teachable, patient, as Job 2.3, 10. and hold
integrity, not as Pharaoh or Ahab, 2 Chronicles 28.22. that were worse by
affliction. Be thankful as well as prayerful, not like them, Psalm 78.34, to
38. Vow and pay, promise and perform, as David did, Psalm. 116. 6. Be faithful
in your Callings, use Talents, 2 Chronicles. 19.8.9. Mat. 25.15, to 28. 7. Be
uniform, still a like in good, at home, abroad, in the family, field, in
public, private, in dangerous times, as Dan. 6.1. 8. Let the bent of your
whole heart be after God, Psalm 119 34.80. that all Matter, Manner, Ends,
Continuance may be right in you.

Ap. If we find these Characters of uprightness in our hearts and lives, we may
then cheer our selves in every condition, whether God sift us, as Amos 9.9. yet
we may say as Psalm 139 23 24. or the world, as it did Daniel, 6 45. or Satan,
as he did Job 27 5 6 and 3: 6: and Peter, Luke 22 31 32. Thus far I touched
upon the forenamed occasion, I now proceed, and which may serve for the first
Use of Examination.

Use 2. The second Use of reproof, is to I. all such as boast or dream of (I
know not what) perfection in this life: 1 ^harisees, Luke 18 19 to 13. 2
Pelagians. 3 Papists. 4 Humourists, Sectarians, and other Justitiaries and
Perfectists, which talk as if they could not sin; neither will God take notice
of, or charge any sin upon them, Numb. 2321. He sees iniquity, etc. See the
Annotations.

II. To all such as do grieve and wrong the righteous by, 1 vexing their souls
with their vile conversation, as the Sodomites did righteous Lot, 2 Pet, 2.7,
8. So some will swear, etc. on purpose to vex a godly person etc. Disgracing
them for their defects, if they can espy any small motes in them, who yet do
daily endeavor to purify themselves, not considering that they themselves
(the while) are like a very sink of filthiness, and Swine-like do wallow in all
uncleanness. 3. Opposing and persecnting them for Righteousness sake, as Cain
who flew his brother, because, etc. 1 John 3.12. There are too many Cainites
alive.

III. To such as put away, and make Shipwreck of a good Conscience; Conscience
that useful faculty, which is judicium hominis de seipso, prout subjicitur
judicio Dei. Est Cordis Scientia, Bernard. and codex in quo omnia
conscribuntur: It takes notice of, and records all; Its the Memories Notary, a
Comforter or Tormentor in the Affections; an Accuser or Excuser, and a Judge in
the understanding, and passes sentence accordingly under God the supreme
Judge; it should be pure and clear and active to instigate, and excite to good,
and restrain from evil, and that by good Arguments, as Abigal, David, Abner,
Joab, 2 Samuel 2.26. And thus the Prophets and Apostles did back their
Exhortations and Reproofs with many impregnable Arguments. Thus Conscience
should do in all, but (alas for grief) How is it put away, stifled, and
shipwrackt in most, and become,

1. Ignorant, so that it cannot, nor will not see to distinguish Colors, but
calls good evil, and evil good.

2. Forgetful of our faults, gives account but of fifty for an hundred, like
the unjust Steward, Luke 16.6.

3. Polluted, like a foul glass in which you can see nothing.

4. Its Secure, and smooths men up that they become like them, that had made a
Covenant with death, and an agreement with hell.

5. And Seared, that its past feeling, senseless of any thing.

Ap. Thus too many are in things of most concernment: and have not our
covetous, ambitious, Time-serving, self-seeking, self-advancing men been sick
of this disease in their consciences.

Quest. But will this always serve the turn?

Answ. Surely no, Conscience will be awakned, and then it will be a woeful day
to wicked men.

IV. This Use of Reproof does extend it self to all wicked, unrighteous and
unjust persons, who though they know, that God has so often commanded
Righteousness, and commended it as the manifest duty of the second Table in
that short abridgement of both the Tables of Gods Commandments. Micah 6.8. He
has showed thee, O man, what is Good, and what the Lord requires, etc. That
the Lord himself is righteous, and hat he loves the righteous and
Righteousness, and that his eyes (of favor) are upon them, Psalm 34.15. And
that better is a little with righteousness, then a great deal more, (they know)
then I need repeat, yet they will adventure upon unjust and unrighteous ways:
For how many men's Houses, See Jer. 22.13, to 20. How King Jeboiakim lived,
died, and was ignomi iously buried. Lands, like Nahoths vineyard in Ahabs
possession. Estates, Isa. 10.13, 14. See the Treasury of the Tyrants of
Assyria, and Provisions; How many men's words and works do testify to men's
faces their unrighteousness.

Ap Of all which the Prophet has spoken abundantly, and we also now can
testify and evidence the unrighteousness of men's hearts and hands in their
under takings and proceedings.

Sure they consider not that the wrath of God is revealed from heaven against
it, Romans 1.18. And that such shall not inherit the kingdom of God, 1 Cor. 6.9.
And in the end shall perish, and receive the reward of unrighteousness, 2 Pet.
2.12, 13.

In a word, there is so much spoken in Scripture against those eminent Trees in
the Garden of God, that did so flourish and overspread, and caused so much
terror in the land of the living, Assyria and Egypt,

(i.e.) Unrighteousness and cruel men in places of Eminency and Authority, that
have caused so much Fear and Sorrow, amongst the people of God, that such may
not only see cause to tremble, but also foresee, that they shall wither, and
fall, and perish for ever.

Thus concerning this second piece of Armor, viz. the Breast Plate of
Righteousness, you have heard the kinds of Breast-plates, 1. Military: 2.
Mystical: 4. Sacred: 5. Spiritual, and that righteousness is either Natural,
Legal, Civil or Evangelical, and what Righteousness is most applyable to this
piece of Armor in the Text.

Doct. Then you had the point propounded, proved by Scripture, three reasons
promoted further by six motives, and demonstrated by evident signs or marks of
Uprightness; all which did conduce, contribute to, and complete the first Use
of Exhortation: The second Use of Reproof to such as dream of perfection in
this life, as grieve and wrong the righteous for Righteousness-sake, as put
away, and make shipwreck of a good Conscience, as practice unrighteousness in
their stations and conversations, these may expect the righteous judgment of
God against them.

Now to close this part of Armor with a word of comfort, the third Use is of
Consolation to all righteous persons: observe that, 1 God is righteous, and
loves righteousness. 2 His eyes are upon the righteous for their good. 3 His
promises made to such are innumerable. 4 His performance is sure. 5 Their peace
of Conscience is unspeakable. 6 Their life is comfortable. 7 Such can attend
their great account with confidence. 8 And their deathbed pangs are tolerable,
and do revive in them the hope of Heaven. 9 They die in expectation of a
glorious Resurrection. 10 And after death there is a reward from them, Psalm
58.11. A voice from heaven shall say, Open the gates, etc, and it shall be with
them as with the wise Virgins, Mat. 25.10. Then shall the righteous shine as
the Sun in the kingdom of their Father for ever and ever, Dan. 12.3.

Touching this Christian Warfare, which does so much concern all, you you know
the Apostles Counsel in this Chapter, Ver. 10. to 19. in nine Verses, does
consist, 1. Of an Exhortation, ver. 10. to 14. to put on our armor. 2. An
Information of the parts of our spiritual armor, consisting of an enumeration
of the several particular pieces necessary for us.

Ap. The former of these I have dismissed with the thirteenth Use, I am now
upon the second, and have already spoken of two pieces of our spiritual Armor,
viz. the Belt or Girdle: and, 2. Breast Plate, which I dismissed with the
former verse.

This Verse does present us with a third piece of Armor, viz. And their feet
shod with the preparation of the Gospel of Peace. For the better understanding
whereof, take a view of the words; The Apostle does proceed with elegant
Metaphors. Allusions and Simitudes taken from Soldiers preparations for War.

I. Feet in the natural sense and use, you are well acquainted with, that they
are the lowest members of the body, by which it is carried about from place to
place, and are the Instruments of motion, Genesis 18, 4. Angels. John 1.35.
Disciples. Numb. 20.19. Deuteronomy. 2.28. Israel passed on their feet, etc. And hence
it was so usual with them to wash their feet after travail, etc.

II. But sigurative, Feet are usually put in Scripture for, 1. The whole man:
Romans 3.15. and 10.15. Swift to shed blood, etc. Psalm 119.101, 105. My feet
from every evil way. 2. The Will and Affections, Desires, Care, Purposes,
Endeavors and Actions: Prove, 4.26. Ponder the path of thy feet, that thou slip
not. Eccles. 5.1. Keep they foot when thou go to the house of God, etc. 3.
Our slips and sins of infirmity; in which sense our Savior says, John 13.10.
He that is washed, needs not save to wash his feet.

Ap. In the first sense, the word Feet is used for the feet and legs up to the
knees: and in this sense we know, it was, and is usual for men to arm their
feet and legs with greaves of brass, as Goliath did, 1 Samuel 17.6. to ward his
Shins from darts, blows and thrusts; or or else with Boots or Shoes, according
to the kind of employment, Military or Civil, that men are usually exercised in
on horseback or on foot in their business.

In the three figurative senses named, the phrase is properly applyable to the
words of the Text, and the matter in hand. 1. If the Will and Affections (as
Feet) the beginners of motion and action. 2. And the whole man be thus
furnished and shod as here. 3. Then they will be the better able to withstand
the mighty enemies before named, yea, and their own failings, slips and
infirmities, and to stand in this Warfare, till they become victorious over
all. The phrase of the Feet is sometimes othewise used and applied as to, 1.
Pupillage, as the Saints to God, Deuteronomy. 3.33. and Paul at the feet of Gamaliel,
Acts 22.3. 2. Subjection, Psalm. 8.6. As the Creatures are put under our feet.
3. Meanness, as of servants, John 13.14. and of servile condition. 4. Weak and
contemptible means; Isa 2.66. The feet of the poor shall tread down the high
and lofty ones, etc. being just and upright persons: But in these the phrase it
is not so pertinent to this Text, as the former three figurative senses, though
otherwise very useful.

II. Shod, this is done corporally, when shoes are put upon the feet, as 2 Chronicles. 28.15. Ezekiel. 16.10. Mark 16.6. Or spiritually, when the affections of
the heart are strengthened with the preparation of the Gospel, (as in the Text)
to go through all difficulties in their way to Heaven, which are many and
sharp. Can. 7.1. How, etc. (i.e.) her walking in holiness, her Ornament,
defense.

III. With the preparation of the Gospel of Peace, (i.e.) with a due
preparation and readiness tum ad confessionem, and ad praedicationem Evangelii.
1. Being ever ready to confess the Faith, Romans 10.10. with the mouth, etc. And
to give an account of the hope that is in us, 1 Pet. 3.15. with meekness and
fear. 2. And to preach the Gospel when lawfully called thereunto, 1 Pet. 5.1,
2, 3, 4. Romans 10.14.15.

You know that the whole course of our lives is often compared to a Way, Walk
or Journey, and also to a Warfare: and for either of these men do make such
provision and preparation as is necessary, and so we must do here as the Text
here teaches us, the point is, That,

Doct. We (who are Christian Soldiers) must make diligent preparation to
profess and practice the Gospel, and also to preach and publish the same, as we
shall be lawfully called thereunto.

This point does consist of two branches: The first of which concerns all, and
the second concerns only the Preachers of the Gospel.

We shall take them a sunder, and begin with that which is universally
necessary for all Christians, viz. To profess and practice the Gospel of Christ.

Exp. The Gospel is so called, ( q.d.) a Goodspel, or Gods-Spell, viz. of
Christ, Gal. 1.6, 7. and 3.8. which was preached unto Abraham long since, and
it does contain: 1. The History and Narration of the things which Christ spoke
and did, which are of excellent use for our Instruction, Imitation and
Consolation, Mark 1.1. 2. The whole Doctrine of the Word, both of Law and
Grace, and whole matter of instruction to rule to guide us under Christ, Who,
Mark 1.14. Came preaching the Gospel of the kingdom of God. And thus we stand
bound and hear, believe, profess and practice the same. 3. The glad tidings of
remission of sins and eternal salvation, the Doctrine of Free grace, and
obtaining righteousness by faith, and teaching the true way, how to attain
perfect Righteousness and Eternal Life; This was manifested of old in
referrence to Christ to come, to Abraham, Genesis 12. In the Covenant, Gal. 3.8.
To us, in respect to Christ already come, Luke 2.10. Romans 11.27, 18. This is my
Covenant, etc. as concerning the Gospel, they are enemies for your sakes, etc.

This Gospel we are commanded frequently to hear and believe, Mark 1.15. Acts
1.57. To yield obedience to it, Romans 16.17, 16. Titus 2.11, 12. And to walk
uprightly according to the truth of it. This is styled, 1. Glorious, 2 Cor.
4.4. 1 Timothy 1.1. 2. The power of God to Salvation, Romans 1.16. 3. Childrens
bread, Mat. 15 26. Milk for babes, 1. Pet. 2.2. 4. The word of Gods grace, Acts
14.2. 5. The word of Faith, Romans 10.8. 6. The Savor of his knowledge, 2 Cor.
2.14, 15, 16. 7. The ministration of the Spirit, 2 Cor. 3, 8. and of
Reconciliation, 2 Cor. 5.18, 19. 8. The Word of Truth, Ephesians. 1.13. 9. Of life,
Phil. 2.16. 10. The Doctrine which is according to godliness. 11. The form of
sound words, 2. Tim. 1.13. 12. The good word of God, Heb. 6.5.

Reasons which may be added to these honorable appellations of the Gospel, are
because by this we are begotten to God, 1 Cor. 4 15. And in it we have our
legacy of peace and salvation, Isa. 52.7. and of all things conducible
thereunto.

This requires Faith, Love, Repentance, Self-denial, Crucifying the flesh, a
new Creature, the putting off the old man, and putting on the new man.

Thus we have heard what the Gospel is, viz. it is good tidings: and what it
does contain. How we ought to hear, believe and obey it, walking uprightly
according to the truth of it; and that from diverse motives wrapped up in the
manifold Honorable Appellations wherewith God has crowned it in reference to
our great benefit by it: and these do induce the main Reasons by which we are
induced hereunto. And likewise we have heard what it does require of us that we
may be saved.

Concerning all the particulars which it does require; It does concern us to
enquire, whether our selves or our Conversation be as it becomes the Gospel of
Christ, walking worthy of the Lord, who has called us out of darkness into his
mavelous light, and also unto his Kingdom and Glory, and of our heavenly
Vocation wherewith we are called, Ephesians. 4.1.

Ap. If we walk regularly answerable to any one of these, then we are rightly
said, To walk worthy of them all; or else we walk worthy of none of them.

I. To walk as it becomes the Gospel, is to lead a life agreeable to the
Gospel of Jesus Christ, and that because, 1. The Gospel may not be evil spoken
of through us, young women must be so qualified, that the word of God be not
blasphemed, Titus 2.5. So also Propfessors and Instructers of others must take
heed of breaking the Law, lest the name of God be blasphemed through us, Romans
2.17. as those Captives of Israel profaned the name of the Lord among the
Heathen, Ezekiel. 36: 19: 2. The Gospel may be adorned by them in all things, as
those good servants did, Titus 2.9, 10. And those whom the Apostle so
exhorts. 3. And that we may be exemplary to others, and instruments of their
Conversion. This is to walk as becomes the Gospel, and those that do walk so
shall be blessed, Gal. 6.16. Have peace and salvation at the glorious appearing
of the great God, and our Savior Jesus Christ, Tit. 2.11, 12, 13. For the
grace of God (i. e. the Gospel) that brings salvation has appeared, etc.

II. To walk worthy of the Lord, is in a conformity to his Image; our relations
to him, as of a good Wife to so worthy a husband, dutiful Children to so good a
Father, loyal Subjects to such a Magnificent King, who is the blessed, and only
Potentate, the King of Kings, and Lord of Lords, 1 Timothy 6.15.

Ap. Every of which does conclude us in all the Duties of each Relation; and
does discover unto us the Iniquity, Folly and Misery of all such who do desert
this husband for any other, or disobey so good and tender a Father, or rebel
against, and revolt from this blessed Potentate, and do become voluntary
Subjects to the prince of darkness; you will all say, This is a bad change, yet
how many are guilty of all these transgressions referring to each relation, and
do make this change usually.

III. To walk worthy of the holy and heavenly Vocation (which Christ has given
us by the Gospel) wherewith we are called by Christ in the Gospel, and by which
we receive the Spirit, whereby we are sealed to the day of Redemption, Ephesians.
4.30.

This Vocation or Calling is holy and heavenly, because it is a voice
descending from heaven, infusing heaven into us here, and inducting us into
heaven at the last, all which it does effect by calling us to Holiness, which
it begets and cherishes in us here, and crowns with perfection for ever
in Heaven.

This Vocation is either external by the Preachers, or internal by the Spirit,
as Acts 2.10. Both are the fruit of Gods Free Grace, and of his love to mankind.

And this holy Calling teaches us how to walk worthy of the Lord, and this
Vocation it self, and the Gospel by which we are so called: and they do walk
worthy of all these, who walk in the sight of Gods presence, and in a lively
sense of the same, do make an holy progress in the ways of God from strength to
strength; that walk suitably with the nature of God, and example of Christ by
rule, in integrity, with constancy, as Zachariah and Elizabeth, Luke 1.5, 6. In
the light whiles they have it, wisely and honestly toward them that be without,
neither giving nor learning any evil example.

Ap. But (alas for Grief) how many do not only forget, and vary from, but do
walk quite contrary to all the forenamed particulars.

I should now descend to the Uses and improvement of all these: and the Subject
of this piece of Armor being as broad as the whole Gospel of Peace by the
knowledge and practice of which we are thus shod and prepared to walk on, and
go forward in our spiritual journey heavenward; as also to war and march on in
this spiritual warfare with the more confidence and comfort in hope of victory
over such potent and prevalent enemies; I say the whole Gospel being useful to
both these ends, the Uses would be exceeding large, and the improvement of
these shoes might be as long lasting as the shoes, and other Apparel of the
Israelites was in their journey from Egypt to Canaan, which was forty years,
Deuteronomy. 8.4.

Ap. But this has been my work so long already in my public employment to
teach men to be thus shod and prepared; and I trust both you and I shall make
it the work of our whole lives, and be so shod and prepared by the Gospel of
Christ, that we may comfortably finish our Walk, and our Warfare heavenward,
and at last get home, and enter into an everlasting peace: therefore I shall
not hoise Sails in so vast an Ocean, nor undertake the discovery of so large a
Continent in the improvement of this particular: This being the drift of the
whole Gospel, and the labor of the longest life.

I shall only give you a few keys, with which you may open doors, and enter
into certain gardens, or fields of meditation, where you may take a view of
your souls from time to time, and may there see:

1. How the good fruits (corn or seeds) do prosper.

2. And how the weeds (tares or brambles) do increase.

3. And so apply your selves accordingly, for the cherishing of the one, or the
checking of the other. Is it so then

That we (Christian Soldiers) must make diligent preparation. 1. To profess
and practice the Gospel: And 2. To preach and publish it, when lawfully called
thereunto. Then the Uses of all sorts fall under these keys or heads, viz.

1. How few are their wills and affections, which (as the Feet) are the
beginners of motion and action thus shod, (i. e.) thus furnished, fenced and
strengthened with the Gospel of Christ, to march and pass on in their way to
heaven through all difficulties and opsitions.

Ap. Hence it is (viz. through the want hereof) that so many stumble and slide,
and fall from the right both in opinion and practice.

2. How few do hear, believe, and obey the Gospel, as we should, which we are
so often commanded to do, or do care to know, and be well acquainted with it,
but do wilfully remain ignorant, although we should be therein, as it is said
of Apollos, That he was a man mighty in the Scriptures, Acts 18.24.

To each of these keys or heads, you may subjoyn Uses of Information,
Exhortation, Reproof or Comfort, as you please.

3. How few do prize the Gospel, and value it according to its names and
Analogies, our Legacy contained in it, our new birth effected by it. Children
should honor their Parents, by whom (as Instruments) they have a natural
being, a temporal provision, and proportionable Legacies suitable with the
Parents Ability.

Ap. How much more should we honor our Spiritual Parents, and regard our new
birth, and spiritual being which is effected by the immortal and incorruptible
seed of the World of God, 1 Pet. 1.23. And value our Legacies of Grace and
glory contained in the Gospel.

4. How little Faith, Love, Repentance, Self-denial, Mortification and
Renovation can be found in most men?

5. How few do live as becomes the Gospel! honor it and adorn it, and shine
according to it, but do rather cause it to be evil spoken of, and shame the
profession of it by the deeds of darkness, and by the works of the world, the
flesh and the devil; do give evil examples to others, and alienate them from
walking according to the truth of the Gospel.

6. How few do walk worthy of the Lord, either in the imitation of his Image,
or in answering our many and near Relations to him, as a good Wife, Children,
Servants, Subjects, a people (like Israel) redeemed and saved by the Lord, who
is the only Refuge, Shield of help, etc. And should we not answer these things
with duty?

7. How few do walk worthy of their holy and heavenly Vocation, according to
the forenamed marks, i. e. As in the sight of God, making an holy progress,
suitable with the nature of God, and example of Christ, by Rule with integrity
and Constancy in and according to the Light, wisely and honestly toward them
that be without.

Ap. But instead of walking thus, how many do not only forget, and vary much
from, but do walk quite contrary to all the forenamed particulars.

8. And lastly, How irregular (in general) is men's practice to the rule of the
Gospel, with which we should be thus shod and prepared: 1. Rulers inverting
Authority to wrong ends. 2. Soldiers exceeding their limits, Luke 3.14. 3. All
people of all sorts, ranks and qualities breaking their bounds and
transgressing against the directions of the Gospel.

Ap. In consideration of all which, we may well complain and say, What a
barefoot world do we live in?

All these keys do open doors, affording abundant matter for Information,
Exhortation and Consolation to all those that are so shod, and do thus walk as
you have been taught, For they shall be sure to share in all Legacies,
Comforts, Promises and Performances of the Gospel, which are innumerable,
invaluable, and far beyond all our thoughts, Ephesians. 3.20.

Thus I have done with the first branch of this Doctrine, viz. That we who are
Christian Soldiers, must make diligent preparation to profess and practice the
Gospel of peace; I do now descend to the second branch of it, which only
concerns Preachers, viz.

Doct. That some of us Christian Soldiers must make a like diligent preparation
to preach and Publish the Gospel of Christ when we are lawfully called
thereunto.

1. This I think no man makes doubt of, but that there must be some Preachers
of the Gospel.

2. And that this some, or number of Preachers, must themselves be Christian
Soldiers, (yea as Commanders and Leaders in an Army) to march with, and before
others in this spiritual Warfare.

3. And that they must make a diligent preparation to become Preachers, 1 Timothy
4.13, 14, 15, 16. Give attendance to reading, etc.

4. And that they must enter upon this Work of Preaching when they are lawfully
called thereunto. Heb. 5.4. No man takes this honor to himself, but he that
is called of God, as was Aaron, (i.e.) No man else ought to take it, but he
that is called.

And this Calling is conjoined with as warrantable a sending, as Romans 10.15.
How shall they preach, except they be sent? i.e. lawfully ordained thereunto,
as our Savior said or spoke to his Disciples, John 20.21, 22, 23. where you
have a very formal (yea the true original form of) Ordination of the Apostles
to their Office.

Ap. Thus Calling and Sending must go together, and Ministers must be called,
and also sent, i. e. Called by the necessity of the Church, which is the call
of God, and sent by Episcopal men, Elders and Overseers of the Churches, the
lawful successors of Christ and his Apostles, who are best able to judge of the
Abilities, Fitness and Qualifications of such as are to be the Ministers and
Pastors of the Churches.

I shall not trouble you with a Concio ad Clerum, or a Visitation-Sermon, I do
not think needful or so useful for you, as some other advice: And I am
persuaded no advised, discreet person amongst you, that does consider the great
and weighty charge imposed upon the Prophets and Preachers of Gods Word, both
in the Old and New Testament. The Names, Titles, and honorable comparisons
bestowed upon them in Scripture, to the number of an hundred and upwards; all
importing the necessity of them, as of Light, Salt, Pillars for the House, or
Seers to be Guides to lead the blind.

The Vigilance, Industry, Pains, Labor and Diligence which must be undergone by
them, as of Watchmen, Husbandmen, as well as the Dignity due to them
proportionably to their work. I say you that do consider this, cannot but be
convinced of the great preparation, that a Minister had need to have to
undergo, perform and discharge such a function well as it ought to be.

But my work and aim is, according to the duty of my place, and what this Text
does necessarily enjoin me to do, is, in this usurping age, to give you a stay
to prevent you from being misled, by giving you a little light into this now
usual Question.

Quest. Whether every gifted brother, (or sister, as some say) that is able to,
may not take upon him the pastoral Function or Office of a Minister to the
full, and in all things?

Answ. To which I must needs return a Negative out of Ephesians. 4.11, to 16. 1
Cor. 12.28, 29, 30. God has set some in the Church; Apostles, Prophets,
Teachers, etc. So in that other place, God gave some Apostles, Prophets,
Evangelists, Pastors and Teachers, etc. And for this, be pleased to take the
abridgement of some Reasons (of a Reverend Divine Dr. Featly) now with God.

Reas. I. The distinction which God has made between Priests and People: Numb.
18.20. The Lord said, Thou shall have no Inheritance, etc. Hos. 4.4, 9. Strive
with the Priest; like Priest, like People. Mal. 2.7. The Priests lips should
keep knowledge: Neither is this distinction to be abolished, as that any person
gifted to pray and interpret Scripture, may take upon them to expound, preach
and dip or baptize at their pleasure. For that distinction was founded in the
Law of Nature before the Levitical Law: For Indians, Turks, Heathen Romans,
Britains and Galls had their (Clergy) Brackmans, Muftees, Flamins and Druides
amongst them to teach them. We read of Priests in Egypt, Canaan and Midian
before the Law, Genesis 47.22. Exodus 2.16. And of Melchizedeck eminently, Genesis
14.18.

In the New Testament Christ gave Commission to the Apostles and their
Successors. Mat. 28.19. John 20.22. Go ye therefore. The Apostle distinguishes
evidently betwixt Pastors and People, Acts 20.28. Gal. 6.6. Heb. 13.17.

Ap. So that all are not Overseers, Teachers, Rulers and Watchmen over souls.

II. Reas. Because God has severely punished men for usurping in this case.

1. Korah, etc. Numb. 16.31.

2. Uzza, 2 Samuel 6.7. 1 Chronicles. 15.13.

3. King Vzziah, 2 Chronicles. 26.21. And though they might have other faults, yet
God smote them especially for this: See and consider the several places cited
at large.

1. Korah was ambitious. 2. Vzzah was presumptuous. 3. And King Uzziah was
proud and impetuous, 2 Chronicles. 26.16, 19. And these ill qualities did put them
on to do so.

Ap. Is it not so with us? Their ends might affright, and be a Terror to all
that imitate, and do the like.

III. All Priests and Ministers must be called thereunto, Heb. 5.4. 1 Timothy
4.14. This does not attend every man; and this call is either inward, which
enableth, Or Outward, which authorizeth to the Function; and this is either
extraordinary, which is not now to be expected, or Ordinary, by the imposition
of hands, and this we must stick to: For no other was heard of (or at least
approved of) in the Christian Church for these sixteen hundred years, or
thereabout: And if there were no lawful Calling nor Pastors feeding and
governing the Church all that time, the visible Church will be almost
invisible: And to say that this is an Antichristian Rite, is injurious, and we
desire them to show us a more warrantable Christian form. None then may
prophecy or preach except he be sent, Jer. 14.14. and 27.15. Romans 10.15. We
know no ordinary way but this for so many years, but these Fanatique Sectaries
have no call inward or outward, whatsoever they do conceit of themselves. But
with them are many Cistern-cocks without Cisterns full of water, ready to pour
out, before any thing be poured into them; More ready to speak than to hear,
and to teach what they never learned.

Ap. Thus the unlearned lead the like, the blind lead the blind, as Bernard,
and (before him) Jerome complained; and though they can make a shift to
discourse an hour or two (by some Crutches) yet they want Tongues to interpret,
Grammar to expound, Rhetoric to persuade, Logic to divide, and Philosophy,
and School Divinity to decide any Controversy: Nor may they plead Inspirations
and miraculous gifts, for these have ceased.

Object. But they will plead the Prophecy, Joel 2.28. which is fulfilled under
the Gospel.

Answ. But there the Prophet speaks not of any ordinary successive personal
power to open the kingdom of Heaven, but of an extraordinary mea^ure of
enlightening graces and gifts of Tongues, and Miracles as are mentioned, Acts
2.15, 16, 17. So St. Peter expounds it.

Ap. Which (I think) they cannot reasonably pretend unto.

Object. 2. And for those places, Col. 3.16 1. Pet. 4.10. Where all are
commanded to teach, instruct, and edify one another.

Answ. 1. It is granted that all as they are able, and according to their
Calling, are to instruct, and do good to others, as full Fountains, Clouds, and
Ears of Corn freely impart their Waters, Grains.

But that therefore all have a Pastoral power to dispense the Mysteries of
salvation, administer the Word and Sacraments, Non sequitur, it follows not;
besides teaching and admonishing is either,

1. Public, expounding the Oracles of God, revealing the whole Council of God
to men for their salvation.

2. Private, By catechizing our Families, conferring with others, repeating
what men have learned from the Scripture, from other good Books, and good
Preachers: advising, encouraging, reproving, comforting as occasion is. Ap. And
is all this nothing to exercise our zeal upon, but that the fire must needs
burn besides the hearth, the proper place, and be upon the house top to destroy
the whole building.

Object. 3. But Eldad and Medad, Numb. 11.27. prophesied in the camp: Saul
also, 1 Samuel 10.9. among the Prophets: And Philips daughters, Acts 21.9.
prophesied, i.e. did tell things to come by the instinct of the Spirit, not
teach in the Church against those prohibitions, 1 Cor. 1434. And Amos a
Herds-man: Amos 14.15. And the Lord said to him, Go prophecy, etc. Peter and
others, Fishermen, Mat. 4.18. And Paul a Tent-maker did so, Acts 18.3, 4. Ergo
Tradesmen may preach if they be gifted; but let ours show such an
extraordinary Call, and consider that

Answ. 1. Extraordinary instances must not be brought in as Presidents: For if
so, then false Prophets may expect Asses to reprove them, as it befell Balaam,
Number. 22.28. and Soldiers may make use of Priests Rams horns to scale Walls in a
Siege, as Josh. 6.3. and lamps and pitchers to subdue enemies, Judge. 7.16.

2. True predictions of future things, speaking strange tongues which the
Speakers never learned, and miraculous cures were the wondrous effects of an
extraordinary Calling.

Ap. Let our Sectaries show the like Call, and the fruits thereof, and the Day
is theirs; we will yield what they desire, else not.

3. But now none are born Priests or Ministers, but admitted by order to that
Office and public employment. We condemn not all Tradesmen, (eo nomine) from
being orderly admitted into the Ministry in some cases. Some men's Parts are too
broad for their Callings, and some men's Callings for their Parts. Parents are
sometimes mistaken in the Genius of their Children, and sometimes at first do
place out their Children, and dispose them to what proves not to be suitable
with them.

These Children dislike, betake themselves to learn and study; then are
approved, and orderly admitted; such we condemn not, but we blame those men.

1. That take upon them the Honor and Office of a Minister and Preacher, not
being called thereunto, as was Aaron.

2. And despise the regular Ordination of the Church by the imposition of hands.

3. That mangle (instead of handle) the Holy Scriptures with unwashen and
unadvised hands.

4. That presume they have those gifts and graces of the spirit, which indeed
they have not.

5. That usurp upon the Place and Function of a Minister of the Gospel, which
they are very unfit for.

6. That undervalue the cure of souls, which is ars artium, says Gregory, a
mavelous piece of skill and wisdom.

7. Which cross the grave and serious Question of the Apostle, 2 Cor. 2.16. But
now who are not sufficient? Mechanics are able Minsters, and dare exercise (ut
dicunt, per famam and populum) in great Assemblies, to the great dishonor of
God, profanation of his Ordinances, and scandal of reformed Churches.

The good Lord rectify these things, that we may be completely shod with the
preparation of the Gospel of Peace, Amen.

The Apostle (you know) is instructing us concerning the spiritual Warfare of a
Christian.

In which you have the War and the Weapons, or the Ability and Art wherewith
the War is managed, Verses 10, 11, 12, 13. The Armor with which the Conflict
and Combat of the same is acted and performed, Verse. 14, 15, 16, 17, 18.

The parts or pieces of this Armor are seven: 1. a Belt. 2. a Breast Plate. 3.
Shoes. 4. a Shield. 5. an Helmet. 6. a Sword. 7. Frayer and Supplication.

Ap. Of the first three I have spoken, and you know how ill this Girdle of
Truth does agree with Falsehood, and this Breast Plate of Righteousness with the
Unrighteousness of men, and this preparation of Shoes to profess, practice and
preach the Gospel, does suit with mere formal Professors, and presumptuous
intruding Preachers.

I do now proceed to the fourth particular, viz. A Shield or Buckler, which
stands in the midst of the rest, like the tree of life in the midst of the
Garden, Genesis 2.9. or a mighty Champion in the midst of an Army, which is
ushered in with a Preface, Above all, or principally put off with the Praise
and Eulogy of admirable and wonderful effects, viz. wherewith ye shall be able
to quench, etc.

Exp. In the words are little difficulty, yet accept of this Explication.

1. Above all, i.e. in our account or esteem: Whatsoever other Armor defensive
or offensive we have or want, let us be sure we want not this.

2. Above or over all in the first place, and principally in reference to all
the whole man, whom it is ready to defend in every part, or all the rest of the
Armor, of all which it is both defensive of all our other Armor, all which
the Shield or Buckler is ready to save from harm: and comprehensive of all the
rest, for that it is impossible to be armed her with, without Truth and
Righteousness, and the profession and practice of the Gospel, or without hope
of salvation; of which it is the substance and evidence; or the Word of God, by
which it comes, or Prayer which it produces to perfection; So as that if we
have true Faith, we have all these in some proportion, though each of them also
have their proper place in our defense, and do mutually concur with this, and
not one of them can be in sincerity without this Faith.

2. Taking the shield or Buckler, you may note, that these two words are
promiscuously and indifferently used one for another: for the substance, shape,
Dimensions, and use of them with horse and Foot, I might acquaint you out of
Polysbius, Livy, and other Authors, vid. Mat. Mart. p. 35 15, 35 16.

But to let that pass, they were Weapons of special defense and use in war, and
they were made of Gold, 1 Kings 10.17. by Solomon. or Brass, 1 King. 14.27 as
by Reheboam; or Wood, 1 Chronicles. 12.8. wrought by some artificial workman to the
use and purpose before named: and the word Shield in Scripture is used
(properly and figuratively) in a fourfold sense, viz. for a Shield.

1. Artificial, made by man for a defense of the body against an enemy, and so
had Goliath, 1 Samuel 17.7. and those mentioned, 1 Chronicles. 12.8. and I think all do
easily apprehend this.

2. Political, so Rulers, Magistrates and Governors are styled, Psalm 47.9.
Hos. 4.18. signifying that they are, or ought to be for defense and protection
of the body politic; not destruction, (like the Rump.)

3. Spiritual, against the Devil, etc. and so it is used in the Text.

4. Divine, and so God himself is a Shield to the godly, To protect them, as,
Genesis 15.1. to Abraham. Deuteronomy. 33.29. To Israel. Psalm 3.3. and 84.9, 11. To
David, and to all that walk uprightly.

3. Of Faith. This is the main grace, the suctject of the Text here compared to
a Shield: Of which I shall speak at large, as I handle the main Doctrine of
this Verse.

4. Wherewith ye shall be able to quench, i.e. not only to repel and keep off,
but also to extinguish, and utterly to destroy all their venomous power of
hurting you.

5. All the fiery darts, that is, all the Temptations of the Devil, whereby he
does provoke us to sin, against which we pray in the Lords Prayer: And these
are said to be fiery darts and destructive, because if admitted once, and
allowed of, they do easily kindle the heart to multitudes of sins, which (like
links in a chain) draw in one another successively: and here we might observe
by the way.

Doct. Satan has his fiery darts to do us mischief with.

Quest. If any do enquire what these fiery darts are, I answer.

Answ. Concupiscence and evil Lusts which do kindle the soul with Covetousness,
Ambition, Self-seeking, Revenge, etc. As also all Incentives to sin, and
dangerous temptations of incredulity, distrust, despair; all which I may meet
with in the main point, and now pass them.

6. Of the wicked, or that wicked one, i. e. of Satan, and his instruments,
wicked men, habits of sin, corruption of heart, etc.

These things premised, and the Text thus explained, it does afford us,

Doct. Faith is a Christians Shield (or Buckler) to withstand, repel, and
extinguish all the fiery darts, and destructive temptations and seducements of
the Devil, Ergo we are commanded to resist him herewith, and we have a promise
of Conquest, for he will flee, if we give no place to him. So also for the
world. This is the Victory, etc. and this we may the more easily be persuaded
of, if we consider,

1. The promises of God made to Believers, which are abundant.

2. The Grace of Faith (this Shield) in it self, which is evidence of our
sonship, union to Christ, as the Anchor, etc. to the Root, Foundation, Head.

3. That it justifies us, by possessing us of Christ, of his Riches and
Merits, Romans 3.28. and 5.1. as in marriage a woman possessing the man's means;
and here you are to consider, what Justification is, and how by faith we do
obtain it: Of which see my Notes at large on Romans 13.11. only thus here,
Justification is an act of Gods imputing Christ's Righteousness to a believing
sinner, absolving him from sin, accepting him as righteous in Christ, and as an
Heir of Eternal life; Bishop Downam de Just. l. 2.1. Papists make Justification
Justification, and so confound Justification and Sanctification, whereas the
Hebrew Hitzdik, and the Greek (...) are verba forensia judicial words taken
from Courts of Justice, and do not signify to make just, but to absolve: See
Proverbs 17.15. Isa. 5 23. Marzdik. Romans 3.24, 26, 28, 30. By Faith in Christ
only we are justified: we exclude not God the Author, nor the Holy Ghost and
Ministers, the Workers, nor good Works, the evidence of Justification: But that
as the matter, nothing but Christ and his Righteousness, which is the Object of
Faith, does justify, Ergo, we say, Fides sola justificat, oculus solus vidit,
as the only instruments to apprehend the Object, but not Solitaria, solo is
joined with the Predicat, justificat, and solus, sed non separatus ab anima,
cerebro, etc.

4. Faith gives Assurance, Heb. 10.22. as to Job, David, Hezekiah, Paul: where
yet note that the,

1 Acts of Faith are, 1. Direct. 2. Reflect.

2. Courts in which Pardon is sealed, 1. In Heaven. 2. In Conscience.

3 Assurance is either of, 1. Adherence. 2. In Evidence.

5 Faith sanctifies and purifieth the heart, Acts 15.9. Purify, etc. Gal.
2.20. Christ's lives in us, Col. 2.12. Risen with Christ by faith.

An heavenly Conversation here, is a good evidence of a heavenly condition
hereafter, as the Spirit put into upon Saul, David, Jehu, were a good earnest
of the future dignity of a Kingdom which befell them.

6. And lastly Faith is an evidence of heaven, and all good hoped for, Heb.
11.1. Hab. 2.4. Ephesians. 2.8. Ye are saved. 1 Pet. 1.9. Receiving the end of your
faith, the salvation of your souls.

Ap Now sum up all these together, and apply them to the point, then that
Faith, (this Shield) by which we have Sonship, Union with Christ,
Justification, Assurance, Sanctification and Salvation, does evidently conclude
a full and final Conquest over all the fiery darts and destructive temptations
of the wicked, and so you may add them all as an Illustration of the Reason
(annexed in this Text-in the praise of this Faith) drawn from the admirable and
wonderful effects of the same, viz. In quenching all the fiery darts.

Quest. If any ask how these darts can be thus quenched, I answer.

Answ. By Faith I have interest into all the promises of God to Believers, I am
his Son, I have Union with Christ, am justified by his Righteousness, have
Assurance of his Favor, am sanctified by his Grace, and have evidence of
heaven, and final Salvation. Now apply these to any Dart or Temptation, and
resist them with these, and say to Satan, etc. Should I yield to be or do what
thou suggest, to defile and undo my self with wicked lustss, forfeit all my
honor and happiness for thy transitory pleasures, profits and preferments.

And say in this case, as the Lord Jesus our Savior said to the Devil upon his
great proffer of the power and glory of all the Kingdoms of the world, Mat.
4.10. Luke 4.8. (...), Abi, abscede retro me, Satana. Arias Montan. Get thee
hence, depart, avoid, be gone, I defy thee in such a case as this; then draw
the sword of the Spirit upon him, and adjoyn Supplications and Prayer to God to
defend thee, and to subdue him under thy feet.

Ap. Thus resist, and he will flee, and thou shall conquer: Thus you see how
you may improve this Shield of Faith to quench the fiery darts of the wicked in
every kind: I have done with the proof of the point, I do now descend to Use.

Uses of this point are of Reproof, Examination and Comfort.

I. The first Use is of Reproof and Terror to all that want this shield, or
neglect it either in defect or excess, either by Unbelief or Presumption. 1.
Unbelief is a sin against Faith in the way of defect; and Unbelievers are such
as either know not the Word of God through ignorance and want of the means of
Faith, as Pagans, Psalm 147.19, 20. which yet excuses them not, but a tanto,
John 15.22. Or Obstinacy and Wilfulness against means, as many Christians, 2
Pet. 3.5. And this is the mother of Errors and Heresies. Know, but acknowledge
not the Truth of it, as Atheists, Epicures. Know, and acknowledge, but appy not
Threatenings, Precepts, Promises, etc. to themselves, nor do conform to it. Men
are moved with nothing to be, and do as they should: Men are apt to except
against the Preacher, who must speak by Rule, but are not so apt to submit to
the Word, which will find out men's faults, and discover their obliquities, do
what they can.

Rep. This piece of Armor is ushered in with a Preface, and put off with
singular praise of the admirable effects.

1. Above all in our esteem, principally in reference to the whole man: All our
other Armor, of all which, it is defensive and comprehensive.

2. The Shield: a shield is either artificial, political, spiritual or divine,
viz. God himself.

3. Quench, i.e. extinguish and utterly destroy.

4. All the fiery darts, i.e. Temptations, Lusts, Incentives, etc.

5. Of the wicked, i.e. of Satan and all his Instruments.

Doct. Faith is the Christians Shield to repel the darts of the Devil: Reasons
from Promises, and in it self, by which we have Sonship, Union, Justification,
Assurance, Sanctification, and Evidence of Heaven, and all future good.

Ap. Apply these to every dart.

Use I. The first Use of Reproof is to Unbelievers who want this Shield: these
either know not, or acknowledge not, or apply not the word, nor conform to it:
Many are guilty of this, and this is a grievous sin: for it,

1. Hinders the Word of God, and works of Christ, etc. Heb. 4.1.

2. Defiles all in us and to us, Titus 1.15.

3. Makes that we cannot please God, Heb. 11.6.

4. But depart from God. Infidelity is the ground and fountain of all
disobedience, bedience, Heb. 3.12.

5. And persecute his servants, as Acts 14.2. the Jews did.

God taxes it in the Jews that believed not his Word, Psalm 106.24. Christ
upbraideth it, Mat. 8.26. And as the Jews entered into Canaan, but were broken
off, so God will punish it with his absence, and with torments, John 3.18. Luke
12.46.

Eve, and the old World, Lots sons, Egyptians, Israelites, were all undone by
it.

If we were but almost persuaded, as ( Acts 26.28.) he to be Christian; and did
we thereupon cry as he, Mark 9.24. Help mine unbelief, there were hope of us,
that we might become Believers, but whilst the Thief and three thousand were so
soon converted, we do still remain in unbelief.

Gutta cavat lapidem, vel vi, vel saepe cadendo.

Ap. But neither force nor frequency of the Word prevail with us: and hardness
of heart through unbelief will bring destruction.

Thus you know who are Unbelievers, what Unbelief is, how heinous a sin it is
in the fruits and effects thereof, and how dreadful in the end and punishment
of it.

II. This Use does also reprove all presumptuous persons, that think they have
a Buckler, when all proves to be but a shield of painted paper, or fig leaf,
which can do us no good in a storm of Temptation, no more than Adam and Eves
clothing of fig leaves could shelter them from the injury of a cold
Winterseason, Genesis 3.7. And here likewise we are to consider, What it is,
whence it springs, how sinful it is, the fruits of it, and the end of it.

I do now proceed to the last piece of the defensive Armor, which is the fifth
in order, viz. The Helmet.

Exp. The words are few and plain, only observe that an Helmet is a piece of
Armor fitted for the defense and safery of the head, which we commonly call an
Headpiece. Now a Helmet or Headpiece of Armor is either,

1. Artificial, wrought by the hands some skilfulful Workman, and fitted for
the heads defense: They were made anciently of Brass or Copper, since of steel
and iron, and that for the hardness, soundness and durableness of the metal,
Aes enimest maxim durabile, it will abide blows without yieldance: and with
such do soldiers use to arm their heads, as Goliath did, and David assaied, 1 Samuel 7.5, 38.

2. Spiritual, and this is the Helmet in the Text, and this is ascribed to
Almighty God by the Prophet: He put on Righteousness as a Breast Plate, and an
Helmet of Salvation upon his head, etc. Isa. 59.7. Though these things are to
be understood far otherwise of God, then of us, (though the Apostle here does
allude unto these terms) for the Prophet there does describe God as a man of
Arms, putting on his Armor, and fitting himself for the performance of some
notable Exploits, and great atchievments; and the meaning is, That God does
undertake the care of his peoples Warfare, in their deliverance from miseries,
temporal and eternal, and in the subversion and destruction of their enemies,
that his power, justice, regard of his own glory, and tender affection to his
people, shall as evidently appear and be seen, as goodly raiment, and glistring
armor upon the body of one that wears it, Psalm 93.1. and 94.1, 2. and 98.2.

Ap. And have we no experience of this in our deliverances from the Rump,
Lambert, and Sectarian party, and Restitution of Government.

But as this Text is applyable to us, so this Helmet does point and direct us
to some particular grace singularly useful for us in our Way and War to
salvation, and this grace is hope of salvation, 1 These. 5.8.

And this hope of salvation purchased by Christ, by whose merits we are saved,
and may lift up our selves (heads) as being already victorious in the combat
which we are to fight, is as an Helmet of defense and glory to us.

Ap. And in this sense Hope is styled the Helmet of salvation, both here in the
Text, and also in that place, 1 These. 5.8. and thus you have the meaning of the
words, which being thus understood, gives us this Doctrine, viz. that

A Christians hope is to him an helmet of Salvation: so that as a Soldier does
arm his head with an helmet against cuts and knocks, and other hurts which it
may else meet with; so does a true Christian arm and fence his heart and mind
(the principal Essential part of man) against the manifold ( furibundos
insultus Diaboli piscator in Isa. 59.7.) furious assaults of the devil. This
hope we must take up, and make use of in this Warfare.

Now concerning this Grace of hope, something must be spokon for Explication,
Confirmation, and Application of the point.

Now, 1. for Explication.

Defin. Spes est extensio appetitus in appetibile, Aquin. Hope is an extension
or enlarging of the desire after something desirable; thus say the Schoolmen:
This reaches hope in the general, and this hope is varied, and may be either
good or bad according to the nature of the appetite, and object of the same.

Divines come nearer, and says as Augustine, Hope is a desire after something
which we do believe we may attain to, or of some excellent good thing (cum
fiducia obtinendi) with confidence of obtaining it: and this Object of our Hope
is attended with four conditions, viz. That it must be, 1. Bonum. 2. Arduum. 3.
Futurum. 4. Possibile. 1. Good. 2. Hard to be gotten. 3. Future, Romans 8.24. 4.
Possible to be attained.

Ap. So that a Christians Hope is a confident expectation of all good hings
promised to us both concerning this life, and a better in heavenly glory. 1
Cor. 15.19. If in this life only we have hope in Christ, etc. But we rejoice in
the hope of the glory of God, (i.e.) of the felicity and happiness which they
shall have in the presence of God, Romans 5.2. though at present they suffer, and
others deride their Exultings.

Or, Our hope in God for Salvation and future blessedness, is a Grace infused
into our hearts by the holy Ghost, by which we expect all future good things,
grace and glory, ( and mitigationem presentis crucis, and liberationem, as also
the mitigation and deliverance from present miseries and afflictions according
to the good counsel and will of God, resting upon the promises of God, and the
merits of Christ apprehended by faith, Psalm 40, 1. and 52.9. and 130.5, 6, 7,
8. I have waited, and do wait, and yet will still wait for the Lord, more then
they that waited for the morning; yea and let all Israel hope in the Lord, for
with him is mercy and plenteous Redemption, And he shall redeem Israel from all
iniquities and calamities, 1 Pet. 1.13. yea hope to end, for the grace to be
brought at the revelation of Jesus Christ. Hopes eyes are upon God the donor
and giver. Our salvation, (the ultimus finis) the last and best gift to us.
Upon the means conducing thereto, as the Auxilia gratiae, the manifold graces
by which we do attain to salvation and blessedness.

You have heard the Quid sit, what this Hope is, and the definitions of the
same both general and special, now for the causes of it.

1. The principal efficient cause is God, who is the giver of every good and
perfect gift. He of his abundant Mercy has begotten us unto a lively hope by
the resurrection of Jesus Christ from the dead; to an inheritance
incorruptible, etc. 1 Pet. 1.3, 4.

2. The instrumental cause is Faith, Heb. 11.1. For hope springs from faith, as
a branch from the root.

Ap. For because we believe in him, therefore we hope for all good from him.

3. The impulsive or moving cause of our Hope is, the manifold goodness and
free benefits of God to his people, and the former favors to them, and to our
selves, of which we have had so great experience.

He that has formerly drank at a plentiful spring, will still hope to speed
well there, when he has occasion and stands in need of supply of water, and so
may we here for support and succor.

4. The final cause or end of our Hope. 1. The Glory of God, in whom we place
our hope, that must be promoted by us, and exalted for his mercy and grace,
Isa. 30.18, 19.2. Our own salvation and blessedness, for which we hope and wait
upon him, Ibid. Isa. 30.18, 19. 1 These. 5.8. and thus for the causes of hope.

3. The Subject of it is a true Christian, and only such as are so: it is spes
piorum, the hope of the godly, not of the wicked, living simpliciter, dead,
Rev. 6.9, 10, 11.

4. The seat of it is the heart, which is seeds Affectum, the seat of the
Affections, not so much of the sensitive, as of the intellective part: of the
Will especially, which is sometimes called Appetitus mentis, the souls
appetite, Pol. Syntag. 598.

5. The place of it is most properly, and simpliciter, the earth, and those
that are living both in soul and body in this world, who hope for many things
in heaven, there is only the hope of resurrection of the body to immortal
glory, etc. then there it will cease, and the completing of all divine
promises to the Church and people of God, as Rev. 6.9, 10, 11. then it cease.
In hell there can be no hope of any good to all eternity, to those damned souls
chained and bound up to everlastling misery.

6. The Object of it is first and principally the Lord, Psalm 33.22. and 38.13.
As we hope in him, so we expect mercy, etc. from him. His Mercy, Psalm 33.18.
and 147.11. Gods eye and pleasure is on such as hope so. His Word, Psalm
119.81. and 38.15. Else David had fainted. And Jesus Christ his son, 1 Cor.
15.19. If in this life, and then in subservency.

All the benefits of God promised to us, and particularly Beneficia, Veniae,
Gratiae, Gloriae, of pardon of all our sins for the merits sake of Christ, 2
Cor. 3.1, 2. being freed from the ministration of death by the Law. Grace, and
all the benefits spiritual and corporal usually conferred upon men in that
state, Psalm. 25.3.11. Hab. 2.3. wait for it, (though it tarry) etiamsi supra
natura essent, Romans 4.18. Glory in a joyful resurrection, and in the state of
glory, Acts 2.26, 27, 28. and 23.6. and 24.5. Romans 5.2. Tit. 3.7.

7. The Adjuncts of it are. 1. A preparation of Mind, 1 Pet. 1.13. 1 John 3.3.
He that has this hope purifieth himself. 2. A holy Life. 3. Perseverance to
the end, till the revelation of Christ, then it shall cease. 4. Assurance, and
this arises from, and is grounded upon the truth of Gods promises, the merits
of Christ, the effectual omnipotence of God that promises good, to perform
whatsoever he has promised, whereas men's promises, merits, and power of
performance is as nothing.

8. The effects of Hope are many, for it makes men,

1. The more godly.

2. To think (humiliter) lowly of themselves, and sublimiter, highly of God,
upon whom the hopeful man does wholly depend.

3. To renounce our own merits, and to rest only upon free grace.

4. Assurance of future good by the mercy of God, and merits of Christ only.

5. Perseverance in our duty to God and man.

9. Patience and joy in Afflictions, Romans 12.2.

9. In quibus convenient and differunt fides and spes, the agreement and
difference betwixt Faith and hope.

Now concerning this ninth particularr, consider, that,

1. Saving faith and hope do agree in the common efficient cause of them both,
viz. The holy Ghost, for it is he that infuseth both into our hearts, adjoining
certainty and assurance, for each of them gives us the like assurance.

2. But the difference between them,

1. Faith begets Hope, and so is before it; but hope comes after, and is an
individual companion of Faith.

2. Faith is persuaded that God spoke truth: hope waits the occasion of time
when God will discover it.

3. Faith is persuaded of the Truth of God, who can neither lie nor deceive,
etc. and of all his Promises, hope expects patiently the performance of them,
and that God will effect them.

4. Faith believes that God is our Father, Hope expects that he will
reprepresent himself to us accordingly.

5: Faith represents future things as present Hope waits for. Then

6. Faith believes that Eternal Life is given us, Hope waits till it come, and
be revealed to us.

7. Faith is the foundation, and Hope rests upon it.

8. Faith sustains feeds, and supplies Hope: for we cannot hope to have any
thing from God, except we believe his Promises; and Hope by patient waiting,
strengthens the weakness of our Faith, if that fail not.

10. The Opposites are Doubt, Despair, hope in the Creature, and humane
inventions, and all the vain hopes of evil men in, and for evil things.

Thus you have the, 1. Definitions. 2. Causes. 3. Subject. 4. Seat. 5. Place.
6. Object. 7. Adjuncts. 8. Effects. 9. The difference betwixt Faith and Hope,
etc. and 10. Opposites of this Grace of hope, the helmet of salvation.

And thus much shall suffice for the explication of the point.

2. Now I descend to the second particular propounded, viz. The confirmation of
the point.

I. It is frequently commanded in Scripture, Psalm 130.7, 8. Let Israel hope in
the Lord, with him is mercy: I need not multiply Scriptures.

II. It is highly commended.

1. Good, 2 These. 2.16. 2. Blessed, Tit. 2.13.3. Lively, 1 Pet. 1.3.4. Sure and
steadfast, Heb. 6.19.5. And by it we are saved, Romans 8.24. because hope is
necessarily joined with faith.

For we believe what we are not in possession of, but hope expects the
performance in due time, so that it continues with us, till we have happiness
in hand; and then hope ends in fruition, and there determines and cease:
Thus it brings us to heaven, Ergo, we are said, To be saved by it.

III. And eminently compared for its further commendation.

1. As here, to an Helmet, for durableness and defense it fails us not.

2. To an Anchor, Heb. 6.19. for its usefulness in storms, and in the most
trouble some times.

To a Staff, to lean and rest upon in our pilgrimage here, Psalm 33.22. Isa.
50.10. Stay upon his God.

IV. And for instances.

1. Abraham above hope, Romans 4.18.

2. David, all along in the Psalms.

3. The faithful in death, Prove. 14.32. Isa. 25.9. Jer. 14.22. Romans 5.2.

4. Joseph of Arimathea, Luke 23.51. for the kingdom of God.

5. The Disciples, Luke 24.21.

6. St. Paul of the Resurrection, etc. Acts 23.6. and 28.20, etc.

7. And the Thessalonians, 1 These. 1.3. with patience of hope.

Now as we have the Commands, Commendations, Comparisons, and diverse instances
of Scripture, so we might raise diverse Reasons and Arguments out of the
Scriptures already cited further to acquaint us, why we should take this helmet
of salvation; and thus, hope in the Lord, and persist therein.

V. And these reasons do arise in respect of,

1. God himself, because he is our help and Shield, He that plucks our feet out
of the Net, Psalm 25.15. and 33.20. and because with him is Mercy, and
plentiful redemption, Psalm 130.7, 8.

2. Our selves, because hope in God never shames men, Romans 5.5. (i.e) Non
frustratur sperantes, hope in other things often does, and we gain much by it;
for we renew our strength, and become indefatigable, Isa. 40.31.

3. From the perseverance and continuance in hope in it self; for we ought to
persist and continue therein to the end, because the grace and benefit to be
broughtto us, is so great, 1 Pet. 1.13. because the whole world hopes for a
Restoration, much more reason have we, Romans 8.19. to 26.

You have heard the point from this piece of Armor, viz.

Doct. A Christians hope of salvation is to him an helmet, which he must take,
and make use of in his spiritual Warfare. This point you have heard explicated,
confirmed.

Now I do proceed to improve and make use of it.

3. I do now descend to the third particular propounded, viz. the Uses.

I. Use is of Reproof to those that hope not as they ought to do.

1. Doubtful persons, that fear God will not defend, nor deliver them in time
of temptation, nor bestow eternal life upon them: True it is, that in us there
is cause enough to doubt, when we consider our sins; but let us bewail this,
and our Confidence may be in God.

2. Despairful people, that apprehend their sins to be greater than mercy can
pardon: Genesis 4.13. Thus did Cain; so those that had no hope, 1 These. 4.13. This
is a great sin: Of this see my Notes.

3. Those that hope in the creature, as too many do. See my Notes of trust in
God, or In humane inventions and forged tales, as poor superstitious persons
and Papists do, who place their hope in the Saints departed, and in their
Relics, in Bulls, Pardons and Indulgencies of the Pope; in Vows and
Pilgrimages, and a thousand other Ceremonious Observations. Or in their own
merits.

4. This Use does justly reprove and condemn the vain hope of evil men, in, and
after evil things: We are here in a Labyrinth, a Maze, an inextricable way: It
were endless to speak of the vanity of men's hopes: Take but a few Instances.

1. Balaam (no doubt) hoped to enrich and advance himself by the wages of
unrighteousness, according to Balacks promise, Numb. 22.17.2 Pet. 2.15. but it
proved otherwise.

2. And bloody Abimeleck, by the slaughter of his Brethren, made himself a
King; but you know what his End was, Judge. 9.5, 6.

3. Ahab hoped to compass Naboths vineyard to enlarge his Homestal, and to hold
it also when he had gotten it, he did so, but he had and held it with a
vengeance, 1 King. 21.

4. Zimri (no doubt) when he had slain his Mr. Elah King of Israel, and reigned
in his stead, hoped he had been safe enough, but Omri brought him to a
desparate end, 1 Kings 16.9, 10, 16, to 21. 2 Kings 9.31. Had Zimri peace?

5. Athaliah hoped that she had secured the Kingdom to her self by the
slaughter of the Seed Royal, but she found it otherwise, 2 Kings 11.1.

6. Sennacheribs huge Army could not compass their design, but were miserably
destroyed, no doubt, he hoped otherwise, 2 Kings 18.19.

7. Isreal's hope in Egypt never did them good, Isa. 30.2, 11, to 15.

8. And those that had made a Covenant with death and hell, hoped that all
would be well enough with them, but they were disappointed, Isa. 28.15. to 20.

9. Those Husbandmen, Mat. 21.33, to 42. and Luke 20.9, to 17. They slew the
Heir, and did seize upon his inheritance, hoped that they had much advantaged
(when they undid) themselves thereby. Why should I be endless in Instances that
are innumerable?

Ap. All those hopes vanish and perish, and no marvel, for God has spoken it,
The Hypocrites hope shall perish, and, Job 8.13, 14, 15. be as a Spiders web;
his house shall not stand, etc. but be as a dying man giving up the Ghost, Job
11.20. For God destroys such hope, Job 14.19.

Quest. So that we may ask the Question, (as Job. 27.8.) What is the Hope, etc.
though he had gained, when God takes away his soul?

Answ. Sure when death comes, The hope of unjust men perishes, Prove. 11.7, 23.
and ends in wrath. Psalm 112.10. The wicked shall see, and grieve, and perish,
and melt away; the desire (or Hope) of the wicked shall perish. Such hopes are
like dust or chaff, foam or thin froth, smoke that is soon dispersed, or a
Guest that stays but a day, says the wise man, Eccles. 5.14. Or like an
unfaithful man in time of Trouble, a broken tooth, and a foot out of joint;
Prove. 25.19. says Solomon.

Ap. Should I bring these things down to our times, when should I end, and
conclude this Subject! For how many did hope, that upon the death of the late
King, both Name and Thing, King and King-ship has been dead for ever; and that
either Anarchy or Tyranny, Stratocracy or Oligarchy, etc. viz. the Rump, should
have domineered over us for ever! And that King, Kingdom, Settlement, or Free
Parliament conducing thereto, should never have appeared more! Others had
better hopes, and now God has decided the business.

You know the point from this helmet of salvation, viz.

Doct. A Christians hope of salvation is to him an helmet, which he must take,
and make use in this spiritual Warfare: This has been explicated, confirmed,
and applied in part. The first Use did reprove doubtful and despairful persons.
The second, Those that hope in the Creature, in humane inventions, or in their
own Merits. And thirdly, The vain hopes of evil men, in, and after vain or evil
things. Instances of which are innumerable.

1. Balaam. 2. Abimeleck. 3. Ahab. 4. Zimri. 5. Athaliah. 6. Sennacherib. 7.
Israel hoping in Egypt. 8. Those Covenanters with death and hell. And, 9. Those
Husbandmen in the Gospel, who slew the Heir, and did seize upon his
inheritance, hoping they had much advantaged themselves thereby, Mat. 21.
whereas indeed they utterly undid themselves by so doing, as it is evident to
this day, (1600. years since.)

These nine Instances were propounded unto you, with a brief Application to
these times, and expression of the righteous Judgments of God against such
sinful and ungodly hopes.

Thus far I have proceeded: I do now descend to the Uses of Examination and
Exhortation, which you may conjoyn together for brevity sake.

The second and third Use of Examination and Exhortation, is A Christians hope
of salvation, a helmet; then try, and examine your selves what Use you make of
it. You have heard it opened in the Causes and Effects of it, etc.

1. Now do you importune God much for this Grace of Hope, he is the Donor of
this, and every perfect gift; He is the Fountain of all good, and to him we
must have recourse.

2. How do we cherish Faith, the Root, and Instrumental cause of this. Faith is
a principal grace, as you have heard: Then use all means to strengthen it, and
starve it not.

3. Does our hope of salvation make us act the more strenuously and vigorously:
For the, 1. Glory of God, from whom we expect salvation, according to what we
pray for, ( Orat. Dom. Pet. 1.) hollowed be thy Name; Glorify him in all
things.

Ap. How can we hope for such honor from him, whom we wilfully dishonor
daily! Be you exhorted and persuaded to mend what is amiss in this particular.
2. And for our own Salvation in the way of it, and in the pursuit of whatsoever
may further the same.

Ap. These are the final causes and ends of your hope; do you answer them.

4. Hope, it is Spes piorum, and is appropriated only to the godly; See that
you be such, these are the proper Bottles fit for such Wine: The wicked have no
hope, being without God in the world, Ephesians. 2.12. 1 These. 4.13.

5. What are the Objects of our hope? Is our hope fixed upon God, Christ, his
Word, and his Mercy, Goodness, and the manifold benefits (Veniae, Gratiae,
Gloriae) of Pardon, Grace, and Glory, the fruits of his Mercy, and the streams
of that fountain of living water: For the Mercies of God fail not.

Ap. Do we esteem the fruition of these the greatest Blessings: or is our hope
set upon the world, the pleasures, profits, and preferments of the same.

1. Sensual, and sinful pleasures are as much as some ( Epicuri de grege porci,
Epicures and others do hope for.

2. With others; Gold is their hope, and gain their godliness. Job 31.24. He
did not so: And Mammon their God, Mat. 6.24.

3. And the Glory, Pomp and Preferment of this world, have caused many to fall
down, and worship the God of this world: This our Savior refused.

6. How are our minds prepared, 1 Pet. 1.13. and our lives purified, 1 John
3.3.1. To entertain such a perseverance, as is required of us, viz To hold fast
our confidence, and rejoicing of hope firm and steadfast unto the end, Heb. 3.6,
14. And, 2. Such a full assurance of Hope unto the end, as is expected and
desired by us, Heb. 6.11. which must be accomplished by diligence, Faith and
Patience, not slothfulness.

Ap. We must be at pains to reach this Assurance, and great diligence must be
used to keep it free and full, without anxiety and doubting: Let this be your
work.

7. What effects have this our hope of salvation wrought and produced in us?
Are we hereby taught to be more heavenly minded? Are our hearts there where our
hopes are? And are we more conformable to heavenly conditions and
qualifications, there is perfect Peace, Unity, Amity, Love and Concord, all in
agreement, and one God, and Father over all, who is infinitely good.

Ap. But we on earth have had many Masters, none of the best; and amongst our
selves, are full of Fractions and divisions. Machiavels wicked rule has had
great power, influence and prevalence with us for many years, viz. Divide and
impera, which has been mightily acted by a Jesuited party, Divide and Rule. We
have more resembled a wilderness of Bears, and Lions, Wolves and Tigers, rather
then a Paradise of God, a place of peace, where the Lion and the Lamb lie down
in peace together, Isa. 11.6. to 10. and 65.25. We have broken one another
heads, and hands, and hearts, and Estates; and how all things have suited with
this Helmet of Salvation, I leave to wise, experienced Christians to determine,
Tantaene animis coelestibus Irae? Great anger among heavenly minds, was strange
to Heathens; The good Lord mend it now among Christians.

2. How much more humble are we then formerly; This is a valley of grace,
Capsula virtutum, a Cabinet of virtues; the first step to heaven; to which God
gives his grace, and then adds Exaltation.

Ap. Yet how few have, and embrace this?

3. How much Self-denial, all in reference to the things of this world, has
this hope wrought in us: Who denis himself the more, in respect of dishonest
gain: Or willingly restores things unlawfully gotten. We hope for heaven, yet
we would willingly hold the worst gotten goods on earth.

Ap. How these things suit, I know not.

4. What Patience upon earth in bearing Afflictions and Injuries? Has our hope
of heaven wrought in us?

5. And lastly, What perseverance in the performance of our duty to God and
man; Have we been more serviceable to God, and more profitable, useful and
beneficial to men then formerly? has our hope of heaven enlivened our
devotions to God, and enlarged our good affections, our hearts and our hands in
charity to men? Or rather, have not we been like those desperate people, ( Jer.
2.25. etc. and 13.10, etc. and 18.11, 12, etc. see the places) who when the
Prophet had reproved them for their sins, etc.

1. They answered him crosly and negatively, yea desperately; for they said,
Noash desperatum est, (a desperate word) q.d. the case is desperate, and we are
at a point, there is no remedy, we are past cure, past care, and therefore we
will do as we have done, etc. We have loved strangers and strange courses, and
so we will do still; a profane resolution.

Quest. But what was their course and crime? I answer with the Prophet.

Answ. They committed two great Evils, Jer. 2.13. And persisted in evil till
their own wickedness corrected them, verse. 19.

They were, 1. like a degenerate plant of a strange vine, verse. 21.

Or, 2. A wild Ass in the wilderness that snuffs up the wind, etc. verse. 24.
and yet they plead innocence, and said, I am not polluted, verse. 23.

2. So Jer. 13.10, etc. They would walk after their own hearts, etc. till they
became like a rotten girdle, good for nothing, though God chose them to be for
a People, a Name, a Praise, and a Glory, yet they would not hear, nor obey,
till God would neither pity, nor spare, nor have mercy, but dash them one
against another, and destroy them, verse. 14. because they were so unchangeable
in evil, like the Ethiopian or Leopard, that can change neither skin, nor
spots, verse. 23, 24, 25.

3. So also, Jer. 18.11, 12. They took up the like desparate resolution, (and
word Noash) to walk after their own devices; to which they added, to devise
Mischief against the Prophet, who gave them good counsel, etc. verse. 11.18. So
Jer. 42. and 43. and 44.15, 16, to 20.

Ap. The places put, or compared together, give us the very exact picture and
character of our late Usurpers: And how can such men wear hope as an helmet of
salvation: Thus much for Examination and Exhortation; I end with a word of
consolation.

Use 4. The fourth Use of Consolation, is, to them that may hope upon
Experience, as Psalm 78.9, 7, 8.

1. They may be of good courage, Psalm 31.24. And have gladness, Prove. 10.28.
And praise God for the light of his countenance, Psalm 42.5.11.

2. May hope in trouble, Jer. 14.8. Lam. 3.26. In death, Prove. 14.32. When
heaven and earth shakes, Joel 3.26. Luke 21.28. 1 These. 4.16.

3. They shall flourish, Jer. 17.7, 8. And rise gloriously, Tit. 2.13.

Of the seven pieces of this Panoply, (or whole Armor of God) so necessary for
us in our spiritual and Christian Warfare: You have heard five of them spoken
of already, viz. 1. A Belt. 2. A Breast-late. 3. Shoes. 4. A Shield. And, 5.
An Helmet. All which I have opened, and applied unto you: All which are
especially Defensive.

6. I do now descend to the last two pieces, viz. 6. A Sword. And, 7.
Supplication and Prayers, which are as well offensive as Defensive: of which in
their order.

6. This sixth piece, is, the Sword of the Spirit, which is the Word of God,
(...): The words are plain, and easy to be understood; only note, that,

I. A Sword is either Material, or Spiritual.

1. Material, which is a sharp Weapon used in War for offense or defense, so
called.

Defin. And the Original word (...) is translated Gladius, a Sword.

Etymol. Now Gladius derivatur a clade, quod ad Cladem sit Inventus, vel ad
hostium cladem fit Gladius, proprie autem appellatus Gladius, quia Gulam
dividit, i.e. cervicem desecat; nam caetera membra securibus caeduntur collum
gladio tantum, Mat. Mart. p. 1030.

Ap. Now a Sword is called in latin by a name derived from a word, that
signifies Slaughter, Destruction and Misery, etc. especially of an enemy.

This has been our Master a great while, and Ergo, we know it by woeful
experience too well, without any further Explication: But this is not the sword
in the Text.

2. Spiritual, and this is the sword in the Text, and is here said to be The
Word of God, and to this only we speak, for we have not to do with natural
words, which men utter with their mouths by speech to express their minds one
to another in this place from this Text.

This Spiritual Sword, the word of God; is either, 1. Essential, or, 2.
Theological.

1. Essential, viz. Christ, the Son of God, the second person in the Trinity,
by whom the Will of God is declared to the Church, as our minds are expressed
to other men by our words. So John 1.14. The Word was made flesh, and dwelt
among us: this is the Essential and uncreated word: and in Scripture, two
special Attributes are ascribed as peculiar to the son of God, the second
person in the Trinity: 1. The wisdom of the Father, Prove. 8.14, to 36. 2. The
Word of the Father, John 1.1. These two Epithites Christ claims to himself,
Mat. 11.27. John 1.18. When he says, No man knows the Father, nor has seen
God, save the Son: In this he assumeth to be his Fathers Wisdom: We are not
wise enough to ascend to such an height. And to be his Word, in that he
reveals, and does declare him unto men; In which respect, he is called a
Prophet: And that Prophet, Deuteronomy. 18.15.

2. Theological or divine word from God to men, viz. The holy Scripture of the
old and New Testament, Luke 11.28. And what is taught in them, and learned from
them, Acts 11.19. 2 Timothy 4.2. Preach the Word, be instant, etc. Reprove, etc.

Ap. This is a created and inspired word, to make us wise unto salvation, 2 Timothy 3. 15, 16, 17. 2 Pet. 1. 19, 20, 21. We have a sure word of Prophecy, etc.
And this Word of God made known to us by Christ, etc. is,

1. Good, so said Hezekiah, 2 Kings 20.19. though the Message was sad. And the
Lord himself said, I will perform my good word to you after seventy years, Jer.
29.10. and Heb. 6.5, 6. Ye hear the danger of them that have tasted the good
word of God, if they fall away: their case is woeful. And this Word of God that
is so good, is also,

2. Pure; Psalm 119.140. Very pure, Ergo, Thy servant loves it; yea, Every
word of God is pure, says wise Agur, Prove. 30.5.

3. True, so said David, 2 Samuel 7.28. In his devout prayer to God: And Christ
himself in his most affectionate prayer to his Father, John 17.17.

4. Gracious: All wondered at the gracious words of Christ's mouth, Luke 4.22.

5. Precious yea, and that most of all when we want it, as 1 Samuel 3.1. When
there was no open vision: Bonacarendo, etc.

6. Sound; a form of wholesome and healthful words (...), such as conduce to
the health of our souls; 2 Timothy 1.13. rather wholesome then toothsome;
healthful than delicates; not tainted with Error or Heresy, with any false or
corrupt Doctrine.

7. It is quick and powerful, and sharper then any two-edged sword, etc. Heb:
4.12, 13.

I. Which most properly may be applied to Christ; For he is,

1. Quick, i.e. living, beholding the thoughts and actions of men, to reward
them accordingly: To distinguist Christ from Idols, which can see, nor do
nothing, Psalm 115.4.5, 6, 7.

2. Powerful, i. e. omniscient, and able to execute wrath upon the disobedient.

3. And sharper then a two-edged sword, which easily enters, and makes way for
it felf.

Ap. So Christ (who is omniscient) does easily enter, see, and search the
secret thoughts and inventions of the heart; for all things are naked and open
unto the eyes of him with whom we have to do.

2. This is also appliable to the word of God made known to us in the
Scriptures; and that in all the forenamed respects: for it also is quick and
powerful, and sharper than any sword, and is therefore styled, The rod and
spirit of his mouth, Isa. 11.4. wherewith the Lord shall, consume, and slay the
wicked as with a sword, sharp and of two edges, as it is in Revel. 1.16. where
he speaks of Christ, and his Word to his Church, and to the Nations of the
world: And as it is thus applied to the Word of God, and of Christ made known
to the world, so is it also,

3. To the Word of God in the mouths of his Prophets, Apostles and Ministers.
See Isa. 49.2. He, i.e. God has made my mouth like a sharp sword; (as well as
a Rod, as it is called before) where you must consider, that Mouth is put for
the Word (of the Prophet) as it is frequently in Scripture: Genesis 45.21. He did,
(Numb. 3.16.) according to the mouth, i.e. Commandment of Pharaoh. Moses
numbered them according to the mouth, i.e. The Word of the Lord, as he was
commanded. Consider also,

1. Who it was that made the Prophets mouth thus like a sharp sword, it was God
the Father, from whom all power is derived and communicated to Christ, Mat.
28.18. It is he only that has made his word (in the mouths of his Messengers)
to be a sword of Allsufficient power, and of admirable efficacy.

2. To what end and purpose their Mouths are made so sharp. I answer, To subdue
men's souls to the obedience of it; even as men do subdue Nations by the power
of a material sword: so by this spiritual sword, the Lord does subdue us to the
obedience of Christ: And it is so with the mouths of Gods Messengers, if you
distinguish of it objective, and have respect to the Objects and Parties whom
it does most concern, to this further end, viz. either for, 1. Evil and
Destruction to the wicked, by denunciation and menaces of wrath against such.
2. It is for the good and salvation of the godly, by promises of Mercy and
Goodness to them.

3. And both these shall be thus effected, and brought to pass, by publishing
that Word of God which is by him put into their mouths to these ends; and all
this shall as assuredly be fulfilled and effected, as if they had done it
themselves, or had seen it with their eyes.

This is the work of Prophets and Apostles, the Messengers and Ministers of
Christ, to do and perform in obedience and subserviency to him; and then they
have done their duty: This you may see eminently in the Prophet Jeremy: Jer.
1.9, 10. Behold, says the Lord, I have put my words in thy mouth: To be as his
mouth, Jer. 15.19. To separate the precious from the vile. Note, that God sends
no dumb Messengers: And he appointed the Prophet, and did set him over the
Nations.

1. For these ends, as above named, to root out, or pluck up, to pull down, and
to destroy, as also to build and to plant, Jer. 12. 16, 17.

2. And by the same means before mentioned; See God himself explaining this to
the Prophet; Jer. 18.7, 8, 9, 10. If he threaten a Nation, and they repent,
then God will repent: And if he make promises to a Nation, and bless them, if
they abuse all then, not that God repents as man does through oversight, or
want of forecast, or out of sickleness and mutability of mind, for such
grounds of Repentance are imperfections in man, and cannot befall God, Numb.
23.19. But God is said to repent, when he does, as men use to do when they
repent, 1 Samuel 25. 33, 34. When he revoketh a doom that he had past, and
stays the execution of a sentence formerly denounced, Genesis 6.6, 7. God
repented that he had made man, etc. 1 Samuel 15.11. That he had set up Saul to be
King; which doom and sentence, as it was denounced, because of man's sin; so it
is reversed, when man cease so to do, the end being accomplished for which it
was denounced, viz. that it might not be inflicted, as ver. 7. So that as the
Schoolmen say, Repentance in man is a change of the mind or Will: But with
God, It is the willing of a change, his mind and purpose abiding still the
same, as Jer. 20.16.

Reg. Take the Rule, 1. Gods Menaces are denounced with a condition, if not
expressed, yet secretly employed and intended, viz. of Repentance.

2. And his Promises likewise are propounded to people, though in absolute
terms, oft-times conceived yet with the like reservation, viz. not to take
place, but upon their perseverance in well doing, unto whom the same are made,
Deuteronomy. 28.1, 15. The blessings and curses to the same people; 1 Samuel 2.30. of
Elies house, of King Saul's kingdom.

'Thus you have seen this abundantly in the Prophet Jeremy: And for the
Apostles, and others, see 2 Cor. 2.15.16, 17. We are a sweet savor of Christ,
etc. and 4.7. We have this treasure in earthen vessels, that the excellency of
the power may be of God, and not of us. And 10. 4, 5, 6. The we apons of our
Warfare are mighty through God.

See further the praises of this word (This sword of the Spirit) accummulated;
Psalm 19.7.8, 9. That it is 1. Perfect, converting the souls; 2. Sure, making
wise the simple. 3. Right, rejoicing the heart. 4. Pure, enlightening the eyes.
5. Clean, enduring for ever. 6. True and righteous altogether, more desired
then gold, sweeter than honey: By these we are warned, and in keeping them is
great reward, ver. 10, 11. ejusdem.

2. And the Word of God is usually compared to Seed, Luke 8.5. And James 8.18.
Of his own will begat he us, with the word of truth. And it is styled, 1. Pet.
1.23. Incorruptible seed, by which we are born again, even the word of God,
which lives and abides for every; Thus much shall suffice for the proof of
this point. I might add Arguments.

1. Excellency of this sword, and that both in the offensive and defensive
properties of it.

2. From the Author of it, viz. The Spirit. But these in the Application will
have their further Amplification and Enlargement, Ergo, I descend to it. Uses
are.

Use I. The first Use informs us of the Excellency of this sword both for
Offense and Defense, to the Enemy and our selves.

I. For Offense to the Enemy: See, 1. Satan; For with this our Savior wounded
the Devil, Mat. 41. 2. The sins of great ones: How plain were the Prophets with
Kings! Nathan, Micaiah; Ezekiel. 21.25. with King Zedekiah. 3. Errors, Heresies,
and evil Opinions. 4. Self-Interests and Unrighteousness. 5. And the unruly
Transgressions of all. But now,

1. Satan will try many tricks and wiles, as Balack did by Baalam.

2. Great ones will endure no Control, like the Princes in Jeremy.

3. Error pleads the Spirit.

4. Self-Interests, and unrighteous innocence, Jer. 2.35.

3. And the cross Multitude, the vulgarity, are all for Tumults and Uproars, as
Acts 19.24. and are set on mischief, as they, Exodus 32.19.

Thus concerning this sword of the Spirit.

You have heard that the Sword is either Material or Spiritual; And this
spiritual sword is either Essential and uncreated, or Theological, Doctrinal or
Evangelical, created, and inspired, and conveyed from God to men. That this
Doctrinal Word is good, pure, true, gracious, precious, sound and healing, Qui
me sanum fecit, seu valetudini restituit, Pas. Lex. p. 713. (...), Doctrina
sana, 1 Timothy 1.10. The Apostle commands Timothy, To hold fast the form of sound
words, (...), Exemplar, (seu expressam formam) Habe (teneto) sanorum verborum
quae a me audisti, etc. Arias Montan. Pas. Lex. p. 712.

7. This word is said to be quick and powerful, and sharper than any two-edged
sword, Heb. 4.12. which is applied to,

1. The Essential, uncreated Word, the Son of God.

2. The Word of God, and Christ to the world, called the Rod, and spirit of his
mouth.

And, 3. To the Word of God in the mouths of his Messengers: 1. To subdue men's
souls to the obedience of it. 2. To be for evil or good, death or life,
destruction or salvation, to the obstinate or obedient.

Ap. And this is the work of Prophets, Apostles, and Ministers of Christ in all
Ages, which himself does explain to them: Ier. 1.7. At what instant I shall
speak of a Nation.

Not that God does repent out of oversight, or defect of forecast, or
mutability of mind, as men do; but when he revoketh the doom he had passed, and
stays the Execution what he had denounced: when his own end is accomplished,
either in the Repentance of the wicked, or perseverance of the godly, etc. to
whom, and to which end all the Menaces and Promises, Threatenings and
Encouragements of God are made: All which Menaces and Promises are ever to be
understood with the condition or reservation there expressed by Almighty God.
How absolute soever they appear, or by us may be apprehended in their Terms or
Words.

8. You have also heard the praises of this Sword, the Word of God, out of
Psalm 19.7.8, 9. in fix particulars.

9. And that it is usually compared to incorruptible seed in several Scriptures.

10. And also the Arguments or Reasons of this point; viz. That,

Doct. The word of God is the true Christians sword, wherewith he does defend
himself, and offend his spiritual adversaries: I say the Reasons do arise from
its own Excellency in the use of it: And the Author of it, viz. The Spirit of
God.

Here the War is spiritual, and so is the Enemy, and so also is the Sword: All
are spiritual; and Ergo, Thus suited one to another in this Warfare.

But the Reasons will meet with a further illustration in the Application of
this point: To which now I do now descend.

11. And the Uses of this point are of Information.

Doct. The Word of God is the sword of all the faithful, wherewith to defend
themselves, and to offend their spiritual adversaries, to withstand, repel,
subdue, and cut off all Satan's temptations, and other corruptions which war
against our souls, 1 Pet. 2.11.

Now the Word of God is called The sword of the Spirit, because,

1. The Spirit makes this Weapon to our hands, 2 Pet. 1.21. For holy men of
God spoke as they were moved by the holy Ghost.

2. This Sword slays our spiritual enemies, Isa. 11.4.

3. It is so sharp, that it pierces to the dividing of the Soul and Spirit,
Heb. 4.12. of the Joints and Marrow, yea of the Heart.

4. Because it is no carnal, but a spiritual Weapon: 2 Cor. 10.4. The Weapons
of our Warfare are not carnal, but mighty, etc.

You have a brief account of what has been already done; we are now come to
the Use and improvement of the point. You know upon this I entered the last
day, but I could only name some particulars to you, not having time to
prosecute any of them.

Of these therefore let me now speak a little more at large. The spiritual
Enemies I then named unto you, were, 1. Satan. 2. The Sins of great ones. 3.
Errors, Heresies, and evil Opinions. Self-interests and unrighteousness. And,
5. The unruly Transgressions and wickednesses of all people.

I. Use of Information: This Use does inform us of the Excellency of this Sword
in the use of it, both in the way of Offense and Defense, to subdue and support.

1. And for Offense, the first enemy to be encountered with, is,

1. Satan, He is a fierce, cruel and crafty Adversary; Of whom you have heard
before, verse. 11, 12. This is he that encountered our Savior in the
wilderness, Mat. 4.1.

In which Temptation you shall find him ( Proteus-like) changing his skin, and
acting a threefold person: but a Tempter he will be in every shape, still
aiming at evil, and endeavoring to seduce men to sin.

1. He will be an Hermit in the wilderness, and will visit Christ as a friend
to advise him: not to fast overlong, nor to hurt himself with hunger: and mark
here the,

1. (...) Satanae, the Devils entrance upon the ensuing Temptation.

2. (...) Christi, the Risistance of Christ thereunto: Christ had fasted long,
and was now an hungered: and hereupon he takes occasion to begin: The devil
takes Christ at the weakest: this is his practice still: note,

Doct. As he did by Christ, so he will do by all: when we are weakest, then he
will be busy at work with us to seduce and destroy us.

1. The Devil observed the preaching of John the Baptist; John 1.34. I saw, and
bare record that this is the Son of God; 2. And that voice from heaven at the
Baptism of Christ, Mat. 3.17. Yet he doubted whether Christ was so indeed, and
Ergo, now he comes to try, and sift it out by this Temptation: for says he,
thou art now hungry, which does not befall to God, nor the son of God; But I
will grant that thou art so, Then turn these stones into bread: for God can
change the nature of things at his own pleasure: But if thou can not do this,
thou art neither God, nor the Son of God.

1. Mark how the devil strikes at the Deity of Christ, and at our Faith, by
raising such a doubt.

Answ. But mark now the Answer and Resistance of Christ to this Temptation.

1. He does not say, I am God, and so drive him away.

2. But he takes up the sword of the spirit, Deuteronomy. 8.3. and therewith drives
him away: for having granted that Bread; and bodily food is the usual remedy
against hunger; Yet says our Savior, There is no necessity for me to do so:
For if I be the Son of God, know thou, That God is not bound to support by
bread only, as Nature is, and men are by the ordinary way of provision.

Ap. But he has many other ways and means to sustain and nourish us withal:
Though here be no bread, yet know, it is not Bread only, or other ordinary food
that does nourish any man, but by Gods appointment of it to that end, and
blessing upon it; Besides God can support and supply us miraculously, He can
nourish us without any food, or put the virtue of food into other things, and
can make poison to be both meat and medicine, Mark 16.18. and Ergo, Upon him
will I wait, says Christ, and so let us do also: Exit Satan, he has done with
this shape, and this Temptation.

2. The Devil acts the part of a seeming Saint, a devout Zelot: He will go
(next) to the holy City, and try what he can do there; He takes up Christ, and
carries him, as Gods Spirit did Philip, Acts 8.39. He caught him away.

Doct. Mark what the Devil can do, if God permit, he can carry away wicked men
quick into hell: And wonder not that Christ suffered the Devil to carry him,
who suffered his Instruments to crucify him: When he had brought Christ
thither, he sets him upon a Pinnacle of the Temple, a place as fit, as
dangerous, to serve his turn, to tempt our Savior.

The City, the Temple, all here minded men of piety, of the true worship of
God; and here the Devil will turn Deceiver; (and because Christ had foiled him
with Scripture before) he will cite Scripture too, and persuade Christ to leap
down, upon the Reason alleged in Psalm, Psalm. 91.11, 12.

Doct. Note, 1. We must take heed of Temptations in the Church, in holy places,
and duties, in great Assemblies, as well as in the Wilderness.

The Devil did not cast Christ down, but bid him cast himself down.

Doct. Note, 2. The Devil may tempt and persuade to evil, he cannot compel, Hoc
tantum pertinet quod egit in principio, Seducere, etc. Iraeneus. The Devil
cites Scripture, but withal, he adds and concealeth at his pleasure, ( viz.
Cast thy self down, and to keep thee in all thy ways, misinterpreteth, and
misapplieth, averteth all, (as impious Heretics, his Disciples do) Mendacium
abscondens per Scripturam, quod faciunt omnes Haeretici, says Irenaeus.

Note 3. That no Temptation of Satan is more pernicious and dangerous, than
that which is colored with misapplied Scripture, and show of sanctity; But
beware the Devil and his Ministers when they are like Angels of Light, 2 Cor.
11.14, 15.

Ap. Thus the Devil persuaded Christ to tempt God, hoping to find him either to
be an Imposter, if he received hurt by the fall, or the Son of God by
preserving himself in the fall.

Answ. But mark how Christ (with the same Weapon, this Sword (foils him again,
by producing a general prohibition that concerns all men; Deuteronomy. 6.16. Ye
shall not tempt the Lord, q. d. It becomes none to tempt God, much less him
whom I know, (and thou doubtest to be the Son of God.

And then is God tempted, when ordinary means are neglected, besides and
against the Counsel and Warrant of Almighty God.

Ap. And so should I do, if (neglecting the stairs by which I may descend with
safety, I should (Sponte, non jussus a Patre, solum a^te provocatus,
praecipitem me dare vellem) freely at thy provocation without my Fathers
command, cast my self down headlong, Exit Satan, the second time.

3. He acts the part of a mighty Monarch, and will try what great gifts will
do; and they use to do much, Deuteronomy. 16.19.

1. He takes him up into an exceeding high mountain; a fit place for
ostentation, and to take the prospect and view of many excellent Things.

2. There he shows him all the kingdoms of the world, and the glory of them:
i.e. The Excellency, Riches, Splendour, Beauty, and whatsoever is admirable in
them; and these he presents to Christ's sen^es, by Vision at least, else he
could not do it.

3. All these he impudently claims as his own, and in his power to dispose of,
and promises to give them all to Christ.

4. His only demand was, Prostratus adora me, do but fall down, and worship me,
and all shall be thine.

Ap. A dangerous tentation, and made up of lies and mischief! how th^nk you,
would such a Promise have prevailed with many a Worldling.

Doct. Note, That the glory of the world is a choice bait of the devil to catch
and ensnare men's souls.

But mark how Christ does answer this his most abominable presumption.

1. To his Person, (...), Abi Satana, Get thee hence Satan, be gone blasphemous
Devil; This he spoke with such Authority, that he durst stay no longer.

2. Then to his Temptation, he takes up the same Weapon, the Sword of the
Spirit, as before, and out of those Scriptures, Deuteronomy. 6.13. and 10.12, 20. and
13.4. which Christ cites thus, Thou shall worship the Lord thy God, and him
only shall thou serve: Thou think that if I do not worship thee, then I am
the Son of God: but if I do, then thou know I am not the Son of God: Be gone
Devil, and know you, that it is an universal Precept and Command upon every
Creature, To give divine honor unto God their Creator.

Ap. Thus the Devil by a threefold Temptation tryes to know who Christ is,
whether the Son of God or not; and when all is done, he is forced to be gone,
as wise as he came to him, without any satisfaction. Thus did he do by Christ,
viz. He did act as a friend in the wilderness, or divine in the Temple, a
mighty Monarch in the world with great promises, but prevailed not.

Ap. And if he did thus by our Savior, what will he not do by us? he will try
all his wiles and shapes.

Hence is the great difficulty of our right using, wel^ing and arming this
weapon well against him: For sometimes he acts as the Prince of Darkness,
then as the red Dragon, as an Angel of light, one while he tempts to
desparation, then to presumption, now he frights with Terrors, the frowns of
men, loss of preferment; Then with promises of the worlds glory (if you will
worship him) and of all desirable things, as he did by our Savior.

He tryes every way to seduce and destroy us; and therefore we had need to
learn the use of this Weapon very well, to be ready to repel his manifold and
various Temptations: Take therefore the sword of the Spirit, which is the Word
of God, to resist the Devil that he may flee from you, Jam. 4.7.

II. The second Enemy to withstand with this Sword of the Spirit, was the sins
of great Men. How plain were the Prophets of old with Kings and Princes, Samuel
with Saul, Nathan and Gad with David about Bathsheba, and numbering the people;
Elijah with Ahab, and with Jehoram also; so also was Micaiah with Ahab, and
Jehu with Jehoshaphat for helping Ahab, so Eliazer also for his joining with
Ahaziah, Shemaiah with Rehoboam, and a Prophet with Jeroboam, and Amos also,
Hanam the Seer with Asa, and another Prophet Amaziah, Zechariah, King Joash,
and Elisha with choram, Jeremiah with Jehoiakim, and Ezekiel with Zedekiah, and
John Baptist with wicked Herod.

Ap. Thus Kings and Princes of old did hear and bear the Rebukes of Prophets;
and those that did obey and reform according to their Counsel, did fare the
better: And those that resisted and misused the Prophets for their labor, did
but resist to their own ruin and destruction.

Now the only thing that makes it so difficult to manage this sword against the
Mighty, is,

Because they do so harden themselves against Reproof, and will endure no
control. They are strait in Asas fit of anger, 2 Chronicles. 16. for which he
smarted: Or else in Ahabs fury, 1 Kings 22. Or like the Princes in Ieremiah's
time, that would never let him be quiet, but vexed him with one thing or other,
Ier. 18.18.

3. The Errors, Heresies and evil Opinions of all ages and times; These are
another Enemy to be dealt with, with this Weapon: These are those Gordian knots
that have always been cut asunder with this sword: For this, peruse the Rise,
and Ruin of Errors and Heresies out of the Ancients, and so from time to time.

1. Yet these strengthen themselves mightily with that resolution mentioned by
Augustine, Nondum persuadebis, etiamsi persuaseris, They will not be converted,
though they be sufficiently convinced.

2. They plead the Spirit as much as any, (but without trial) though it be as
much of delusion as confusion; of which we have much experience.

3. They cite Scripture (this sword) abundantly, though miserably maimed,
perverted, misinterpreted and misapplied to that purpose, yet they will not see
wherein they fail, though their defects and mistakes be discovered with the
clearest eye, and doomed to silence by the most impartial judgment.

But it has been their usual course to run themselves out of breath in their
own endless Mazes, till they fall asunder, dissolve, and vanish to nothing.

4. The next enemy to encounter with this Sword, is Self-seeking,
self-interests, and Unrighteousness of men. This practice is point blank
opposite and cross to that Grace of Self-denial, so much recommended to us by
our Savior Christ: Luke 9.23. If any man will come after me: and practiced by
the Worthies of all ages, who have denied themselves in their own Will, Mind,
and sinful Affections.

In the cases of Pleasure, Profit, Honor and Preferment,

1. Thus did Abraham; Genesis 13.8 In his Son, as well as in his seniority, to Lot
his Nephew.

2. Moses. Exodus 32.10. When God promised him so, and yet he did prefer the
people before himself, choosing affliction, etc. esteeming the reproach of
Christ, etc.

3. And Job 1.20. In the loss of all he submits, and blesses God.

4. Wise Agur, Prove. 30.2. I am more brutish, etc. and know not.

5. And the three Children, Dan. 3.16. upon the utmost danger.

6. The Prophets, 1 King. 13.7. That the man of God, Jeroboams reward, or
Micaiah, Ahabs threatenings. Instance in Daniel, Dan. 5.17. whom Belshazzars
rewards could not divert from right Counsel, verse. 22. Dan. 6.10. Nor fear of
Lions from the service of God by prayer.

7. The Apostles, Mat. 19.27. That forsook all to follow Christ; Take St. Paul
for instance: Phil. 3.7. Less then the least of Saints. Gal. 1.16. He conferred
not with flesh and blood, etc. Romans 9.1. He could wish himself accursed, etc.
respective.

8. Yea and Jesus Christ himself, Phil. 2.6. who in the form of God, etc. Mat.
26.39. Not as I will, but as thou will, in his Agony.

9. Besides, The Widow of Sarepta, 1 King. 17.12. by her meal and oil.

10. And Esther the Queen: Esth. 4.16. By her life, if I perish, I perish.

11. The Macedonians: 2 Cor. 8.1. Who beyond their power.

12. And those Hebrews; Heb. 10.34. Who took joyfully the spoiling of their
goods: With many others which might be added to this Roll, Martyrs and
Confessors, etc. Who sought not themselves, but the Lord Jesus Christ, and
loved not their lives unto the death.

Ap. But, alas for grief, how many of our times have walked quite contrary to
this Precept and Practice; who have sought rebelliously after higher places, as
Korah, Numb. 16.10. Absalom and Zimri did: with many others. And Bloodily after
the life of others, as Saul did, 1 Samuel 20.1. And the Philistims, 2 Samuel 5.17.
Absalom, 2 Samuel 17.3. And Herod did, Mat. 2.13. And Covetously after the
Estates of others, as Ahab and Iezabel did.

And by these I mean the Church, and State-Robbers, and Plunder-masters of our
times. 1. Who made a Self-denying Ordinance, yet minded and practiced nothing
less; but acted the contrary. 2. Who did enrich themselves with their own
unrighteousness, and the Ruin of the Nation, whilst they pretended nothing but
the Common good, (if you would believe them) and never would have a settlement,
but have continued our confusions, to their advantages.

Ap. But now if you draw out this Sword, and whet it against such: These will
ward off their blows, and shelter themselves, and say, You aim amiss to strike
thus at them, for they are innocent, and their intentions were good, that they
had nothing but pay, providence, success, lawful prize, and due rewards for
their service. Their drift was to advance the Kingdom and Scepter of Jesus
Christ, and to make a through reformation, when they acted and effected the
deformation of all that is called Good, (Was ever any Nation thus beguiled!
etc.)

These are just like those in Jeremiahs time, who pleaded innocence, and called
themselves the Temple of the Lord, Jer. 2.35. 35. Nothing but innocence and
piety, when they were a cage of every unclean and hateful bird, Rev. 18.2. A
very den of Dragons, to say no worse.

5. The last Enemy we have to encounter with this Falchon, the Sword of the
Spirit, is,

The unruly wickedness, and headstrong transgressions of all sorts, especially
the Rude multitude, and vulgarity of the people, this Bellua multorum capitum,
multitudes who are called, the beast of the reeds, (Gegnar Ghajath Cannae, (i.)
Increpa feram Cannae, Ar. Mon.) Rebuke the beast of the reeds, or the company
of spear men, the multitude of the bulls, with the calves of the people: Psalm
68.30. Till they submit, etc. and scatter the people that delight in war: Which
place is appliable to, 1. An unruly Army, ill set as Lambert was upon bad
designs. 2. Or a rude rout of vulgarity, bent and resolved upon any vanity or
folly: You shall find them as unteachable and incorrigible as those Dragons
amongst Reeds and Rushes in fertile soils, and great plenty of all things, Isa.
35.7. Those Wild Bulls and Calves (Commanders and common Soldiers) here
mentioned.

Ap. When multitndes ( Soldiers and others, or both Conjunctim, united
together) are set on mischief like those Idolaters, Exodus 32.19. which cost
three hundred men's lives in one day, they will not only raise uproars and
tumults as Demetrius (with such assistance) did at Ephesus about Diana, Acts
19.24. But there is no Action so heathenish or foolish, so barbarous or
facinorous, that they will not be ready to act; remember what such did to our
Savior, Mat. 27.20. And what such did in England, Ian. 30. 1648. to King
Charles the first, such had need of rebuke, till they submit themselves, and
till they be scattered by the hand of God, and of lawful authority.

I am heartily forry that I must conclude this branch of this Use with an
observation of my own experience, which is this, viz.

That I have heard and read many Sermons of these our times: In which if you do
well view the subject of the discourse in the Text (under hand) you may
perceive a Sword, Bright, and brandished, drawn forth glittering and shining;
and you would think it would do mavelous or wonderful Execution; but when it
comes to the upshot, if you observe it, you shall find as well as I, that the
Timeserving Preacher has learned the Art, to make the point of this sword so
blunt, and the edge of it so dull, that it shall neither pierce nor cut,
neither search nor hurt, no nor give any wound at all (in the sense of the
Apostle, Heb. 4.12.) to them that stand in most need of such a scrutiny. I am
not ignorant that there are several kinds of preaching, viz. That there is a
soul-saving, a self-pleasing, and a timeserving, or men-pleasing preaching.

1. The last, viz. The Tim-serving is best accepted; He that can daub with
untempered mortar, and make pillows for men's elbows; that can cry peace, peace,
when there is no peace, and with lies make the heart of the righteous sad, and
streng then the hands of the wicked by promising them life, Ezekiel. 13. The
Apostle St Paul did not so, Gal. 1.10.

These are the men that are most accepted, whilst they hate him that rebukes
or reproves in the gate, and abhor him that speaks uprightly, Amos 5.10.

2. The second of these, viz. The Selfpleasing-Preacher, who does improve all
his Abilities, Parts, Learning, Reading, Pregnancy of wit, or Elegancy of
speech, etc. for oftentation, more then edification, to set forth himself; such
a man is a man of esteem: Though the religious, wise and judicious Auditors can
say, That he sought his own glory more then the Glory of God.

This St. Paul did not (though as well able as any) for says he; 1 Cor. 2.4.
My speech and my preaching was not with entising words of man's wisdom, but in
demonstration of the Spirit, and of Power.

3. But the first of these three, viz. The Soul-saving Preacher, is the only He
that does the work, heals the wound, and effects the cure, though he has least
thanks for his labor, and is worst respected of all the rest.

Yet this is he that has best studied and learned the Preachers charge, and is
most careful to observe the rule of God. Ezekiel 3.17. Son of man I have made thee
a Watchman unto the house of Israel: he has learned not to be afraid of men's
faces, nor dismayed at their words, though they be among briars and thorns, and
dwell among Scorpions. Ezekiel. 2.6. Jer. 1.7. Whatsoever I command thee, thou
shall speak: This is his practice, and for success and reward he waits upon God.

And if I may out of unfeigned love to you all, and especially to all such as
would gladly see the face of our late times, of themselves, and of their own
souls (in reference to the Times) in a clear Crystal glass, which will neither
flatter you, nor detract from any.

I would recommend the renowned Sermons preached lately before Honorable
Assemblies, and upon public occasions, by that truly Reverend Dr John Gauden
Preacher at the Temple: of whom without prejudice of any others, (whose learned
labors I have also read) I will only say (in reference to our late Times) as
Solomon's mother does of the virtuous Wife, and that with little variation of
the words; Many Preachers have done worthily, but thou surmountest (or
excellest) them all, Prove. 31.30.

You have heard the first branch of this Use of Information, informing us how
to make use of this sword, by way of offense against our spiritual enemies,
viz. against Satan, the sins of great men, Errors and Heresies, the
unrighteousness of many, and the unruliness of the Multitudes who are set on
mischief.

2. I do now descend to the second Branch of this use, which does inform how
this sword is Defensive of our selves.

I. In the very subduing of the enemies, this sword does prove to be defensive
of our selves. 1. Gideon overcame the Midianites, Judge. 7. 2. And David the
Philistines, 2 Samuel 5. 3. Jehoshaphat the Ammonites, 2 Chrou. 20. 4. Asa the
Aethiopians, 2 Cron. 14. 5. And the Isralites the Canaanites, Number. 11.2.3. All
which was done by the Word and Direction of the Lord; and by the right use of
this Sword of the Spirit, as well as by the material Sword, the very overthrow
of their enemies, did produce the safety and preservation of themselves. So
also, when all the godly (by the help of God, and this sword of the Spirit,
which God has directed us to make use of to that end) I say, when all godly
men do overcome and conquer the flesh, the devil, and the worlds vanities: Even
in so doing, they do defend themselves.

This is the first way in which this Sword does prove defensive to us.

II. This sword is defensive, in that it does instruct and furnish every man
for his own proper place, calling and employment of what degree soever; This is
a teaching sword. 1. Joshua was made a wise and valiant Captain, Josh. 1. 2.
Hushai was made a wise Counselor, and overmatched Achithophel by this. 3.
Solomon was made a wise King by this, 1 King. 6.3. 4. And Timothy a wise
Divine, 1 Timothy 4.18. 5. And the Husbandman is instructed by this, Isa. 28.23.
This is a study for all: For Kings. Deuteronomy. 17.14, 18, etc. And all others.

Ap. Now the fitter any man is for his own lawful employment, the safer he is:
Diligence in Duty is our safety, and Satan has the less advantage against us:
The Bird upon the wing in flight is safe from Gunshot, till she stoop to the
lure; the Bait laid for her, then she is in danger.

David in his Wars, and Solomon whilst in pious Works of building the Temple,
were very right in their way; But when at ease, and out of good employments,
each of them met with a fiery dart of the devil: The first by another man's
wife, 2 Samuel 11. And the second by a multitude of Wives, 1 King. 11.1. which
made a wound, and left a scar, almost indelible, which before they were free
from.

3. It is by the instruction of this sword, the word of God that Kings reign,
and Princes decree justice, etc. Prove. 8. That Kingdoms are established and
prospered, yea the very foundations of the earth were laid, and the heavens
established, and all things governed by this Word: Thit is the best sword of
defense for any Country, Nation or Kingdom, yea, and for the whole world:
Where this is wanting, there is no safety, but all goes to wrack; The Nations
are naked, and exposed to all kind of Trouble, Danger and Destruction, 2 Chronicles.
15.3, to 7.

In this lies the hope of Englands happiness, and the misery and confusion of
Infidels and Indians, through the want of this.

4. It has a great influence upon life it self: For by it our days are
prolonged, Deuteronomy 32.46 47. And the years of our life increased, Prove. 9. By this
our ways are made safe, and our sleep secured, Prove. 3.23, 24. And our life it
self is given and defended hereby, Eccles. 7.12. Wisdom is a defense, and money
is a defense, but the excellency of knowledge is, That wisdom gives life to
them that have it.

5. By this Sword we do defend our (selves in our) best parts and abilities:
For by this our Souls are converted, Understandings enlightened, Thoughts
purged, Affections sanctified, Wills confirmed to the Will of God, Memories
stored, Consciences cleared, Hearts changed, cheared and comforted, which
before were as flint or Adamant.

6. With this Sword we defend all our Graces, Faith, Hope, Charity, Patience,
Perseverance.

7. With this Sword we do defend our selves from and against Idolatry,
Infidelity, Heresy; Strange Religions, Men's Traditions, Carnal security,
Presumption in iniquity, Desperation of Mercy, Idleness, Evil Company, Pride
and vain Glory, all manner of ungodliness and wickedness of Conversation
usually practiced by men in several kinds, as you may see more at large in Mr.
Tho. Becons Book, entitled The Governance of Virtue, printed above an hundred
years ago.

2. These things lead me to a second Use of Exhortation: For since this sword
of the Spirit is so exceedingly useful, both for offense and defense.

1. Let us be persuaded, to let the Word of God dwell in us richly or
plentifully as Col. 3.16.

2. And let us labor to be like Apollo mighty in the Scriptures, Acts 18.24,
28.

3. And to use this sword so well in our several Stations, Vocations and
Occasions, as that according to our ability and opportunity, we may become
instrumental, that ignorant men may be instructed, disordered men reformed,
dull Memories quickened, cold zeal inflamed, the afflicted comforted, and the
distressed relieved, that error may be convinced, vice corrected, death may be
avoided, and life eternal through Christ obtained. In a word, to conclude; by
this Word the righteousness of God is revealed, the Church is sanctified, and
at last everlastingly saved, and glorified in heaven, so that we may well
conclude with the wise man, Prove. 8.34, 35. He is a blessed man that hears,
attends upon, and gains wisdom by this word: And with the Kingly Prophet
his father, Psalm. 19.11. That in the keeping (and making a right use of) this
word, there is (true true safety, as well as) a great reward.

7. This verse leads me to, and gives us in the last piece, viz. the 7th. of
our spiritual Armor, wherewith to resist these mighty enemies before cited:
And this seventh piece of Armor is propounded last, yet not as the least, and
most useless piece of the rest, but of great concernment, in reference to all
the rest: For we are commanded before; Verse. 10, 11, 13. To be strong in the
Lord, to take unto us, and to put on the whole armor of God; and how shall
this be done without prayer to God to help us herein? Besides, how shall we get
any good, either in the way of offense or defense by all the former pieces,
viz. Truth, Righteousness, Gospel, Faith, Hope, and the sword before named, if
God do not furnish us with them, and give us wisdom and strength to make use of
them aright, until we have gained the victory: Thefore to all these (to bring
up the rear) and also to arm you completely, add this seventh and last piece of
our spiritual armor, viz. Prayer and Supplication; betwixt which (I think) you
need not make use of that nice distinction betwixt them, viz. That Prayer is
put for Deprecation of some evil or temptation that it might not overtake us.
And Supplication is an earnest request to God for his help and grace against
the evil of Temptations that may befall us: 1 Cor. 10.13. There has no
temptation taken you, etc. So Paul did, 2 Cor. 12.8, 9. both the words being
promiscuously used, and usually taken for the same thing.

Now this last piece of our armor is both offensive and defensive; it subdues
our enemy, and supports our selves; and this Prayer and Supplication, (...),
Oration and Obsecratio, Arias Mont. Thus conjoined together, do intimate to us
the very nature of Adoration, when any one does humble himself before God, and
does ask any thing of him, and does imply,

1. An acknowledgement of the Omnipotency, etc. of God and Christ, and Ergo
does adore and obsecrate him as the only God and Savior.

2. And of his own Indigence, which sets him upon supplication for help; and
this is the first condition of true prayer.

The conditions of Prayer are diverse; you have had the first: And,

2. The next is, when you must pray, (...), Always,, (i. e.) in every
opportunity, as ost as necessity requires. When Evils and Enemies invade and
assail us, we had need fly to God, and have recourse to Christ for help, Psalm
50.15. Call upon me in the day of trouble, I will deliver, Luke 18.1, 7, 8.
That men ought always to pray.

Note, That he speaks of free, voluntary prayers, and occasional; Not of the
ordinary prayers of the Church, or several Families; nor in favor of them that
are ever babbling, as the (Euchitae) praying Heretics, who rejected all
Ordinances, Vocations, Alsted. Dr. Sclat. p. 508.

III. Prayer must be in the Spirit, the holy Spirit is the procreant cause of
our prayers, and our own spirits must be set to work also: it must not be only
with our lips or in Hypocrisy, as they did, Esaias 29.13. that drew near God
with the mouth, and with lips, etc. but with a faithful understanding and
devout mind, that is, intent upon God, and apprehends his promises, Est enim
spiritus Anima or ationis, ut anima est forma, and vita corporis, corpus sive
anima putidum est cadaver, sic Oration sine spiritu, Zanchius.

IV. It must be conjoined with vigilance and perseverance, watching thereunto
with all perseverance, as Christ says, Mat. 26.41. Watch and pray, that ye
enter not into Temptation. This implies a Fervency, that we be not dull,
languid and tired with praying, but to hold out constantly.

V. It must be accompanied with Charity for others, as well as for our selves:
It must be for all Saints, all our Fellow Soldiers militant here on earth,
those triumphant in Heaven need them not. These prayers that are charitable and
fervent, are very prevalent, Jam. 5.16, 17, 18. the effectual, fervent prayer,
etc. Elias is an instance of such prayers.

Note, None are so good, but that they stand in need of prayers. And for
Enemies, see Mat. 5.44. Luke 6.27, 28. as our Savior Christ, and Saint Steven
the first Martyr, did, Luke 23.34. Acts 7.60.

I. Now if you ask me what prayer is, I answer, Quid sit. Prayer is the Request
of a soul lifted up to God, in the Name of Jesus Christ, for something suitable
with Gods Will, on the behalf of our selves and others, in assurance to be
heard, and accepted by him, and returning thanks accordingly for mercies
obtained.

2. It is the souls Request to God, for strong desires of heart go for loud
cries in the Ears of Almighty God. Moses did thus at the Red sea, he lift up
his heart to God, and the Lord said, Why cryest thou unto me, Exodus 14.15. When
Moses spoke no word, but in the earnest desire of his heart; So Hannah prayed
for a Son, 1 Samuel 1.10, 11, 12, 13. in her heart, though her voice was not
heard, Eli heard her not, but God heard her, and granted her Request, Ver. 19,
20, 26, 27. So Nehemiah (2.4.) did, when he attended at the Table, and it
succeeded well, Non vox sed votum, etc.

II. These Requests, Desires, and Liftings up of the heart, must be only to
God, Deuteronomy. 6.13. You shall worship the Lord your God, and him only shall you
serve. And prayer and praise, are a special service of God, Psalm 50.14, 15.
Offer unto God Thanksgiving, etc. and so also, Call upon me (says God) Not go
to Saints and Angels for help, Esaias 63.15, 16. Look down from Heaven (says the
Church) doubtless thou art our Father, though Abraham be ignorant of us, and
Israel acknowledge us not, and in thee only the Fatherless finds mercy, Hos.
14.3. In vain (therefore) it is to pray etc. to Saints and Angels.

III. They must be in the Name of Jesus Christ, (not of the Saints, etc.) John
14.13, 14. and 15, 16. and 16.23, 24, 26. In my name, i. e. Through my
Mediation, for my merit sake, I will do it, i.e. I will hear, and grant your
Requests, because I am able to perform it, to whom the Father has committed
all power, Mat. 28.18.

IV. And all must be suitable, and according to the Will of God, and to his
Glory, 1 John 5.14. This is our confidence, that if we ask any thing according
to his (not our) will, he hears us. We must learn of our Master, who said,
Luke 22.42. Not my will, but thine be done. And did the same throughout his
whole life, John 4.34. and 5 30. and 6.38. And taught us to pray, Thy will be
done, Mat. 6.10. Luke 11.2.

V. And all that we thus desire on the behalf of our selves and others, must be
with assurance. For he that comes to God, must believe that he is, and that he
is a Rewarder, etc. Heb. 11.6. and this is the ground of our confidence, 1 John
5.24. And thus we are to draw near to our High Priest, Jesus Christ with a true
heart, in sull assurance of Faith, having our hearts sprinkled from an evil
conscience, etc. Heb. 10.21.22. We must not be like them, mentioned in James
1.6, 7, 8. wavering, doubtful, and double-minded, etc. so as to question the
Attributes of God, and whether he be able to save us, or will do it? Such a
doubting excludes Faith and makes us like a wave of the Sea, driven with the
wind, tossed and broken to nothing.

Thus you have heard what prayer is, and the Definition thereof opened to you
in the several Branches of it. If you ask, Quotuplex sit? I answer, 1. Mental
only, in the Elevations of the thoughts and desires unto God without voice, as
Moses did, Exodus 14.15. and Nehemiah, Ver. 2, 4. 2. Vocal, when by words we
express the desires of our hearts. Such was Christ's prayer, who in the days
of his flesh offered up prayers with strong Crying and Tears. Heb. 5.7. 3.
Vital (or Real) (say some, Oration vitalis (which is in a continued good life,
Semper orat, qui semper bona facit. Gloss. Good works call for, and procure
blessings, as some sins cry in the Ears of the Lord. But the Apostle speaks
of Prayer, properly so called, which consists in the two former kinds, Neutral,
Vocal: There is Vox, sanguis, and Sodomorum, Genesis 4.10. and 18.20. and 19.13.
Abels blood, and the sins of Sodom, cried loud for vengeance.

Now, if the desires be continual, Or we omit no set-times and seasons of
prayer; Or pray frequently, as occasions require, or necessary Employments
permit: Or, without ceasing, i. e. without fainting, Luke 18.1. Or, besides
solemn and set-prayers, we make use of Ejaculations, darting out our desies
unto God, which may be done at any time.

In all these ways we may be said to pray always, or continually, because, in
all this diversity, is no contrariety: and in all these we do lift up our
souls, Psalm 25.1. and pour out our hearts like water before the Lord, Jam.
2.19. In simplicity, and plentifully, as the Clouds do the Rain, or the Springs
of water their streams, and that in the Night as well as in the Day, at all
times, and upon all occasions.

These things premised, lead us to the point of Doctrine, viz.

Doct. True Christians (who are spiritual Soldiers in this war) must pray to
God frequently and fervently, to Repel (or Remove) such Evils: and to gain (or
obtain) such good things as are necessary for the souls or bodies of our
selves, or others.

1. This is frequently commanded us, we have Precepts in abundance. Take a few:
Psalm 27.8. and 50.15. When God said, Seek ye my face, David's heart said, Thy
face, O Lord I will seek. It were well if our hearts were in this tune; Call
upon me in the day of trouble, Esaias 55.6. Seek the Lord, and call upon him
while he is near, Mat. 7.7. and 11.28. Ask, and it shall be given you. Come
unto me, says Christ, all ye that labor and are heavy laden, and I will give
you rest. James 5.13, 14, 15, etc. Is any afflicted, let him pray Again, is any
sick, let him take the like course, prayer will save them. Hence the Apostle
exhorts, 1 Timothy 2.1. That first of all, (...), Obsecrationes, (...)
Orationes. (...) Postulationes. (...) Gratiarum, Actiones. 1. Supplications
against evils. 2. Prayers for good. 3. Intercessions, for others. 4. And Thanks
be for all: 1 Kings good, or bad, Jer. 29.7. All these must be made, and
performed, and that for all men, i. e. All kinds of men, Jews, Gentiles, Bond,
Free, Believers and Infidels Friends or Foes, Great men, or mean ones, public
and private. Or all sorts and manners of men, howsoever qualified or
conditioned. Especially for Kings, 1. Because the most eminent and highest in
Authority, upon the well or ill management of whose Government, much of the
safety, or danger of the Church and Nation does depend, and 2. If they be not
so good men as we could wish them, yet we must pray for them (as Israel in
captivity was to do for Babylon,) though not out of any special affection to
such a State. Yet in regard of our own interest and share in the common Rest
and quietness of a Nation; In which as in a Vessel, wherein we are all
Embarked, Jer. 29.7. Thus are Supplications and Prayers, etc. to be made for
all Men.

II. Of this you have a Cloud of instances, a multitude of Examples that have
led us the way in this practice of Prayer: viz. Patriarchs, Prophets, Apostles,
and others mentioned in Scripture, have been abundant in prayers both for
themselves and others: a few Examples may suffice instead of many. David prayed
seven times a day, Psa. 119.164. and praised God, and Daniel thrice, Dan. 6.10.
(as also David did) Psalm 55.17. Nevertheless the great danger he was in by a
Decree. Anna served the Lord with fastings and prayer, night and day, Luke
2.37. continually as occasion was offered. And our Savior himself withdrew
himself from other company, and spent whole Nights in prayer to God (besides
his ordinary and daily Devotions) Luke 6.12. to teach us vigilance, and
perseverance in prayer. Oh what should we do in this kind for our own
Salvation, seeing Christ has spent whole Nights in prayer for us. Ambrose in
Luke l 5. c. 6. And how should we bewail our backwardness and sluggishness
hereunto, and herein. And to this ( viz. To our frequent and fervent prayers)
we have as many promises and performances (in manner) as we have Precepts, and
Presidents, Commands and Examples. Take a few: Psalm 91.14, 15. Because he has
set his Love upon me, therefore I will deliver him, and set him high, he shall
call upon me, and I will answer him, be with, deliver and honor him; Mark, how
love to God, and prayer to him are conjoined, and God enables us to pray, and
then answers us, Esaias 65.24. Before they call I will answer, and whiles they
are yet speaking, I will hear, i.e. and I will be more forward to grant then
they to crave, more ready to answer then they to ask. And did not God do thus
by David, Psalm 32.5. I said I will confess, etc. and thou forgavest the
iniquity of my sin; David was in the Future, God in the preter tense, Daniel
(10.2.) Daniel was mourning three full weeks, an Hand touched him, etc. and
told him, that from the first day, etc. his words, prayers, were heard; This
was a good Hand (of an Angel, or Seraphim at the least, Esaias 6.6, 7.) and how
good is that God who puts forth such an Hand for the strength,
encouragement, and comfort of his servants. And that prodigal Son, Luke 15.18.
He is resolving to go to his father, to submit and ask mercy; the father saw
(yet a great way off) and had compassion and ran, and fell on his neck and
kissed him; the Father made more have to meet him with mercy, then the Son did
to seek it. And are not these great encouragements to this Duty? and is it not
thus ever? Before the time cited to you, Daniel was praying, etc. and whiles he
was so employed, the Angel Gabriel flies to him with an Answer, Dan. 9.20 to 14
So Acts 10.44. while Peter spoke, the holy Ghost fell on all them that heard
the Word; yea when he began to speak. Acts 11.15. Christ has confirmed these
Promises of God with Amen, Amen, John 16.23. Verily, verily, etc. Whatsoever ye
ask in my Name, etc. So that you may make the case general, which you have
Psalm 34.4, 5, 6. I sought the Lord and he heard me, and delivered me from all
my fears, etc. This poor man cried and the Lord heard him and saved him out of
all his troubles; Thus every prayer-full man.

To these Precepts, Presidents and Promises, etc. you may add Reasons and
Arguments: in respect of

I. God himself, because he is the God able to save, and he alone, 2 Kings
19.15. to 20. Thus Hezekiah prayed, and mark the answer, and the success he
had, v. 2 of to 37. So David, Psalm 63. throughout, O God, thou art my God,
etc. Because he is good and ready to forgive, and plenteous in mercy unto all
that call upon him, Ps, 86.3, 4 5. to 11. This is the Nature of God, Thou art
good, and do good, says David, Psa. 119 68. Ergo, we pray as he, Arise for
our help, and redeem us for thy mercies sake, Psalm 44.29.

He is a God in covenant with us, by a covenant of Grace, Ps. 89.3. I have made
a covenant with my chosen, etc. Therefore we have recourse to him, saying with
the Church, Esaias 64.9. Behold we beseech thee, we are all thy people.

II. Our selves, and our own Estates: How do our manifold wants, in both: 1.
Spiritual, and 2. Temporal; Things which are continual call upon us for this
Duty.

1. In respect of temporal things: how many miseries and sorrows does poor man
meet with, that all may say as David did, Innumerable evils have compassed me
about, etc. and I am poor and needy, Ps. 40.11. and have need therefore to pray
as he there; v. 11.13, 17. Withold not thou thy tender mercies from me, O
Lord, etc.

2. But if we have the affluence (Abundance) of all earthly blessings, how soon
may the Arm of strength be dried up as Jeroboams was, 1 Kings 13.4. and all
things else turned and changed in us: Our wisdom into frenzy, or folly or
brutish madness, Ahitophel, 2 Samuel 17.23. Nebuchadnezzar, Dan. 4.31, 33. and
our best perfections turned into defects: sight into blindness, hearing into
deafness, memory into forgetfulness, etc. health into sickness, wealth into
want, plenty into scarcity, when God does break the staff of Bread, Ezekiel.
4.16. By either: 1. Preventing us of Bread, Or 2. Changing the virtue of it,
and other food, so, that we shall eat and not be satisfied, Hos. 4.10. peace
into trouble, and life into death: and if all these be not sanctified to us,
how soon are we made worse by them, and are the more exposed to Satan's snares
and temptations: Thus for temporal blessings, and for spiritual Graces and
blessings how many do we want; and are yet wholly without them, besides the use
of them all how requisite growth of them, and increase daily, how necessary?
and our perseverance in them, to crown all with comfort, and the efficacy of
all the means of Salvation, as to our good, and to become a Savor of life unto
life; All is to be had from God, he only opens the heart, Acts 16.14. He did of
Lydia, else Paul may plant, 1 Cor. 3.6. but God only gives the increase. Our
Faith is but weak, our Hope but faint, our Obedience imperfect; our resolutions
vows, promises, purposes, how variable are they? and how apt to change? the
woeful experience of many sick persons when recovered, and many troubled
Consciences, when comforted, who have revolted from all to sin again, does
speak too much to this. 5. And our lives, how short, and how momentary.

5. And lastly, The very shortness of our lives which are but for a moment, and
our own inability, as of our selves, to bring any thing to perfection.

All these do call upon us, and invite us earnestly to be importunate with God
for his help from above to strengthen, and confirm us.

And since our lives are so short, to pray and do, as Psalm 39.4, 5. Lord make
me to know mine end, and the measure of my days. Psalm 90.12. And teach us to
number our days that we may apply our hearts unto wisdom: and may learn of the
Apostle to redeem the time, because the days (of our lives) are evil, Ephesians.
5.15.

III. Others, whether Friends or Enemies.

1. For Friends: How many elected, are yet uncalled; remaining in darkness! How
many weaklings are there in the body of Christ, that need thy aid in this kind!
And how many fainting under the cross, being feeble-minded and comfortless:
Compassion must move us to do as we are commanded, James 5.14. viz. To pray one
for another.

3. And as for Foes, (whether men or devils) we know they are many, and mighty,
and crafty, and cruel, violent and insolent, aiming at our destruction:
Therefore we had need to pray. Psalm 25.19. Lord consider mine enemies, for
they are many, and they hate me with cruel hatred: And deliver us not over unto
their Will, for they breath out (nothing but) cruelty, Psalm 27.12..

And thus in respect of our selves and others, there will be everlasting Use of
this Armor, and that in several kinds. 1. Prayers or Apprecations for
blessings. 2. Supplications or Deprecations against evils, either felt or
feared, that they may be prevented or removed. 3. Intercessions for others. 4.
To all which we must add Thanksgiving, in reference to all, as occasion is
offered, and success comes in; as they are in part named here in the Text, and
all of them conjoined: 1 Timothy 2.1, 2. In that serious Exhortation of the
Apostle, That first of all Supplications, Prayers, Intercessions, and giving of
Thanks be made for all men, etc. You have had reasons from God, our selves, and
others.

4. Now add a fourth Reason, which is the last, and which arises from, or is
in respect of the duty of Prayer in it self, and its excellency in the Cause,
End and Effects of the same.

1. In the Cause, viz. God himself: It is the Lord that sets us on work to the
performance of this duty by Precepts and Promises: And he only does effect this
in us by his holy Spirit. Romans 8.26, 17. Who helps our infirmities, for we
know not what we should pray for as we ought, but the Spirit it self does
inform, and act us hereunto, and in the duty. And this is very welcome and
acceptable to him, which he prefers before other sacrifices, and calls for as
for Music. Can. 2.14. Let me hear thy voice, for it is sweet.

Ap. These are the pleasant harps and sweet perfumes which he delights in, Rev.
5.8. Here be the golden vials full of Odours or Incense; and this must needs be
excellent, which has such acceptance with him.

2. In the End of it, viz. The Honor and Glory of God: He is set up, and
magnified in our prayers to him: And in his Answers to us: Prayer gives him the
honor of his greatness, and us the experience of his goodness.

3. In the Effects of Prayer, which are mavelous: There is so great an
Efficacy, and such an invincible force in prayer, that it is said of Prayer
thus: Vincit invincibilem, ligat Omnipotentem, it conquers the invincible, and
binds the Omnipotent; overcoming him that overcomes all things. Do but mark
what God says to Moses: Exodus 32.10. Deuteronomy. 9.14. Let me alone (or suffer me)
that my wrath may wax hot against them, and that I may consume them.

Quest. Why, what could Moses do to hinder God, or stay his punishment?

Answ. Surely nothing by the prevailing of humane force above divine, but by
condescending of divine Grace to the desires of the godly: as Genesis 32.24, 25,
26. In Jacobs wrestling by powerful prayer, Hos. 12.4. Hence Israel, and the
destruction of Sodom, Genesis 19.22. Nothing could be done till Lot was gone: His
presence and prayers prevent it.

Ap. Oh how much are the wicked bound to the godly for their company, and the
godly to the Lord for his benignity, who spares them in such a comcom calamity,
as he did Noah before; See Isa. 65.8. As the new wine is found in the Cluster,
etc. destroy it not for a blessing is in it, so will I do for my servants
sakes, that I may not destroy them all.

1. Prayer is truly styled Consolatio slentium, cura dolentium, and Sanitas
Aegroterum, a comfort for mourners, the joy of the sorrowful, and health for
the sick.

2. Prayer has a faculty of singular prevalency: it is like the gift, which is
as a precious stone, (or a stone of grace, Eben-chen, Lapis gratiae, Arias
Mont. in the eyes of him that has it, (whether Giver or Receiver) whether
soever it turns, it prospers, it makes room for a man, i. e. It gets him
favorable audience, and exalts him to honor, Prove. 17.8. and 18.16. of these
we have daily experience: and the like we may say of Prayer, It prospers, it
moke room for; and honors us.

This piece of Armor is of admirable use, viz. Prayer, and that in the way of
Offense and Defense.

I. Offense: Of which take a few instances; by this it was that,

1. Moses overcame Amalek, Exodus 17.10. to 14.

2. And Israel the Canaanites and Midianites, Judge. 6.7. etc.

3. By this David frustrated the Council of Achithophel, 2 Samuel 15.31. and
17.23. (so may thou of the Devil against himself) and conquered his enemies
often, Psalm 56.9.

4 Abijah Jeroboams mighty Army, 2 Chronicles. 13. so that five hundred thousand
chosen men of Israel were slain, verse. 17.

5. And Asa, Zerah the Ethiopian, with his Host of a Million, (2 Chronicles. 24.9.
to the end) and three hundred Chariots.

6. Jehoshaphat the multitude of Moab and Ammon, and that without a blow
stricken, 2 Chronicles. 20.6, 17. or any fight at all.

7. Hezekiah, Sennacherib, and his Assyrians.

8. And wicked Jehohahaz was reliev. ed by prayer from the cruel oppression of
Hazael and the Syrians, 2 Kings 13.3.4, 5.

Ap. There is no way more ready to subdue an enemy, than by prayer to the
Almighty.

And without doubt it is as effectual against spiritual as corporal enemies.

1. The Devils were cast out in the Gospel, Mat. 17.18, 21. 2. And that
Pythoness dispossessed by the Apostle St. Paul, Acts 10.16, 17, 18. 3. And this
piece of Armor, viz. Prayer and Supplications, is here prescribed against the
Wiles, Assauls, and violent temptations of the Devil in every kind, so that the
devil has no weapon so sharp against us, but this is able to break the point,
and dull the edge of it, so that it shall not be able to hurt us.

And as it is thus Offensive to an ene my of what sort soever, so it is no less
defensive of our selves in many respects. In the very way of Offense it serves
for our Defense; For that in the fall of such enemies, when they are brought
down, we rise and stand upright, Psalm 20.8.

II. And in the way of Defense, prayer is very prevalent to,

1. Save us from the wrath of God, as in the case of Sodom and Zoar, the
Israelites, Exodus 32.

2. Deliver us from the imminent dangers, as in the case of Jacob from the
wrath, of God, and inveterate malice of Esau, Genesis 32. And the Children from
the furnace. Dan 3. Daniel from the Lions den, Dan. 6. Jonah from the Whales
belley, Jon. 2. The Apostles from prison, Acts 5.18, 19. Peter, Paul and Silas,
Acts 5.18, 19. when fast in the stocks.

3. Supply us in multitudes of Cases, viz. Abraham with a son Isaac, Daniel
with wisdom to interpret dreams, Dan. 2. And a revelation of the future times,
Dan. 9. Elijah with fire to consume his sacrifice, 1 Kings 18.38. With water to
refresh the earth, and change of weather, Jam. 5.17, 18, And fire to devour
them that came to apprehend him, 2 Kings 1. Elisha with the Spirit of Elijah
doubled upon him By this Isaac obtained a Son, viz. Jacob, so Rachel a Joseph,
Anna a Samuel, Manoah a Sampson, Zacharias a John, and Elisha a son for the
Shunamite woman. M. Anton. Emperor, Rain for his Army, per legionem
fulminatricem, Alsted. T. cat, p. 731: And Nehemiah with commission for the
repair of Jerusalem.

4. Removal of judgment, as by Moses from Israel, Genesis 32. That Prophet, 1
King. 13.4, 6. Amos 4.7, 1, 4, to 7. From Grasshoppers and fire. Nineveh from
misery and utter destruction, Jonah 3.

5. And lastly, Prayers have been marvellously effectual to the working of
wonders and miracles: For by this Inshua stopped the Sun in his course, Josh. 10.
and Isaiah brought the Sun back ten degrees, 2 King. 20. Sampson had water out
of a Jaw Bone to revive his spirits when spent, Judges 15. to 20. And Samuel
procured Thunder and Rain in wheat harvest, 1 Samuel 12.17, 18. Elijah and Elisha
raised the dead, viz. the widow of Zareb, and the Shunamites sons, 1 King.
17.17, to 24.2 Kings 4.18. to 38. And Peter and Paul did the like by Dorcas and
Eutychus, Acts 9.36. to 42. And our Savior himself made use of this piece of
Armor, when he raised Lazarus fromd eath, John 11.11.

Now if you put all these together, and cast up the sum, viz. Preservation from
Gods wrath, Deliverance from dangers, Supplies of blessings, Removal of
judgments, and manifold wonders wrought and effected by Prayer. You cannot but
say that all these tend to the Defense, Support, Encouragement and Security
from and against all the fiery darts of the devil, and opposition of wicked
men, and whosoever it is that does withstand our souls.

And will you see all these fulfilled in one example, then take the instance of
Elisha 2 Kings 6.14, 15. to 19. where for Offense you have an Army smitten with
blindness: And for defense an Army of Angels, and heavenly forces discovered
for the aid of the good Prophet. In which the before named particulars of
defense do admirably appear, and all do confirm the conclusion of St. James,
Jam. 516. The effectual fervent prayer of a righteous man avails much.

And thus you have had the Reasons and Arguments of this point, viz.

Doct. That true Christians must pray to God frequently and fervently to repel
such evils, and to obtain such good things as are necessary for the souls, or
bodies of our selves or others, which is founded upon four Pillars, or such a
foundation, which (like a threefold cord, Eccles. 4.12.) is not quickly
broken, viz. In respect of God, our selves, others, and the duty of prayer in
it self.

I now descend to Application, and to improve all in the Uses.

Use I. The first Use is of reproof.

1. Such as neglect this duty; Many are so profane, that they are very like
David's Atheistical fool, Psalm 14.1, 4. They do little less than say in their
hearts, there is no God, It is no wonder therefore, That they call not upon the
Lord, as verse. 4. For he that comes to, and calls upon God, must believe that
he is, etc. Heb. 11.6. Sure men are senseless of their own wants, and
Neighbors afflictions, or of him that should help them, or else they would
never be so careless in this as many be. Personal grievances are many, public
calamities have been abundant, and that both in foreign Countries, and in our
own land. How has the Church and State been endangered, and the whole Nation
afflicted and oppressed? But where have our Prayers been the while? What help
have we contributed this way to their relief? Bewail this neglect; Miseries may
be removed, remedied by Prayer; if not, I am sure, they will be mitigated,
sanctified, and sweetened by it: and yet which is worst of all, I fear there are
too many, That seldom think or call upon God otherwise, then by cursing and
swearing, etc. thereby blaspheming that glorious and dreadful, or fearful name
of the Lord thy God; at which name all ought to bow and tremble, Deuteronomy. 28.58.

Ap. It is no wonder if to such, all blessings be turned into curses, their
table into a snare, etc. Psalm 69.22, etc. 109. The Word of God a savor of
death unto death, and the means of salvation, an occasion of their damnation, 2
Cor 2.15, 16.

II. Others there be, who from the decrees, providence, and appointment of God,
do argue and dispute against this duty, as in other cases also, viz. of
Repentance, an holy life, etc. they do to their own destruction; For say they,
God has determined what he will or will not give, to what purpose then should
we pray?

Gods ordinary providence and the appointment thereof, do not exclude, but
include second causes, as the means of their accomplishment. It is by his
appointment that we have life, yet we must make use of food and raiment. That
the earth is fruitful; to which there is a concurrence of the stars influence,
the heat of the Sun, the moisture of distilling, and refreshing showers.

And this knitting the first and second causes together, is so indissolvable in
the appointment of Almighty God, that without them, the effects do not
ordinarily follow.

So our Prayers for Gods blessings, though they be no natural Causes of them,
yet they are a means appointed by the Will of God to obtain them: Neither do we
pray to alter the disposition of God, but to obtain what he has ordered to be
obtained by the prayers of his servants.

He has decreed the victory, yet the Soldier must not cast off, or run away
from his arms: so in many other cases. Vid. Alsted. Theol. Cat. page 727. So in
the significationsof Gods secret Will, Precepts and Promises are ever conjoined
together: And if the duty commanded be neglected, the blessing promised is not
obtained; See Jer. 18.7, to 11.

Ap. It has been the practice of the godly, that when they have been most
certain of obtaining, they were most instant in praying, Isaac had a seed
promised and renewed, yet he prays, Genesis 25.21. And Elijah knew when rain
would come, nevertheless he prays instantly to obtain it, 1 King. 18 42. So
must we also.

God so promises his blessings, that he will have them obtained by prayer,
that it may not be said of us, as of them, Isa. 4.2. Ye have not, because ye
ask not.

Here its true, Spare to speak, and spare to speed.

III. Others neglect this duty out of Conscience and sense of their own
vileness and unworthiness, and Ergo, dare not presume.

1. But since God has so honored us, as to command us, let us not be guilty
of unthankfulness and disobedience.

2. And we present not our prayers in our own righteousness, but in his great
mercies, Dan. 9.18.

3. And to this end the Lord has provided us a Mediator, his own Son Jesus, in
whom he does accept our persons and prayers.

IV. Others are discouraged, and omit the duty, because of their weakness and
coldness in prayer, and want of words to express their desires, etc. I answer,
Qui non est hodie, cras minus aptus erit. but sighs and groans are the best R
hetorick in prayer, Romans 8.16. God bears with Solecisms and Barbarisms: Better
break the Rules of Grammar, then of the holy Ghost, and his Canon. Weak
performance is better then whole omission. We know not how God may quicken our
dull affections: But we know we have an Advocate with the Father, 1 John 2.1.
propitiating for our sins, and imperfections in prayers, Rev. 8.3, 4.

You have heard in the former Use the reproof of such as either neglect or
argue against this practice, that out of sense of their own vileness, or fear
of their weakness, are beaten off and discouraged from the performance of this
Duty, and so restrain prayer from before God, as Eliphaz charged Job, but not
truly, Job 15.4. and withold from God this Worship due unto him. These things
lead to a second Use of Exhortation.

Use II. This second Use exhorts us to the constant practice and performance of
this duty: To which we have so many precepts, presidents, promises and
performances as have been before mentioned in the proof of the point, and to
put on this piece of Armor, to set upon the use of this Excellent Gift, and to
exercise this Grace which so much concerns us. And to this, I hope, I need not
urge many Motives to persuade and excite you, as if you were backward, since
all the Reasons before named to confirm the Point, do sufficiently invite us.

Hence Motives arise from the greatness, and goodness, and the loving
kindness of God, in covenant with us: and Ergo, ready to do us good, were
enough, to which you may add this, the necessity of prayer, which in respect of
us is absolutely necessary ((...), Simpliciter, and Absolute) as a part of
divine Worship due to God from us, In, and after this present Life, for ever,
and to all Eternity.

II. Our own wants and weakness, deficiency and uncertainty of, either having,
or enjoying corporal, temporal, or earthly, or spiritual, supernatural, and
heavenly Blessings and Graces, the good things from above, but only according
to the good Will of God, and the measure of his gracious Dispensation toward
us; besides the manifold fears and feelings of evils, which our short lives are
always obvious to, and never free from. These may very well send us to the
fountain of all good, the Rock of Ages for our supply, safety and security.

Thus the manifold wants, weaknesses, evils and troubles, that we with others
have experience of, should be as wings or spurs to our devotions: Hence it is
said, precatio sine Malis, est avis sine alis (Alsted. Theol. Cat. p. 728.) We
are apt in prosperity to cease our flight, and slack our pace in our prayers,
till winged and spurred on by afflictions: or if we consider others, whether
they be Friends, and what need they have of our help this way: Or Foes, and
what need we have of help against them: These may well put us to seek aid from
above to help us, both according to our necessities.

IV. The duty of prayer in it self, and the excellency of it in the cause, end,
and effects.

It is God that sets us on work, he is the Author and Efficient cause; and
Christ his Son has taught us, he is our Tutor herein, and the Holy Ghost does
enable us in the service, and shall we be negligent? And if Christ himself was
so often in prayer in the days of his flesh, and did offer up so many
supplications with strong crying and tears, Heb. 5.5, 6, 7. to testify, that
God his Father was the Author and Fountain of all good, Mat. 11.25. To obtain
of his Father the Fruit and Efficacy of his Ministry, John 17. For strength to
undergo his sufferings, and to complete the work of our Redemption, Luke 22.41.
And that by his Example (as well as Precept) he might animate us hereunto, that
so we might follow his steps.

Ap. Consider then, if he did thus, who was most holy, had the fullness of the
Spirit; how much does it behoove us, that are poor miserable sinners, that are
destitute of all good) but what we have by divine Dispensation (to supplicate
earnestly at the Throne of Grace for help and supply in every kind: And since
all the most Renowned Worthies in all Ages that ever we Read of, Patriarchs,
Prophets, Apostles, etc. were all frequent and servent in this Duty; let us
then excite our best abilities hereunto: For except we ask as we are commanded,
Mat. 7.7. how can we think to obtain blessings, either corporal or spiritual,
earthly or heavenly Mercies, all which are necessary for this present life, and
for a better life which is to come. This motive we have from the Cause.

2. From the End of our prayers, viz. the honor and glory of God; sure the
common sense of all, as Men or Christians, will send the Creature to the
Creator, the Redeemed to the Redeemer; the sanctified and saved ones of the
Lord, to the Sanctifier and Savior of souls, to return (with that Leper)
thanks: yea, that honor, praise and glory which is due for so great salvation.
This is done best by our prayers and praises. This is the best we can do in the
way of Requital in our Requests to him; in asking and praying we do
acknowledge, and advance his greatness and goodness; and in our praises, his
Bounty and Grace, who has respect unto the poverty and necessity of his
servants, does give us his Spirit to help our infirmities, Romans 8.26. and does
make us sharers in the intercession of Christ, Esaias 53.12. Romans 8.34. Heb.
7.25, 26. by which we have audience and acceptance to our persons and prayers,
as if both were qualified with full perfection; and as it is God that put us
upon this work of prayer, and we in performing it do aim at the honor and
glory of God.

III. So if you have Respect to the effects of faithful prayers: they do (in a
sense) overcome the invincible God, and do oversway that power which is
unresistable, as in the case of Jacob with Esau his inveterately hating
Brother, Genesis 32. and God had done the like for a filthy Sodom, and her
polluted Sisters, had they had but ten righteous persons among them; and Prayer
is a piece of Armor of admirable use, both in the way of Offense, and subduing
our Enemies, whether corporal or spiritual: Of which we have many instances,
and of defense, and that diverse ways: It shelters from the wrath of God; it
delivers from many dangers; it supplies with blessings of several sorts in many
cases; it removes judgments felt or feared; and it works Wonders many times
to the amazement of the Spectators and Observers. Of all which you have many
Examples in Scripture, and all which do in a manner concenter in the
deliverances of Elisha from the great Army (or huge Host) of the Syrians: and
the extreme fury of King Jehoram (the Son of Ahab) who sent a Messenger to cut
off the Prophets head, because his wickedness and abominable Idolatry, had
provoked God to send a great famine upon Samaria, 2 Kin. 6.14, 15. to 19.

Mark (in this Prophet) how the Messengers of God are looked upon and dealt
with. If there be any evil Occurrences in a Land or Nation, they are laid in
the fault, and must bear all the blame as it befell Elijah before him, 1 Kings
18.17, 18. But from both these great dangers, the Lord delivered Elisha, which
are accompanied with many Favors: the favor of God; freedom from danger; help
from Heaven; fers removed; Tyranny (of Jehoram) disappointed, v. 31.32.

All these Motives from God, our selves; others: and the duty of prayer in it
self, may abundantly suffice to put us on, and spur us forward to this duty (to
which, nevertheless we are so naturally backward) and all which I have urged
from the Reasons, though in another way. So that to the Wonders effected by
Prayer; I shall only add a Remarkable Example or two, recorded by the Ancients
in other Histories: the first I shall make use of, is,

1. The Army of Marcus, Aurelius, Antoniinus, Philosophers (a great persecutor
of Christians in the second Century) was so distressed five days together for
want of water, and otherwise in great danger, being encompassed with their
Enemies. A President of the Army acquainted the Anxious Emperor, who was much
troubled at these things, that there was nothing which Christians could not
obtain of God by prayer; and that in the Army there was a Band of Soldiers,
all of them Christians. Hereupon the Emperor requested their prayers; which
they did speedily perform, and falling down upon their knees, and pouring out
their prayers to Christ, upon a sudden a plentiful Rain was sent from Heaven
which abundantly refreshed the Army. But (on the other side) it terrified their
wicked Enemies with Thunder, Lightning and Hail (ignis specie and similitudine)
like fire. Upon this their success in prayers the Emperor (much amazed, and
astonished) did highly honor the Christians, and (in perpetuam rei memoriam)
for an everlasting memorial of the same, he called that Legion ((...)
Fulminatricem) the Thundering Legion; and afterward he wrote an Epistle to the
Senate of Rome, to certify the strangeness of the thing: saying, Semel atque
se Humi abjicerunt, Deumque precati sunt (quem ego ignorabam) Statim and coelo
pluvia delapsa est, etc.) As soon as the Christians did cast themselves down
upon the ground, and prayed to that God ( whom I know not, said the Emperor,
but am ignorant of) the rain came down abundantly: And hereupon he made, and
published Edicts in Favor of the Christians, Alsted. Theol. Cat. p. 731. and
Chronolum, p. 179. This befell in the second Century. ( Cirum. annum Dui 170)
Sims. page 23.

II. The second History that I shall make use of in this kind, Cent. 4. Circ.
An. 381. Theodosius (Magnus) the Great, who had occasion to make War twice
against ( Regicides shall I call them, or) the Murderers of good Emperors.
The War was against Maximus the Tyrant, and Andragathius the Captain of his
Army, who slew Gratianus the Emperor; and then (as it is usual) he usurped the
Empire of the West, whom having subdued the Emperor prevailed against him.
Maximus the Tyrant was justly punished with death; and Andragathius, seeing no
way to escape, threw himself headlong into a River, and so desperately ended
his wretched (and blood-guilty) Life, Judas-like.

His second War, was against those Rebellious Traitors, Eugenius and
Arbogastus, who had strangled the good Emperor, Valentinian the second, lying
in his bed. In the beginning of his battle against them, the good Emperor
Theodosius, was very hardly put to it, or bestead, at the first; But he had
recourse to God by prayer, prayer all the Night ( Jacob-like) in which he
fought, magis Orando, quam feriendo, more by prayer then by any other armed
power, or Forces: So, that the Lord sent a mighty tempest of Wind, which blew
so vehemently in the Face of Eugenius his Army, that their Darts were turned
back by the violence of the Wind into their own Faces, the Tyrant Eugenius fell
down before Theodosius to beg pardon, but was slain by the Soldiers at the
Emperors Feer. Thus judgment without mercy is for them that showed none,
James 2.13. And ^rbogastus the Traitor (the Author and Master of mischief)
being out of all hope of safety, slew himself; Thus, evil shall hunt the
violent man to overthrow him, and bring him to destruction, Psalm 140.11. and
the man that does violence to the blood of any person shall flee to the pit,
let no man slay him, Pro 28.17. For blood lies heavy upon the Murderer, and
will bring him to an untimely End in despite of all his Friend: and indeed,
none must, or can hinder it.

Annotations upon this miraculous support to the Emperor from above; the Poet
Claudiam wrote those Verses, (though no Christian)

O Nimium dilecte Deo cui Militat Ether,
Et conjourati veniunt ad clasfica venti. Englished thus:
O Gods beloved, whom power Aereal,
And winds come armed to help, when thou do call.
Sure thou art much beloved of God, to whom the air and winds bring aid against
thine Enemies ( or come in with aid, etc. These Verses are variously cited by
several Authors. See August. de civit. Dei, l. 5. c. 26. with L. vives Comment.
Alsted. Theol. Cat. page 732. Simps. Hist. Cent. 4. p. 67.

Ap. In the end of these before-named, and their violent deaths, Observe, what
may be expected by such: but the usual End of Traitors, Tyrants and Usurpers,
and what mercy should be showed unto them, more then to those Husbandmen, who
conspired together, saying, This is the Heir, come, let us kill him, and let us
seize on his Inheritance, that shall be ours, and thereby we shall be rich,
Mat. 21.33. Mark. 12.1, Luke 20.9. But how long did they hold and enjoy the
Inheritance, and what was the end, and final event of this Conspiracy, etc. the
Lord of the Vineyard came, ere long, and miserably destroyed those wicked men,
and did let out his Vineyard to others.

This must be the End of wicked and Blood-guilty men. Have we had none such in
this Nation within these twenty Years? and could they think, that it was so
often written in vain, that the spoylers of others must be spoiled themselves,
Esaias 33.1. Eze. 39.10. Habak. 2.8. and they that take the Sword (in unjust
Quarrels, and wit hout a just Calling according to the Ordinance of God) shall
perish with the Sword, says our Savior, Mat. 26.52. yet Peter drew his Sword
in a very good Cause, one would think. Causes of War had need to be well
examined before Men fight, spoil and kill, else there will be a retaliation of
such things, Jer. 25.14. God will Recompense men herein, and with what measure
men meet to others, it shall be measured to them again, Mat. 7.2. For, he that
leads into captivity shall go into captivity, or be led by others, he that
kills with the Sword, must be killed with the Sword. In the mean time, here
is work for the prayers, the patience, and the Faith of the Saints, Rev. 13.10.

These things may encourage us to be unwearied in prayer; For faith, patience,
and prayers, work wonderfully still, as in former Ages, on the Churches behalf,
and have we not lately had experience of it. For, do we not think, that prayers
had not the most powerful Efficacy in the great Alteration, who God in much
mercy has made in our Land in May last, An. Dom. 1660. Yea, and that besides,
and beyond any other military Force: in reducing the King, Charles the Second,
so many Years banished, and the Ancient Government of the Kingdom so long, and
so miserably oppressed, and spoiled by cruel and wicked Usurpers, and that
contrary to the cursed intentions of so many, and beyond the very hopes and
expectations of all men, in so strange a way.

Quest. And why did God do this, but to verify and justify his manifold
promises to Kingdoms and Nations, in that case so frequently?

Sol. All which you may sum up in that short Sentence of the Psalmist, Psa.
34.6. with the variation of one word:

This poor Nation cried, and the Lord heard and saved, or delivered us out of
all our troubles, Sit Deo and Gloria.

Thus you have had the Uses of Reproof to sundry persons, and of Exhortation
with diverse Motives to persuade us thereto. To these I shall subjoyn some
Advertisements, and Directions concerning Prayer, and so conclude this Subject,
and close up this Text.

I. You know what prayer is, viz. A making known of our Requests to God, in
every thing by Supplication, etc. conjoined with Thanksgiving, Phil. 4.6. And
this may be done Mentally, or Vocally, by Ejaculatory Expressions, or studied
Petitions, upon a sudden, or at a set-time: privately or publicly, as the
present necessity, occasion, or opportunity of the Affair does require and will
permit.

II. Who must pray? I answer, All persons, out of duty to God, the Great
Creator and bountiful Benefactor of all things, of men in a special manner,
Psalm 8. Acts 14.17. Hypocrites within, and Infidels without the bosom of the
Church, all may and must pray thus, out of duty, and sometimes they may perform
it successefully: as Ahab, 1 Kings 21.27. Those Mariners in a storm, Jonah
1.5. though Heathens, and the Ninevites, Jonah 3.8. But the Elect of God pray
only effectually, and to purpose: and of these, all that are truly godly, do in
a most special manner apply themselves to this Duty; and that because he best
knows that this is a Service due to the Lord, who is Paramount, the chief Lord,
from whom we hold all things; he is acquainted with the duty, and receives the
Spirit of Adoption to help him therein, Romans 8. And he is qualified for it,
both in his person and Graces.

1. In his person, he is not in the state, trade and bondage of sin, for God
hears not such, Joh. 9. But he is Righteous, etc. and to such is the promise
made, Psalm 34.15.

2. In Graces: and that in his Understanding, Will, and Affections; In the
understanding with knowledge, faith to believe, that God is, and that he is a
Rewarder, etc. Heb. 11.6. that our persons are accepted through Christ, and
that out Suits are welcome to God through him. In the will and affections with
a right posture upon the right Object, viz. God, not upon sin, Psalm 101.3. For
if we regard iniquity in our hearts, he will not hear us, Psalm 66.18.
Sincerity desiring, Bonum sub Ratione Boni, Grace, because it is Grace; to such
is that Promise, Psalm 145.18. Zeal must be in our will and affections, and
that in a right proportion. This Sacrifice must have some Fire, such prayers
are effectual, James 5. Not if cold, or dead. These and all such persons so
qualified, of whatsoever sex, age, state, or condition, etc. may, and must pray
privately, according to their own proper station, place and Employment, etc.
But for public prayers in Church, they only must perform them which are
lawfully, and publicly called to Church-Employment, as Timothy was by Paul,
etc. Act. 6.4. 1 Timothy 2.1, 2. Thus, there may be an intrusion upon public
work, whether prayer or preaching, or administering the Sacraments, etc. The
public Minister is the mouth of the people to God in prayer, and of God to the
people in preaching.

III. To whom must we pray?

Answ. To God, He only is to be worshipped with our holy prayers, Deuteronomy. 6.13.
Mat. 4.10. This is an Homage only due to him, God claims it as his peculiar
prerorative, Psalm 50.15. And the Church acknowledges it her duty to perform
it, Psalm 65.1, 2. Praise waits for thee, O Lord, and unto thee, etc. O thou
that hear prayer, unto thee shall all flesh come. Or to all, or any one
person in the Trinity, that holy Hymn, Esa. 6.3. Vulgo, or (...), is directed
to the three Persons of the Trinity: to them all, as may appear from John
12.41. Acts 28.26, 27. Mat. 28.19. Revel. 1.4, 5. Or to any one Person, viz. To
the Father, Dan. 9. To the Son, Psalm 45.7. Col. 3.17. To the Holy Ghost, 2
Cor. 13.14 The worship of Christ was commanded by the Father, Heb. 1.6. and
practiced by many, viz. the Centurion, the Lepers, the Blind-men, St. Steven,
and he, Revel. 22.20. It is safe to pray to one person, ss. Thin. Inclusive,
not Exclusive of the Rest.

IV. By whom, or by What means, may we make address to God?

Answ. Only by Christ the Son of God, He is the only Mediator, and in him will
the Father be honored. Some have many Lords; many Mediators, viz. Saints,
Angels: but where does God give them Commission to be Masters of Requests for
him? But to the Church there is one Son, one Name, one Altar, and one High
Priest in whose Hand alone they offer up all.

V. Vouching the End of our praying. Observe, it is not to acquaint him with
what he knows not, or to mind him of any thing forgotten; Or to move him to any
mercy, as if he were backward thereto, as if we could prevent him, in
forwardness for the Creatures good; But it is to acknowledge out dependencie,
and his Soveraigntie; and to make a way or thankfulness, and a holy and right
use of mercies when received: for if God should bestow upon us Non Petita, we
should easily ascribe them to our selves, or to chance. Alsted. Th. Cat. p. 726.

VI. For what things must we pray?

Answ. 1. Not for every thing: For every thing will no more bear a Prayer, then
every stream a ship, or every back a weighty burden. But prayer may and must be
made for all things comprehended in the Lords Prayer, there is their Rule: For
whatsoever makes for the glory of God, and for our own salvation; and for all
the means conducing thereunto, and only for such things, for spiritual good
things without condion, and for temporal with the condition, if God will, and
that it be for our good, as that Leopard did, Mat. 8.2. if thou will.

For you must note, that all the things we pray for, must be warranted under
some precept or promise in general, though not expressly, and be of some weight
or importance, either in it self, or by circumstance; But we must never pray
far any unwarrrntable or any wicked thing, as Gamesters and Thieves, etc. do.
such prayers are abominable, Alsted. Theol. Cat. p. 745, 735. Dr. Harris, p. 142

VII. Quest. For whom must we pray?

Ans. For all men especially the Elect.

1. All men are our Neighbors, whom we ought to love as our selves.

2. But the Elect are our brethren, fellow members of the same mystical body,
and one body with us in Christ Jesus. In that prayer, John 17.11, 22, 23.
Christ prays for it, and the Apostle affirms it, Romans 12.5. 1 Cor. 12.12, 13.
Therefore we must have chief or special respect to them: For Charity begins at
home.

Thus we must pray for them in the first place. Me must pray for men of all
orders, ranks and degrees whatsoever, high or low, rich or poor, one with
another. For Infidels, Heretics, exc^mmunicated persons, Enemies and
Persecutors.

All Relations are to pray for each other mutually.

1. Ministers for the whole Church, and specially for the people committed to
their charge, Ephesians. 2.16. to 20. and 3.14. to 20. And the people for their
Ministers, as the Church did for St. Peter in prison. Acts 12.5.

2. Magistrates for their Subjects, as David did: 2 Chronicles. 29.18. yea though
they be rebellious: as Moses did, Exodus 32.11. And Subjects for their
Magistrates, as Psalm. 20.

3. Husbands for their wives, as Isaac did, Genesis 25.21. And wives for their
husbands.

4. Parents for their Children, and Children for their Parents.

5. Masters for their Servants, and Servants for their Masters.

6. Generally we must pray one for another, Jam. 5.16.

By mutual prayers we may prevail more for the greatest good one of another,
then we can effect by any other means whatsoever.

Quest. Now if it be asked, Whether it be lawful to pray against others?

Answ. I answer; Prayers of this nature are of two sorts, viz. 1. Quaerela. 2.
Imprecatio, Complaints or Imprecations.

1. Complaints of the Saints to God: now these are then, when in their prayers
to God, they do mention the multitude, Malice, the Cruelties, Injuries and
Insultations of enemies over them, as Hezekiah did when so railed upon, 2 Kings
19.10, 14, to 20. The desertion of friends, as it befell David. The greatness of
the Afflictions, and their own infirmity, and inability to bear and withstand
them.

Of these the Psalms, the Lamentations of Jeremiah, and of most of the
Prophets, are full of examples.

Ap. These are very lawful, and out of question very good, because God only can
restrain, repel, subdue, or convert, or change the minds of such enemies.

2. But as for the Imprecations of the Saints, which are made only against Gods
and the Churches implacable Enemies; and which are indeed but Prophetical
Denunciations, by which the judgments and punishments which shall befall such
enemies are evidently, and clearly foretold, if they do not repent. Such as
these are usual in Scripture, and the form of them is by Maledictions and
Curses upon such enemies, as it is manifest in them every where.

Ap. And these are, or may by lawful, but with these conditions.

1. Imprecations must be only against such, as God has cursed, and that are
his Enemies. 2. It must be in the cause, behalf, and for the sake of God, and
not from any private hatred, and desire of revenge. 3. It must be with the
condition, that they are incurable, and past healing or amendment. 4. Neither
may we rejoice at the destruction of them simply considered as men, but at the
vindication of the glory of God, and deliverance of his Church from destruction.

As for the Requests of Moses and Paul against themselves for others sake,
Exodus 32.3. Romans 9.3. You must note, That those Prayers are not to be
understood simply and absolutely, but conditionally, if it might be, with Gods
good pleasure, And each of those Wishes or Requests did spring from no common,
but from a most excellent faith, acting by a singular, extraordinary and
incomparable Charity, and is not therefore to be drawn into common example.

VIII. How should we pray, and what are the things requisite to religious
prayers?

I answer: 1. Frequenter, frequent and often: The many Precepts and Promises of
God to, and for this, do prove it sufficiently: And the continual meditation
upon Gods promises, especially such as Isa. 49.15, 16. and 65.24 may and will
quicken us hereto, if we have any sense in us.

2. Scienter, with knowledge; and that of God, who is near unto us, and in us:
And for what we ought to pray with good warrant, and for whom in charity: only
those that sin against the holy Ghost are excepted; But these are hard to be
known.

3. Attente, with intention of heart, and ardency of desire.

Ap. These (as I have said) are the only prevalent prayers, as of Moses,
Elijah, David, and not with lip-labor. Yea the very Heathens at their solemn
devotions, did proclaim, Hoc agite, do this, to excite intention, and to invite
to an united strength in devotions, Tanquam in celeusmate, as Mariners do when
they draw the Anchor: And shall not we do so as they did in Solomon's time, 2 Chronicles. 5.13, 14.

4. Sancte, in an holy manner: The holy God must be sought with an holy heart,
both for spirituals and temporals. Not what we, but what he will: and all
earthly things are to be asked and sought for so, as may be suitable with his
glory and our good.

5. Humiliter, humbly and with a contrite heart. 1. Out of the sense of our own
misery and unworthiness, as Dan. 9. 2. And an earnest desire of the grace of
God, which is the fountain of living waters, Psalm 42.1, 2. and 143.6.

This Humility is wrought in us by a due sense of Gods properties and
attributes, his Immensity, Omnipotency, Sanctity, and the effects of the same
to usward, as he is our Creator, Redeemer, Sanctifier; And of our own
four-sold Estate. 1. Integrity. 2. Misery. 3. Grace. 4. Glory. Then let us pray
with the prodigal Son, and say as he, Luke 15.21. Father, we have sinned
against heaven, etc.

6. Fidenter, believingly with confidence, That we shall be heard in our
prayers, because of the Truth, Goodness, Omnipotency of God, who is able to
save to the utmost: And with an acknowledgement that Christ is the only
Mediator and Intercessor.

Use. Hear then the Doctrine of Papists, etc. concerning the Doubting of our
salvation, resting upon the Intercessions of Saints and Angels, and boasting of
their own merits, and the Churches stock of works of supererrogation: All these
fall to the ground, as Dagon did before the Ark of God.

7. Obedienter, obediently, submitting our selves to the Will of God without
exception, observing diligently, what is suitable with his mind; what is lawful
and permitted to us to ask: And what he has promised to give. And Contra, what
is not thus, suitable, lawful, or attended with promise: It is intolerable
arrogance in man, to dare in any degree, to subject (or subjugate) the good
pleasure and will of God to our lust.

And let us learn to practice what we pray, and to do what we say in our
prayers. We say as Christ has taught us in his prayer, viz. Hollowed be thy
name, Thy kingdom, etc.

Ap. But do we practice it? Do we glorify, not dishonor his name, promote and
hasten, not hinder his kingdom of grace and glory: Obey, not rebel against his
Will, etc. If we do thus, then indeed we pray obediently, and may expect an
answer accordingly: and Contra.

8. Perseveranter, perseveringly, importunately, not fainting, or giving over
to pray, but persisting still herein.

This our Savior directs us to by a Parable of that unjust Judge, Luke 18.1.
to 9.

David prays, and waits upon God, Psalm 40.1. and 130. per totum, till he was
weary with crying, his throat dried, and his very Eyes did fail, Psalm 69.3.
with expectation, and yet he renewed his Suits. Moses was importunate, Exodus
32.10. and Jacob prevailed by wrestling with God in prayer, etc. Genesis 32.26.
Hos. 12.4. The woman of Canaan would not be stav'd off, nor discouraged with
Reasons or Reproaches, Mat. 15.25, 27. The blind man, when checked, cries the
more, Mark 10.48. Paul prayed thrice, i.e. often, at last obtains support only,
2 Cor. 12.8, 9. and thus should we be instant in prayer; and then we need not
doubt, but that we shall be prevalent at the last.

But now comes in Satan's temptation, and our own corruption appears also, and
both conjoyn to suggest something, to make us weary of praying, and to give
over. Oh says the weak Soul, I have prayed, yea and that often, and a long
time, yet no answer comes; Nor have I obtained what I have so often, and so
long prayed for?

Answ. This is a temptation usual and frequent, and prevalent with many to
hinder instance in prayer, even, for the best of blessings, and most necessary
to Salvation.

1. Why does God many times defer to hear the prayers of his children?

Answ. To try them, to exercise their Faith; to make them acknowledge the gifts
and blessings prayed for, to be of God, and not from themselves; to prize
blessings the more, when not presently or easily obtained. That their hunger
and thirst after Grace might increase.

2. Consider, that he hears the prayers of his people several ways: By
granting what they ask according to his Will; by way of exchange, not giving us
what we ask, but something that is better; he denies temporal, but gives
spiritual and Eternal blessings; he removes not the Cross, the affliction, but
gives strength to bear, and by suffering, to conquer in the end, as he did to
Christ in his Agony, Luke 22.42, 43. To S. Paul, 2 Cor. 12.9.

3. Why God does not hear the prayers of men many times?

Answ. For many Reasons: Because we ask amiss, James 4.2, 3. we ask what God
will not give, or what is not fit for us to receive, like children that ask for
poison, which the parent denies, we ask for things good, and useful in
themselves, but may be hurtful to us; as a Child asks a Knife, but is denied:
because we many times ask coldly and perfunctorily without that zeal, affection
and devotion requisite in prayer; but God by deferring us, warms and whets us,
and fits us to more thankfulness, when we have obtained. We often pray without
that due submission, patience and acquiescence in the good Will and pleasure of
God, which we should have. We often murmr under the Cross, and are impatient
under afflictions. We do not bless God, as Job did, in distress; hence we are
not heard, or deliverance is deferred: we are too hasty and do not wait as we
should for the Lords fittest time to help us, which is only known to himself.
God often hears us, non ad voluntate, sed ad salutem, as Bernard, not to our
Will, but to our Salvation. So to Elisha, who in the time of Jezabels tyranny
and persecution requested to die, 1 Kings 19.4. This was not granted he
desired, but soon after he was translated to Heaven without any death at all, 2
Kings 2: 11. in a glorious manner. The greatness and multitude of our sins,
which are not very quickly removed and subdued, do often cause this. An old Oak
is not cut down with one stroke of the Axe, nor an exquisite Image or picture,
perfected in one day, but with many Reiterated strokes and cuts, or carvings:
So the old Adam in us, is not so soon slain. Nor the new man, so soon made up
to perfection in us.

I have done with the substantials of devout Prayers. Now as to the
Circumstances of Voice, Gesture, Place, Time, Forms of prayer and Order,
briefly

1. For Voice, I say, public prayer must be Vocal, for the Minister is the
mouth of the people, Psalm 116.18. 1 Cor. 4. But private- prayer need not be so
always, as we do see in the Examples of Moses and Hannah; Yet the Voice is
often used to very good purpose, even in private prayers, though not to
advertise God of any thing, or before, to whom desires are manifest; Yet to
excite our Devotion, as Austin, and to consecrate our tongues to the praise of
God, to which purpose they were made, Jam. 3.9. To lend our tongues to the holy
Ghost in praising God, and to restrain the motion of our wandering minds. But in
all our prayers, let us be sure that our hearts do lead the way in our Vocal
expressions and petitions, least that be objected againstus, as Esiay 29.19.
Mat. 15.8. For God is (...), the Spirit leads us in prayer to God, Tertullian,
Non orat clamor, sed pectoris intimus ardor, etc.

2. Avoid Battologie, which is more for ostentation then intention of mind;
short prayers are most effectual, if from the heart.

3. Groans, Sighs and Tears have their use, Fletus Deus citius audit quam
preces;

For the Gesture of the body in prayer, this has been very various in the
prayers of holy and devout men.

Nor does the Scripture confine us by any certain Rule; all Gesture being
sanctified hereunto.

For we find some kneeling upon their Knees in prayer, with Solomon, and
David, and Christ, St. Stephen, St. Peter, St. Paul, 1 Kings 8.54. 2 Chronicles.
6.13. Dan. 6.10. Luke 23.41. Acts 7.60 Acts 9.40. See Psalm 95.6. O come, let
us, etc.

Falling prostrate upon their faces, with Elijah, and our Savior Christ, 1
Kings 18.42. Mat. 26.30.

Standing upright, as Christ, and the penitent Publican, as well as the proud
Pharisee, John 11.41. Luke 18.13. See Mark 11.25.

Sitting with Elijah, and David, 1 Kings 19.4. 2 Samuel 7.18.

Lying on bed, with old Jacob, David, Hezekiah (and all sick persons confined
to the Bed) Psalm 6.6. 2 Kings 20.2, 3.

Lifting up their eyes with Confidence in God, as Christ did, Matthew. 14.19.
Mark 7.34. John 11.41. Not daring to look up, but rather casting them down,
with smiting upon the breast, out of the serious sense of sins, as the
Publican did, Luke 18.13. Spreading abroad their hands with Moses. Solomon and
those of Judah and Jerusalem, Exodus 9.29. 1 Kings 8.22, 54. 2 Chronicles. 6.13, 29.
Esaias 1.15. Walking in the field, or in flight from Enemies, as Isaac and David,
from Saul's fury, and Martyrs from cruel and bloody persecutors, Genesis 24.63. 2 Samuel 15.31, 32. Jehosaphat riding in his Chariot, in a Battle, 2 Chronicles. 18.31.

Yet although there by not a set-Rule prescribed in Scripture for the Gesture,
Yet Right Reason will teach us to use such Grave and Reverend Gestures as may
best express our fear of God, and excite and suit with our affections in
several cases: as to lift up our Eyes in hope of Gods mercy, and cast them
down, in bewailing our sins, etc. that our Bodies may conform with our Minds.
In public Assemblies, let us conjoin with the Church: and in private prayers,
use such gestures as the zeal of our souls does suggest. Such Gestures, Quos
ardor animi imperat, Being ever mindful of St. Augustines Rule, That what
things are not against Faith, nor good Manners, and have something in them
conducing to better Life, wheresoever we find them, we do not only, not
disallow of them, but do commend and imitate them, August.

III. For Place for private prayers: All places are warranted for private
prayers. John 4.21. 1 Timothy 2.8. I will that men pray every where, lifting up
holy hands, etc. But that place is fittest, that is freest from distraction,
and farthest from suspicion of hypocrysie. For public prayers, before the Law
the Patriarchs found out places, where they built Altars, etc. which were for
the convenience of the place, or upon some special manifestation of God, Gen,
8.20. and 13.18. and 28.16, 17, 18. Under the Law, the Tabernacle, the Temple,
both for the Ark of the Covenant, and a Type of the Messiah, 1 King. 8.48. Dan.
6.10, 11. Besides they had many Synagogues for prayer in the cities of the
Levites, Under the Gospel Religion is not bound to a place: For our Savior
prayed in the wilderness, Mount, in the Temple, and Synagogues. Peter on the
house top. Paul on the sea shore. The primitive Christians in the Cemeteries,
under better Emperors, holy Houses, till driven out by persecution, which
Decius and Dioclesian did demolish and destroy: Then sumptuous Temples were
raised in, and after Constantines time, by diverse Emperors and Bishops, etc.

True it is, that in Aftertimes, diverse superstitions crept in; but these
being purged and removed, we may make use of the places, as they did in the
time of Constantine, etc.) make use of Temples (abused to Idolatry) when the
Idols were cast out, and the Idolatry purged away: And such places, and
Sumptuous Fabrics we now make use of for Order and Decency, and Convenience;
not for the holiness of the place, per se, sed tantum relative, as it is
employed and used in the worship and service of God.

IV. For Time: Non adsemper, Times have turns for several business; are
occasional or ordinary.

We are not tied to any one set hour for private prayers. 1. It is not for us
to err with the Euchytae the Euchites, that would only pray, but contemned all
other Ordinances. He that will do nothing else but pray as they did, shall pray
nothing at all to purpose. They might as well conclude, eating always, from that
place: 2 Samuel 9.10. where David said of Mephibosheth, He shall cat, etc. as so
to pray contiinually.

2. Nor with the worlding, that can find a time for all things, but for Prayer
and Devotions can spare no time at all: For Prayers as they are, 1. Occasional.
2. Ordinary, as daily Prayer like the morning and evening sacrifice of old. 3.
Or Extraordinary, in extraordinary times of danger and distress, etc. And in
such cases eminent men have prayed three times a day, as did David, Psalm.
55.17. and Daniel, Dan. 6.10. However, it is for us, Non segnescere, not to be
dull and slothful, and negligent in prayer. The Ingress and Entrance of the
morning, our refreshings at our meals, and the close of the evening, do all
invite us to be mindful of this duty of Prayer.

5. And lastly, Touching forms of Prayer, you must still distinguish betwixt
private and public.

1. In private prayer it is impossible for any form to answer, and suit with
every man's particular necessity, and every man is left to himself.

2. In Public; a form of Prayer is very useful and convenient, and agreeable
with antiquity. Set forms are appointed by Almighty God, as of Blessing, Numb.
6.23, 24, 25, 26. So set Psalms by David on special occasions; So for Fasts.

And our Savior prescribes his prayer as a Rule, Mat. 6. And as a form, Luke
11. Of all prayers, premeditated are the best, Eccles. 5.2. And of
premeditated, those allowed by public authority, are to be preferred. All
Christian Churches in the first and best times had their set forms. And our own
Liturgy both simply and comparatively is the best, penned and allowed of by
learned Doctors, and Martyrs: Yet Quaedam in pulchro corpore, as Ja.
Armachanus, that reverend Primate of Armagh advised in several things: and
consider, it was composed by men, it is inferior to the Scripture; It is not
to be rested upon, as alsufficient to salvation; This is to idolize it, and so
we may abuse the best things, and make them pernicious to our selves, that are
precious; To rest to much upon a form, is in in the way to fall.

And for order, a man may begin his Devotions with Confession, Petition,
Thanksgiving, as he sees cause. In all, be we sure our hearts be right, and
that the duty be performed with regular and true devotion of soul, so shall we
have acceptance with God, and at last obtain eternal salvation. Amen.

Thus of the things less Essential or Circumstantial in our Devotions, viz. 1.
Voice. 2. Gesture. 3. Place. 4. Time. 5. Forms, and order, of Prayers.

FINIS.
THE Dying Preachers Legacy.
1 THESE. IV. I. Furthermore then we beseech you Brethren, and exhort you by the
Lord Jesus, that as you have received of us, how ye ought to walk, and to
please God, so ye would abound (or increase) more and more.

(...).

Reliquum ergo, Fratres, rogamus vos, and obsecramus in Domino Jesu,
quemadmodum acceptistis a nobis quomodo oportet vos ambulare and placere Deo,
ut abundetis magis, Arias Mont.


THE Exhortation of the Text foundeth like the words of an aged, decaying, or
dying Apostle, ( Philem. 9.) or faithful Preacher of the Gospel, (choose you
whether; who having spent the course of his life, in giving light to others, so
that he may in a proportion assume the Motto of a wasted Lamp, Torch or Candle,
which is lucendo pereo, he having faithfully taught people the way to
salvation, showing them how they ought to walk, and please God, and so be happy
for ever: at last he does assume the liberty of a dying man, to crown all his
former pains with a general precept of greatest concernment, and which he would
have take the deepest impression upon them, viz. That what they had received
and learned, that they would retain, be expert in, increase in strength, and
abound in fruit more and more.

This text may be fitly styled, The dying Preachers Legacy; and whether the
Preacher dye soon after, or otherwise, yet is the Counsel very useful for the
living, yea for all.

And in this short Legacy, though one main thing be aimed at, viz. Their
increasing and abounding, etc. Yet upon the by, you have three things more very
observable, so that the particulars of the Text in this verse, are four. 1. The
Preachers labor and incessant work, (...). 2. His Love and passionate
affection to the people, viz. as to brethren, and those of nearest and dearest
relation. 3. The peoples duty, viz. In relation to the Preachers pains to
receive, learn and practice so, as to walk as they ought, and to live so, that
they may please God. 4. A Christians Excellency, (which brings him to full
maturity) viz. To increase instrength, and to abound in good fruit more and
more. These are the particulars of this Verse, and of these in order.

In handling of which, I shall take notice of the Original words, as we pass to
clear all to you.

1. And now as to the first, viz. The Preachers labor. Thus as the old,
shortbreathed Prophet, ( Hosea I mean) is very sententious, as is evident to
the judicious Reader.

Ap. So is our Apostle: Every word has its weight: (...), q.d. Reliquum ergo,
it remains therefore.

A man would think that the Apostle had said and done enough, yea as much as
could be done for their good, yet here is a (...), a Remnant, Futhermore,
something still to be added to what was done before.

Doct. I. A Preachers work is never at an end, his labor is as long as his
life: Redit labor actus in orbem. His motion is circular, and the end of one
work enters another. As it is with the serular, so with the Spiritual
Husbandmen, one business dispatched, makes way for the next: something is still
to be done, though people be never so well instructed and grounded in the
truth. St. Peter thought so: 2 Pet. 1.12, to 16. He would put them in
remembrance, whilst in this Tabernacle, etc. Dogmaticals must have
Exhortationals: And Doctrines must be put on to the life, with strong
perfwasions, and for confirmation.

Reasons: 1. Experience proves this: For who sees not this, that will see at
all! 2. The peacher feels it, that understands his own work. 3. The world sees
it, and knows it well enough: you need no more proof. What Use shall we make
of it?

Use 1. Of Information. 2. Of Exhortation. 3. Of Consolation. Endless work must
needs be very great and hard work. It is a Proverb, A light burden far carried
is heavy: sure then, A heavy burden long carried cannot be light: This needs no
proof; and such is the work that we speak of.

2. If this work be so great, no doubt, something is due for it, sure Pity and
Prayers at the least, and some Encouragement is due from the people: But I
shall not examine this strictly, because I spare you: 1. Labans dealing with
Jacob so good a servant, was nothing commendable, Genesis 31.36, to 42. 2. And
their carriage (I am sure) was too bad toward the Apostle, That accounted him
an enemy, because he told them the truth, Gal. 4.16. They did fulfill that
Proverb, Veritas odium parit. Only thus much let me say,

That Prophets, Apostles, the worthies of all Ages, and the truly wise men of
this age, will tell you by woeful experience, That this great work and endless
labor of the Ministry is little, or not at all considered, valued, regarded,
or rewarded in the world, otherwise then with as much neglect, disdain and
reproach as may be, as Jer. 20.8.

Ap. So that these sore laborers may sit down with those sad people, or that
sad Church, and say as they, Our soul is exceedingly filled with the scorning
of those that are at ease, and with the contempt of the proud, Psalm 123.3, 4.

Instance. And so was Paul rewarded by many Humourists of his time, Acts 13.50.
and 16.22, 23. and 21.30, 31. Romans 3.8. 2 Cor. 10.10. And at last, viz. (Anno
32. Conversionis) after above thirty years of his labors and Ministry, he was
beheaded by Nero, Anno Christi 67. Alsted. Chron. Some of whose bloody
Offspring did not (long since) of late years bear great sway amongst us: Let
God have the glory of the abatement of their power.

3. But Lord, though it fare thus with thy Messengers amongst men, yet let thy
servants be precious in thy sight, and then shall they be glorious, because
their judgment is with the Lord, and their work, (yea, and reward too) is with
their God, and he will be their strength (for ever) Isa. 49.4, 5.

Oh, when will this state of England think this endless work worthy of a better
reward, then 5.10.20.30.40.50. l. etc. per annum, to support the person of him
that is thus employed, and the Family depending upon him, with Food, Physic,
Books, and all other necessary provisions.

I have briefly dismissed the first point, and so I intend to do by the (second)
next; and the second particular is,

2. The Love and passionate Affection of a Preacher to his people, which is
expressed in an Appellation and Obtestation.

1. The Appellation is, Adelphoi, brethren: a style of near relation, and
betwixt whom there should be dear affeon.

2. The Obtestation adjoined is expressed in the two Verbs, viz. 1. (...),
significans Rogare, ab (...), q.d. Amorem significat, q.d. Amanter rogamus, We
do request you with great love and affection. 2. (...), and obsecramus, And we
beseech you.

Now Beseeching is in an humble way, conjoined with great desire: So here the
Apostle does not command like a King, etc. but does request and beseech (or
beseech and exhort) in a most affectionate and supplicant way, as to brethren,
etc.

2. And in the person by whom he does thus adjure and beseech them, it is by
the Lord Jesus; not in his own Name, but in the name of the Lord Jesus Christ
by whom they were created, redeemed, elected, and called to life everlasting:
And all this he does to win the more upon the Thessalonians, and to persuade
them the more effectually to their duty.

Conjoyn all these together, and the Result will be this.

Doct. II. Faithful Preachers of the Gospel do (and ought to) use all the
pathetical and affectionate means that they can device, to win men to grace,
and to increase therein, as becomes the servants of God; and that not in their
own, but in the Name of Jesus Christ.

Instance. For proof of this, you need look no further then our Apostle, who
was an exquisit Artist in this kind. For how did he insinuate upon King
Agrippa, Acts 26.27. So 1 Cor. 9.19. He a servant to all men, all things to all
men, Non mentientis astu, sed compatientes affectu, Augustine. not by a sinful
compliance in evil, but a Civil in things indifferent, not against a good
Conscience. He yields to their infirmities as if he were in the same case to
support them. So 2 Cor. 5.19, 20 As we have a word of Reconciliation from God,
so as Ambassadors for Christ, as if God did beseech you by us, etc. And yet
again, 1 These. 2.7, 19, 20. Mark the place, The Apostle was as a nursing
mother, not a mercenary, to his hope, crown, glory and joy, as he styles them;
And as a Mother-nurse in those respects.

1. Puero gaudenti congaudet, and condolet patienti, she does sympathize with
the child she nurseth: So here, Romans 12.15.

2. Sublevat puerum cadentem, So should we, Gal. 6.1, 2. If a man, etc.

3. Lact at puerum plorantem, we draw forth the breasts of consolation.

4. Instruit puerum nescientem: Thus Timothy was, 2 Timothy 1.5. And we do, etc.

5. She tastes meat and Medicine, to refresh or restore the hungry, or sick
child, so we counsel and comfort others, Ezekiel. 3.17. 2 Cor. 1.4. And in some
cases.

6. Ligat puerum nolentem, so would we people from disorders, etc.

7. Et Pascit recusantem, so must we, Ezekiel. 2.6, 7. and 3.5.7.

8. Abluit puerum se sordidantem, etc. A nursing mother will perform mean
offices for the Child's good, so do we to do good, Romans 12.16.

9. Balbutit, ut facilius instruat non loquentem, so here, John 16.12. Romans
6.19.

Hand and Feet are made use of by the Nurse for the weak child: so here, as
Isa. 49.11. and 66.12, 13. By the actions of hands, or devotions of knees. Thus
St. Paul did for himself, 2 Cor. 12.8. And we for many.

11. Nutrix deosculatur cadentem, sic pastores fovent patientes osculis amoris
and pacis.

12. Sibilis and cautinelis demuloet puerum dormientem; So does the faithful
Preacher endeavor (omnibus modis) to lay people to Rest; either by heavenly
Meditations here. Or the heavenly habitations after death; the Grave being a
bed of Rest, Sleep, a preparation to a Resurrection; A Gate of Glory.

Ap. All this the Nurse-mother undergoes out of affection to her Infant, the
like does the faithful Pastor, who is a Father, 1 Cor. 4 15. A mother, Gal.
4.19. as Timothy did naturally care for them, Phil. 2.20. because he loved and
prized them, as bought with a great price from Nature to Grace, so must we.
True, Our Apostle was a Champion in this way of winning Souls: Yet was he not
alone. For as this was the practice of our Apostle, so also was it of others,
who herein did but imitate their Renowned Predecessors.

2. Thus also did the wise (Kingly) Preacher, Eccl. 12.9, 10, 11. He sought out
acceptable words of truth, proverbs, etc. yea words, which should be as Goads
and Nails fastened by the Master, etc.

3. What moan did the Prophet make, Esaias 49.4, 5. for the people?

4. In all this, see the Lord is the pattern, who does spread out his hands all
the day long, Esaias 65.1, 2. Romans 10.20, 21. and draws with the Cords of Love;
Takes off the Yoke, Hos. 11.3, 4. He comes not at first with an iron Rod, Psalm
2.9. In the Whirlwind, Earthquake, or Fire, but in the stillsmall voice, 1
Kings 19.11, 12. Not with evidences of terror as at the deliverie of the Law,
but with a distinct Expression of his mind and mercy, which might be heard and
understood without terror, as in the Gospel.

5. And lastly, Our Savior surpasses in this kind: he had compassion upon a
scattered Flock, Mat. 9.36, 37, 38. and bemoanes Jerusalem, Mat. 23.37, 38.
passionately, O Jerusalem, Jerusalem, how often would I have gathered, etc.

Thus God the Father, and Christ his Son, do deal by mankind now, as of old
with the children of Israel, Deuteronomy. 32.6, 7, 8, 9, 10, viz. As a Father, who set
their bounds, made them his portion, whom he found in a wast howling
wilderness, yet he instructed, led and kept them as the Apple of his Eye, did
by them, as an Eagle by her young, who stirs up her nest, fluttereth over
her young, spreading abroad her wings, takes and bears about her young upon
them, so the Lord alone did lead them, etc. He advances them to the high
places of the earth, and fed them with the increase of the Field, with honey
and oil, butter and milk, with the fat of Lambs and Rams, and Goats, with the
chiefest wheat, and they drank of the purest wine: And thus would he do by us
all, did not our sins turn away, and withhold good things from us, Jer. 5.25.

Reasons of this point, are in Respect of God, our selves, others, the means
used.

1. God. All souls are his, Ezekiel 18.4. and most precious in his sight, and in
themselves, he calls for the heart, Prove. 23.26. and what profit is it to win
the world, and lose his soul, Mat. 16 26. His glory is most advanced by winning
souls, which is a main motive to excite us to use our best art and skill to
effect it. The question will not be, how much credit or profit, but how many
souls we have gained to God by the Gospel? Thus in respect of God.

2. Our selves, Because it is for our Credit, profit; Credit, see Prove. 11.30.
The fruit of righteousness is a Tree of life, and he that wins Souls is
wise: That wins them to God, from evil to good, whether by council or example,
or both: the verse is an Allegory made up of familiar Metaphors, of a Tree, yea
of life, to which he is resembled, a comparison drawn from Hunters, Fishers and
Fowlers.

1. It is for the credit of trees to be like that tree, Psalm 1.3. and those,
Eze. 47.12. Or that tree, Dan. 4.10, 11, 12. which did so flourish, were a
shadow and shelter, and yielded so much fruit to many to sustain them: and such
an One is he (that righteous man) that wins Souls, such a Man is styled a
Tree of life, in allusion to that Tree, Genesis 2.9. and 3.22. because God has
planted them, blessed them, and enabled them to do much good to others.

1. As to the similitude or comparison to Hunters, Fishers, etc. Our Savior
when he called his Apostles, styles and makes them fishers of men, Mat. 4.19.
He taught them the Ministers duty by their own trade, as Psalm 78.71, 72. like
those fishers upon the holy waters, Ezekiel. 47.10. the world is the Sea,
Unbelievers fishes, Ministers the Fishermen, the Gospel the Net; Nor are any
kind of fish (sinners) excepted from this fishing, Gal. 3.28. See the
Annotations on both places cited: It is for the credit of the Fisher, that he
catch much, etc.

Ap. If by Light and Life we gain men to God, Luke 5.5, 6, 7. John 21.3. and
like Salt do season the Souls of many. This is the highest credit and comfort
of a Pastor; it is not applause, credit or profit which they aim at, but to
gain (upon good ground) this praise, Quod artem norint animas ad Deum
convertendi, T. Cartwright, James 5.19, 20. For if any do err from the Truth,
and one convert him, Esaias 5.19, 20.

2. Profit, For this makes for the great good of the Teacher, Dan. 12.3. They
that be thus wise (or such Teachers) shall shine as the brightness of the
Firmament; and they that turn many to righteousness, as the Stars for ever and
ever: they shall enjoy an incomprehensible, and exceeding and eternal weight of
glory, a rich Recompense for all their labors, 2 Cor. 4.7.

3. Others, This is the greatest good we can do for them, viz. to win them to
God; for this delivers the captives of Satan into the liberty of the sons of
God, that's woeful, this a joyful and blessed Liberty, 2 Timothy 2.25, 26. Restores
and revives men from Diseases, Death, the Graves of corruption unto light and
life, and perfect health, raises from the dust and dunghill, etc. to the new
Jerusalem, from the lowest station to the highest condition, Psalm 113.7, 8.

Ap. Should men do so by us, we should value the courtesy; O be persuaded that
he does you the best turn, that aims and endeavors most for the good of your
Souls.

4. The means used, the more it savors of kindnesser, the more like it is to
prevail; Man should be so ingenious, as to be won with Love, rather then forced
with Rigor, Facilius ducimur, quam trahemur; we are more easily led, then drawn
and enforced when the hearer, (cannot but fee) Love in the looks of the
Teacher, affection in his Face, compassion in his countenance, and the zeal of
his heart in his hearty expressions, etc. how can it but enter and pierce the
heart, and rend like Nails fastened in a sure place, and make him be persuaded
that all is spoken for his good. Sure where the patient is well persuaded of
the love an skill of his Physician, the Potion is like to have the better
working, and the physic to be the more prevalent.

Ap. So it is here, all Council will do the better, and have the kinder
working, if you be but persuaded of the love and good will of the Teacher,
which indeed, is inexpressible and unutterable.

For faithful Pastors (I am sure) may proportionably make use of that saying
of the Apostle, Phil. 1.8. God is my Record, how greatly I long after you all,
in the bowels of Jesus Christ. A most affectinate expression, conjoined with a
serious attestation of Record of Almighty God who searches the heart; and the
most exquisite, and Excellent Regulation of true Christian affection, viz. that
it was in the Bowels of Jesus Christ. Not a carnal, but a spiritual affection,
it was for Christ's sake, and because they were in him that he loved them so
well, and it was according to Christ's, to his mind and his example, in whom are
the most tender Bowels of affection; and who therein, as in all other
Excellencies is the most absolute pattern of the utmost perfection, see Mat.
9.36.

You have heard the Point, and the proof of it, I do now descend to use,

Use is of Reproof, and that to both sorts, viz. To the Agents and Preachers,
when they are either too dull, or diverted to a wrong course: To the Patients
or Hearers, when they are either too hard, or disaffected with what is
cordially intended for their good.

1. The Agents edge is too dull, when Minister or others neglect this duty, and
have no respect to this winning way. What opportunities have many upon the
souls of their Friends, etc. and Neighbors, which yet neglected, and how many
Ministers (as well as others) are as careless as Cain, or Gallio the Deputy,
and as ready to ask the question with Cain, Am I my brothers keeper? Genesis 4.9.
Acts 18.17.

Ap. The Country rues this, and many souls lost by this neglect.

But if you have a Form of public worship and service of God, if that be
performed, is it not enough, and have not Ministers and people done their duty
sufficiently? etc.

Answ. I answer, and I pray mistake me not (for I am very apt to be
misapprehended by some sinister Ears) I am clearly for a Liturgy, or form of
Gods public worship or Service, as singularly useful to the Order, Unity and
Peace of the Church, and a great help to the weak, both Ministers and others,
and a means to prevent many inconveniences which will befall through the want
of it, as schism, faction, etc. And in this (I am sure) I have all the
Christian Churches in the World, Greek and Latin, Eastern, and Western, and
that in the Primitive (the first and best) times on my side, Jac. Armach.
Besides much Scripture Authority cited by Armach. Nevertheless, my esteem of a
Liturgy, or form of Gods public worship and service, be as I have spoken.

Yet in answer to the Question propounded, I would be always understood with
this Caution, viz. That I would have none Rest, or Rely upon any form of
public worship (devised by men) as all-sufficient, either to the discharge of
a Ministers duty, or to the salvation of a particular Christians soul.

1. For to speak first to the latter of these; It is impossible for any
particular form to reach all the necessities, Corruptions, Temptations, wants
and Weaknesses, Infirmities, Defects and particular Occurrences incident to
men. There will ever be occasion to observe that Precept of our Savior, Mat.
6.6. Enter into thy closet, etc Christ himself made use of other prayers upon
occasion; He prayed all night, and in several places, Luke 6.12. Let our
Addresses to God be secret and private: for secret sins and sorrows of soul,
and God that does hear in secret will reward us openly, Mat. 6.6.

In a word, Let not a public form exclude or extinguish our private Devotions,
nor let our private Devotions justle out the public Form, causing us to
neglect or contemn it, as Fanatics do: Let both go hand in hand: frequent the
public Form devoutly, and use private prayers seriously, and be we thankful to
God for his good Spirit, that does assist us with Grace, to make use of both,
as helps to the heavenly Jerusalem.

2 As for the former, touching the discharge of a Ministers duty, if that be
not sufficiently done by this,

Answ. I blush to hear any Minister talk so, nor did I ever think him fit for
the Ministry that did so Public forms are to be used for Order, Unity, etc.
but this is not all (not, col. Ha. Adam) of the man or Minister.

For besides this, we have a word not to be dispensed with, Ezekiel. 3.17. Hear
the word at my mouth, etc. A great Command, John 21.13, 16, 17. Feed my sheep;
serious advice trebled, 1 Cor. 8.16. Woe unto me, etc. A severe aprrehension, 2 Timothy 4.1, 2. I charge ye, etc. A dreadful Charge; it is to omit all other
places that enforce this; I could never think that these, and such as these
places could ever be answered with the bare observation of any Form of Gods
public worship, divine Service, or Administration.

Ap. If any of my own profession dare appear before the great Tribunal at that
great and terrible Day of the Lord upon this account, I must profess to you
all I dare not so appear, nor durst I ever be so presumptuous: The good Lord
pardon our defects, and strengthen us to his own work, for who is sufficient
for these things, 2 Cor. 3.16. Thus, if the Agent or Preacher be too dull in
his place.

3. Now this Reproof is against such Preachers as are diverted to a wrong way
of winning souls: which is, when Ministers think to prevail by rigor, storms
and continual Thunder, rather then Lenity, the still voice, when God appeared
to Elijah, 1 King. 19.11, to 29. it was not in the whirlwind, nor earthquake
nor Fire, (which yet were useful for preparation paration, etc.) but in the
still voice which gave Gods direction for the anointing of Hazael, Jehu and
Elisha, to revenge Gods Quarrel against Idolatry, and to rectify things so far
amiss. But, though this still voice, be for the most part the most prevalent,
and this mild way of winning Souls be most usual and useful; Yet this must not
exclude the sharpness and severity of a Preacher upon just occasion; there is
a time and place for Boanerges, Mar. 3.17. to Thunder; and the Apostles Rod, 1
Cor. 4.21. is (as to Children) better then Bread in some cases: Or a Barnabas
to comfort, the Prophets did so of old, they spared no persons, no crimes, Eze.
21.25. You profane. And our Savior took his time to tell the Jews, that they
were of their Father the Devil, John 8.44. and the Apostle calls them, foolish
Galatians, when they were so soon bewitched not to obey the Truth, etc. Gal.
3.1.

Ap. These things are useful to prepare the way of the Lord: the terrors of
Mount Sinai, prepared them to receive the Law, and the wind, etc. at Horeb; the
Prophet for the still Voice, 1 Kin. 19.11. and the Law is our Schoolmaster to
bring us to Christ, Gal. 3.24, 25. Obstinate Offenders must have answerable
Rebukes, men are of different tempers: some like Nettles must be handled hard,
others like briars, gently. But yet as the Lord in Judgment does remember
mercy, so must Love be mixed with all this. But then, these preparations being
thus made, the still Voice behind us gives us the encouragement, Esaias 30.21.
saying, This is the way, walk in it, etc. Lenit as apostolici spiritus
obsecrationibus magis agit, quam rigidis jussis, Paraeus, Gasp. Olevianus. Haec
ratio docendi mazime convenit Ministris Dei, ne pro imperio dictatorie and
rigide postulent, quod praecipient lenitate and precibus facilius obtinent ab
Auditoribus.

1. Apostolical Lenity does act more by kind Entreaties, then by rigid
Commands: and Ministers that teach thus, do not so much imperiously and
magisterially dictate, as ministerially and friendly Request, by which they do
soonest gain upon their Hearers, Paroeus Olevianus, Acts and Monum Fox, Vol. 3.
p. 146.

It is Recorded that there was such an austere gravity, and severity imprinted
in the Countenance and discourse of that Renowned Martyr, Mr. Hooper, Bishop of
Worcester and Gloucester, even to the terror of the Spectators: that it was
sometimes wished, that it might have been a little more popular, and familiar;
then let Lenity and Gravity be mixed to win the Souls of all.

And a Teacher must take heed of being quarrelsom for trifles, and too much
seeking himself, and the like, and must so behave himself, that he may say
truly with the Apostle, 2 Cor. 12.13, 14. I seek not yours, but you: and the
people may assent thereunto, having nothing to say to the contrary, and then
they are like to be successeful. Thus much for the Reproof of the Agents or
Teachers, when they are either too dull, or diverted amiss.

2. The next Branch of this use of Reproof, is, against all such Patients or
Hearers, as are either too hard, or disaffected.

1. They are hard, that will admit no swasions to prevail with them, Durum est
quod non cedit, sed recist Tactui^, Mat. Mart. When men harden their hearts,
and stiffen their necks, and strengthen their Faces like the Flint, the
Adamant, the Anvil, or the nether-Milstone, as with Iron-sinews and brows of
Brass, Esaias. 48.4. See Zach. 7.12. Job 41.24. like the Leviathan. And thus did
Pharaoh Exodus 7.14. against all Plagues and Judgments: Zedekiah, 2 Chronicles.
36.13. against all Councels for his safety. The Jews, Jer. 7.26. Acts 7.51.
and all impenitent persons, Romans 2.5. who after their hardness and impenitent
hearts treasure up wrath, etc. and this hardness is accompanied with unbelief,
Mark 16.14. Impenitency, Romans 2.5. Wilful ignorance and blindness of
understanding, Ephesians. 4.18, 19. When men shut their Eyes against the Light, and
are resolutely and obstinately bent to persist in evil doings: as Jer. 44.15,
etc. Such hard ware and work have Ministers to deal with.

And is it not a mavelous mercy of God, to make his Messengers as hard as
Resolute in the discharge of their duty, and pursuance of that which is good,
as the people are in evil. For thus says the Lord to the Prophets, I have made
you as a defenced City, as an Iron-pillar and brazen walls, Jer. 1.17, 18. and
your Faces strong against their Faces, even as an Adamant harder then Flint,
against their wickedness, Ezekiel. 3.7, 8 9. Waiting when they will return to the
Prophets, etc. for they must not return to the people.

This is a great evil, and the Note of an ignoble Spirit, to be inexorable to
the Entreaties of God; for their God waits, and, knocks, and bids us open; And
we refuse all: But mark the issue, 2 Chronicles. 13.15, 16.

2. The next to be Reproved, are such as are disaffected when Council is
faithfully prepared, tenderly delivered, and fitly applied for the peoples
good. Many make it their work to pick quarrels, either at the Message, or the
Messenger, the matter, or manner of delivery, etc. its easy to find fault.
This disaffection hinders many of the good they might receive. Thus did
Johanan, and the proud men discredit the Prophet, and his Prophecy, Jer. 43.44.

I doubt many Preachers and Hearers neglect this, but let it not be so with us,
let good affections be answered with the like, and good counsel with obedience.

I have showed you a Preachers, 1. Labor, which is endless. And, 2. Love which
is unutterable, which Love I have cleared by the example of the Apostle, who,
1. did insinuate upon King Agrippa. 2. And became all things to all men. 3. Did
beseech as an Ambassador. 4. And did behave himself as a Nursing mother to
them, in twelve respects. Solomon the Ecclesiastes, or the Preacher. The
Prophet Isaiah. The Lord himself to them of old. And The Lord Jesus to his
flock.

Reas. To these I added Arguments in respects of, 1. God, whose Glory is thus
best advanced. 2. Our selves, to whom it is our credit and profit. 3. Others,
to whom it is the best good. And, 4. The means used, which this way are most
like to succeed.

Uses are of, 1. Reproof to Ministers if too dull or diverted. And, 2. To
Hearers, if too hard or disaffected to good Counsel.

Use 2. Informs us, if souls are so precious, how vain then are they, who set
souls at so low a rate, as many Ministers and people do their own, and the
souls of others, as if they were of no value. Ministers by neglect or ambition
to rise, or eagerness after many things, etc. set aside this main thing of
gaining souls to God. And people scarce care upon what account they loose their
souls, if Honor or Profit (how unjustly soever gotten) do but invite them
thereunto: Good God! How many men of latey ears have hazarded themselves
dangerously upon this rock!

How great is the grief, if the Fishers, etc. can catch nothing, etc. much more
if their industry only gain injury.

Ap. Yet this is the case of many Fishers of men. And how foolish are they,
that can prize Liberty, Recovery or Dignity, etc. procured and conferred by
men, and yet do undervalue these glorious Gospel-proffers for their souls
health.

Use 3. Exhorts: Prize your Pastors affections, and add to them by your prayers.

Use 4. Of Consolation; Where this concurrence is, how good is it! This harmony
of affection is happy and successful.

You have heard of the Preachers labor and Love; The peoples Duty and
Excellency remains to be spoken of. I do now descend to the third particular,
viz. The peoples duty: This duty of the people is in relation to the Preachers
work: For a Receiver presumes a Giver. Where nothing is given nothing can be
received; The Earth gapes still if the clouds be dry: so that in this
description of the peoples duty, you have four particulars. 1. A Giver. 2. A
Receiver. 3. A Walk. And, 4. The manner and end of Walking.

I. Ministers are the Givers; For you received of us, says the Apostle. The
Priests lips preserve knowledge, Mal. 2.7. The tongue of the learned gives a
word in season, etc. Isa. 50.4. We must give warning, Counsel, Comfort, etc. as
need is.

Ap. When all are Givers, they give nothing, because there are no Receivers:
yet our brainsick Fanatics fancy such a thing: Every one is a Teacher, and
thinks he knows more then enough: no need of receiving, they are so full
already. But I leave these to their Fancies, and to their windy fullness.

II. If we must give, you must receive: If our Doctrine drop down like dew or
rain, You as the earth, the tender herbs, and the grown grass, must receive it,
If we be as Jakeh, you must be as Agur, Prove. 30, 1. If we as Fountains, or
Springs of Water pour out, you must be as the fruitful valleys which receive
benefit by the same. If God by us gives Doctrines to mollify and fructify
your hard and barren souls, it is not for you to remain like the rock, the dry
desert, and barren wilderness no way bettered by the influence of heaven. If
God by us set up a light, as a Candle upon a Candle-stick to give light to all
that be in the house, it is for you to receive it, and not to wink against, but
to walk in the light, as Children of the light, till you received the
inheritance of the Saints in light.

These things premised, yield us this Result.

Doct. Giving and receiving are relalative, and mutual actions, which reflect
upon each other, Se ponunt and tollunt invicem. And Christians must take great
care in both. You need no proof of this, for God is the great Giver, and all we
are Receivers; All else are under him as stars.

Reas. And for Reasons for this, consider the, 1. Giver. 2. End. 3. Gift. and,
4. Danger.

1. Giver. Because God by himself, his Messengers, and Means, gives much, he is
indefatigable inexhaustible.

Quest. Is it not a great affront and indignity to the Majesty on high to
refuse to receive him.

Quest. If Princes confer Honors or Favors upon Subjects, will it be well
taken if they refuse it?

Ap. Oh do not you thus provoke the Lord Almighty: What shall the highest give
to the lowest, the best to the basest, and worst of Creatures, the most
honorable to the most despicable; and shall these refuse? Sure this is madness
and folly, and much more to receive what Satan gives, Mat. 4.9.

2. The End of giving, which is our good; this is quite frustrated, where is no
Receiver to make use of it. If the clouds give never so much rain to the rocks
or desert, all is lost, so is good Counsel to the obstinate.

So the Receiver, if he receive never so much, if it be not from a lawful Giver
that has power and right to give, it is not so properly receiving, as taking,
stealing, or usurping. A Thief, etc. takes many things, but who gave them to
him: Neither God nor man will say to such, As you have received of us, for we
gave you not such things.

Ap. Many such we have had in this Nation of late: so in Spirituals; Many take
up new Opinions, strange fancies and errors, etc. But neither God nor good men
ever gave them, But the great Tare-sower the devil, Mat. 13.27.

Ap. In all they sin extremely, that frustrate God, and gratify the Devil in
receiving his Tares, Bane and Poison.

Thus our good, which is the main end of giving and receiving, is quite
prevented and frustrated, if both the Giver and Receiver be not right and good
inse, and in donis.

3. The Gift it self, see to that, whether it be good or bad: Every good and
perfect gift is from above, James 1.17. A good gift tends to make the Receiver
good also; and a bad gift to corrupt him, as Bribes, etc. do, which blind the
eyes of the wise, and pervert the words of the righteous, Deuteronomy. 16.19. There be
many gifts of that nature, that serve to corrupt and pervert men: But do you
receive none such; only let it be said of you as in the Text, That you have
received how you ought to walk, and to please God; This is to receive that
which tends to your perfection and salvation.

4. The Danger of not receiving good gifts from God, when they are proffered
and tendered to us; And of receiving Evil from the Devil. This sin does sharpen
the displeasure of God against us, and does aggravate his wrath exceedingly.
Prove. 1.20, 24, etc. When Wisdom shall cry after us for our good, and we shall
reject her Counsel, this does provoke God to rejoice at our destruction, and
mock when our fear comes, Verse. 26. whereas e contra, He that hearkeneth unto
wisdoms counsel, and receives it, shall dwell safely, and be quiet from fear of
evil, verse. 33.

Note, That refusing God makes way for the devil to enter and pervert us with
his gifts. This not-receiving, but rejecting the good Counsel of God, was the
great sin of the old world, and of Israel of old throughout the old Testament,
and brought woeful miseries upon them, 2 Chronicles. 36.15, 16. And as of the old
world and Israel, so also in the New Testament for the rejecting of Christ, and
his word. How are they rejected of God, and become the scorn of Nations. Indeed
this has been the sin of all Ages; For when was the Word, and Messengers of
God more slighted then in this present age, our times? Never.

Thus you have had the point, and the proof of it; The Reasons from, 1. The
Giver. 2. The End of Giving. 3. The Gift it self. And, 4. The Danger, etc. I
descend to Use, which is of instruction and Lamentation.

Use I. Instructs us. Be we very cautious both in giving and receiving, as the
point bids us; this deserves our utmost care and heedfulness. It is not for us
to give a stone for bread, a Scorpion for an Egg, or for a fish a Serpent, or
poison instead of wholesome food, Mat. 7.9, 10, 11. But to give as God gives.
And this caution opens a wide door of Lamentation for very many Givers and
Receivers.

Look but upon two or three things of greatest concernment.

I. For matter of Doctrine, and public instruction.

Quest. How many strange Doctrines and erroneous opinions (if not blasphemous
abominations) have been vented, and given forth in these times? Time would fail
me to speak of the particular Errors of the manifold Sects of these times. I
have formerly or lately given you in a parallel of erroneous persons, viz. Of
Papists. Ancient and latter Separatists, and their mutual concurrence in diverse
particulars, viz. Schism by a Separation. Strangeness and uncertainty of
Doctrine in them all alike. Independency and uncontroulableness; all are
stubborn. Anrichristianism, which does act it sel^ in a fierce opposition to
the power of Magistracy, and the Ministry in the right office, use, power and
efficacy of the same to do good amongst men: For this all their principles do
very punctually agree against Magistracy, whatsoever any of them pretend to the
contrary. And as for the Ministry, as the Papists overthrow the power of it by
concealing the Scriptures in a strange language, and turning it into a
sacrificing Priesthood, and preaching into Legends, etc. so do Separatists by
a Jerobams Priest hood, crying down all Maintenance, and defaming Ministers
with the vilest names of Baals Priests, to render them odious to all, etc. But
alas! These that give forth such strange Doctrines, consider not their own
Errors, nor do they think how they do rake up, and revive the anciently
confuted, exploded and condemned Errors of former times, and in many things
outstrip them, so prodigiously fruitful have our late times been, in producing
to the birth many monstrous conceptions of novel opinions, and unheard of
Abominations; Yet nevertheless the inconsiderate despicableness of any the
Givers, or the badness of the gift, yet such Teachers want not their Sectaries,
and Followers, whose itching ears do readily and earnestly drink in, and
greedily devour any novel fancy, though it be stark poison, and banesul to
their souls.

Ap. Such Troublers there were, both of sound Doctrine, and of the Church in
the Apostles times, whom the Apostle wishes cut off, Gal. 5.12. as rotten
members, whose practice was to creep into houses, and lead captive filly women
laden with sins, and led with diverse lusts, 2 Timothy 3.6, 7, etc. These are wells
without water, etc. who while they promise liberty, they themselves (as well as
their hearers) do become the Servants of corruption, 2 Pet. 2.17, 18, 19. How
sad will the account be, when the Teachers can only say, What I taught them out
of my own heart, did please their fancy, and suited well with the times, etc.
And the Receivers can only say, Of these men I did learn to be unsettled in
religion, and by them was rolled from one opinion to another, till I had quite
lost the truth, etc. as many Quakers and Ranters may truly say. To prevent
these miserable miscarriages, consider well, what, and how you hear and
receive, as our Savior advises: Luke 8.18. Take heed how, etc. Do as these
noble Bereans did. Acts 17.11. Receive, etc. with readiness of mind, and search
the Scriptures, etc. and try the spirits. 1 John 4.1. By the Touchstone of
Gods Word, as Christ commands us, John 5.39. Search the Scriptures, and we must
prove all things, 1 These. 5.21: And the Angel of Ephesus did try them that
said, They were Apostles, but were not so, but only liars, Rev. 2.2. Thus must
you do, you must not believe every Teacher which will tell you he has a
Revelation, etc. For false Teachers will boast of the spirit, but try whether
they be of God by inspiration, revelation, or any lawful mission or commission;
try all by the rule of the Word, and you shall be safe. Thus much for the first
great fault, concerning giving and receiving, in matter of Doctrine and public
instruction.

The next fault, which is of very great concernment, is in the Education of
youth; The miscarriage in which is almost incurable. Education often mends or
marres the man for ever.

What a charge does God give frequently to the Jews concerning the Education of
their Children. How they should season them with the principles of true
Religion, and teach them what the Mysteries of God in their Sacraments,
Sacrifices, etc. did mean and what these things upon them by catechizing from
time to time.

2. And how does Solomon carry on all the Counsel of his Book of Proverbs in
the way of a Fathers instruction to a son.

Besides, there have been Volumes written by worthy men concerning this
Subject, of the Education of youth, yet nevertheless all that has been
commanded, written or done in this case, how great is the neglect of all sorts
of persons generally in the performance of this good work to posterity, whereby
often times it befalls, that multitudes of youths do receive in their tender
younger years, and contract such habits, as are very difficult to be cured by
the best advised counsels, reproofs, or corrections that can be given, so that
often it becomes their own destruction.

Look a little amongst the several ranks and degrees of men; even the most
eminent have been to blame in this. As K. David was in the Education of an
Absalom and Adonijah; His too much tenderness bred his grief, and their smart
in the end; See 2 Samuel 14.25. 1 King. 1.6. He was (in all likelihood) affected
with their beauty, that he neglected his duty to rebuke them for their faults;
and you know what befell them both in the end.

This also was old Elies fault, though otherwise a good man, 1 Samuel 2.22, 29.
and 3.13. Yet he said more to them then many in these times will do.

Look upon our Gentry, and let them consider what Education.

Some they devote to travel, in which for want of a good Tutor or Remembrancer,
sometimes they loose their Religion, and perhaps Morality too: See Bishop
Hall's Quo^vadis, etc.

Others being bred idle at home, because ordinary employments are thought too
low, and other things are too high for them to reach. These may say, Nos numeri
sumus, and fruges consumere nati. Some Gentry (I doubt not) do see and rue this
miscarriage.

As for the Vulgarity, for the most part they give such Education, that the
Children can only say, I received and learned of my Parents to curse, and
smear, and lie, and steal, etc. and to be Telluris in^tile pondus, good and fit
for nothing, but destruction; a sad account this is, but too true of
multitudes; so far are Men from acting the part of Timothies Ancestors; O that
this might be mended among us, and we should be happy.

Most men are very apt to make great provision for their posterity, and to
leave rich portions of these earthly Treasures and Possessions to their
Children: But how few are solicitous to see the Image of Christ, the Truth and
growth of Grace, the power of godliness imprinted, and stamped upon, and really
ingrafted into their offspring, and posterity, and those under their Charge,
as the Apostle did, Gal. 4.19. who did travel in birth of them, until, etc. Men
look upon Earthly Portions and possessions as things very desirable, durable,
and of long continuance: But heavenly graces the true Treasure, and things of
that Nature, they look upon them as (...), as mere Notions, vapors and
vanishing Clouds: and are ready to question whether there be any Reality or
durable substance in them, yea or no.

Ap. Yet Experience does instruct us daily, how changeable and perishable the
portions and possessions of this world have been, and still are: For, how many
mighty ones, both in place and state, in great dignity and abundance of
superfluity of all things, that (you might think) nothing could impair them
have been brought down, whilst mean men (by the blessing of God) have been
Advanced (not as many of late were, but) upon good ground and just desert.

To conclude, When Pastors and Parents, and all others concerned in this way of
giving Council and Instruction, Education, and Directions for the right
ordering of Life: when all these (I say) can give a clear account to God, that
all that they have done, and given in that kind has been right, and according
to Rule, and has been received and accepted accordingly; O how good is it, and
comfortable both to Givers and Receivers, and how bad is it when it is
otherwise? When Evil has been given, and Evil received, and the Evil of
eternal misery is the event of all. Be we all warned, each man do his duty, and
we all shall be happy.

The Pastors Labor and Love; have been handled in the two former parts of this
Verse, we are now upon the third particular: viz. the peoples duty, in which
are four considerable particulars, viz. a giver, a receiver, a walk, and the
manner and end of walking: I have conjoined the two first, (because Relative
actions) into one point.

Doct. Giving and receiving, are mutual actions, quae ponunt, and tollunt se
invicem And Christians, must take great care in both. This was proved by
Reasons, drawn from the Giver, end of giving, gift it self, and the danger of
not receiving, etc.

Uses were of Instruction, to be very cautious in giving, and receiving for
lamentation in mis-giving and receiving, especially in two Cases:

1. Of doctrine, and public instruction, and exhortation, which has
marvellously miscarried of late, and that because, although the Doctrine
delivered and given forth to others, be never so vain and Erroneous; and the
Teacher never so inconsiderable or unreasonable, yet multitudes of people drink
in the doctrine of such Teachers (as the thirsty earth does Rain) how hurtful
and banefull soever it be to their poor deluded and dead souls.

2. In the case of education of Youth, which is miserably neglected in these
our Times, by (almost) all degrees, ranks and sorts of people, of what
condition soever they be; nevertheless, the manifold Commands of God, and the
abundant Council and Advice which is given in this particular Case. I shall no
longer insist upon this Point in any other instances, or further Inlargements:
Only I shall pray heartily for the amendment of these forementioned Faults,
which are of so much concernment to Church and Kingdom, and to the right
ordering of all public affairs.

I do now descend to the rest of the peoples duty, consisting in the walk, and
the manner, and end of such walking,

Here in, as in the former Point I shall conjoyn both these particulars into
one main point of doctrine for our use, which will make the Doctrine full, and
Use offectual. Touching the walking in this Text: you must understand that
walking is appliable to God, and man:

1. To God; and so it notes his presence, Genesis 3.8. as in the Garden, etc. and
providence for good, or evil toward us, Levit. 26.12, 28.

2. To men, it signifies the motion of the Body from one place to another: in
which is, terminus a quo, ad quem, and via per quam, etc. The whole progress
of man's Life in matters of Faith and Manners, Genesis 5.24. Enoch, Psalm 119.1.
and pasfim. And hence observe this.

Doct. Every man's life is a walk, and but a walk, it begins at our Birth, and
ends at our Death, and is but short at the longest: In every life there are
Terms, viz. a quo, ad quem, and via per quam: and these terms do differ, ex
Diametro, are quite cross one to another according to the way in which we do
walk. For if our way be good, then our Terms are from Satan to God, Sin to
Grace, Hell to Heaven. But if it be bad, then our Terms are contratrary. For
this Walk is appliable to good, and bad in their several ways, and this leads
me to take in the rest, viz. the manner and end of thus walking, viz. so as to
please God, for this is the Consolation, and this will be the perfection of a
Christian, and this makes the Point full, being conjoined together, viz.

Doct. Every man's life is to be ordered so, that we may please God in our
generation, and in the course of our conversation. This the Apostle prays
earnestly for, viz. Thut we may walk worthy of the Lord to all well-pleasing,
Col. 1.10.

This all will easily grant, that we should all live to please God, but the
Business is not so easily done, and upon due search we shall find, it is a
very hard work to live as we ought, and here you may Dicotomize the world: and
all the ways and terms of all men walking in the world: all which are either
pleasing or displeasing to Almighty God; and this puts us upon one main
Inquiry, viz.

Quest. How should we so walk that we may please God, and wherein does this
walking consist, that we may discern: for this being known, we shall easily see
who they be that displease God, in the course of their life and practice?

Now in answer to the grand Question, observe, that the distinctive Notes and
Characters of such as walk and do please God, are such as these:

1. They are such as walk with God: as Enoch and Noah did in their Generations,
Cen. 5.22. and 6.9. And you know how God translated the one from Earth to
Heaven, so that he never saw death, Heb. 11.5. and preserved the other with his
whole Family in the general Deluge, when the whole world besides was drowned,
Heb. 11.7. And all because they had this Testimony, that they pleased God.

2. And that walk before God, as Abraham and David did in their time, in
integrity and uprightness, Gen 17.1, 24, 40. 1 Kings 9.4. and David made use
of all deliverances to this end, Psalm 56.12, 13. of his soul from death, and
feet from falling, that I may walk before God, etc.

These were men that so walked with, and before the Lord, that they made a
progress (as Travelers do in a Journey) in their holy path: they were neither
idle, nor stood still, much less were Retrograde, or apt to Retreat: they ran
to the Goal, and gained the Garland of Glory, This is our duty, God expected
it, and if we perform it, God will crown it accordingly. These walked not
inordinately, etc. but (...), exactly, and according to Rule, Ephesians. 5.15. Not
after their own Fancies, Imaginations, inventions, as many ignorant,
superstitious, ceremonious Formalists and Fanatics do, to the great danger of
their Souls: and these men in their walk, way and practice, aimed not so much
at the applause of men, as the approbation and acceptance of Almighty God.

1. Enoch walked not with the world, but with God, and God took him out of the
world, as too good to live in the same with such men.

2 Noah was a Preacher of Righteousness in a most unrighteous Age, when the
earth was filled with violence (as our Land was of late) the old world did
neither love him, nor would hearken to him, or Regard his preaching, though for
their own good; the result of all was, the Lord preserved him, when the rest
perished.

3. Abraham believed in God in a most Idolatrous Age, and walked before God
when others forsook him; the Result, God blessed him abundantly, called him his
Friend, Jam. 2.23. and gave him the honorable title of the Father of the
faithful, Romans 4.11, 16.

4. And David was much afflected with the evils of his time, insomuch, that his
Eyes gushed out with Rivers of water, because men kept not Gods Law, Psalm
119.136. These Evils he endeavored to Repress as he was able, Psalm 101. and
God gave him the testimony of an upright heart, 1 King. 9.4.

5. Many others did the like, Princes, Prophets, Apostles: the care of those
men was to please God. Had those men learned to smooth and slick, to temporize
humor, and concur with the times, etc. sure they might have had the favor of
the World in a very high measure, for the World will love her own, John 15.19.
But this they sought not after, it was besides and below them; and hereupon
this Record of Honor lies upon all their Graves, as well as upon Enochs, that
they pleased God, Heb. 11.5. and the reward of weldoing is with them, whereas
had they walked with, they had perished with the world.

1. And those men that walk so, with and before the Lord, as those men, Enoch,
etc. did, are said ever since, to walk in Gods Laws and Commandments, in his
Judgments, Ordinances, ways, and Paths, Psalm 119. and passim, in the name
of the Lord, Micah 4.5. not only in external profession, but in the true Faith
and Knowledge, sincere Worship and Service of God. Idolaters walked in the name
of their Idols (as Papists and others do) but without any truth of faith or
worship. In the Spirit, Gal. 5.16. i.e. By the directions of the Spirit of God,
suitable with the holy Scriptures which were dictated by the same Spirit, 2
Pet. 1.21. Many in our Times pretend to the Spirit marvellously and strangely,
but they lay the Scriptures aside; By this you may know their Spirit to be a
Spirit of Error, not of God, but a delusion of the delusion of the Devil. In
newness of life, Rom 6.4. Having Received a new life of Regeneration from
Christ, in whom they are ingraffed, and now as graffs in the true stock do
bring forth fruit accordingly. In good works, Ephesians. 2.10. which God has
ordained that we should walk in them; Here try your works whether good or no:
All is not gold that glisters, Hypocrisy, vainglory, boasters, bad ends, are
such as spoil our seeming good works, as with man, these have been, and are too
frequent amongst us.

2. These men that so walk as Enoch, etc. did, are also said to walk in the
old, in the good way, Jer. 6.16. Many pretend to Antiquity, but are much
mistaken, as Papists for their Religion, which indeed (Statu quo) Is but an
upstart Sect, a Novel invention. Many Protestants also in respect of somethings
which are now accounted old, are much mistaken also. Many would have things to
be good, because they be old, but except you unite goodness to the oldnesse,
you say nothing. The old man's hoary head is a Crown of Glory to him, Prove.
16.31. Yea, but how? if it be found in the way of Righteousness; but the old
sinner of an hundred years old, is accursed, Esaias 65.20.

It is not simply the oldnesse, but the goodness of any thing that does really
commend it, else sin is very old, viz. from our fall in Paradise in the
beginning, all vice and violence is very old, viz. from before the Flood: the
old world was sick of it, and God was sick of them for it, and you know what
befell them, Genesis 6. and Capitibus sequent. Yet in Solomon's sense, all vice is
but a new invention, Eccl. 7.29. But mark his ground, viz. because God made man
righteous, Genesis 1.27. Innocence was first, and Christ the ancient of days in
the beginning. Sin came in afterward, an egg of our own hatching, Esaias 59.5.
So that Tertullians Rule is very true, Quod antiquissimum, est verissimum, God
is Truth it self, who is from Eternity, and innocence is of the Truth, which
was the first state of man.

Ap. Thus every thing, the nearer it is to the Fountain, the Original, the
truer it is in its own Nature.

Thus it is with Religion, the way of our walk of old, that Religion which kept
closest to God, his Word and Precept, was best, and this the idolatrous
Israelites rejected. So in the New Testament, that Religion which is nearest to
the Doctrine and practice of Christ, his Apostles and primitive purity, is the
best, which many Christians do marvellously swerve from.

Ap. Popish additionals, and ostentous ceremonies, etc. do not add to, but
impair, not beautify, but deform and deface the goodness of true Christian
Religion and power; And thus we must reason with all Papists, Idolaters, and
superstitious persons in the world, whose Ceremonies and vanities are mere
Novel Inventions, and the very Ground-plot of all their novel Fancies and
erroneous Opinions that have so pestered the Church in our times: For say they
(in effect) If the Pope may propound what Rules he pleases, and press them as
laws to be inviolably observed? why says the Pastor, or principal person of
each particular Assembly, may not I do the same upon a better principle (as
they speak) and by the Dictates of the Spirit though without the Word of God.

To close this, this old way is applyable to diverse things, but I have given
you Gage enough to judge of ancient things by their goodness, but not of their
goodness by their Antiquity. Choose the eldest things that be the best: and as
you are wise in your Choice, so shall you be happy in the fruition of old and
excellent things. Thus much for the old way.

2. Now next, such are said to walk in the way of good Men, in the paths of the
Righteous, Pro. 2.20. Phil. 3.17. i.e. after the best pattern and Presidents,
Men worthily Renowned, and most fit to be imitated by others.

This Rehoboam did a little while ( viz. three years) 2 Chronicles. 11.17. and so
long he prospered, but he soon grew weary of it, and then many changes came
upon him. But Josiah (that Renowned Reformer of Religion) he clave more
conscionably and constantly to the good ways of David, and walked in them
irreversibly, for which he is Renowned for ever, and that upon Record to all
Generations, 2 Chronicles. 34.2.

3. The men that walked as Enoch, etc. did are also said to walk, or live by
faith, not by sight, 2 Cor. 5.7. i.e. in belief and hope of things promised by
God in his Word. And to walk in Faith, for else no pleasing God, Heb. 11.6.
Love, Ephesians. 5.2. And in all things circumspectly, Ephesians. 5.15. And in Truth, 3
John 4. as the truth of Gods Word prescribes, sincerely and constantly;
according to the Rule prescribed by the Apostle, Gal. 6.16. peace shall be on
them, etc. and after his Example, Phil. 3.17.

4. And lastly, These men that thus Walk, are said to walk worthy of their
Vocation, Ephesians. 4.1. and worthy of the Lord, Col. 1.10. 1 These. 1.12. and that
in all Wisdom, Col. 4.5. and with all the Heart, 1 King. 8.2, 3. i.e. in
sincerity and integrity, both objective and subjective, the Rule and our selves.

They that walk otherwise, may justly be said to walk by sense; things obvious
to sense, are the utmost object of their care; Not in faith toward God,
resting wholly upon him. Nor in love toward others, or themselves: Heedlesly
and at Random without circumspection, and after their own Fancies, Not in the
Truth, nor by the Rule, or good Example further then they please. Neither can
they be said to walk worthy of either their Vocation, or the Lord, but cross
to both; or wisely, but foolishly, that are only taken with toys and trifles:
Or in integrity, but in much partiality, both in respect of the Rule of the
Word, some of which only they will make use of: and of themselves, some parts
or powers, they are content to employ for God, and sometimes for some ends, but
not their whole selves, either entirely or constantly.

And for the manner of these men's walking; they walk honestly, Romans 13.13. 1
These. 4.12. (...), decenter, as well becomes us. Uprightly, and shall ascend
Gods holy Hill, and God will be their Sun, Psalm 15.2. and a Buckler. Pro. 2.7.
and Gods Word does them good, Micah 2.2.7. Do not my words do good to him that
walks uprightly, in integrity, Psalm 26.11. Pro. 19.1. and bumbly, Micah 6.8.
with their God, so also they are said to walk. At liberty, Psalm 119.45. Not in
sin; but as freed from sin, etc. Surely, Pro. 10.9. Upon sure ground. Others on
Quicksands. Safety, Pro. 3.23. Under good wings of protection. Fear not. In
peace, Mal. 2.6. and Equity, and turn many from iniquity, and Truth, 3 John 4.
i. e. Sincerely in Religion prescribed in the Gospel, and shall walk with
Christ in white, Revel. 3.4. for they are worthy, Dignatione divina, as those
good ones in dead Sardis.

To conclude this answer to the grand Inquiry (before.) Those that thus walk to
please God, are such as have the Image of God instamped upon them, and do
answer the Relations betwixt God and them, viz. Of a King, Husband, Father,
Master, and of a Friend.

1. Only a few words of the first of these, touching the Image of God. The
Image of God is said to be in Christ, Angels, and Men.

1. In Christ, above all Angels, Men, or any other: and that as God Infinitely,
or Incomprehensibly. Identically, or Essentially as Man, and that unutterably,
by the prefence of the divine Nature bodily. Mightily by Works, Wonders and
Miracles. Eminently by Qualifications of Knowledge, purity, etc. and most
admirably, viz. As God the invisible; As man the visible Image of God.

2. In Angels above men, in respect of their Excellency in Nature: Freedom from
humane necessities, and present fruition of beatifical vision in the presence
of God.

3. In men, the Image of God is said to be, 1 Cor. 11.7. Col. 3.10.
accidentally respecting qualities spiritual and heavenly. Genesis 1.26, 27. Not in
any bodily shape, as some Heretics and others too easily believe, and which
Popish pictures of God do marvelously nourish, which yet is against that, Deuteronomy.
4.15, 16. to 20. for you saw no similitude; but,

1. In Creation, in the nature of the soul, as it is a spiritual and immortal
substance endued with three faculties, viz. Understanding, Will and Memory, as
the Deity has three persons, by which man is in a capacity to know God, which
others have not.

2. In Regeneration, in the supernatural endowments of divine knowledge,
righteousness and true holiness: For as Eccles. 7.29. Ephesians. 4.24. God made man
upright, and the new man, etc.

3. In the Authority and Dominion over the Creatures, which God did confer upon
man. Genesis 1.28. Over fish and fowl, etc.

Ap. The first and last of these are much impaired by the fall of man in
Paradise, viz. Our natural parts and dominion over the Creatures. But the
second of these, viz. Gods image upon us in our regeneration, is ever upon the
improvement, and by this we do daily become like unto the Lord Jesus more and
more; And where this Image of God is instamped, there the body of sin dies
daily, Romans 8.10. This Image, and that body are inconsistent and incompatible.
It makes us fruitful in good: This stock cannot be barren, etc. Its universal
in its cure, not partial to some particulars, but it overpowers the whole man,
which is acted by this Image. Christ becomes our life, then we live the life of
Christ, etc. And thus beautified, we are accepted of God, and (as Jacob and
Stephen) We may see Angels ready to serve us, Psalm 34.7. Heb. 1.14. And Christ
himself ready to receive, and save us, Acts 7.55, 56.

Thus those that walk and please God, are accepted of him.

Of the second particular, viz. In answering our Relations as to a King, etc. I
may not here speak at large, only consider, That whatsoever subjection is due
to any, is much more due to God.

Thus those that walk to please God, do walk with and before God, in the Laws,
Name and Spirit of God; in the old and good way, and in the way of good men: In
faith, Love circumspectly, in the Truth, by Rule, etc. worthy of their
vocation, the Lord in Wisdom and inregry.

And for manner, they walk as you have heard. These bear the Image of Christ,
ut supra, in Creation, Regeneration and Dominion: Or by, 1. Idea. 2. Descent,
Acts 17.28. Non corpor is mole, sed animae respectu, Beza. 3. Qualities of
Soul. Sanctity of actions. 5. Sovereignty over the Creatures. And, 6.
Conformity in glory.

And these do endeavor to answer the Relations betwixt God and them, as He is
their King, Husband, Father, Master, and as he is their Friend.

But for these you may see my Notes upon those several Relations.

Use I. Let it be our Glory to bear the Image of Christ, the visible God, since
he bears the Image of the invisible God. God is to us like the Sun, which is
but one; none can behold it in its brightness. All Sublunaries are refreshed by
it, and nothing hid from the light thereof. So is God, Be we then as the fruits
to the Sun, that grow upward, and ripen by it, that so we may grow like to
Christ in qualities, though we cannot in Might and Miracles.

Get this Image, present your selves to his Mint and Printing House, to receive
his stamp and Character upon you; and when you have it, do not deface, but
improve this Image of Christ in you daily.

Motives to walk, at supra, are from God; His love and delight is in them,
Psalm 51.6. And his promises abundantly to them, Ps. 84.11. Could we but see,
and rightly apprehend this, it were enough, besides the Liberty, Security,
Safety, Peace, and final felicity with Christ, Rev. 3.4. all such are great
Motives. And yet the great things God has done for such as to Enoch, Noah,
Abraham, David, Elijah, Elisha, Jehoshaphat, Hezekiah, Their comfort at death,
Isa. 38.3. conquest over hell and the Devil. They stand in the Judgment, and
enter into glory.

Thus much shall suffice for Answer to the great Inquiry, how we may know, when
we walk so as to please God: This being known, we may easily discern, who they
be, that do not please God in their walk, or course of life.

1. Such as set God aside, such there were in David's time. Psalm 54.3. and
86.14. They have not set God before them, they may well be called Strangers,
proud, and violent persons; For they were of a strange condition: and have we
not many such, That set not God before them. These say to God, Depart from us,
etc. Job 21.14, 15. What is the Almighty that we should serve him, and what
profit, etc. if we pray to him?

Ap. Now is it any marvel that such as these, who seclude God from their
company, do run into all manner of enormities, and walk contrary to God, as
Lev. 26.21. etc. The apprehension of Gods presence would produce better fruits,
as you have heard, but this they cannot endure to think of; The thought of Gods
presence, is as the shadow of death to them.

2. Such as walk after the flesh, Romans 8.1. 2 Pet. 2.10. (i.e.) according to
that carnal state of sin in which we were born, and do order our lives as our
corrupt reason and evil affections do lead us after our own lusts.

Note, That the words Fleshly, Carnal and Sensual are opposed in Scripture to
Spiritual, because they are so led, they look not after the things that are not
seen, as Faith does, and faithful people do, 2 Cor. 4.18. But only after the
things obvious to sense, The things of this world, as worldly minded men only
do: These are so far from being new Creatures, and walking in newness of life,
that they disdain to be Changelings, are acted by the old Adam in all things,
he has dominion over them, and are as ignorant of a new birth, as Nichodemus
was. John 3.3, 4. Who asks a strange question, etc. so simple was he. And as
for the ways of good men, they abhor and scorn them, as ways too precise and
strict for them to walk in.

3. Such as walk in the way of the people after the manner of men, that are not
guided by the Spirit of God, but by their own corrupt reason and affection. Now
Isa. 8.11. 1 Cor. 3.3. We are not to walk in the way of the people. But mark
how the Lord warned the Prophet there, to avoid this, viz. By a strong hand, i.
e. by such a forcible ingestion, or motion of his spirit, as made a strong
impression upon the Prophet to yield obedience, and by such a hand as was able
to confirm him in his resolution, and to strengthen him to effect and perform
it, the same hand no donbt warned the Martyrs and Confessors of God.

Ap. Thus was the Prophet charged, Not to walk in the way of the people;
Neither may any of us follow a multitude to do evil. Exodus 23.2. For they that
sin with the multitude shall perish with the multitude, as those of the old
world, and the men of Sodom did.

True it is, Examples have a great influence upon many. Scilicet in Vulgus
manatant exempla Regentum. Regis ad exemplu^ totus componitur orbis. And in
this case the examples of great men are very prevalent. In the Holy History, as
well as in others, we read, how people usually followed the pattern of the
Princes, as when David, Jehoshaphat, Hezekiah, Josiah, etc. reigned, the people
did well, lived godly, but when Rehoboam forsook the Law of the Lord; All
Israel went with him, 2 Cro. 12.1. and when Jeroboam advanced Idolatry, He
caused all Israel to sin, 1 Kin. 14. which is fourteen times repeated to his
everlasting infamy: The very natural infirmities of Princes have been imitated,
a Mole, Wart, Wen, or Wry-neck, etc. Much more their moral qualities, whether
good or bad: the Drunken, Gor-bellied Emperors made the whole Empire so.
England has had experience of these things: for how did the people follow
after in King Hen. 8. King Edward 6. Q. Mary, Queen Elizabeth's times. To do as
the most do, is the safest course with many, though not the best: This is a
great, yet usual disease in these times. Those that imitate the greatest, and
run along with the most, think themselves safest, and past peradventure for any
danger. That Principle of some Noblemen of this Nation of old, Factus sum ex
salice, non ex quercu, whom Powlet Martyr of Winchester, Mill. p. 969. is very
appliable to multitudes of this time. They wear Religion as many do their
Apparel, to turn, and shift, and lay aside, as they think best for their own
security and advancement in the world.

Ap. But how safe this course is in the sight of God, and how pleasing to him,
I leave to all wise men to judge: Had the Prophets, Apostles, and holy Martyrs
done so, they had never be renowned to After-Ages, as they are.

Religion is no longer Religion, then whilst it does bind us to God, and to
his Rule, not to men's example. The dispensation is general; It is better to
obey God then man, Acts 4.19.5.29. if it once come to the point: If Gods Laws
and men's cross one another, its no Question in that case, who is to be obeyed:
As our King (whom God long preserve) has excellently expressed in his
Declaration: A Matchless piece. Beloved, For the Rule of your Religion, pitch
upon the Holy Canonical Scriptures, as you heard worthily of late (on Tuesday
by Mr. Dingly of Haseley.) And for examples, pitch upon the best. Christ is the
unparalled pattern of all others: and many Renowned Men there are which are
Imitators of him; and do you follow them, as they follow Christ, as the Apostle
persuades, 1 Cor. 11.1. You must not ask (and then depend upon) Pope or
Emperor, the Civil State or Ecclesiastical, what Religion you should be of; The
Turks depend most upon the Emperors, and Rome upon the Pope; yet both far wide
of the way to please God. It is not what the Church or State say simply, but
you must enquire of the Oracles of God, by which all Kings and Kingdoms, and
all the Churches in the world, are to be framed, ordered and governed, and so
follow them.

And when the ways of Princes please the Lord, And that they become nursing
Fathers to the Church, Isa. 49.23. as it is now with us, blessed be God, how
great is the blessing of such a Kingdom or Nation, and how do the faithful
people rejoice therein! When we have such (as now) how much do we owe unto
them, viz. To honor them in our hearts, and to have a reverend esteem of their
persons and authority. Sure David's carriage to Saul, and Daniels to
Nebuchadnezzar, and Bathsheba, and Nathans to David may be fi^ Presidents for
our practice in this particular, 1 King. 1.23, 31.

Non tamnere Divos, is as good Rule in Policy, as in Divinity, See Exodus 22.28.
Eccles. 10.20.

2. To obey them in all lawful things, as the Israelites to Joshua, Josh 1.16,
17. David's servants him, 2 Samuel 15.15. The Centurions Soldiers him, Mat 8.9.
Else the Exception lies, Acts 5.29.

3. Love them which makes duty easy and acceptable to God and man.

4. To imitate them in good, as the Israelites did Joshua, and that good King
Josiah in their generations, Josh. 24.15. 2 Chronicles. 34.33. Here that of Solomon
takes place, Prove. 24.21. Meddle not with them, etc. Follow not a multitude as
many did Korah in his conspiracy, and perished with him, Numb. 16. And so they
followed Absalom in his Rebellion, But he being destroyed, the people were
scattered from him, and vanished to nothing, 2 Samuel 15.12, and 18. Ergo, Let us
fear God, and honor the King, as 1 Pet. 2.17.

4. Those persons do not please God in their walk and way, Who do walk after
their own devices, and after the imaginations of their own hearts, Jer. 18.12.
These are said to walk in their own Councels, Psalm 81.12. And in their own
ways, Acts 14.16. Their own idle fantasies, in the ways and imagination of the
heart, Eccles. 11.9. Jer. 13.10. To walk in lies, Jer. 23.14. In pride, Dan.
4.37. Isa. 3.16. After the eyes, Job 31.7. viz. To covet others goods. After
vanity, Jer. 2.5. (i.e.) Idols, which are Devils, or nothing. And after ungodly
lusts, Jude 18. The corrupt motions of the flesh. In all which, They walk after
things that profit not, Jer. 2.8. For Idols, and Vanity, and Sin can never do
us any good; no real lasting benefit can be had or got by them.

Ap. Thus many men do follow their own imaginations and fantasies, walk in
their own ways, counsels and devices: They love to do what they list, without
control of any; and they make Sensuality, Security, Lies and Covetousness,
Pride and Haughtiness, Luxury and Wantonness like to Nebuchadnezzar, Dan. 4.37.
Or Jerusalems Dames; of whom you may read at large, Isa. 3.16. to 25. Who did
walk in pride, ut locis citat. Yea they make Vanity and Wickedness to be their
constant practice, their daily delight; Never considering that the imaginations
of our own hearts, are only evil continually, Genesis 6.5. And though our own ways
seem right unto our selves, yet the end thereof are the ways of death, Prove.
14.12. and 16.25. And though many men's vices which are their walk, their course
and constant practice may seem very pleasurable or profitable for a time, and
as useful as an eye or an hand: yet when they consider, that this eye must be
plucked out, and this hand cut off, and that for all they must come to
Judgment: they will then find all these to be but bitterness in the latter
end, Matthew. 5.29, 30. Eccl. 11.9.

These things premised, do easily inform us (by way of Use) how many are the
ways that do displease God, and how few the persons are that do so walk as to
please God: For these things do reach all the wicked in the world, whom (for
Method sake) you may divide into four sorts: viz. Atheists, Sensualists,
Timists, or Temporizers, Men-pleasers and timeservers, Fanatics: I mean all
such as follow their own Fancies, devices and imaginations in the Service of
God, and set the Rule (of the Word) aside.

1. Atheists, men without God in the world, or such as carry, and behave
themselves as if there were no God, and of these are three sorts: viz. In
thought, word, work.

They are such in heart and thought, who say as those, Ps. 14.1, etc. The fool
has said in his heart, etc. Note, That every wicked man is a fool, and all
wickedness is folly, in Scripture phrase, they are fools as to the main end of
life, viz. true Happiness, though they may be wise, and very prudent to some
particular worldly Ends: as on the contrary, the godly are wise to the main,
though very simple to particular Ends and Businesses, Arist. Ethic. so Jer.
4.22. wise to evil. This fool has said in his heart, Philosophers distinguish
between (...) of Man, between his inward and his outward speech; he has said
in his heart, he dares not speak it out for fear of punishment, and of the
light of Nature in him; for scarce any Heathen did absolutely deny a God, and
if any did, they were severely punished, even by heathens themselves in former
times. Wherein, as in many things else; they have outstript many professed
Christians, that tolerate Blasphemies, etc. But, though he does not (or dare
not) absolutely deny a God, ye he does deny the providence of God, and his care
of men, That he is a Rewarder of just, and unjust, and this is in effect to
deny the Being of a God; and this is the worst and most dangerous Atheism. Such
an one was Epicurus, and such are (it may be feared) too many Christians, yea,
and such Christians as make great show of Holiness, and have the Name of God
much in their mouths, but it is for their own worldly Ends, the favor of Men,
and to bring their own ambitious designs to pass; there being no better
expedient Engine or surer Instrument for the Achievement of worldly ends, then
Hypocrisy, and palliated sanctity: such were the Pharisees, Mat. 23.14. (2 Timothy 3.2. to 6.) And all those who had only a form of godliness, and have we
had none such in our Times? let all wise men judge, Many such Atheists (no
doubt) have been, and are still, and these men proceed on this Atheism, as
Psalm 10.4, etc. They will not seck after God, i.e. in the way and duties of
true Religion, and by a due consideration of the end of our Being: Our
Qualification with a Rational and immortal Soul, and of our particular Actions,
to what end they do conduce, and of what is true and real Happiness, and what
is deceitful, and Imaginary. Sure these things would make us seek after God in
a right way. Not as our foolish Seekers (of these times do) who yet are carried
about with every wind of Doctrine, Ephesians. 4.14. Ever seeking, but can never
find the Truth, 2 Timothy 3.7. They are not justified by this place, though
possibly, they may pervert this, as they do other Scriptures to their own
induration and destruction, as many the like before them have done, 2 Pet.
3.15, 16. But as they will not seek after God, nor serve him, so he is not in
all their thoughts, but against their wills they set him aside, and affect not
the apprehension of his presence. They think God forgets all, as they do that
which is best, and that he either cannot, or will not see what they do. Hence
it comes to pass that they do contemn God, they make no more of God then of an
Idol, and grow to that height of Atheism, that they deny his Providence, his
Justice, and say, he will not require it.

Ap. These are the steps, by which the Atheist does ascend to the height of
wickedness, and descend to the depth of Hell. And thus a profane neglect of
God, and mean thoughts of him, do produce a contempt, both of God himself, and
of his Judgments in their conceits: so that they make but a tush (or pish) at
any thing you speak of him, as if he were just like our selves, of little or
no account, Esaias 2.22. But how God will require for such things, see Psalm
10.14, etc.

2. They are Atheists in word, who question and quarrel at Gods providence as
they did; Job 21.14, 15. How does God know through the Cloud? and what profit
or advantage will it be to us if we delight our selves in God? Sure nothing at
all, say they. These are four times mentioned in that Book of Job, and six
times in the psalms, viz. psalm 10.4, 11, 13, etc. No doubt but that we should
avoid their wicked practice, for they say, who does hear, who does see us? as
if God had no regard of any thing here below: yea they stick not to say, The
Lord neither hears, nor sees, nor provides for any, but has forsaken the
Earth, Ezekiel. 8.12. therefore they contemn and speak against him, Psalm 73.8, 9.
Thus much of Atheists in heart and word.

3. Now touching Atheists in work: How many are there who in their lives and
conversation, do live as if there were no God; and are therefore said, to deny
God that is above: as Job speaks of several kinds of wickedness, Job 31.28. I
should have denied, etc. says Job; and though such may profess that they know
God, yet (says the Apostle) in works they deny him, being abominable and
disobedient, and to every good work Reprobate, Tit. 1.16.

Ap. Now if we do strictly examine our selves about these things: Alas (for
grief) how many are there that do entertain mean thoughts of God, and do speak
of him too slightly, if not Blasphemously, yea, and do deny him in their
practice insolently and impudently. If we do consider aright of these things,
we have much cause of lamentation, and who is it that has not cause to Repent,
Reform, and keep a strict Watch over his own heart in this particular case.

Thus much of Atheists in heart, word, and works: of which the world is too
full, and this Age too much inclinable to.

2. The next are Sensualists, such who live so as their Senses lead them, and
walk by Sense, and not by Faith.

These are said to live after the flesh, Romans 8.1, 6, 12, 13. to which Death is
annexed, and not to the Spirit, Jude 19. They are merely Animal, and Natural,
and Brutish, without any true holiness in them, or part in Christ, Romans 8.9.
and their sensual wisdom which is not from the Spirit of Grace, 1 Cor. 2.14. is
also said to be Earthly and Devilish, James 3.15. For they mind only earthly
things, their God is their belly, their glory is in their shame, and their end
destruction, Phil. 3.19. which the Devil does aim at with his utmost wisdom,
and they by this wisdom do effect.

If you would have a more particular view of these Sensualists in their
condition and practice, then do you peruse these ensuing Scriptures, in which
see an exact description of them, Job 21.7, to 16. Men that live are mighty,
and prosperous, and abuse all, etc. Psalm 73.3. to 12. That are proud, violent,
and talk highly, Amos 6.3. to 7. That put away the evil day, mind their beds
and bellies, which you may briefly sum up thus: viz. They are men accomplished
with all earthly Accommodations, have Health and Wealth, Honor and Power, and
what not: they abuse all to luxury and vanity, are all for mirth and pleasure
whilst God is set aside, and his Service contemned; and because they have no
afflictions they are proud and violent, and talk highly and loftily against
Heaven and Earth, they care for none, hereupon they put the evil day far from
them with those, Ezekiel. 12.27, 28. For they have made a covenant with Death, and
with hell are they at Agreement, so that no harm can come nigh them, Esaias
28.14, 15. They scorn the Message of God and his Messengers, and make Lies
their Refuge, the power and purity of Religion is the Object of their Derision:
the Affliction of Joseph, the troubles of the Church are a non-concernment to
them, as to Haman of old, Esther 3.15. But all this while they consider not
what is coming, viz. that they are going to the Grave, and how soon they know
not, in a moment. The word (Sheol) signifies also Hell and misery, etc. see the
Annot. that interim, they stand in slippery places (as men upon Ice) and some
cast down into destruction, etc: Psalm 37.17, 18, 19, 20. That an overflowing
Scourge shall disanul their League with Death and Hell, and they shall be
trodden down, Esaias 28.18, 19. and the captivity (even of Hell) is upon them,
for the evil day to them is approaching, and at hand, and the effect of every
Vision, and the Word of the Lord shall be done, Ezekiel. 12.22. to the End: then
shall they feel the truth of that Word which they believed not.

Should we apply these things to our Times: Alas, how many (especially of our
Gentry and wealthier sort) do live thus, as mere Sensualists, men given up to
pleasures, as if they were born to no other purpose, then to jovialize and
wantonize, to eat, and drink, and play in the World, like Leviathan in the
Ocean, Psalm 104.26. to spend their time in sleep and idleness, being
altogether unprofitable to any good work, until they dye and perish, and fall
into utter perdition and destruction, which is the proper end of an
unaccountable, useless, and fruitless life.

3. Timists, or Temporizers, or (if you will) men-pleasers and time-servers, of
all Ages: who, if they can please men, and suit with the times in which they
live, they think themselves well and safe enough, whether the Lord be pleased
or not: and many such have been and are in every Age, and upon every Change of
Religion, especially if Religion be up, and in credit, all will honor it; but
if it be discountenanced, every one will trample upon it: See all the holy
History and Ecclesiastical Writers for this. If Jeroboam will set up (Calf)
Idolatry, he shall have flattering fools enough, who (to please him) will
promote his design, and run with the stream of the time. If Julian the Apostate
seem to favor the Christians, many others will do so; but if he Apostatize as
he did, and become a hellish and Devilish persecutor of what before he
professed, all run after to curry favor with him, etc. Many that believed on
Christ, did not confess him for fear of the Pharisees, (and for the love of
their praise and honor from them:) the fear and favor of men are great stops
to Religion; but what says our Savior, How can ye believe that seek honor,
etc. and they loved the praise of men, John 5.42, 43, 44. Consider those two
places well, viz. John. 5.44. Thus it is with Landlords and Tenants.

Ap. But in these times (Alas) how many will transgress for a morsel of Bread,
Pro. 28.21. they do so much respect persons and fawn upon greatness: a meals
meat, a Copy of a great man's Countenance, a Complement, etc. And if a
Gardener; or Bower of abhorred memory, were now alive, how many to please them
would persecute the Truth with violence; the Apostle did not so, who had been a
great Time-server, Acts 7.58. Gal. 1.10, 13, 14. For (says he) Do I persuade
men or God, i.e. that you should obey men, or God, or do I study and seek to
please men, to approve my self and my Ministry to men, or God? for if I yet
please men, (viz. the Jews, or my own Nation) as I did formerly when I was
zealous of Traditions, etc. Gal. 1.13, 14. ( and persecute the Church of God
extremely to gain their favor) I should not be the servant of Christ, but an
abominable Dissembler with God and the World, Gal. 1.10, 13, 14. I speak none
of this, but that we all stand bound to please one another, for their good to
Edification, Romans 15.2. i. e. to further their growth in godliness, which
tends to Eternal salvation in the Life to come, this will please best at
last; For he that rebukes, etc. prove. 28.23. But we must take care, that we
neither please men, nor suit with any Times so, as to dispease God, For, if we
do, let all Temporizers consider, that men in Affections, saepe, in time,
semper, are but for a moment, and time will have an End: there is an (...), a
punctum temporis, a point of time upon the Confines of Eternity. When suiting
our selves with Men or Times (otherwise then in well-doing) will stand us in no
stead, nor do us any good at all; But then, they that please the Lord, shall
find that his Favor and mercy endures to Eternity, Mal. 3.18. which the good
Lord grant unto us.

This walk of a Christian, is his whole Life, and the End of his Life is to
please God. This is the main Duty of a Christian; The great and good Lesson
which he is to learn. And hence the Doctrine (which you have heard, before, is,
viz.

Doct. A Christians life is to be ordered so that he may please God. This is
every man's work in his Generation and Conversation.

Quest. How can this be done, and who do perform it? you may soon see, viz.

Answ. Such as walk with, and before God, as Enoch, Noah, Abraham, David,
Elijah, and the Prophets have done,

These being known, you may easily discern and know who they be that do not
please God in their way of Life, viz. Such as set not God before them, but set
him aside from their way. Such as walk after the flesh, and follow their
sensual Lusts. Such as walk in the way of the people, the men of the World
generally. Such as walk after their own devices and imaginations. These four
things do answer the Question, who do not please God: and these do reach all
the wicked of the World, whom you may divide into four Ranks: viz. Atheists
Sensualists, Timists, Fanatics. Of the three first has been spoken. I do now
descend to the fourth sort of persons that do not please God.

4. Fanatics: the Word is but lately taken up amongst us, and made of common
use, and (I believe) not very well understood by every one. I shall therefore
explain it to you, for we must break the Ice before we can drink the Water, and
break open the shell, before we can eat of the Kernel. This being done, we
shall the better discern, how that ofttimes ( Convenient Rebus Nomina saepe
suis) Names do suit with the nature of the things to which they are designed.

The Name Fanatics, was first used be Heathens, and by them in a better, and
in a worser sense.

1. In a good Sense and honest esteem with them: the Gentiles did apply it to
those ( Qui in fanis sacra curabant, etc.) who did attend the holy Services in
their Temples, and did frequent their Churches and consecrated places, to
consult the Heathen gods, and to receive Answers from them touching their
Affairs: and in this better sense such persons were called (...), and (...),
sacris usibus destinatus, and sacris inserviens) Men appointed to holy Uses,
and attending holy Services. Thus in the best Sense.

2. Afterward, the same Word became to be used for Insanus, furiosus; which
signifies Witless, and Furious, and accordingly it was applied to people that
were besides themselves, that were Rapt, Ravished, or inspired with some Fury,
possessed with a Spirit; Or to such as were Foolish, Mad, or Frantic. And this
change of the use of the Word began upon this occasion: The Sybels, or Bellonas
Priests, who were called and indignitated by that Name, In the time of their
predictions, and prophesyings, and performances of their Devotions and holy
Services, did use to turn about their heads, to dishevel and toss their Hair,
etc. (like Bedlams) with many other strange postures and gestures, Erantick
like, to cut, lance and wound their Arms and shoulders, that they might
sacrifice their Blood to their beloved Goddess, just like Baals Priests, 1
Kings 18.28. Or those Nazarenes or Samaritans that are said to have Devils: Or
those superstitious Romish Flagellants, that have learned of the former, and do
act the same things: For they are the Apish imitators of Heathens, Jews,
ancient Heretics in their holy Services: to conform.

Ap. Now from these strange postures, gestures and actings in their Devotions,
it is manifest, why the word Eanatick was first used for a frantic person,
Fanaticus insanus dicitur, quoniam Sacerdotes, cum Responsa dabant furore pleni
insanire videbantur (prout) and hinc patet quare Fanaticus pro infano dici
caeperit: Thus one describes him.

Another describes him thus: Fanaticus Numine Afflatus, Bacchabundus (Hadr.
Jun.) one raging ripe with a Fury.

A third thus: Fanatum quod in Fanis consulentes oraculum Sacerdotes Laureum
tenentes termitemspiritum conciperent, baccharenturque all to the same purpose
in effect.

Hence it befell, that by reason of such strange behavior of the men thus
inspired, and possessed with this Fury and Rage, this humor was accounted as
well a Disease as an Error. Ap. So that as the Hebrews of old, and the Romans
afterward did avoid and abominate the Leprosy, Scab, Morphew, and other the
like deforming diseases, which infect, deface and hurt the skin, etc.

Ap. So did the Ancients fly from, and avoid this Fanatic disease or error,
and from those that were taken with it, Vt mala quae scabies and morbus regius
urget, aut Fanaticus Error, Hor. and that for the fierceness and terribleness
of the disease, as in some Quakers. Fear of the mischief, hurt, blows or
stripes, that the Enthusiast may do, or give in the fit of his fury. And for
that it was a Disease, Error or Misery inflicted upon them, whom God was very
angry with, and marvellously displeased, or else, who had greatly offended or
wronged Almighty God himself, or his Attributes, in his Sovereignty, divine
power, Majesty and Authority, his Will, Might and Virtue.

The Greek Poets, etc. do give us in diverse Names very suitable with their
postures and practices in divine Worship.

1. (...), (i.) Qui captus tenetur. (...), peculiariter dicuntur Afflati,
Instincti, Numine, Scap. l. p. 550, 551.

2. (...), In quo Deus est, seu Afftatus, aut Instinctus Dei, Divinus, (...),
Fanaticus Furor, etc. Impetus numine afflatorum, (...) More eorum, qui furoris
Fanatici instinctu aguntur, Scap. l. p. 627.

3. (...), Deum ferens, and (...), qui divino monitu fertur, numine afflatus,
Scap. p. 1735.

4. (...), Lauri Comestor, Epitheton Vaticinantium, quoniam Comestor lauro
numen haurire credebantur, unde and fatidica laurus dicitur a Lat. The Bay that
foretells things to come.

5. (...), qui ab Oestro ictus in gyrum se agit, qui Oestro agitante quasi
rotatur, Scap. p. 407. such as are wheeled about with a fury, a Fly, a Gadbee,
the Bees, etc. as the word does signify.

Ap. All which Descriptions, Names and Properties of these persons, do reduce
us to this conclusion and inference; Hinc jam liquet cur Fanaticos and
Enthusiasticas, eos dicamus, qui fingunt se divino afflatu regi, quique
posthabitis divinis literis, ad Revelationes commentitias, aut Diabolicos
suggestus convolant: Hence it is manifest, why we call those men Fanatics and
Enthusiasts, who fain they are guided by a divine inspiration; and setting
aside the Holy Scriptures, that Holy, Divine, and Heavenly inspired Writ and
Rule, they all fly together, and have a unanimous recourse to feigned and
counterfeit revelations, and diabolical suggestions, Mat. Mart. lex. p. 775,
776.

Thus the name Fanatic was first used by the Gentiles in several senses, viz.
1. In good sense to them that were more serious in the service of God. 2. In
bad sense, to them that were more furious and frantic in the Worship of God.
In both senses the word does reflect upon this Object, viz.

The Worship or Worshippers of God: The first soberly and seriously, and these
bear the name in the best sense. The second madly and furiously, and these gave
the word the worser sense, even among them; for which you have a full Jewry of
witnesses, of Poets, Orators, Comedians, Tragedians, Historians, and
Etymologists, etc. and some of them of great antiquity, viz. of above 1800.
years standing: From them the name is transferred to Christians; by whom it is
used only in the worser sense, in reference to them, who are somewhat wild
Worshippers; (we have better words for better Worshippers) and the name name
does fix most and soonest upon them, who do act something like heathens in
their divine worship and service, leaving the Oracles of God, and learning to
their own fancies and imaginations, or other inspirations.

The Authors for the proof of these things are cited by Mat. Mart. Cicero and
Livius, etc.

Thus much for the Explanation of the the word Fanatic, and this being
premised, you may easily understand, whom I do mean by Fanatics, viz. 1.
Negatively; Not in any person in whom appears the power of godliness, though he
may be of another opinion or persuasion in some things from my self. But, 2.
Affirmatively: By Fanatic I do mean those persons, who (setting the Rule of
Gods Holy Word aside) do follow their own fancies, the devices and imaginations
of their own heads and hearts in the service, visions and inspirations, etc. as
a new rule besides the Word of God. And here you may take a view of all the
Will Worship and Worshippers in the world, Col. 2.20.21, etc.

1. If you look abroad into the world, and take a view of both the Indies, and
all the adjoining Countries: What a world of strange Worship shall you find
amongst those Pagan-Infidels and Heathens, and all for want of a Rule, the
direction of Gods Holy Word, which we have. Some adore one sole God, whom they
paint with three heads, but can give you no reason for it. Others worshipping
the Sun, Moon and Stars in America. Others adoring Nature, as the Canary
Islands. And others the Devil himself, as in Puana, Japan, etc. Somewhat they
meet first in a morning, as the Tartarians. Should you look into Arabia, China,
Africa, Ethiopia, Egypt and Babylon, etc. you shall find as many strange gods,
and strange worships, as men have fancies, faces, and strange imaginations in
their heads and hearts. Some worshipping a Toad, or a Serpent, a Dog or black
Sheep, an Ox or a Calf, and what not?

Ap. All these follow their own Imaginations, and perish for want of a Rule:
But I leave these to be pitied most: See Acts 17.30. This God regarded not, so
as to destroy them presently.

2. If you look into Asia, and the parts adjacent, (once the glory of the
world) where now that Flagellum Christianorum, the great Turk does tyrannize
and domineer; and in their Mohammedan worship, what a world of strange fancies,
minnick gestures, and childish (not to say Apish and Monkish-like) fooleries
may you observe; They reject the Law and Gospel, the Word of God for Mahomets
Alcaron.

3. To come nearer; if you look into the Holy History, and take a view of the
Jews, Scribes and Pharisees, etc. None could pretend to more devotion then they
did; Their Alms, Prayers, Fastings, Phylacteries and Borders of their garments,
all specious; yet our Savior tells them, That they had rejected the
Commandment of God, and made his Word of none effect, that they might keep
their own Traditions. See Mat. 15.1, 2, to 10. Mark 7.1, 2, 3, to 14.

Here was a great deal of verbal and seeming Sanctity amongst these men, but
the main was wanting, the Life and power of Godliness, in as little set by or
esteemed: and so our Savior told them plainly: but this was strange Doctrine
to them, and they regarded it not: And therefore, Though he the Son and Heir
were sent unto them, who taught as having authority, who spoke as never man
spoke, and did what none ever did or could do; yet this Christ could never gain
credit with the Priests, etc. but ever and anon, they are quarrelling with him
about the observation of the Sabbath, according to their Rule, and the neglect
of their own Traditions. And in the end they violently persecuted and put him
to death.

Thus they crucified the Heir and Prince of Life, Acts 3.15. For which how
heavy is the Judgment of God upon them till this day!

4. Come we nearer home yet, and look we next amongst Christians, and see if we
have no Fanatics here, as well as amongst Pagans, Turks and Jews, Scribes and
Pharisees: And here (I presume) those of the Romish profession will claim the
first place, as the most numerous and unanimous Christians: And the first (of
these Western parts) converted to the Christian Faith: yet, with their leave or
without it, England received the Christian Faith some years before them,
whilst Rome remained Heathen; of which we have a sevenfold testimony of very
good credit and Authority, and better then such as they usually produce to us
in like cases: Nevertheless we shall easily grant them, what they would have,
so that they will but grant us a reasonable demand.

1. For we yield, that they were a very famous Church when the Apostle wrote
unto them, and testifies of them, That their Faith was spoken of throughout the
world, Romans 1.8.

2. Our Demand is only this to them, Let them but reduce their Church to the
same state of Doctrine, Faith and Life which then they had when the Apostle
wrote and so testified of them, and the contention betwixt us is at an end, all
is well: But now that they have swarved from the Rule, forfeited the Apostles
praise, and lost the faith: But they will say, When did we loose the faith,
swarve from the rule, etc. I retort and ask, when did every gray hair begin
with an ancient head, and every infirmity with an aged man? When did all the
flowers, fruits or weeds in a field appear in one day? When did the Stars all
appear in an instant, or your own sins to your selves in a moment? Things of
this Nature appear in time and succession, so have their errors done: yet to
answer directly, we are not ignorant, when their Principal, Deformities befell
them, the Council of Trent, with many Acts before and since, fay enough to
this: but I wave this at present: only this much let me say, He is no studied
Scholar, that is not acquainted with the grounds of an unreconcilable
difference betwixt us and Rome: See Bishop Hall, Dr. Gauden, etc.

Thus let old Rome take the Glory of Religion as of old, but now statu quo, as
it is a Religion made up only of Heathenism, Judaism and ancient Heresies, they
are become more then the parallel of Scribes and Pharisees, whom yet they do
much resemble in many things.

1. None pretend to more piety and devotion, and to the honor of Christ, then
they: None perform less, or do more dishonor Christ, then they.

2. The reject the Commandment of God, to observe the Popes Decretals: What he
says must be good, though against the express Word of God.

3. The Pharisees were very quarrelsome about their Ceremonies and
superstitious observations: so are these to the height.

4. They presecuted the Lord Jesus, the great Shepherd of the Sheep, and at
last put him to death as an Imposter, Deceiver; These persecute the Pastors of
Christ's Flock, and slaughter the sheep of Christ from Generation to Generation,
in the most cruel and barbarous manner imaginable Thus do they imitate the
Jews, the persecuting Priests, the hypocritical, vainglorious Scribes and
Pharisees of those times.

But yet our Papists stay not here, but having rejected the Scriptures, the
word of God, and betaken themselves to their unwritten verities, as they call
them, etc. To gain credit to these, they have recourse, as much as any, to
Dreams and Visions, to Apparitions and Revelations, to Ecstasies and
Enthusiasms; yea, and Diabolical Delusions; for many amongst them have been,
and are the most skilful and exquisite Conjurers and Necromancers in the world:
And all this is only by such tricks and lying Miracles to gain credit and
reputation to their own inventions and de(...)

These things do sufficiently evidence to all, that, and how the Romanists are
fallen from being amongst the first of Christians, To be the prime Fanatics of
the world, and indeed the principal Authors, Patrons and Incouragers of all
those kind of people wheresoever. For if Fanatics do pretend much piety and
devotion, reject the Holy Scriptures, be zealous of their own Superstitions,
and be very violent against them that oppose them, and persecute them to the
utmost, and if they do lean to visions, revelations, strange miracles, etc.
more then to the Word of God; The persecuting Popish Priests, etc. do act all
these things to the utmost.

And yet further, if I should descend to their Devotions and Religions,
Performances, etc. I should lead you into an endless Labyrinth of
Idol-imaginations and ridiculous inventions, in which they outstrip the very
Pagans, etc. there you shall see such Congies and Crowching, such Beads and
Babies, such Altarworship and Image Worship, such Crossings and Cursings with
book, bell and candle, such advancement of man's, and abatements of Christ's
merits, such Adoration of holy Relics, (of I know not whom) for they have
their holy bones and holy stones, holy rags and holy bags, holy wells and holy
bells, etc. holy graves and holy knaves; For some of their Saints were never
men, and others no better then monsters of men, surely never honest men at the
best.

In a word, (for why should I be endless in this) they have so much Vanity and
Foppery in their divine service, as does far exceed either Pagan, Jew or
Heretics, (other then themselves) in their Religious performances.

4. If you add their most unwarrantable uniting the Apocriphal to the Canonical
Books of holy Scripture, a if of the same Authority and Spirit; And that
intolerable error of Transubstantiation, rightly styled A Subabomination,
above all other evils, as being a complicated error against Reason, Sense, the
nature of subsistences, and things real in being. Against Faith, Scripture, and
the limits of true Religion, an Error of Blasphemy, Cruelty, and abominable
absurdity, in changing the food of our souls into corporal food, making us
Cannibals and Deniers of the true humane nature of Jesus Christ, with some
antiekt Heretics.

In a word, The vanities of their divine service are innumerable, and their
abominations intolerable. They have maimed the ten Commandments, wounded the
Sacraments, turned prayer into vain babbling, and Preaching into legendical
lying. They defile whatsoever they touch; Even the best things that remain
amongst them, what with their Additions, Diminutions, strange Interpretation,
and injurious concealment from the people, they do plainly dicover themselves
to be the right successors of those Hypocrites, the Scribes and Pharisees, that
did shut up the Kingdom of Heaven against men, so that they did neither go in
themselves, nor suffer them that would to go in, Mat. 23.13. Thus have they
lost their wheat corn in a heap of chaff, their Needle in a bottle of straw or
mow, their Pearl in a Dung-hil, their true, first and best Religion in a
Colluvies, a Sink, a Quagmire, a Quick-sand of Ceremonies, Superstitions, and
humane Inventions, so that upon the whole matter, they are the greatest
Schismatics, Fanatics, yea and Heretics now throughout the whole world.

Now to conclude with these, whose Errors admit no period, and their
Superstition no conclusion. If God be well pleased with such toys and
trinkets, with such fine babies and rattles fit to please Children, etc. then
no doubt, they are in the best way to please God, and far beyond any others,
whose Devotions are not so attended with Pageants and brave shows as these be.

1. But if the Lord shall say, as to them of old. Isa. 1.12. Who has required
this at your hands, to do as you do, to sacrifice and to serve me in such a
strange manner; and then shall proceed against them as there he did against
Judah and Jerusalem, see verse. 21.25. of that Chapter, How is the faithful
City, etc.

2. And if Christ shall say of them, as he did of those hypocritical Pharisees,
saying, In vain they do worship me, teaching for Doctrines the Commandments,
Decrees

These things do sufficiently evidence and Traditions of men, and turn them off
with an Ironical speech, a scorn, saying, Full well, (i.e. full ill) ye do
reject (or frustrate) the Commandment of God, that ye may keep your own
Tradition; as it is in Mat. 15.9. and Mark 7.9. And then proceed against them
with all those woes thundered out against Scribes and Pharisees (their Compeers)
by our Saviors own mouth, and inflicted and executed accordingly, Mat. 23. per
totum.

Alas! What will then become of all?

1. Their Will Worship, ceremonious and superstitious Devotions. 2. Their
Tantalogical repetitions of the name of Jesus, etc. 3. Their Innovation of
Saints, Images, and holy Relics, all will then prove to be no better then
vain-babling, or a mere taking of the name of God in vain: When the Lord shall
reject all their sacrifices, etc. as vain, and hide his eyes from their
Addresses: as in Isa. 1.10, to 16. Then shall they be in danger of the greater
damnation, with them mentioned. Mat. 23.13, 14, viz. The Scribes and Pharisees.

Come we nearer yet, and look we amongst our selves; and here we shall find
Formalists, Separatists and Atheists to add to, and fill up this number of
Willworship and Error, to make up a Monster with seven heads, like the Dragon
or Beast, Rev. 12.3.17.3. The fifth sort of Fanatics are Formalists. I say,

5. Formalists, mistake me not, I mean such persons as are all for Service and
Ceremony, that is, the observation of the Liturgy, and other Rites, inteneded
only at first for decency and order, and for the instruction of the weak and
ignorant in the first principles of Christian Religion: This being done, our
Formalist sits down with a Sufficit: It is enough, all is done that need to be
done: Hereupon he slights the powerful Preaching of the Word of God, as a thing
useless, needsels, or to very little purpose, which yet is so often and
strictly commanded, and by which we are led on to perfection, Heb. 6.1. And
without which we shall still remain Children in understanding, against the
Apostles mind. 1 Cor. 14.20. Brethren, etc.

It is (or may be) well known, that none has a more reverend esteem of
well-composed Orthodox Forms of diviue service, etc. for Order, Peace and Unity
in the Church, then my self; yet was I never so simple (since I studied
Divinity) as to think this to be the (...), or Col-Ha-Adam, the only and whole
work of a Christian; as if nothing else were to be done, though I thought it
ausual preparation to the rest; but our Formalist here takes up his rest,
slights and sets preaching aside, and values the Preacher accordingly, if he
suit not with his humor; the Gourd and Pine, Shrub and Cedar, Bramble and Vine
are all one to him; and if he had power to his will, he would as soon strip a
Church or Nation of the faithful, powerful, Soul-saving-Preachers of the Word
of God, as any Schismatic, Anabaptist, or other Sectarian in the world, would
do it.

And this leads me to the next sort of Fanatics, viz. Separatists.

Separatists, These are of many sorts and have multiplied marvellously in these
late times of licentious liberty: Here you may see Brounists, Barrowists,
Independents, Anabaptists, Fifth Monar. Quakers, Seekers, Ranters; and I know
not how many more; yet this you may observe, That all, or most of these can
hold communion one with another; but none of them conjoyn in communion with the
Orthodox; all these, you know, I have parallelled with Papists, those grand
Fanatics, in four particulars, viz.

1. Schism, They begin with Separation, and divide themselves.

2. Uncertainty of Doctrine: Therein they had no bottom.

3. Independency; They will endure no control of any other Church, Synod or
Counsel.

4. Antichristianism in their opposition of Magistracy and Ministry, in the
right use and power of them; Besides their Church-gathering, Church-number,
Church-Preachers, Church Censures, their Self-conceitedness, Censoriousness,
their rigid Discipline, and vain dependence upon Revelations, Inspirations. and
Enthusiasms (with Papists and others that do so) and generally, their common
Tenets about Tithes, Relations, (as Husband and Wives divorces, etc. Christ's
worship, Church-covenants, and Administration of the Sacraments, etc. of which
I have observed about the Number of twenty particulars.

Ap. All which are the fruits of their own devices, and after the imagination
of their own heart, without warrant and Authority from the Word of God (as has
been excellently discovered by many Learned and worthy Pons) which does justly
entitle them to be Fanatics.

Lastly, Atheists: These are they that fill up the Number, and do bring up the
Rear. These are such as have set God aside and do reject his Word; and in
Scripture Phrase, are said (with the rest) to walk after their own devices,
the Imaginations of their own hearts, and in their own ways: Now that which
fixes this Title upon them is this: Look what the Conceit, and Fancy, the
Vision, Revelation, or Enthusiasme of any of the rest is to them, the same is
this man's inbred-Corruption, and Satan's suggestion to him: they say, that they
must do that which the Spirit does suggest to them.

Ap. So says this man, That which his own Spirit, or Satan the evil Spirit
suggesteth to him, that he will do, he is resolved upon it, and nothing shall
divert him from it. Tell him the Word of God is against him, and that his ways
do tend to destruction, etc. he will bid you depart from him, he cares not for
the knowledge of those ways, Job 21. He will quickly answer you, and perhaps
desperately as they did the Prophet, Jer. 2.25. That as they had done formerly,
so they would do still; and as for the Word of the Lord in his mouth, they
would not hearken to it, nor obey it, nor be persuaded by him, but they would
persist in their own Courses, and let come what would; And you may soon know
what did come, and that did cost them dear, because they would take no warning:
Thus desperately do these Atheists rush on to Destruction, whom I do therefore
style Fanatics, because they do reject the Word of God, the most infallible
Rule of Life, and are wholly steered and guided by the devices, inventions, and
evil imaginations of their own wicked heads and hearts to avarice, how heinous
or hurtful soever before God, and to men.

Thus have I opened to you the word Fanatic, and applied it to whom it does
most properly appertain, viz. to Pagans, Turks, Jews, Papists, Formalists,
Separatists, Atheists: Of all which (for they differ much in degres and
Qualities.)

1. The Pagan is most to be pitied.

2. The Turk is to be destroyed.

3. The Jew is long since rejected of God, Romans 11. for Unbelief.

4. As for Antichrist (the Papacy) the Lord shall consume it with the Spirit of
his mouth, and shall destroy it with the brightness of his coming, 2 These.
2.8, 9.

5. Let the Formalist add to his Formality the true practice of piety, and
power of godliness, the Life of Religion.

6. And the Separatist, abate of his self-conceitednesse and Censoriousnesse,
and get an humble, peaceable and charitable Spirit.

So both these may be reduced to the old and good way, which (like Virtue) is
seated in the midst betwixt Extremes on either hand, to which it declineth
not, but remains like Mount Zion, or the Rock which is unmovable, on which it
is founded, Psalm 125.1.

7. As for the Atheist, there is no hope of him until he be converted, which
(if in Mercy) it do ever befall him, he will reject with indignation his own
devices, and wholly submit to the Dictates of Gods Holy Spirit, manifested in
the Word of God.

Ap. So that of all these, the Formalist and Separatist are nearest the Truth,
and most reducible to the Right: For both which my hearty prayers to God are,
that he will add, and abate to, and from either of them whatsoever is wanting,
or superfluous, that they may Brotherly conjoyn with the rest of the Church of
God, and may help to make up that holy and happy harmony as may be for the
honor of God, the true peace and unity of the Church, the everlasting
salvation, and abundant consolation of their own, and many other men's souls,
who will rejoice to behold this good, and pleasant prospect (or thing) that
Brethren do well together in Unity, Psalm. 133.1, Endeavoring to keep the Unity
of the Spirit in the Bond of peace, and that upon the Apostles grounds, Ephesians.
4.3. to 7.

Obj. But if any should now object, and say, You have discovered so many
Fanatics, i.e. men that walk after their own Fancies, and vain imaginations,
etc. As that, where will you find the truly Catholic Christian, the sound,
well-grounded and Orthodox Protestants (as we call them by a latter, but not so
proper a Title.)

Answ. I answer, that nevertheless all that has been spoken, yet as in the
great and terrible time of persecution in Ahab and Jezabels time, God had a
Reserve of seven thousand in Israel, who had not bowed their knees to Baal, nor
kissed him with their mouths, 1 Kin. 19.18. So I doubt not, but God has a
Reserve of seventy times seven thousand in the Christian Reformed Churches,
that have not thus wildly wandered after their own inventions.

I. I could give you in a golden Roll of those Renowned Kings, Recorded in the
holy History to eternal Memory, and of many other Christian Emperors, Kings
and Princes, out of other Histories, and experimentally till this very day, in
other Countries, and in our own Nation, to his Majesty that now is (whom God
long preserve) that have been, and are Men and Women, famous in their
generations, that are Foundations and Pillars to the Church of God: the
Nursing-fathers and Mothers, the Amplyfiers and Establishers of Mount Zion,
Gods holy Hill, Esaias 49.23, etc. that are, and shall be glorious to all
after-Ages, and succeeding Generations, till the end of the World, when time
shall be no more.

II. I could give you in a Catalogue of other Worthies of a second Rank,
Princes and Noblemen, Statesmen and Courtiers, that have been great Friends to
the Prophets, and Favorers of the people of God in the worst of times, when
the true Worshippers of God durst not appear because of persecution as well as
in better Times, when the Storm was over.

1. Such were Obadiah in Ahabs Court, who bid one hundred of the good Prophets
by fifty in a Cave, from Jezabels fury when she cut them off, and there he fed
them, and supplied them with Necessaries: How few would do so in such a
dangerous time, 1 Kings 18.4.

2. And what a man was Mordecai in Ahasuerus Court, who studiously sought the
welfare, peace and prosperity of all the Jews the people of God: He improved
his honor to this end; a Renowned Pattern for all Noblemen, Esther 10.3.

3. Jeremiah the Prophet, a man so tossed in his time with troubles and
perpetually persecuted, yet he found some friends at Court, viz. Ahikam the Son
of Shaphan that had been one of good King Josiahs Princes and Counselors, and
others of the Princes (perhaps by his means) Jer. 26.16.24. and also Ebedmelech
the Ethiopian, Jer. 38.7. to 14. who saved his life more then once, in the
Reigns of Jehojakim, and unhappy Zedekiah.

4. Not to trouble you with many instances: the Church found some friends in
cruel Herod's, and cursed Nero's Courts, and in the time of those ten terrible
persecutions in the primitive times, though but a few for fear, etc.

5. Luther, and his Associates and Followers found many friends amongst the
Princes of Germany, the first Protestants.

6. And the like (upon search) may be found in England, in our Marian days.

Ap. All which Friends of the Prophets, Pastors and people of God in such
dangerous times (you may be sure) were neither Atheists, Sensualists, Timists,
or Fanatics, but the Noble Worthies of those Times, who did improve their
Dignity, Authority, and opportunities, to preserve, countenance and encourage
the servants of God, and not to discouroge and dash them quite, as many in
these times do.

III. I could give you in a long Albe, or Record, of many eminent Bishops,
Pastors and Doctors of the Church, that have been resolute Champions of the
Truth, undaunted Adversaries of Antichrist, the papacy and Errors thereof:
great encouragers of faithful Preachers, Zealous promoters of the power of
godliness, and prudent preservers of the peace of the Church, by a due
observance of such well-composed Forms of divine Service, and other Rites
established as are conducible thereto. Some of which have washed their Robes in
the blood of the Lamb, and shall be clothed in white with palms in their
hands, and all these shall walk with Christ in white, for they are worthy,
Revel. 3.4, 5, etc.

And I could present you with a black Roll of Bishops, that were ready for the
black Rod of divine indignation, etc. being acted by Abaddon the Prince of
Darkness, the enemy of Mankind, to the ruin and destruction of the Church and
peoof God, as much as in them did lie.

I know personal Faults are ill transferred to the Offices; yet good Offices
suffer for such ill managers of them. I am well acquainted with the Name,
Office and practice of Bishops, both Historically and Experimentally; and I may
know a Bishops Office as well as he knows mine; and if they be right, as they
ought to be, they are Eminent lights and pillars of the Church: but if
otherwise, they are most pernicious, subverters and destroyers of it, as too
many have been.

Thus the Church in general, this Church and Nation in particular have had
Kings and Princes. Noblemen and Statesmen, Bishops and Doctors, that have been
luminaria mundi, Lights of the World, Stars of the greatest Magnitude; Men most
excellent and famous in their several Ages and Generations, that were no
Fanatics.

IV. But no man can name, or number the multitude of those faithful and
powerful Pastors and Preachers, of whom there is most use, and by whom the
Church receives the greatest benefit; for most business is done by the light
of lesser candles, whilst Torches and greater Lights are only for Festivals,
and Funenerals, and Times of more Solemnity then others. Neither can any man
know, how many true Converts like them, Acts 2. and well grounded Christians,
like those of Antioch (who were first so called, Acts 11.26.) There are in the
Christian World, who have rightly learned to fear God, filially, so as no to
displease him; sed contra, to honor the King, and obey him in all things, 1
Pet. 2.13, 17. To reverence their faithful Pastors and Teachers, and to esteem
them worthy of double honor, 2 Timothy 5.17. To have Respect to their Relations
in several cases, and to perform their duties accordingly, both actively and
passively. To love their Nighbour as themselves: yea, as Christ has loved
them, Mat. 19.19, etc. 1 John 13.34. To be comformable in all things of
Devotion, Decency and Order, that make for the peace and unity of the Church in
which they live, and of which they are Members. To do justly and uprightly in
all their dealings with Men in the Affairs of this World, Micah 6.8. To walk
circumspectly, Regularly and sincerely in all things concerning their own
Hearts and Lives.

In a word, These are such Christians as have learned to walk so
conscientiously, as to have God before them, whose Glory they aim at, his Word
by, and within them, which is the Rule of their practice and to have their End
in their Eye, which is, that they do daily prepare for, that they may have
comfort in their Change, and hope in their Death, and a good Evidence of
happiness to all Eternity.

This is the progress of them that please God, of whom you may say, Mark the
perfect man, and behold the upright, for the End of that man is peace, Psalm
37.37. A holy Life brings a happy Death, and a gracious Conversation a glorious
Condition. Even so make us, and come Lord Jesus.

Now all these being put together: You see that we have found out a mighty
multitude that are no Fanatics; and all these together, viz. Emperors, Kings
and Princes, Nobles and Statesmen, the Peers of Nations, Bishops and Doctors,
Presbyters Pastors and Teachers, that have been pillars in Gods House, painful
Laborers in his Vineyard, and faithful Dispensers of his Oracles and
Mysteries: Together with all other true Believers and godly Christians, who
(indeed) are the only well-grounded Protestants, and none else, and all free
enough from any of the Fancies and Furies abovenamed, I say, All these do
jointly conduce to make up the sum of that innumerable multitude that stand
before the Throne of God, and minister unto him, and are said to be one
thousand thousand, and ten thousand times ten thousand, and ten thousand of ten
thousands: Yea, a great multitude, which no man could number, all which do fall
down upon their Faces, worshipping God, and giving glory to him for ever and
ever, Dan. 7.10. Revel. 5.11, etc.

I have done with the main Discovery of whose ways do please God, and whose do
displease Him: I shall close this point of Doctrine, viz.

Doct. A Christians life is to be ordered so, that he may please God: with a
few considerations to be had in everlasting Remembrance, both to uphold you in
the good ways that do please Him, and to prevent the contrary: and that by
this means, viz. Do you seriously represent to your selves, as if present
before your eyes, and as visible as other Objects are; These things:

1. The Lord in his Majesty, purity and glory (as he is represented, Ezo. 34.
Esaias 6. Job 42.5, 6. Revel. 1.13. and as present with you in all your Actions,
good, or bad.

2. The Wonders that God has wrought on the behalf of them that please him: as
for Enoch, Elijah, Noah, Abraham, David, and Daniel, the three Children,
Prophets and Apostles, etc. And against those that persisted in displeasing
him: as against the old World, Sodom and Gomorrah, Egypt and Babylon, etc.

3. Satan in his own shape, when tempting you to any sin, or to any practice
dipleasing to God.

4. This Devil in his proper practice of accusing for sin, Revel. 20.10.
sparing neither good, nor bad, but urging to the utmost, to procure desperation
and damnation; He that once spoke, placentia, will now speak, Terribilia.

5. Death, with all the dreadful thoughts and terrors which do atattend it,
and the issues or events thereof.

6. Judgment, with that great and last account, which must be made at that day
before the Judge of all the world.

7. Hell, as open before your Eyes, and the damned souls there in misery and
torment, crying out with Dives, Luke 16.24.

8. Heaven, and that open also, as to St. Stephen, Acts 7.55. That you might
behold Jesus standing on the right hand of God, together with the dignity and
felicity of glorious souls, the Company and Society of Saints and Angels, With
the whole Assembly of God the heavenly Jerusalem, Heb. 12, 22. All giving
honor to him that sits upon the Throne for ever and ever. As Rev. 5.8, 9, 10,
11.12, 13, 14. For the benefit of their Redemption and eternal salvation
purchased by Chrict.

Now these things thus represented and apprehended as visible, and seen by us;
then apply them to what has been taught, and think seriously wi^h your selves.

1. How the holy and glorious God does love Purity and Uprightness, both in the
heart and life, with which he is well pleased; and how he hates iniquity, and
every evil way.

2. How marvellously he will preserve, and save the lives and souls of his
servants; When the wicked shall be turned into hell, etc. with all their glory
and pomp, Psalm 9.17. Isa. 5.14, etc.

3. Such as so walk, as to please God, How well are they armed against the
assaults of Satan in what shape soever, as our Savior was, Mat. 4.1. to 12.
Whereas others are unarmed like those Exorcists, Acts 19.13, to 17. Who were
overcome, prevailed against, and wounded by the devil.

4. Such as please God in their ways, how well are they armed against his
bitter and virulent Accusations, as well as Assaults; Take Job for instance:
How spightfully, though falsely, did the Devil accuse him, Job 1.9, 10, 11, 12.
etc. as if Job had been a mere Mercenary, that served God for prosperity only,
or for his health and ease; but if stripped of these, That then Job would curse
God to his face.

But how galliantly did Johs stedfastness and unchangableness in his course,
coufute the Devil to his face, and make him appear a Liar, as he is, John 8.44.

2. And when his Wife would have persuaded (or derided) him (rather) to a
change; how well was he armed against her Temptation, and how excellently does
he answer her, Job 2.9.10.

3. And when his friends did bitterly, though ignorantly, accuse him, how
excellently does he ward them off, and defend himself, only with the luster of
his innocence and uprightness.

4. Yea when God himself seemed to be his enemy, and to write bitter things
against him. Job 13.26. And that the arrows and terrors of God were set in
array against him, and that the poison of them did drink up his spirit, Job 6.4.
For Job, you may be sure, did see the hand of God in all that did befall him
through the Malice of the Devil, the Weakness of his Wife, and the ignorance of
his friends.

Yet what then was his defense and resolution: See Job 13.15. Though he slay
me, yet will I trust in him, etc. For my uprightness I hold fast, and will not
let it go; my heart shall not reproach me so long as I live, Job 27.6. This was
Jobs resolution in the depth of his affliction: Whatsoever did befall him, he
would be sure to hold to his uprightness, which is the thing that pleases God;
And this was his practice both before and after his Affliction; Hereupon the
Lord does justify him to the devil, and to the whole world, Job 1.8. before
his affliction, and to his friends after his affliction, preferring Job before
his friends, and making Job an instrument of quenching or pacifying Gods wrath
kindled against them, Job 42.7. You need no more instances; Else Daniel is the
next.

2 Daniel might be the next instance, if you needed more, for you know how his
true piety and innocence armed him against the accusations of his enemies,
against the virulency of the Kings Idolatrous decree, and against the violence
of the devouring Lions, so that he had no hurt by all, Whilst the wickedness
of his adversaries exposed them to present destruction. Dan. 6.11.

5. When death approaches, which is appointed to all, Heb. 9.27. Think what
stead, This way of pleasing God will stand you in at that time: how undaintedly
may such look death in the face, and cheer themselves in their approaching
change!

Inst. How did Hazekiah upon his deathbed, as he thought, comfort himself in
this, That he had walked before God in Truth, and with a perfect heart, Isa.
38.3. And that he had done that which was good in the sight of God. For the
righteous has hope in his death, Prove. 14 32. But to all others, especially,
death may be fully styled, The King of Terrors, Job 18.14.

6. Think of that dreadful day of Judgment mentioned, Mat. 25.31. to the end.
2 These. 1.7, 8, 9, 10, 11. 2 Pet. 3.10, 11, 12. When all shall appear before
God to give an account, etc. Think who then shall stand in the Judgment with
confidence and comfort; sure, none but the righteous, the rest shall be
rejected.

7. Hell, and the miseries thereof, which are prepared for the wicked; And from
which such as please the Lord, shall be delivered.

8. Heaven and the Glory thereof, into which they only shall enter, whose ways
do please the Lord, Rev. 22.14 The rest shall be excluded, Rev. 21.8. and
22.15. But, etc.

These may serve you as useful meditations throughout the course of your lives;
These you may enlarge and apply accordingly, till you attain to salvation,
which God grant to you all: Amen.

You know the parts of this Text, which are four, viz.

1. The Preachers Labor. 2. His Love. 3. The Peoples Duty. And, 4. A
Christians Excellency.

From the first three particulars, you have had four Doctrines.

1. A Preachers work is endless.

2. His Love to the people is pathetical, using all most affectionate ways and
means to win men to God.

3. Giving and receiving are mutual Actions, ( ^uae ponunt and tollunt se
invicem, without one of them, the other cannot be) and Ghristians must be very
cautious and careful in both, viz. What they give, and what they receive.

4. A Christians life is to be ordered so, That he may please God.

These two points you had from the third particular, viz. The peoples duty in
these words, viz. That as you have received of us, how ye ought to walk, and to
please God; The particulars of these points may be further and more largely
epitomized.

I am now come to the fourth particular of this Text, which contains the
Excellency of a Christian, and is the main drift and aim of the Apostle, viz.
That they would abound more and more; and indeed this is the end and aim of the
Preachers labor and Love, and of your hearing, receiving, and learning of us
how to walk, and to please God: All tend to this main end, That (as you have
learned to be Christians, and to walk accordingly, so) you should increase in
stature, excel in strength, and abound in good fruit more and more, (...), For
the word (...) does signify and import so much; for no Tree can abound with
fruit more and more, except it have stature and strength to support, and
produce the same.

Ap. Now in the Apostles sense, you (as you are Christians) are the Trees,
Grace is the sap, your christian conversation is the good fruit, in which you
are to increase, excel, and abound more and more, q.d. Tou have learned of us
to become Christians, you have received Grace to that purpose.

Now let your practife express what fruit you are to produce, and that in great
abundance; then you are right.

These things premised, and rightly understood, afford us this Doctrine.

Doct. The Excellency of a Christian does appear in his conversation, in his
increasing, and abounding in good; the more he does increase in stature after
the likeness of the image of Christ, the more strength he does gain in the
habits of Grace; and the more he does abound in good works, which is the fruit
of his hearing and learning of his growth, and strength in the habits of grace,
the more excellent he is.

Thus you have in this point the main drift of the Apostle, and of all the
faithful Ministers of the Gospel. And in this point you have the Acts, Object
and Result.

1. The Acts are increasing and abounding; the word signifies both; for the
same word here translated to Abound, is in the tenth verse next following,
translated to Increase more and more.

2. The Object, that which is good, viz. Grace, and the fruits thereof: Grace
both habitual and actual: For as we are to increase in the habits of true
saving-Grace, so are we to abound in the Acts, Works and good Fruits of those
blessed Seeds, and Habits of Grace in us.

3. The Result of both is, That this is the Excellency of a Christian, viz. To
be strong in the habits, and rich in the good works of Grace.

And thus much the word (...) does import also, which is translated to Exceed,
2 Cor. 3.9. And to Excel, 1 Cor. 14.12. For as he that grows and increases,
does exceed another man in stature: So he that multiplieth and abounds, does
excel another in good works, the Acts and Fruits of Grace.

Thus the point remains firm; viz.

Doct. That a Christians increasing in grace, and abounding in good, is his
Excellency as well as his Duty: True it is, that he is bound hereto; And as
true it is, that he is blessed herein; this is the Apex of his Excellency, the
Topstone of perfection, and concludes in everlasting Glory in Heaven.

Now for the clearing of this so weighty a point, I should use this method,
viz. To give you in some Scripture-proofs to confirm it. Instances and Examples
further to illustrate it. Arguments and Reasons to strengthen it. A view of the
Grace, which you are to increase in. And also of those good works, in which you
are to abound. And then descend to Application, which afford us several Uses,
viz. Of Information, Reprehension, Exhortation, Examination and Consolation.

Use I. Informs us, how wanting we be in performing good works; how wicked we
be in producing and practicing so much evil, as provokes the curse of Christ.

Use II. Of reproof to men of all ages, babes, old and young, for that having
so much means, they continue so weak, sick and wicked as they do, and produce
no better fruit.

Use III. Exhorts men of Eminency and Authority, and all men to labor for
proficiency, which to effect, prune and lop off superfluities which hinder
growth and fruit, viz. Idleness, Pride, Worldliness, Custom of smaller sins,
and ill company. Make use of such things as further Increase and Fruitfulness,
viz. Industry, Humility, heavenly Mindedness, Conscience of all duty, and Gods
Society; All which are sovereign Antidotes against Dwarfishness and Barrenness;
and then provide for growth and fruit thus: Get the Spirit, and let the
Vine-dressers be diligent: Make use of Ordinances and Means, Exercise your
Graces, and use good company.

Use IV. Of Examination, teaches us to try whether we Increase or not.

Use V. Of Comfort.

But alas! When can all this be done? Not in a moment, or in one hour, etc, so
that I am at a stand what to do, the acceptance of me, and my labors of late,
and the manifold exceptions against both, (my sickness and weakness neither
considered nor pitied) have put me almost upon the resolution of the Prophet.
Jer. 20.8, 9. viz. To preach no more, for as he, so have I been rewarded, etc.
But that I have a glorious God and Father in heaven that designed me to this
work from my birth, a gracious Redeemer that does command me often to feed his
Sheep, John 21.15, 16, 17. A blessed Spirit that does encourage and strengthen
me hereunto; That many Souls are to be edified and instructed; I have a
Conscience to be discharged, as in the sight of God: A great Account to be
answered and cleared; And a Soul to be saved in the day of the Lord Jesus: And
but that the Word of God is as a fire burning in my heart with zeal for his
glory, and the good of souls, I had been utterly discouraged long since in our
confused times. But a necessity is upon me, yea woe is to me if I preach not
the Gospel, 1 Cor. 8.16. Therefore with the Prophets, Isa. 62.1. Jer. 4.19. I
will not, nor I cannot hold my peace for Sions sake, for your souls sake, till
your righteousness appear in brightness, and that you do grow on to perfection
in some good measure; Therefore though aged and weak, I shall resolve with aged
St. Peter, not to be negligent to put you in remembrance of the things that
concern your salvation, though you know them and be established in the present
truth, 2 Pet. 1.12, 13, 14, 15.

Now to pursue our premised and intended Method, I hope I need not produce many
particular proofs: For the whole Scripture aims at this, and persuades us to
grace, and to the fruits thereof, by many Arguments.

1. Yet to give you in a few for many, St. Peter lays a strict charge upon us
for the root. 2 Pet. 3.17, 18. Beware of being misted, etc. But grow in grace,
etc. Auxanete implies Motion and Augmentation, Growth and Increase, a progress
to a fullness and abundance.

2. And for the fruit, our Apostle is as serious, 1 Cor. 15.58. Be ye steadfast,
etc. Always abounding.

3. And for both the Apostle tells us, That this is the main end of the work of
the Ministry, and the manifold gifts of God upon men, viz. For the edifying of
the body of Christ unto a perfect man, unto the measure of the stature of the
fullness of Christ, verse. 13, 14. That we be not children, etc. But speaking the
truth in love, may grow up into him in all things, which is the Head Christ,
etc. and may receive increase of the body, unto the edifying of it self in
love, Ephesians. 4.12, to 17.

4. And answerable hereunto are our Apostles incessant prayers for the
Colossians, Col. 1.9, 10, 11. That they might be filled with the knowledge of
Gods will, in all wisdom and spiritual understanding, that they might walk
worthy of the Lord, etc. being fruitful in every good work, and increasing in
the knowledge of God, strengthened with all might by his glorious power, unto
all patience and long-suffering with joyfulness: And this is a passing from
strength to strength, fath to faith, and from glory to glory.

1. From strength to strength, Psalm 84.7. i, e. Never weary, but increasing in
strength and courage till they came to Mount Zion, to Gods House; so does the
Christian, till Heaven. From Faith to Faith, Romans 1.17. Not to several kinds of
Faith, but from one degree of faith to another, till it do attain its full
accomplishment in Life Eternal. From glory to glory, 2 Cor. 3.18. i.e. From
glory begun upon Earth by Grace, to glory consummated, and perfected in the
glory of Heaven; Thus much for Scripture proof.

2. I shall add a few instances of either sort, proficients and
non-proficients, men of stature and Dwarfs, fruitful and barren.

1. For the first sort: Christ is the incomparable president, and most
transcendent pattern in this; for he increased in wisdom and stature, etc. Luke
2.5, 2. For stature, he increased by little and little, as Children do, and
that Lege humanae naturae, by the course of Nature, Enthyminus. And for Wisdom,
although the fullness of the Godhead did dwell in him bodily, Col. 1.19. and
that God gave him the Spirit beyond measure, John 3.34. Yet because he assumed
a reasonable Soul as well as an humane Body, the Deity thereto united was so
veiled, that the graces thereof discovered themselves by certain degrees,
according to the nature of his humane Faculties: so he is said to increase. And
he increased in Wisdom Experimentally; for though he was a Son, yet learned he
obedience by the things which he suffered, Heb. 5.8.

As God, he was absolutely perfect, and needed no increase: but as Man,
consisting of an humane Body and Reasonable Soul, and as a man obvious to
sufferings, he is said to increase in wisdom and stature, etc. But this first
is an instance beyond Example, a President that admits no parallel,
incomparable.

2. Come we to a second, that reflects more upon us, viz. The Thessalonians
that were here exhorted to this duty, how are they commended, 2 Thessalonians. 1.3, 4.
in that the Apostle gives thanks to God for them, that their Faith grew
exceedingly, and that their Charity toward each other abounded; so that the
Apostle, etc. did glory in them, in the Churches of God, etc. Oh how well were
it, if all people would give their Teachers cause thus to glory; but these
Examples are Rare.

1. Their faith increased, in regard of the Object, when they apprehended more
profound Mysteries of faith then before. Subject: When more confirmed in the
Mysteries apprehended, and that we give a more full Assent unto them without
any staggerings, or doubtings.

2. Charity increases, either intensively, by our more fervent affection to
God, and to our Brethren; Or extensively, by doing good to more and more, and
more abounding in works of Mercy.

Ap. And this increase of Faith and Charity, is a sure Argument of our
sincerity in both, and of our proficiency in Christianity.

3. I need not multiply more instances of this first sort: For Solomon long
since has stated the case, Prove. 1.5, 7. Ishmang, Chacam, Vejoseph, Lekach, A
wise man will hear, and will increase learning; But fools (Evilim) despise
wisdom and instruction. In which words, Solomon does stamp this, (...), as an
exact Character upon the head of a wise man, that he will improve himself in
good, as here: and that all such, and only such are truly wise. Whereas ( E
contra) those that neglects this course, he concludes to be (Evilim) simple,
stubborn, self-conceited, and incorrigible fools, for so the Word signifies.
And thus we have as many instances of good proficients in Grace, as there be
wise men in the World.

2. But now to instance on the other side, of them that be non-proficients,
Dwarfs in stature, and barren of good: Israel of old is a most sad Example; for
what abundant means did God use of old, to bring them to this, viz. but to
learn how to walk, and to please God, and to abound therein, and how crosly did
they move against all, and grew worse and worse. God gave them Oracles and
Miracles, his Word and Rod, Prophets, his Messengers in abundance, whose pains
and industry was indefategable, never wearied, yet still they went backward,
and to do good they had no knowledge: They despised the Word, mocked and
misused the Messengers of God, until his wrath arose against them: and then, as
they had turned off him, and all the means afforded, so he turned off them, and
brought Enemies upon them, that did ruin and destroy them without mercy, 2 Chronicles. 36.15, 16. to 21. They persisted in all manner of evil, and stuck not to
say, that they were delivered to do all those abominations beforementioned:
and yet thought the formality of this, that they were the Temple of the Lord,
and must bear off all, Jer. 7.3, 4. to 11.

Yet more, Nevertheless, of the means offorded them to make them better, they
became worse then Sodom and Gomorrah, and Idolatrous Samaria, Ezekiel. 16.49, 50.
whose sins were pride, intemperance, idleness, uncharitableness,
prophannesse, uncleanness. This was Isreal's Condition: they were very evil
proficients in good, nevertheless the great means afforded them to the
contrary. But has Israel no fellows? I am sorry to say it: yet I must say the
Truth, I fear England is too near a parallel with Israel in these things: We
(as they) have had Oracles, yea and Miracles too of late, viz. In the Return of
the King, etc. the Word of God has been continued to us all this while; though
the Rod of God (the worst of Rods, viz. A civil War) has been upon us almost
20. Years, yet how brutish does England in general remain, even as they,
despising the Word of God, mis-using his Messengers, etc. 2 Chronicles. 36.15, 16,
to 21. till wrath, etc.

Look among all sorts, of all Ranks and Qualities: How much more piety and
peaceablenesse, humility and charity, temperance and sobriety, self-denial and
heavenly-mindedness, shall you find amongst our Nobility and Gentry then
heretofore; Nay, are they not more profane and contentious, proud and
uncharitable (not to say cruel) yea as intemperate, and licentious, or
deboisht; more self-seeking, and earthly, minded then ever? as if no future or
further felicity were to be expected in another Life. Is not this in effect to
say as they, We were sure delivered to do all these abominations, Jer. 7.10.
Were not the sins of Sodom, pride, intemperance, idleness, uncharitableness,
profaneness, and abominable uncleanness, Ezekiel. 16.49, 50. and is there no
such thing to be found in England? It were happy if there were no such thing to
be found with us, among them of Eminent Rank and Quality. But, as they bare off
all with the formality of the Temple of the Lord.

Ap. So ours with a little formality in the profession of Religion, think to
escape free from the blame of Abominations, though they be as many, and as bad
as theirs, mentioned, Jer. 7.4, 8, 9, 10, ult. who did steal, murder, commit
Adultery, etc. But to leave our first Rank, amongst whom many of these things
are too frequent and familiar.

Come we to the Clergy (as they are commonly called) or Ministry of England,
which have suffered much these times, and for the Stars of the first magnitude
(as they esteem themselves) our Bishops: Tell me, how much less pride and
Lordliness, neglect, or disdain of their Brethren (that are of the same
profession with themselves) shall you find, then formerly? Or, how much more
meekness and humility, care and compliancy with their Brethren for the Churches
common good, and Well-ordering of all things in the Church according to the
mind of God, and Rule of his Word, then formerly? And for other Ministers in
particular Congregations, How many can you find, that are more diligent in
their duty, more studious of the good of souls, more tender and gentle, kind
and loving to their people, that by all means they may gain some more fouls to
God then before?

And for the Commonalty of England, They have smarted sharply, and have seen
the face and fruit of confusion, etc. Yet how few shall you find, less factious
and seditious, or more pious and peaceable, friendly or neighbourly in their
ordinary Conversation with others then heretofore.

Oh how well were it with us all, if the Word and Rod had so kindly wrought
upon us, that we had learned to know the day of our visitation, Luke 19.44.
That it be not with us, as Isa. 10.1, 2, 3.

Thus you have the point, viz. That increasing in grace, and abounding in good,
is a Christians Excellency as well as duty: This is the drift of all the
Scripture, the whole Word of God, and this is the main end of all the gifts,
and works of the Ministry.

For this you have had some Scripture proofs to confirm it, and some instances
for the further illustration of the same.

I do now descend to the Arguments and Reasons to strengthen it, which is drawn
from God, the person in whom this Grace and growth is, proficiency in it self;
Grace in it self, and the event or effect of this growth and fruit, Increase
and Abundance.

1. God, this is the end of all his husbandry, cost and care of us, for whether
he do plant or prune, plow or sow, weed or water, feed or physic us, as
Husbandmen and Parents do as occasion serves, all is to this end, that we
increase and abound in good, John 15.2. 1 Pet. 2.2. Milk, Meat and Medicine,
are all for the health and growth of the Child, and if we be fruitful we shall
receive a blessing with that Earth, Heb. 6.7. which brings forth meet fruits,
etc. Nay, wicked men in their way, will be at great care and cost to compass
their own ends, whether ambitious, covetous, luxurious, etc. though they be
worse by obtaining. They may teach us industry in better things, but none will
be at pains for nothing, no fruit, no success, no good, real, or appearing and
seeming so.

The event will be, that the barren Land, and Fig Tree, etc. and those that are
fruitful in evil, who like that Earth, bring forth Briars, etc. is nigh unto
cursing, etc. Heb. 6.8.

2. The person in whom this grace and growth is: This increase becomes
connatural, with him that is a truly gracious Christian, so that he cannot do
otherwise; As healthful Children (being supplied with Necessaries) cannot but
grow. As wicked men increase in sin, and grow worse and worse, because sin is
con-natural to them, 2 Timothy 3.13.

Ap. So the gracious man is better and better, because Grace is become
connatural with him by which he is become Nadibh, a Free and voluntary mover as
natural movers are: For as the stone descending, moves swifter near the Center;
And the Sun ascending to the Zenith, the Noon-point gives more and more light,
Prove. 4.8. And the Rivers flowing toward the Sea, (their proper Center) do
increase more and more, as those waters did, Ezekiel. 47, 3, 4, 5. so moves and
shines the gracious man in the Valley of Vision toward the Vertical-point and
Center of Felicity; the heavenly glory increasing still in light, in grace, and
in good fruit: Nor can he do but so, as natural movers cannot do otherwise in
their Motions. Thus also do wicked men move freely in their way of wickedness
toward the center of eternal destruction.

3. This proficiency, and increase in its self, is to be considered as
praiseworthy, and very commendable: For, if Skill, trade or science be good,
then we should learn, as the Apostle advises us, Tit. 3.14. (...), pulchris
operibus prestare, to excel, and surmount others in good works: Scholars,
Artificers, etc. are worthily commended for their Increase in Learning, and
Skill, and exquisitnesse in both. Profitable, for by this increase and growth
in stature, etc. the empty Twig, a poor weak plant, becomes a fruitful Tree:
yea, the Child becomes a Man. And the Novice, a young beginner, or raw
practitioner in any Skill, Art or Science, one newly entered, or but lately
converted to the faith, and into the profession of true Religion, becomes an
expert Artist, his Craftsmaster, and an experienced Christian in the ways of
Faith and true Religion. And by this, we poor younger Brethren become like our
elder Brother, the Lord Jesus Christ, and sharers with him in wisdom, as well
as Wealth, etc. Ae contra, where this increase is not, there is nothing
praiseworthy, or profitable, all things void of it are despicable, and
abominable.

4. Grace in it self; It being once infused into the Soul, it is expulsive of
Death out of these pots, or earthen-vessels, our selves, Jer. 18.4, etc. Romans
9.21. and that in the cause of Death, as that Meal did, 2 Kings 4.40, 41. It is
expulsive, of badness and barrenness from us, as that Cruse of Salt did from
Jerico's Land and Waters, 2 Kings 2.19, 20, etc. These are good preparations to
growth and fruitfulness. It is of a diffusive Nature, and sweetens all, making
our fruit to be as the smell of Lebanon, most pleasant, delightful and
Odoriferous, Cant. 4.11. Hos. 14.5, 6. Whereas Leaven and Vice do sour, and
impoison all, 1 Cor. 5.6. It is of it self of a growing and enlarging Nature,
like good Corn which lives, not dead, but puts forth the Blade, the Ear,
full Corn in the Ear, Mark 4.28. Or like the grain of Mustard Seed, Mark 4.30,
31, 32. which produces a goodly Tree, as Mat. 13.31, 32. so that the Fowls of
the Air may lodge there Gods power appears in the growth of Grace (as of his
Church also) out of very small Beginnings, far beyond all men's expectations, so
that the Fowls of the Air etc. i.e. all the godly gave recourse to Grace, and
to the saving Word that works it, as to a Refuge of Rest, in all their
tribulations and distresses, Aretius, in Mat. 13.31.

5. The event and effect of this growth and fruit, this increase and abundance,
is, that it is a singular Remedy against Apostasy; the grown Tree is not easily
writhed, nor the strong man soon subdued; But men still employed in good, are
like the Fowl upon the Wing, without danger of Gunshot, or the Fowlers snare,
which others are subject to. Or like the swift flowing stream, that does not
contract mud in the Channel, as other Waters do. Or like the Heavenly Bodies,
whose continual motion is profective: it prevents and avoids Corruption.

Ap. So such Proficients as increase and abound in Grace, shall be free from
Satan's Snares and wiles, they shall not hurt them. And from the Vice and filth
the World, it shall not infect them.

Lastly, Like the heavenly Bodies, they shall be established, confirmed, and
perfected in their course, and blessed for ever and ever. You have had
Scripture Proofs, Instances and Reasons for the Point.

4 The next thing to be spoken of, is, To take a view of Grace, which you (and
all Christians) are to increase in. Now Grace is put for diverse things in
Scripture; I shall not trouble you with the several Acceptations: but
especially it is put for Gods free and eternal Love and Favor, which is the
Wellspring of all our happiness, 2 Timothy 1.9. For he has saved, and called us
according to his own purpose and Grace before the world began. Our free
justification by the imputation of Christ's Righteousness, which is a fruit of
the former, Romans 5.15, 17, 20, 21. Our Sanctification by the work of the Spirit
of God in us, Renewing in our Souls the Image of God, defaced by sin, Enabling
us to obey his will, which power we had lost; Furnishing us with Faith, and all
other graces needful to Everlasting happiness, 2 Cor. 12.9. My Grace is
sufficient for thee, all which we were empty of. This is a Fruit of our free
Election and Justification: and this we call Sanctification, an hallowing or
sanctifying us, in that it extends to all parts and powers of the whole man,
and is begun here, and perfected in Heaven. Here must be no Exception of parts,
head, heart, hand, etc. must all concur: Nor may we presume to enjoy this Grace
of Sanctification in Heaven, if we have no sense of this Grace on Earth. This
is the Grace wherein we are to increase, viz. In growing more like to God, in
conformity to his Image, and the likeness of his Son Jesus Christ, the
absolute pattern of Holiness; Increasing in holiness, and performing obedience
to Gods Will; Abounding in the number and measure of all needful Graces,
increasing from a small beginning to a greater, bulk or stature till we become
Men and Women perfect in Jesus Christ: And this growth must be,

1. Real, not imaginary, asin melancholy persons, who fancy things to be
great, which are little or nothing at all.

2. Universal to all parts, and to all Times: Parts, there must be no Rickets
in Religion and Grace as there is in Nature, when growth is in some parts only,
not in others: though that (as this) is too frequent in our Times, and for
times, we know, Natural things cease to grow at a certain time, as all
Creatures do that grow. But it must not be so with us in this case, our growth
in Grace must last while we live, for here we cannot attain to our full stature
and measure of perfection.

3. Effectual; This growth must be to some good purpose: as when a Child can do
the work of a Man, we say, he is well grown, and to good purpose; So when we
Sapling-poles are become Timber Trees, fit for any use in the most magnificent
Buildings. So also it may be, when well-grown Christians, are become useful as
Pillars in Gods House; which is his spiritual Building, and men of age and
strength for use.

Now this increase in Grace is put upon us, upon excelleut good grounds, viz.
From the excellency, necessity, sufficiency of Grace, in reference to God, our
selves, our present and future condition.

I. The Excellency of Grace appears in reference to God: Because it is a Beam,
a Raie of Divine Excellency and Beauty; so much of Grace, so much of God, and
of his blessed Image: The Lord Jesus purchased it Merito passionis and
intercessionis, the holy Spirit that does impart it, does beautify and
dignifie us therewith.

II. The necessity of Grace appears in respect of our selves, both in our
Persons and Estates. Touching our persons, Grace repairs the defects of soul
and body; it is light in the mind, order in the affections, etc. It sets the
body also in a right way, by having so good a Guide; whereas before, The blind
(mind) led the blind (body) Estates, Grace does advantage us for the, 1.
Present, 2. Future.

1. For the present; it enriches, for it has the promise of this, and a better
life, Deuteronomy. 28.1, etc. Prove. 3.16. Length of days, Riches, and Honor are in
her right and left hand, and all things shall be added to such, Mat. 6.33. For
as, 1 Timothy 4.8. Godliness is profitable unto all things, having the promise,
etc.

Object. But the godly want, and are often in necessity?

Answ. These things are given but as they are expedient, And a little that a
righteous man has, is better, etc. Psalm. 37.16. There is a Nimium honoris,
voluptatis, divitiorum, etc. We may have so much (too much) of these, that we
may forget, or deny God; as Agur speaks, Prove. 30.8, 9. And the wicked stourish
to perish, Psa l. 927. But there is Non nimium Gratiae, We can never have too
much Grace: This cannot be bought for money. The words, Mat. 25.9. Go, etc. and
buy for your selves, are words Deridentium, non Consulentium; intiating, that
those who neglect to get Grace here, have no means left to get any then when it
is too late. Thus Elijah did, 1 King. 18.27. He mocks Baals Priests for their
folly. See the Annotations.

2. For the future, if we have Grace, we shall be admitted with the wise, else
excluded and shut out with the foolish Virgins, Mat. 25.10, 11, 12. There is a
necessity therefore of Grace, if salvation be necessary.

III. The sufficience of Grace appears in our present and future condition.

1. In our present condition; consider that Grace does sanctify prosperity,
and gives a luster to every natural ability and perfection, else Strength,
Beauty, Wisdom, Honor, Eloquence, Riches, and the most eminent Endowments, are
of no value or repute at all, but are most pernicious, if ill-imployed

Grace strengthens to bear, and to resist temptations, 2 Cor. 12.9. and carries
us through crosses with strength and comfort. Isa. 40.29, 31. For God does
strengthen them to mount up with wings as Eagles, to run, and walk, and not
faint. It gives content in every condition, Phil. 4.11. In want, etc. and
satisfies the endless and restless desires of the soul, it being a Well, a
Fountain of water springing up to everlasting life.

2. And for the Future, in what we hope for; It makes way to glory, therefore
it is so called, 2 Cor. 3.18. and is conjoined with it, Psalm 84.11. The Lord
will give Grace and Glory; and where he gives the first, he will be sure to
give the second.

It removes impediments that lie in our way to hinder us. Grace puts the Lion
out of the way, and plucks up the hedge of Thorns, which do deter and hinder
slothful men from the pursuit of Glory: See Prove. 15.19. and 22.13. and 26.13.

Grace does administer all helps and furtherances, which may animate and enable
us in the way to life and glory. It will persuade us to make use of all
Ordinances, Opportunities and Means, whereby we may be filled with abundance of
Grace, till we attain the fullness of glory.

Thus much of the Grace which we are to increase in.

The next thing to be spoken of, according to the Method propounded, is,

5. A view of those good works in which you are so to abound; concerning which,
we must premise and consider.

I. The Rules that declare and determine our works to be good works.

1. Our works must be warranted by the word of God, that it is the light, by
which our deeds are made manifest, that they are wrought in God, John 3.21. In
his sight, and by his rule which he works in us, and enables us to do. Hoc in
Deo facimus, quod Deo in nobis faciente, datur nobis, ut faciamus, Fulgen. de
prae. ad Mon. l. 1.

2. Look we to our selves; for the Tree must be good, and then the fruit will
be so, else never, Mat. 7.17, 18. and 12.33. We must be Believers; for when
they asked our Savior the Question, John 6.28, 29. What they might do to work
the works of God? Christ answers them, and said, This is the work of God, that
ye believe on him, etc. This is our first work; with this we must begin: By
Faith we are justified and accepted of God as good Trees, by whom we are
created in Christ Jesus unto good works, Ephesians. 2.8.9.10.

Our persons being accepted, our works will be so also.

3. To this we must add a preparation and purging our selves from dross, That
we may be vessels of honor, sanctified and meet for the masters use, and
prepared unto every good work, 2 Timothy 2-21. This we must do, if we would have
our works accepted as good in the sight of God.

4. Besides, we must make it a matter of most concernment; It must be our Meat,
as our Savior speaks, to do the Will of God; and to finish his work, John
4.34. The works of God which are good; to do them, must be our main business.

5. The Ends, to which our good works are directed, must be good, else spoil
all. The end crowns or shames the work. Now the end of our works, that they may
be justified, must be the glory of God, 1 Cor. 10.31. Mat. 5.16. Let your light
so shine, etc. The edification of our neighbor, the discharge of our
Obedience, testification of our Faith, 2 Pet. 11.10. answering of our calling
in Jesus Christ, Ephesians. 4.1. Escaping the punishment or sin, and the
destruction of the wicked; obtaining the Glory of Heaven; with many other
subservient ends.

Ap. These things considered, do clearly evidence to us, That Works without
warrant from the word of God, how speciou soever they be in pretense, and
outward appearance, as were the Ceremonies of the Jews, so of Papists, and
superstitious persons to this day, yet they are rejected; for God is not
pleased, but with what himself prescribes: We may not devise new things in Gods
Worship, as we please. Where the Agents are Unbelievers, and not accepted of
God: If the Tree remain incorrupt, so is the fruit, and Ergo, both are
unacceptable.

Where there is no purging of our selves, nor preparation to good works, there
cannot but be very many miscarriages.

When good works are not our business, but fall in by accident, or are enforced
by some extremity, as by sickness or death, or when we begin too late, when it
is with us, as with them, Prove. 1.27, 28, etc. and Mat. 25.10. But we ne, glect
our opportunity whilst we may and lose all, when we never make them our
delight, as we do other matters of natural concernment, such as to eat and
drink, etc.

When our good works are for sinister, base or bad ends, As to be seen of men
Pharisee-like, Mat. 25.5. To devour widows houses, Mat. 23.14. or to act
mischief. To suit with the multitude, and please the world, as they did, John
7.7. That hated Christ, and persecuted the Apostles, John 16.2. who thought it
well done; And some real good work may be done to this end. To purchase our own
pardon and peace with God, as Papists and Patrons of Merit think they do,
though thereby they do frustrate the merits of the Lord Jesus for us.

In a word, The ends of our works are many, and that both good and bad, as they
are directed by the Agents and Workers of them; But if they be not suitable
with the Rules before expressed, and that our works will not endure the trial
of the light, as John 3.20, 21. Whether they be of God or no. We have great
reafon to suspect, yea, and to reject our own works, as unacceptable and
displeasing to Almighty God. Thus much touching the Rules concerning our good
works.

II. But now if any should say, You have given us Rules for our works.

Quest. But what are the works in particular, in which we are so to abound?

Answ. Good works are such as are performed by the grace of the holy Spirit,
out of a true faith according to the prescribt Rule of the Law, to the Glory of
God, the certainty and assurance of our own salvation, and the Edification of
our Neighbor, Wolleb. p. 192. Polan. p. 256.

And these good works must be performed out of such a true faith, by which we
are sure that they are commanded of God, and that both we and our works are
pleasing to God through Christ, Pol. 258.

And for the names conferred upon good works, They are called the fruits of the
Spirit, from their efficient cause, Gal. 5.22. Ephesians. 5.9. The fruits of Faith
from the instrumental cause. The works of the Law, from the form, because
suitable to it, and from their quality, good works, and good fruits.

For their number; for they are numberless, extending to all the affections and
actions of a regenerate man, Wall. p. 293. and to all those things prescribed
by the moral Law of God, about which such actions and works are conversant,
Bucan. 334. So that for this, I must only say, as the Apostle does conclude.
Phil. 4.8. Finally brethren, says he, whatsoever things are true, honest,
just, pure, lovely, and of good report, every virtue, And every praiseworthy
action enters into the list, and helps to make up the number and measure of
works that be good in the sight of God, Bucan. p. 333, 334.

As to the causes of good works, they are many, especially these.

1. The principal efficient cause, it God, his Grace and holy Spirit, who does
begin, continue, and perfect all our good works in us, Phil. 1.6. and 2.13. He
that begins, will perform to the utmost: And it is God which works in us both
to will, and to do, etc. For without him we can do nothing, John 15.5. So then
our good works are not the fruits of our own free will, as Pelagians, Papists,
and too many others think.

2. The instrumental cause is Faith, which is the Root whence all good works do
spring, Gal. 5.6. For it works by love.

3. The matter of our good works is our affections and our actions, and all
things about which they are conversant.

4. The formal cause of them, is, their conformity to, and agreement with the
Word of God, Psalm. 119: 1.2, etc. Deuteronomy. 4.2. Ezekiel. 20.18, 19. Mat. 15.9. Else
all is vain worship.

5. The final cause or end of our good works is manifold, and may be
distributed into things referring to, 1. God. 2. Ourselves. And, 3. Our
Neighbor. In reference to,

1. God: His glory is the main end, our due obedience to his Will and Command,
and our thankfulness for our Redemption, and all other benefits are hereby
testified.

2. Our selves, We do good works, to evidence the life of our faith, which else
is dead, being alone, Jam. 2.17. Solitaria. To get sure that we are justified
before God: for Bona opera sequuntur justificatos, non praecedunt
justificandos. To make sure our Election to eternal life, 2 Pet. 1.10. To
exercise, nourish, and strengthen our Faith, to adorn our Vocation, to avoid
temporal and eternal punishment, that we may receive the Reward of well-doing
freely promised by Almighty God. Mat. 25.21, 23. Well done good, etc.

3. Our Neighbor; That we may be hurtful to none, but useful and profitable to
all to our power, Thereby to edify the faithful, and to win unbelievers, Wall.
p. 260, 261.

As for the Species, or particular kinds or forms of good works; The particular
actions so styled are very many, yet you may distinguish or distribute them
into three Channels, viz. As works referring, 1. To God. 2. Our selves: And, 3.
Our Neighbor.

1. To God, and so the whole worship of God, and every particular branch of the
same, are good works, whether they refer to the inward Worship of God, as a
right and true acknowledgement of God, Love toward him, Trust and Confidence
in him by a lively saving faith, and assured hope in him; as also by Humility
and Patience in the sense of his greatness, and goodness to us even in our
Afflictions. The inward and outward worship of God jointly and together: Such
are the Acts of Invocation of God by prayer, with fasting sometimes, as Dan.
10.2, 3. or by lawful oaths, whether assertory or promissory, affirming some
needful truth, or promising some lawful and useful thing, as oaths of judgment
or of Allegiance, giving of thanks by a celebration of God, and giving him
glory in the approbation, admiration, and right estimation of all his works. By
a confession of him, and one faith in him, Vel voce, vel martyrio, in word and
deed, in expression or martyrdom: By an observation of such Ecclesiastical
Rites, and of such holy times, as have warranty in the Word of God, as in the
right use of the Ordinances of God, his Word and Sacraments; and the
observation of his Sabbaths, and the like: but be sure we walk not, nor make
progress in these things of divine Worship without a divine Warrant.

2. To our selves, in the exercise of those divine Graces and Virtues with
which God has endued us, viz. Our Wisdom, Courage and Temperance in the
several branches of it, viz. Sobriety, Chastity and Vigilance, etc. as is
requisite. And in the study of true Glory by virtue. These are good works, and
in these we should be exercised.

And as our good works do refer to God, our selves,

3. So also to our Neighbor in diverse respects, which do reflect upon the
soul, as well as the body: such are, 1. Humanity, (...), wherein we express our
love and good will to men in gesture, word and convenient offices, Pol. p. 312.
2. Civility in the moderation of our external manners, and gestures toward
others, and that both in our language and actions, shunning scurrility, and
unseemly things, and using Urbanity in a civil and seeming way. 3. Christian
Charity, which is the mother and root of,

I. Liberality, which communicates both Counsel and Comfort. 1. Counsel, when
we impart our gifts for the good of others, in reproving, instructing,
admonishing, or encouraging, and praying for others, To reduce them from evil,
and to excite you to that which is good: These are good works, Jam. 5.19, 20.
For if any of them do err from the truth, etc. And no less good, than to pull
an infant or weak person out of the fire, or water to save them from perishing,
Jude 23.2. Comfort, by lending and giving cheerfully and liberally according to
our Ability to the relief of our brethrens necessity, and especially to such as
are godand of the household of faith, Psalm 41.1, 2, 3. Isa. 58.6. to 13. Gal.
6.10.

II. True Friendship and amity both public and private, and that for piety and
virtues sake, as was betwixt Jonathan, and David 1 Samuel 18.1. Pol. page 318.

III. A mutual Sympathy both by commiseration and congratulation of our
Neighbors, both in their sorrows and joys, Romans 12.15.

IV. A readiness to procure another good, both in his fame and goods, his
reputation and ectate, Phil. 2.4. 1 These. 5.11.

Thus Humanity, Civility, and Christian Charity do produce excellent good works
for our Neighbors Peace, Solace, comfort and advantage. Let me name one, or
two more, which are, viz.

4. The Exercise of the common justice, righteousness and equity, which should
be amongst men in their affairs and dealings: and this is either universal,
which consists in the agreement of our whole life with the Law of God, and
obedience to all those Laws in special which do most concern and belong to us:
or particular, in the performance of those things, wherein we stand bound to
others in some peculiar manner: This is either privative, concerning our own
Calling and Station, and that both in our lawful obtaining it, not by money, or
unjust means, as in Papacy, etc. And our care to discharge our duty in our
places with that sedulity and diligence which is requisite, Romans 12.11. and
with that fidelity and trust, that we may give up a good account of the same,
as modest Moses was in his place, Heb. 3.2, 5. Or public in the Administration
and Dispensation of Justice, both commutative and distributive. This Justice is
a Verue of large Extent, and has an influence into our whole Lives, and is the
very Bond of all public Societies and Communities and Affairs of Nations: But
I hasten, for I may not enlarge upon such an ample Subject.

V. Lastly, A restraint and Moderation of such inordinate motions of mind, as
usually arise from pride, anger, or desire of wealth, or honor, the common
Makebates of the World, vid. Pol. page 314, 315. But Cure the first by modesty,
humility, and teachableneffe. The second by meekness, longanimity and
placability. The third by contentment in every condition, Phil, 4.11. and by a
serious and due consideration of the uncertainty, mutability and vanity of all
earthly contentments, Honors Riches, Pleasures, all are vanity and vexation of
spirit.

You have had the Point, the Proof, and Explanation.

Doct. Increasing in Grace, and abounding in good works, is a Christians
excellency as well as his Duty. This was the Point, for which you have had
Scripture, Instances, Arguments or Reasons. As also a view of the Grace which
you are to increase in, and of those good works in which you are so to abound.

Concerning which good works, you have had a view of the Rules of good works,
by which they are to be ordered; of the works in themselves, and that in their
nature and Definition, Names, Number, Causes and Species; or kinds of good
works, and that in Respect of God, our selves, our Neighbor.

In all which if we did abound, we should be sure to have peace with God, and
abundant comfort in our own consciences, in the evidence of our Faith; and of
our implanting into Christ, and that we are fruitful Branches in him: and that
we and our works are accepted of God, as Cornelius was, Acts 10.2, 4. and that
our good works will never leave us, but will attend and follow us, as Rev.
14.13. both in Life and Death, even as the shadow does the Body, until they
bring us to the Reward of well-doing, the joy of our Lord in the eternal life
of glory Mat. 25.21, 23, 34, 46. Of God, in all acts of piety and true Devotion
toward him; Our selves in the way of Regularity and exact Walking. Our
Neighbor, in the works of Christian Charity, in all which, etc.

I have done with the proof, and clearing of the Confirmation and Explication
of the Point; I do descend to the sixth and last thing in the method
propounded, viz. the Application which is manifold in the several Uses of
Lamentation, Reprehension, Exhortation, Examination, and Consolation.

1. Use is of lamentation: and that upon this occasion.

Me thinks, whilst we have been viewing these good Works beforementioned, we
have been with Saint Paul in Paradise, and have heard and seen strange and
wonderful things: But now being descended (with him to the Earth) in the Use
and Application of these things, and to see what is done among men, we may say
with him, that we have heard (...), Arcana verba, quae non licet homini loqui
(Arias Mont, Secret or Unknown, or) unspeakable words, which is not lawful, or
possible, for man to utter: Not lawful for us to say, because our speech would
be untrue, and Christians must not utter and speak untruths. Not possible, for
as Solomon makes enquiry after Women, Prove. 31.10. So may we after men, and
say, who can find a virtuous man, so qualified with Grace and good works as is
before specified? Ans. It is almost impossible to sinde such a man, and
therefore impossible to utter it, 2 Cor. 12.4. So few are the Jobs and
Nathaniels of our Times. In the general, we may say of this increasing and
abounding, as the Poet of Astraea; Terras Astraea reliquit, These things in a
manner, have forsaken the Earth: And instead of these, How wanting are we in
the good works toward God, our selves, and others, as is above specified. And
how wicked are we in producing and abounding in the contrary, growing worse and
worse and multiplying bad works and fruits daily.

I. To the first of these, viz. How wanting we are in good works, we may easily
give a short, but yet a very full account with Solomon, Eccl. 1.15. That which
is crooked cannot be made straight, and that which is wanting cannot be
numbered: For as for that little measure of Grace we have, and those few good
Works which we do, if we do but consider how crooked, perverse tortuous or
writhed they be from the straitness, uprightness and excellency which should
be in them, they are as nothing; But if we consider, how much Grace, and how
many good Works are wanting, we may well say with a learned Interpreter,
Infinita desiderantur, in quibus pietas and probitas versatur: we are
infinitely wanting both in Grace and good Works. For our Graces, how few are
they, and those few how defective, if you should take a view of particulars,
Faith, etc. And gor our good works, how defective are we to God, in our
Invocation of God, whither by prayers or oaths, etc. or giving of thanks by
approbation, admiration, and a right Estimation of his Works; who does consider
these things? confessing him, vel voce, vel Martyrio, like them, Joh. 12.42. in
a right use and observation of his holy Rites and Times, his holy Word, and
Sacraments, and Sabbaths. Do we not rather run Byas and backward in those
things, then to perform them devoutly as we should? To our selves, how
defective are we in the exercise of our Graces, Virtues, Parts and Abilities,
whatsoever they be? We rather suffer them to Rust, and become unprofitable like
him, Mat. 25.29. And to others, how wanting are we in particulars named, viz.
In our Humanity, Civility, Christian charity, with the happy fruits thereof,
viz. Liberality, giving Counsel and Comfort, Amity, Sympathy, and readiness to
do good. In the exercise of that common Justice, Righteousness and Equity which
we do owe to all, in all our Affairs, Actions and Dealings, both privately and
publicly: of all which we may say, Where are they, are they not lost?

And lastly, In the restraint and moderation of our inordinate and unruly
passions, affections and motions of mind, which do arise from pride, anger,
evil concupiscence and unlawful desires, which are so apt to boil up in our
sinful Souls to the prejudice of others, yea, and to our selves also, whilst
we feed, cherish and pursue them.

Should we pursue these particulars as before-named, it were an endless work
to innumerate our Wants, for that which is wanting cannot be numbered, Eccles.
1.15.

2. Now for the second particular, if we consider how wicked we be in producing
and abounding in bad Works and Fruits, we have reason to abhor our selves, and
to repent in dust and ashes, Job 42.6. for how apt are we to produce the works
of the flesh, Gal. 5.19. adultery, fornication, etc. the unfruitful works of
darkness, Ephesians. 5.11. dead works, that have the Lineament, but not the life of
good Works, or sins which expose us to death; the works of the Devil which
Christ came to destroy, 1 John 3.8. So like are we to the barren Figtree in our
emptiness, Luke 13.6. Or to the bad Vine in our Fullness, Esaias 5.24. for our
Fruits are degenerated, Jer. 2.21. (as Israel was) into the nature of a strange
Vine, and producing wild grapes, Esaias 5. so that our Vine is as that of Sodom,
and our Fields as of Gomorrah; Our grapes are of Gall, and our Clusters bitter;
Our wine is the poison of Dragons, and the cruel venom of Asps, Deuteronomy. 32.32,
33. which may too fitly be applied to us, yea, we are very apt to produce such
works, as may fitly be compared to all sorts of vilest Fruits. Such are our
unsavory fruits of luxury, lust and uncleanness, bitter fruits of envy and
strife, James 3.14. Some distasteful fruit of anger and passion James 1.20.
Insipid and indigested fruits of Gluttony, Drunkenness, and fullness of Bread,
and all intemperance. Cold destructive fruit of sloth and idleness (in the love
of God, and practice of good works) Prove. 10.4, 5, etc. poverty, shame and
beggary, are the cold fruits of a slothful person; Corrosive, ill relish't
fruit of cruelty, covetousness and oppression, which corrupt the taste of our
Souls, so that we cannot well relish (but disgust) the taste of spiritual
things: Hard, high-grown fruit of pride and disdain, the Fruits of Mount Gilboa
without Rain or dew of any divine Grace in them, 2 Samuel 1.21. Such are proud
persons, Rotten, worm-eaten fruit of vicious Manners: which expose us to the
dunghill, or the Swines-trough, Luke 15.15, 16. and provoke the worm that shall
never dye, Esaias 66.24. Mark 9.14, 46, 48. to live in us, to torment and consume
us for ever, like them, Revel. 20.10.

Ap. So forwardly are we to abound in such Fruits and Works as end in
Destruction, and so unapt to those good works to which we are created, redeemed
and sanctified, and which have the Encouragements (and Motives) of the
conscience of well-doing, which is ever attended with abundant comfort in Life
and Death, and for ever; as E contra, The clearing of our Faith and
implantation into Christ, the acceptance of God, before whom we must appear, 2
Cor. 5.10. The eternal Reward, promised to welldoing, Mat. 25.21, 23, 34. This
is a lamentation, and shall be for a Lamentation, Ezekiel. 19.14.

Thus from this first Use of Lamentation, for our being so wanting in good and
abounding in bad Works.

2. I proceed to the use of Reprehension, which is, To all such as are at so
little cost and pains to get Grace, and so little care to abound in good works,
whilst they are unwearied in the pursuit of other things; and here we may
justly blame men of several Ages.

1 How many young Children, the Infantry of the Church, are rude and unruly, as
being never taught and instructed in the Principles of Religion, the great
fault of Parents: Whereas young Timothy was taught, and knew the Holy
Scriptures from his very Infancy, by which he became wise unto Salvation, a man
of God perfect, thoroughly furnished unto all good works, 2 Timothy 1.5, etc. Whose
parents are an Exemplary pattern to all Parents in the World, though they be
little imitated in our Times.

2. Young men, who though they have rich opportunities and much means to get
Grace; strong abilities and activities to apprehend, remember and do what they
have learned and do know; Yet for want of due consideration, that they are
under uncertainties, both of Life and the means of Grace: For they may die in
their strength, and the means may be removed: and that Temptations may so
prevail, and lie so heavy upon them that they cannot grow: yet they take no
care to get this strength, that they may overcome the Devil.

3. Old men, in whom though the outward man decays, and the Soul must flit
shortly from this Cottage of clay: Yet they take no care with the Apostle, 2
Cor. 4.16. that thaugh the outward man perish, yet the inward man might be
renewed day by day by the spirit of God, in spiritual strength, as Esaias 40.31.
Nor do they strive to close with good works, as Dorcas did, Acts 9.39. The
Apostle and Evangelist, 1 John 2.12, 13, 14. writes with more comfort sure,
where he ingeminates his Writings to Christians of all Ages: whether little
Children, Fathers, Young men, or new Converts, experienced Christians, or
Resolute Professors of good standing, in any of these Ages and Conditions, the
Evangelist speaks to them twice a piece with joy.

1. To little children, because their sins are forgiven, and because they have
known the Father. It is a most happy thing when Children, or Babes (which
either in Age, or Religion) are thus washed spiritually from sin, as it befell
those new Converts, Acts 10.43. And when so well instructed as to know God
(their Father) betime, and to give him Honor, as Children and new Converts do.

2. To fathers, because they have known him that he is from the beginning, i.
e. Old men have been long acquainted with Christ, and have the Knowledge of him
in a greater measure then other Christians; and happy are gray hairs found so,
in a long-continued experimental knowledge of God, and of Christ, Prove. 16.31.

3. To young men, because they are strong, and the Word of God abides in them,
and they have overcome the wicked one. When spiritual strength is joined to
bodily strength: and the Word of God dwells, and abides in young men to Rule
them: And that their greatest Conquests are over the Devil, who is the most
powerful and spightfull Adversary: then such a sanctified Youth is truly
Victorious and Glorious, 1 John 2.12, 13, 14. But surely the Apostles times
were better then ours: For generally, Many remain weak, or sick, or dead,
nevertheless the means of life and health is afforded: Weak, that they remain
Babes in Christ still, 1 Cor. 3.1, 2. and must be fed accordingly, Heb. 5.12.
when they might have been Teachers, for the time they had enjoyed the means of
Knowledge. Sick, That they grow worse and worse like evil men and Seducers, 2 Timothy 3.13. Like Ephesus they have lost their first Love, Rev. 2.4. Or as
Laodocea are grown lukewarm, Rev. 3.14, 16. with Israelites, they first love,
and then loath Manna, Number. 21.5. or with Galatians, begin in the spirit, and
end in the flesh, Gal. 3.3. The Pharisees were Nipt with the least persecution,
John 12.42, 43. so are these. These leave Orthodox Truths for Heterodox
Opinions, 2 Timothy 4.4. And forsake the old and good way for new paths of their
own invention and making.

1. This is the case and sin of Many, not considering that in Grace and doing
good, there is no Solstitium or retrograde Motion: For non progredi est
regredi, qui non prosicit Deficit, and Qui nihil acquirit, non nihil perdit;
Here Is no standing still: He that goes not forward, goes backward; and he that
gains not, loses all: This is their sin.

2. And for punishment; what can be expected less, then the removeal of the
Candlestick, except we Repent, and do the first works, Revel. 2.5. See Eze. 11.
and 12. Chap. of Gods departing: And the Burning threatened against that Ground
which receives the shine, and drinks in the Rain of Heaven, but bears nothing
but Thorns and Briars, Heb. 6.8.

3. Dead, yea stark dead in sin: They are so wicked, so that we cannot say as
Christ said to that Nobleman, whose Son was sick at Capernaum; Thy Son lives,
John 4.46.50. But as Gehazi to Elisha, 2 Kings 4.31. the Child is not awaked.
Or as David's Servants to him. 2 Samuel 12.19. the Child is dead.

In this case what can we do, but have recourse to Christ, and pray: saying,
Arise O Christ; and he say to us as to Lazarus, John 11.43. Come forth. Or, as
Ephesians. 5.14. Awake thou that sleep, and arise from the dead; and Christ shall
give thee light.

Ap. Then, if the Lord shall arise upon us with his Glory: as Esaias 60.1, 2. and
Command: as Cant. 4.16. Awake O North Wind, and come thou South, and blow upon
my Garden, that the Spices may flow out; then shall we awake, rise out of our
Graves, and begin to spring; then shall we become like a watered Garden, or a
Field that the Lord has blessed: Or the Trees of the Garden of God: Or the
Cedars of Lebanon that he has planted; Yea, we shall be able to invite our
Savior: as Cant. 4.16. Let my Beloved come into his Garden and eat his
pleasant fruits. Thus much for the second Use of Reproof.

III. Use of Exhortation, does persuade, 1. Great men: 2. All men.

1. Great men of Eminency, Dignity and Authority. Such are Eminent Trees in the
Garden of God in Paradise, Ezekiel. 31.8, 9. more excellent then others: as being
more tall in statute, Eminent in their Estates and other accomplishments.

2. Strong in power to overawe and command others, by the Dignity and
Authority conferred upon them. Therefore it behooves them to be most Eminent in
Grace and abundant in good Works, that they may be like the Trees in Gods
House: those Palm Trees and Cedars, psalm 92.12, 13, 14. which are firmly
rooted, sound and imputrible, straight and upright Ornaments in their places,
etc. So should such men be, Rooted and grounded in the truth, as Trees of
stature must be; and not like Pilate, who inquired what is Truth, Joh. 18.38.
Sound and incorrupt, imputrible in their practice, as Cedars are. Straight and
upright in all their proceedings, as some choice Trees are in their growth, not
writhed and crooked. Ornaments to the Church of God, as the Palms trees were to
the Temple. Pillars in Gods house, a shelter, a support to his place, as the
strongest trees are in great buildings. Abundant in good fruits and works like
the best fruit trees, and that in the faithful administration of their places
to the public good, and in their acts of piety, mercy, and charity to the
poor. Such men of Eminency should resemble the Cedars of Lebanon: whose
odoriferous savor is such, That Fugat Serpents, and interficit vermes, say
some Authors; so should the savor of their good ointments, viz. Divine graces,
and exemplary practice. The presence and perfume of their power, and piety
should be of Efficacy to kill the Canker-worms that blast us: and to chase
away, or put to flight those Serpents which would destroy us.

If our Nobility, Gentry, and men of Eminency were such, their good names
should flourish like the Palm, and spread abroad like the fruitful Vines and
Figtrees: Then we the underwood of the same Garden of God should Digna Cedro
canere, record and sing the praises of those Cedars which God has planted,
Psalm 80.10. and 104.16. Whilst they do resemble the Tree, Dan. 4.10, 11, 12,
20, 21. which was so strong, tall, fair and fruitful, for all: So such, whose
root is piety, body prudence, branches power, and fruit is justice, mercy, and
every good work: For such men, we bless the God of heaven, and say, Arbor
honoretur, cujus nos umbra tuetur. And when such men shall dye like men, Psalm
82.6, 7. Yet by the seat of Water ( viz. Of divine Grace by Christ, and the
Virtue of his Resurrection) they shall bud, Job 14.7, 8, 9. Rise again, etc.
and sing in eternal glory, Isa. 26.19.

E contra, For the Nobility and Gentry of a Nation to be like those of Israel.

1. It will but entitle them to be Rulers of Sodom, Princes and people of
Gomorrah, Isa. 1.10.

2. It will entail them, and bind them over to destruction and ruin, Isa.
9.13* 14, 15, etc. This may be a warning to all wicked great men.

And thus much for the first branch of this Use to great men.

II. Now the second branch of this Use of Exhortation, is To all men; For all
men ought to labor for this increase and proficiency: which that they may the
better do, they must take a like course with themselves, as Arborists and
Florists use to do with their Orchards and Gardens, the trees and Flowers which
they would have to thrive and prosper, They must prune off, and weed out, such
superfluities, as hinder them, provide such means, and helps as may further
their growth and flourishing.

For the first of these, the weeds and superfluous branches which this Orchard
and Garden should be quit of, for sothe Church is called, Cant. 4.12, 13. and
frequently, That the choice fruits and flowers of the same may prosper, are
idleness or neglect of the means of growth or proficiency.

Neglect the Fire, and it will go out of it self, or the Scholar or Pupil his
Masters Readings, and his growth in learning will soon be at a stand. Let the
Child or any other person neglect his food; or mark any man that does neglect
his necessary business, and observe what increase and abounding will ensue:
observe the sluggards field, Prove. 24.30, 31. Or suppose the Trees Root should
refuse to fetch in sap, or the branches to receive it, they are dead, off with
them. Our Ears are as the Root, our actions are the branches of these Trees of
the Garden of God.

If we refuse to hearken to Council, and receive advice, or having received,
(like dead branches) if we do not act and express the same in our fruit, we are
dead.

7. In a word, Do but neglect the Orchard, Garden or Field, and see what will
become of it, if all do not run to ruin, etc. How many with us had need to
prune off this dead branch of Idlenefs and Neglect! Sure multitudes are guilty
of of it; Ergo, We have the more need to fall to this work speedily, which that
you may the better effect, shall I lend you a weeding or pruning hook to fetch
off these superfluous branches as you meet with them; Then for this first dead
branch of Idleness, let industry and diligence be the pruning hook to take off
this: For this will look out far and near (as the living roots of trees do) to
fetch in sap to supply the soul: Its the souls purveyer to fetch in provisions
of all sorts. This Enriches a man both in his outward, and in his inward
estate, Prove. 10.4. and 13.4. His wealth increases, and his soul shall be made
fat. In the bodily condition, a man may be fed with the choicest food, and
possibly may be supplied with all the Viands and Delicates imaginable, and yet
be neither strengthened nor fatted in body by them: For the blessing of God may
be wanting in these cases; And man lives not by bread only, etc. Mat. 4.4. But
for such as seek first the kingdom of God, etc. Mat. 6.33. and labor with
diligence for the heavenly food: The blessing of God is never wanting to such,
but that they shall grow and increase, be strengthened and fatted, as calves of
the stall, Mal. 4.2. viz. In the graces of Regeneration and Sanctification,
tending to salvation; See Psalm 63.5. Isa. 25.6. Jer. 31.14. Ezekiel. 34.14.

2. Pride and Self-conceteitedness, an Opinion of our own worth and
sufficiency. The fresh man that thinks himself as wise and learned as his
Tutor, and the Artist as expert as his Teacher, the raw servant, as his Master
and Mistress, wanting no direction of either, and the Soldier as wise as his
Commanders. Solomon will tell you, Prove. 26.12.

1. These are like those Pharisees, who said, We see, i. e. We know enough; For
they had a great opinion of their own knowledge and sanctity, Ergo, They
scorned to learn, or to be taught by any, John 9.24, 40, 41.

2. Or like those holy Laodiceans, that thought they had need of nothing,
Revel. 3.17. when they wanted all things: and sure, such as think themselves
wise or learned, healthy or wealthy enough, etc. will never take much care for
either Reparation or Increase. Therefore the Apostle tells us, that not many
wisemen, or mighty; but God has chosen the foolish and weak, and base things,
etc. 1 Cor. 1.26, 27, 28, 29, i.e. Such as know, and Esteem themselves to be
such, as they stand before God, without any worth, merit, strength or Virtue,
as Paul did, 1 Cor. 3.5. Who is Paul? and and therefore low in their own eyes,
such are chosen of God.

Thus we see, that this Self-conceitednesse is a Rank leavy Branch without
Fruit, and such will hinder the tree from ever bearing any: therefore off with
them and spare them not. Now the best pruning-hook to fetch off this Branch is
Humility, to be low and base in our own sight, as David was, 2 Samuel 6.22. This
is 1. A Cabinet full of Excellent Pearls: 2. A valley of Grace, which makes a
soul like a watered Garden, a fruitful Meadow bespangled with Beauties: yea
like a Field which the Lord has blessed; or the Trees by him planted, which
are ever fruitful, fat and flourishing, Psalm. 92.12, 13, 14. Jer. 31.12. Esaias
58.11. Genesis 27.27.

3. Worldliness. This is the next superfluous Branch to be cut off, when our
hearts are too much set upon this World, The World (you know) is threefold: 1,
The old World which perished by Water, 2 Pet. 3.6. 2. The present World in
which we do now live, which is evil, 2 Timothy 4.10. And passes away, 1 John
2.17. 3. The World to come, Luke 18.30, etc. where is Life everlasting. It were
well if we did mind this last World more then we do. It is then the present
World, and the things thereof which I speak of: And by worldliness or earthly
mindedness, I mean, setting our hearts on these things below. Principally and
in the first place, as Esau and the Prodigal. Unconscionably, as Ahab and the
unjust Steward did. Inordinately and impatiently, as Rachel and the Horsleech:
Insatiably as the grave barren womb, the Earth, and the Fire, Prove. 30.15, 16.
Securely and voluptuously relying upon the World, as they did, Luke 12.16, etc.
This minding of the world and affecting it too much, is a Bait which shows the
best, but hides the worst from us. A beam in our eyes, that we cannot see what
is best for us. A Thorn in our Feet, that we cannot walk for strength. A Canker
in our mouths, that we cannot eat the best Food. A Snare to our Souls that
prevents all our chief good.

Ap. This hinders our growth extremely, when we so set our hearts upon these
sublunary things, which we are apt to do: Mark the Caution, Psalm 62.10. Trust
not in oppression, etc. If riches increase, set not your hearts upon them. This
made some err from the faith. 1 Timothy 6.9, 10. The Love of money, etc. And Demas
to forsake the Apostle, 2 Timothy 4.10.

These are weeds and Brambles indeed, which must be cut off and rooted up:
Which the better to effect and do; The best Instrument that I can supply you
now with, is Heavenly mindedness: Take the Apostles Counsel. Col. 3.1, 2. Seek
the things above, and set your affections on them. The Apostle uses two words
of great weight, and emphatical signification:

1. (...), Seek, Ad totius hominis vires refertur, etc. Zanchius. A man must
put forth his whole strength after these things, as the Apostle did labor and
strive, (...), Decertans, striving as a man would do for his life, Col, 1.29.
For these, as ambitious, studious, poor, impertinent men do for what they like,
Honor, Learning, etc. Not so for earthly things

2. (...), Set your affections, Ad totum mentem refertur, The whole soul with
all the powers thereof, must act this way; and the word imports, To mind, and
regard, to love, and care for those things most which are above and heavenly:
And those things are, The blessed Trinity, God the Father, his only Son Jesus
Christ, and the holy Spirit of God, blessed for ever and ever, and also all the
fruits, graces and blessings which proceed from the Father, from Christ, and
his holy Spirit, and are poured out upon, and performed to us, both here and
hereafter: in this, and in the life to come. Such are the means of salvation,
the Graces and the privileges of Saints, all tending to the final perfection
and glory of a Christian in heaven; all are from above.

In a word, Holiness and Happiness are above in the presence of Christ. If we
were acquainted with, and our hearts set upon these things above, we should
soon set a right price upon all earthtly things, and look upon all sublunary
comforts, as base and brittle in their own nature, and in comparison of other
things, and unable and insufficient to stead us at our need, because they
cannot fill the heart, and satisfy the desire. Eccles. 1.8. Isa. 55.2. Why do
ye, etc. Nor lengthen life. Psalm 49.6. No ransom to live ever. Prevent Gods
Judgment, Zeph. 1.17, 18. Ezekiel. 7.17, 18, 19. Nor comfort a distressed
conscience, Dan. 5.6. Nor purchase good to the soul, Micah 6.6, 7, 8. Heb.
10.4. Not Bulls and Goats. 1 Pet. 1.18, 19. Not gold or silver, etc. Nor can
they extend themselves, nor continue with us to eternity, but all bid farewell
at the deathbed, Psalm. 49.17. Vanish like a dream, Isa. 29.8. And pass away, 1
Cor. 7.31.

Were these and the like things rightly considered and practiced, it would soon
cure us of our earthly-mindedness, and stock up by the roots these weeds and
brambles, which do so hinder the growth of better fruit.

4. The custom and allowance of smaller sins in the worlds account, at least,
such are lying, petty oaths, fleshly lust: This is like the ill diet of some
young people, which eat (Oat-meal, and other) odd things, till they overthrow
their health. Or like the small flies that blast the flourishing Boughs of the
fairest trees, and will destroy the trees at length, though not so soon as a
Thunderbolt or an Ax.

Ap. These must be smothered and killed, or they will spoil all: They war and
fight against the soul, 1 Pet. 2.11. to destroy it, even as those do against
the health and life of people and trees: And a small leak in a Ship may sink
it, a Needle or Bodkin may kill a man, as well as a great Cannon-Bullet, or any
other Weapon of War and Violence.

I have read how the greatest Beasts, Fishes and Serpents are annoyed with
things, the Elephant, Whales, etc.

For the cure of this Annoyance to the choicest plants, I can prescribe you no
better means or remedy, then the Conscience of all, even the smallest duties
which God has commanded, Judgment and Mercy, etc. must be done, yet Mint,
Annise and Cummin must be tithed, Mat. 23.23. The Conscience of Duty will
expel the custom of sin. Acquaintance and intercourse with God by duty, will
exclude the allowance of any iniquity.

5. Evil Company and bad society is a great hinderance; These are like
Ash-trees in an Orchard, or Cole-worths among the Vines, or Weeds and Brambles
in the Garden or Corn-field.

This is certain, that neither Orchard nor Vineyard, nor Field or Garden can
ever prosper, if they be so attended. These are such under-brances, such
Suckers at the Tree-root, that they quite spoil the growth and stature, the
flourishing and fruitfulness of the Trees amongst which they are permitted and
suffered to grow: Such Society as this does always leave an evil blast behind
them among the Trees of the Garden of God, i. e. Good men: for that it will be
conjectured, and much suspected, whether they be not of the same quality with
these unworthy weeds, or at least, in danger to be wrought upon to be for their
guide and practice etc. This is no small hurt. The only remedy which I can
prescribe for this malady, is Good fociety: This does, as it were, Transform a
man into another shape: it does possess him with those Notions which do
prevalently persuade him into another practice; In which being habituted by
continuance, he is well armed and fortified against all Opposites, whether they
be companions or temptations which do invite him to a contrary course of
practice. The words of the wise remain with him, as nails fastened in the
building, Eccles. 12.11. To hold him steadfast from swarving upon any occasion.

Thus much be spoken of this first particular, viz. The removal, or the pruning
off and weeding out such superstuities as hinder these plants.

2. The next thing to be done, is to direct you to some such means and helps as
may further the proficiency, the growth and flourishing of these plants in the
garden of God. If you enquire how that may be done, I answer, By gaining, and
making good use of these things, The Spirit of God, the Vine-dressers pains,
the means and opportunities, exercise and good society, all which do much
conduce hereto. Make sure of a principle of life in these plants, without which
there can be no growth, each plant must have a life in it, each man a soul, and
each soul must have the spirit of God in it, else all are dead, and nothing can
be expected from them. This Spirit of God is a principle of life; gain this.
Things grow and flourish according to the strength of life in them: And as the
Soul makes the body strong and active, so does the Spirit of God make our
souls, 2 Cor. 3.17, 18. Where the spirit of the Lord is, there is liberty from
the burdens and pressures which hinder proficiency, viz. the Law in the curse
of it, and sin in the power of it, etc. But not at all to vice and
licentiousness.

This Spirit is of such efficacy, that it does transform them that have it,
into the same likeness or likeness of Christ, and of his Spirit, that as silver
set against the Sun becomes radiant, and sends forth beams: And Moses face
shone by conversing with God, Exodus 34.30. So will it be here: Here will be
light and luster, a progress from grace to grace, and from glory to glory, 2
Cor. 3.18.

I. This Spirit insuseth life into every part and power of the Soul: And as the
Soul is in every part, the blood is transmitted into every vein, and sap into
every branch.

Ap. So this Spirit does immit and put in life and vigor, and sap into every
limme and branch, and so makes the Tree to live: this lays a good foundation,
and reareth the house, which before was not: this Spirit of God does thus begin
this work. And as this Spirit of God thus infuseth life, and lays the
foundation, etc. and begins these trees and buildings, so,

II. It supplies these trees with necessaries, and makes each tree to flourish
and increase in stature and fruitfulness. It furnishes the house also, being
built, and becautifies every room; Else when would this plant and house be
useful, all would be but empty, naked and bare, without this Addition: But this
Spirit puts on new Habits and Qualities in a person, which answers the most
exquisite Beauty of the choicest plants, and the richest Furniture of most
sumptuous Buildings.

III. This Spirit gives power to the soul to make use of all it has: the Tree
in Winter, and the man asleep have habits, but not the use of them: and an
unskilful man may have an instrument of Music, or for work, but cannot use it,
so is it with him that wants the Spirit of God; He has a Soul and Body, the
powers of the one, and parts of the other: He may be a man of great Abilities
for Learning, Memory, Elocution, and other natural and acquired Excelcies, but
he can make use of none of all these to any purpose, but to his own ruin and
destruction, till he be endued with this life from above, this good Spirit,
whilst he that has it, has knowledge and power to make use of all to the
best Ends and purposes.

IV. This Spirit gives Essicacy to all the means of growth and proficiency; a
man may use industry about his plants, but he cannot give Efficacy, nor impart
the desired Effect This makes the Word to be a word of grace to us, which is
able to build us up, and to give us an Inheritance among them that are
sanctified, Acts 20.32. And it enliveneth our prayers with sighs and groans
which do pierce the Heavens, and enter into the Ears of the Lord Almighty.

Quest. Now if you enquire further, how this Spirit may be gotten and obtained;
and being gotten, how it may be kept and continued withus? I answer, 1. Wait.
2. Pray. 3. Obey.

1. Wait for the Spirit of God in the preaching of the Word; Mark that, Acts
10.44. While Peter yet spoke (preaching the Word) the holy Ghost fell on all
the hearers to their conversion, and salvation. This was an happy Sermon, and
they were happy Hearers; Who knows when the Spirit of God like that good Angel,
John 5. will descend, and so trouble (or work upon) these Water; of his Word,
as to make it alike effectual to heal our Souls, to convert, cure, comfort and
strengthem us. Those persons, Gal. 3.2, 5. Received the Spirit by the hearing
of Faith preached.

2. Pray for the Spirit. If we once have but a taste of the Spirit, we shall
desire and pray for more, for a greater measure of it then we had before: as
Solomon did for Wisdom, 1 Kings 3.5, 9. He prays for an understanding (or
hearing) heart, to discern between good and bad in Judgment. Mark this: that
wisdom increases by hearing; A hearing Heart is very like to become a wise and
underderstanding heart; and as Elisha did for Elijah's Spirit, 2 Kings 2.9. He
prays for a double portion of Elijah's Spirit: and you know how they sped, for
both Solomon and Elisha had their desire to the full: their prayers granted
with interest. Prayer opens Gods Cabinet, for thy self, thy Friends, and others.

To close this particular, mark the practice, precept, promises, and
Comparisons used by our Savior, Luke 11.1. to 14. He himself prays, v. 1.
Nevertheless, that he was so good, so excellent, that all fullness of the
Spirit (yea of the Godhead) dwelt in him, Col. 1.19. etc. He teaches his
Disciples how to pray, and prescribes them a Form of prayer to help them in the
Duty, v. 2.3, 4. He presses importunity in prayer, by the comparison of the
importunate Friend for Bread at Midnight, who obtained because of his
importunity, v. 5, 7, 7, 8. He promises success to importunate Suitors, v. 9,
10, 13. To the former comparison of the importunate Friend, he now adds
another comparison from the natural affection of Parents to their Children, v.
11.12, 13. which he applies with a gracious promise in the end. In both which
Comparisons there is a strong Argument, from the worser to the better; from the
weaker to the stronger: For if the unwilling Friend, will give for
importunities sake; And if Parents, that are (often) wicked, as well as weak
and poor, will give good gifts to their Children: How much more will God who is
so willing, Esaias 65.24. who is so great, so good, so rich, powerful and
gracious (as cannot be expressed) give good things; yea, and that most
excellent gift of all, even the holy Spirit to them that ask him, as v. 13.
This is a great Encouragement: And thus much for this second Direction to gain
the Spirit, viz. Prayer.

3. And lastly, Obey the Spirit in the Motions and Excitements of it. This is
the good voice behind us: saying, This is the way, walk ye in it, etc. Esaias
30.20, 21. The Spirit does this by the Word and faithful Teachers; and this is
a special means to keep the Spirit, once gained, and to continue the Spirit of
God with you.

Take special care that you neither resist, nor grieve, nor quench the Spirit:
Of which see Esaias 63.10. Acts 7.51. Ephesians. 4.30. 1 Thessalonians. 5.19. The Spirit of God
in Scripture, is put for either the person, the gifts and gracious Endowments,
and the Motions of the Spirit: these Scriptures cited, do extend to all the
three. Only note, that the Gifts are of three sorts, tending to particular
Callings: as in Saul, 1 Samuel 10.6, etc. A Spirit for Government, which was lost
after a while. General graces tending to sanctification, such as Faith in some
kind; Remorse for sin; And joy in the Gospel in some measure; Also a taste of
the good Word of God, Heb. 6.4, 5.

Ap. But of all these, Hymeneus and Alezander made shipwreck, 1 Timothy 1.19, 20.
Such (like the Corn sown upon the Rock, Luke 8.6, 13) may make a show for a
time, but in time of Temptation fall away, Cain, Judas and Herod, etc. did look
a litlle this way, and many others, but all came to nothing suddenly. There is
the Root and Habits of heavenly graces, which are in the godly: and these
cannot be lost, the Gates of Hell cannot prevail against them, Mat. 16.18. to
overthrow them,

Ap. Now to apply these Gifts qualifying to particular Employments: as it was
in Saul, 1 Samuel 10.6, etc. may be lost. So also the gifts disposing to
Sanctification, may be as in Hymeneus and Alexander before-namd. And for the
best gifts, the exercise of them may be intermitted: as in David, about Vriah.
As Sense and Reason are in sleep and passion, the heat and fervor of Gifts may
be abated in some measure: as in Ephesus, Revel. 2.4. Suggestions and
particular motions of the Spirit may be repelled. And thus: although habitus
non amittitur, Yet Actus intermittitur, and gradus remittitur, as it befalls too
often to the dear servants of God. Therefore to keep our spiritual gifts in
Life and Vigor: the means are 1. Exercise and Employment; 2. Good conscience
and holy Obedience, 1 Timothy 1.19.3. Humility, that conservatrix virtutum, Bern.
4. The use of holy Assemblies, Heb. 10.25. Neglect no means sanctified to work
Establishment. These things understood, you may easily perceive what it is to
grieve, resist, or quench the Spirit, viz.

1. Grieving and vexing the holy Spirit, Ephesians. 4.30. Esaias 63.10. does specially
refer to the person of the Spirit, to the holy Ghost, the third person in the
blessed Trinity; Not as if he could grieve, etc. as we do, but it is so spoken
((...)) to our understanding as weak men, that we may know how much it is
against him, when we by our obstinacy and stubbornness, our manifold sins and
rebellious, do enforce him to withdraw himself and comforts from us, as Ps.
51.12. Restore does intimate, and to make us feel the fruits of his anger, as a
Father does with grief behold those evils in his Children, for which he must
needs (though unwillingly) correct them instead of embracing them. Thus the
Spirit is grieved by our sins and Misdemeanors.

2. Resisting the holy Spirit (as it is charged upon them, Acts 7.51. does
specially refer to the Motions of the Spirit: which motions and suggestions,
whether secretly or openly by the Word of God, his Messengers or otherwise, are
obstinately resisted and withstood by wicked and ungodly men: and too often (in
some things) by the dear Children of God.

3. Quenching the Spiit, does specially refer to the Gifts of the holy Spirit;
which are as Fire to give Light to our Understanding, heat and fervor to our
Affections.

. This sire must not be quenched, but maintained as the Fire of the Altar,
which was never to go out, Levit. 6.12, 13. neither by violence put out, nor by
Negligence; We must not stop, restrain, or abate of these gifts and motions, of
the Use and Degrees, or fervor of any of them, lest they be lost, intermitted,
or impaired, and our selves undone; But we must stir them up by all good means
ordained to that end; as 2 Timothy 1.6. (...), as Paul advised Timothy, neglect
the Fire, and it will go out of it self, the Fuel must be put up together to
keep the Fire burning. Let us take heed that we neither stop the Motions of the
Spirit in our selves, nor restrain the gifts thereof in others; But rather let
us use all good means, that this Fire of the Spirit may always be kept burning
in us with Zeal for the honor and glory of God, till we all appear before, and
shine in his presence, being clothed with his Eternal and everlasting Glory.
And thus much for the first and principal means of growth and proficiency of
increasing and abounding in good, viz. the gaining and keeping of the Spirit,
the Principle of Life.

Quest. Only thus much more, If any shall ask, how the Motions of Gods Spirit,
may be distinguished from diabolical delusions.

Answ. I answer, 1. By way of concession; It is true, that Satanical
suggestions are often subtly contrived and cunningly colored: For Satan can
transform himself into an Angel of Light, and that lying spirit dares sometimes
to counterfeit the Spirit of Truth, 2 Cor. 11.14.

Scarce ever was Heretic so impudent, but pretended guidance by the Spirit of
God. So Anabaptists and others, though they despise Authority, and Vilify all
Ordinances, yet pretend to Instincts and Revelations from the Spirit of God. So
did Montanus of old for his damned Errors of Whoredom, Incest, etc. for he
affirmed himself to be the holy Spirit.

But for distinction betwixt these suggestions: I answer, To the Law and
Testimony, Esaias 8.20. let that be your Rule, if they speak not according to it,
etc. see Deuteronomy. 13.1, 2, 3. of lying Wonders: all must be suitable with the
Word; Expect not extraordinary Inspiration, that is ceased, God deals not now
as formerly, but by his Word, Revel. 22.11. which must not be added to, or
impaired, but carefully observed by us. If the suggestions be to any evil thing
in the whole kind, or by circumstance, it is no divine motion, but either a
concupiscential fantasy, James 1.14. Or a diabolical delusion, as it was in
Judas, Joh. 13.2. If any motions lead us beyond our Callings, or measure of
Gifts, be we jealous of them: our Rule is to be wise to sobriety, Romans 12.6.
and not to meddle with things too high, Psalm 131.1: Korah must not murmr at
Moses, Nor Vrriah usurp the Priests Office: the work of the Ministry is a
glorious Employment.

Ap. Excitements to that Function without Gifts, are but suggestions of pride,
vainglory, ambition. And thus much for the resolution of this Question.

Use: Let me add a word of Application useful for us.

1. How sad is the condition of Revolters from the grace of God, who having had
some sight or taste of the blessed Estate of the Children of God, as Balaam had,
Numb. 24. do either for fear, or love of the World with Demas, or the Enjoyment
of sinful pleasures, with those, 1 Timothy, 5.6, 11, 13. or the dread of
Affliction: Yet they do carelessly grieve, and willingly neglect, or do
violently resist, or wilfully extinguish the blessed motions and worthy Gifts
of Gods Spirit in them, yea and the holy Spirit himself; their danger is great,
see Heb. 6.6, etc. and their latter end will be worse then the beginning, 2
Pet. 2.20.

2. Few there be (at least with us) but hear the good Voice behind them:
saying, This is the way, walk in it: but how few regard it? The usual end of
such men is, that their hearts grow more obdurate, their lives more brutish
and abominable, or Agonies of conscience arise which punish them with
everlasting despair.

3. Let our men that think so little preaching will serve turn, and that we may
abate of a nimium of devotion, look to these things. Ds Slater on 1 These. 5.19.
Indeed Papists may well abate of their Nimium of Devotions, till they come to
that which God has required of them, as Esaias 1.12. and then upon the point,
they must, almost abate all, either for matter or Manner, upon one respect or
other, as they have strangely changed holy duties, and divine Services, in holy
and spiritual worship.

Use of Consolation: Yet let no weak Christian take offense at this, as if
every suppressing of a good motion, or abatement of the Spirits fervor, or
interruption of his sensible operation in us, should cast us into an
irrecoverable condition; No, God forbid, but the sin is fearful and
uncomfortable. Yet, let the weak Christian observe his first declinings, and
repair speedily, then all will be well: the Apostle speaks only of a total
final loss, both of the Exercise and Gifts of the holy Ghost, which only
befalls the wicked that are Reprobates and Cast-awayes. Thus much be spoken of
the first means of promoting this growth, increase, and abounding in good
works.

2. The next means is, let Gods Husbandmen, the Vine-dressers and Keepers of
his Orchard and Garden, look well to their Office, that the Trees under their
custody, may be called trees of Righteousness, the planting of the Lord, that
he may be glorified, Esaias 61.3. the Master will enquire of his Husbandmen, how
the fruits prosper, and will expect to receive of them in their feason, as Mat.
21.33. to 42. If the servants thus entrusted, and liberally rewarded for their
pains, shall transmit this Trust to some poor Hireling for some small trifle,
who will neglect the Vineyard, Garden or Orchard and let all run to ruin, will
the Master take it well? Yet God has too many such Laborers in his Vineyard,
pluralists and non-Residents, who transmit their trust to poor Curates that
spoil all. But let poor Hirelings be removed, and then let these
Nursing-Fathers discharge their duty as they ought, and you will find that this
is the way to make the plants prosper, the children thrive, and come on am^in
to perfection. Now these Nursing-Fathers are 1. Magistrares. 2. Ministers.
Magistrates, see Esaias 49.23. Kings shall be Nursing-fathers, etc. 2. Ministers;
so was the Apostle, he feeds with Milk or Meat as they were able to bear it, 1
Cor. 3.2, etc. So Heb. 5.12, 13, 14. You have need that one teach you the first
principles, etc. Like children, they were to be taught, olearn their letters,
and to spell, before they could read perfectly, and to feed on Milk, before
they could digest strong Meat, which might shame them for their great
negligence, that had time and means enough to have been Teachers:

(...), etc. says Clem. Alexandrinus; I have Catechized you in Christ with
suitable food, as Milk is for children, etc. To which practice of the Apostle,
do St. Ambrose and Chrysostom allude, in descanting upon the Miracle wrought
at his Martyrdom; for when he was beheaded, the Ancients do affirm (Lac pro
sanguine manasse) That Milk issued forth instead of Blood.

Ap. However, Preachers are to condescend to the capacity of the Hearers, and
to feed them with sincere Milk, that they may grow thereby, 1 Pet. 2.2.

2. Every Christian Church and Commonwealth is Gods Vineyard, Orchard, Garden,
Field, etc. Magistrates and Ministers with the Sword and Word of God, his
Authority and Doctrine do dress it, and defend it, as Adam did Paradise, Genesis
2.15. from the force and fraud of Tyrants, as Constantine, and many other
Renowned Emperors and Kings have done; From the Errors and Delusions of
Heretics, etc, as Athanasius, Epiphanius, and other Renowned Worthies have
done in their times.

3. The Magistrate sometimes proceeds to Amputation, and cuts off with the
Sword immedicabilia vulnera; He prunes the Orchard of superfluities, and weeds
the Cornfieldsd, and this is his proper work.

4. The Minister, his work is to plow up the fallow ground of men's hearts and
prepare them: then to sow good seed, and prevent the growing of weeds, by
injecting principles of Grace, and sowing the good seed of sound Doctrine and
heavenly things, John 3.12. This being done, who knows but a good Crop of good
Fruit may ensue? The Minister must be indefatigable, like Solomon's Seeds-man,
Eccl. 11.6. In the morning sow thy seed, and in the evening withhold not thy
hand, for thou know not whether shall prosper, etc. When the Word of God is
to us Line upon Line, Precept upon Precept, here a little and there a little:
as Esaias 28.10, 13. Sure, then some Lines may take right upon us, and some
Precepts reach us.

Use. Then how prayerfull should we be for those in Authority: as 1 Timothy 2.1,
2, 3. The Apostle exhorts, that first, etc. And so likewise for the Ministry,
see 1 Thessalonians. 5.25. and 2 Thessalonians. 3.1, 2. Brethren, pray for us (Bis) that the
word of the Lord may have free course and be glorified, etc. and we may be
delivered from unreasonable and wicked men, yea pray for them and obey them,
for they watch for your Souls: as both are conjoined, Heb. 13.17, 18, 19. that
they may give account with joy, etc.

2. How wise and heedfull, how circumspect and careful, etc. should all people
be in the choice of all public Officers and Trustees, whether for Church or
State, etc. that Grace may be advanced, and that public Officers (if they be
as they should be) are so useful thereunto, and all Bishops (and Presbyters)
be, in the Admission of Ministers to be over the Churches for Edification: as 2
Cor. 10.8, etc. Ergo, as 1 Timothy 5.22. The charge is, Lay hands suddenly on no
man, etc.

2. And how thankful and contentful should we be, when we have those that be
good, and faithful over us both in the Magistracy and Ministry

Whee Mordecai was mighty, (who was an excellent Magistrate) how well was it
with the Jews! See his greatness and dignity, his authority, popularity and
industry, Ester 10.2, 3. E Contra, when Haman was high, how ill was it with the
Jews, till he was hanged, Esth. 7.10. For as Psalm 12.8. The wicked, etc. When
Jehojadah was Priest, how well was it with Prince and people, 2 King. 12.2. And
how ill when he was gon^, 2 Cron. 24.25. ad finem cap. So it is in all ages,
Prove. 29.2. When the righteous are in authority, the people rejoice, etc. Thus
much be spoken of this second means of proficiency, viz. The pains and labor
of Gods Husbandmen, Vinedressers, etc.

III. Now the next means of prosiciency and increase, etc, is, Let all use
diligence in the use of Gods Ordinances, and observing their opportunities with
all such helps as God has afforded to this end. Now for the first.

1. The Scholar that attends diligently his Masters or Tutors Readings and
Directions, is like to profit to good purpose.

2. So is the Artificer, or any other Learner in any lawful or useful Trade or
Mystery, Art or Science whatsoever. 3. And so is the Christian that does attend
the means of this growth in Christianity with diligence, affection and delight.
For this you have a most remarkable example, a president scarce parrallel'd in
the whole Scripture in all particulars. Nehem. 8. per totum; For if you
confider the particulars, viz. 1. The Assembly, the Generality, and Unanimity
of it, with their desire and request to Ezra the Scribe, as one man, verse. 1.2.
2. Place, viz. The open street, under no other roof then the sky, verse. 1. 3.
Time, viz. Of the Exercise from morning till midday: They spent about about
five or six hours in those holy duties, Ver. 2.3. 4. Attention of the people,
the ears of the people were to it, Verse. 3. Like them to our Savior. Luke
1948. Execremato, They hanged on him. 5. Order and Decency, Ezra in the Pulp it
above the people, for their better convenience in hearing, Mark verse. 4, 5.6.
Gesture, both of Preacher and people, all stood up to prevent drowsiness, and
to promote true devotion and attention, ver. 4, 5.7. Acclamatious and joint
actions of the people with the Preacher in their Amens, lifting up Hands,
Bowing Heads, worshipping the Lord with heads to the ground; good expressions of
deep devotion, and of persons truly devout, as these were, verse. 6. A good
warrant for devout Gestures in the worship of God, but not at all for
superstitious gestures to Frames, and Forms and Fictions, etc. And indeed both
Jewish devotion and Popish superstition do condemn our want of reverence. 8.
Continuance and stay of the people there, ( though it was in the open street
under no other roof then the sky, verse. 1.) till all was done; For they stood
in their place, as unwearied till the end Our people hardly would do so; For we
are too soon weary of any good works, verse. 7.9. The Priests did their work
faithfully, For they did read the Law distinctly, expounded it clearly, and
applied it faithfully, which are the three main parts of preaching, verse. 8.
And the people received the word affectionately, as appears in their sorrow,
They wept passionately, and grieved mournfully for their sins against the Law
and Judgment of God threatened thereupon, as Josiah did, 2 King. 22.11, 19. But
our hearts are as hard, and dry as the flint, v. 9. in their Joy, which the
Priests exhorted, and the very day invited them to it, being consecrated for a
Festival, and a day of rejoicing, and which they performed accordingly, because
they understood the Law read unto them. Let us do so, ver. 10, 11, 12. Charity,
for they did send portions, and relieved others, as they were exhorted, verse.
10. Do we do so? verse. 12. Perseverance, for the chief of the Fathers, etc.
went to Ezra the next day when the Feast was ended, ( For the Feasts of
Trumpets lasted but one day, Numb. 29.1.) to be further informed in sundry
points, and that they might the better resolve the doubts of others. It were
well if we would do so, verse. 13. Obedience, for they presently set up the
practice of what they had been taught and learned; And this they did in keeping
the feast of Tabernacles, verse. 14. ad finem cap. and this is all that we
desire of our Hearers, To do, as taught. And thus let us be diligent in making
use of all good means according to this rerenowned and unparalle'led example of
the Jews, and not like them that live above, or below Ordinances, etc. But such
as live beside their food, are like enough to famish and perish.

To the use of means, be sure to observe your opportunities of Grace, as
Merchants, Mariners, Tradesmen, Husbandmen, Sheepherds, Fishermen, etc. All do
in their several affairs and occasions in the world.

Ap. So do you in this heavenly affair, as God does offer you more means, and
afford you many precious opportunities which others have not: Be sure you
improve the same to your further increase, and abounding in good fruits.

Thus much be spoken of this third help to proficiency, viz. To make good use
of Gods Ordinances, and our own opportunities.

The next means or help of growth and strength to abound, is Exercise; This
must be thus, viz. As proficiency comes on, be sure to make use of your graces
and abilities; As the Scholar that has learned his Grammar Rules, and is well
versed in them, will try how he can make Latin suitable to the same: And the
Logician that has well learned his Logic Rules, etc. will be disputing, and
try how he can frame an Argument, as well knowing the Rule, Frustra fit
potentia, quae non reducitur in actum, Ability not acted, is little worth. So
the young Scribe, Scribendo discit scribere; the more he writes; the better and
more easily he may write. Yea Laborers and Travelers are better fitted for
their Business and Journeys, by use and exercise.

And to encourage us hereto, our Savior has given a gracious promise, (...),
Omni habenti, (and utenti) dabitur, Mat. 25.29. And therefore gives us a charge
in each employment in the use of our graces and abilities, Luke 19.13. (...),
Negotiamini, Occupy, employ or make use of these Talents till I come. To this
end the Apostle bids Timothy, 2 Timothy 1.6. (...), Resuscitare, To stir up, to
renew, and set in former strength the gift of God which was in him: So should
we; That we may counsel and comfort others, as we our selves have been of God,
2 Cor. 1.4. as the Apostle did in time of his Troubles: And the more we do in
this kind to others, the more ability we have to do so still: He that
faithfully uses the graces of God, shall have them increased; whereas in other
things, The more we spend, the less we have, till all be gone. Money, and
Goods, and Lands, and great Estates may soon be spent by use or gift,
liberality or prodigality, bounty or magnificence, etc. But here it is
otherwise: The more free and liberral any man is of his Graces in a right use
of them, The more his stock increases, and the richer he is in a spiritual
endowment, the more he gives, the more he gains; till he be filled, brim-full,
with the fullness of God in everlasting glory.

Thus much of the fourth help to proficiency, viz. Exercisese.

5. The last help to proficiency, is guod society; make use of it; for a man
either is, or is like to be such an one as his Companions are. A man is much
bettered or worsed by company: For the words of the wise are as nails and
goads, Eccles. And do minister grace to the hearers, Ephesians. c. 4.29.

E Contra, the language of evil company is like an open Sepulcher, and the
poison of Asps, full of filthiness and deadly poison, so is the discourse of
such, full of blasphemies against God, of Reproaches, and railing at men (not
of their mind) and as contagiously infectious, as the poison of Alps; For which
there is no remedy but cutting of, Romans 3.13. So here, the only remedy is
cutting off such company from us, or such dangerous tongues in our Saviors
sense, Mat. 18.8. least being incurably infected, we perishby the poison of it.
Naturalists observe, That the Stag (or Heart) and the Serpent, the Wolves and
Sheep cannot agree, and Vines and Coleworths can never grow together: and so it
is with good men, when mixed with ill company, there can be no agreement: e
contra, Vines and Olives, the Fig Tree and Rue, or Herb-grace planted at his
root, yea Lilies and Roses are much the more fragrant, if Garlic be planted by
them: so wise and hot Christians will do. And the Lizard loves a man so well,
that he preserves him from the Serpent: so will a good companion do. Bad
acquaintance cannot be avoided; But bad Familiars may: Let this be our
practice, and prosper: vid. Keck. 1. Tom. p. 1388. etc. Magir. p. 206, 207.

From this last particular in this verse: you have heard the main end of all
our preaching and your learning, viz. That increasing in grace, and abounding
in good works, is a Christians excellency as well as it is his duty. This point
has been proved and confirmed to you at large: The Uses were of Lamentation,
Reproof, Exhortation; Examination, and Consolation. The three first of these
are dispatched already; The two last remains, so that I am now upon the fourth,
viz. Of Examination.

Use 4. The fourth Use is of Examination, which puts us upon the Trial, whether
we do increase and abound as we ought to do, and for the better effecting of
this trial, and our more certainty therein, forasmuch as we are fallen upon the
Scripture-allegory, which does often compare the faithful to the Trees of the
garden of God, as the Vires, Palms and Cedars. etc. let me give you a taste of
your trial from some signs which do appear in Trees, whether they do thrive and
prosper, or not; which signs do arise from the Root, Body, Bark, Branch, Fruit,
and Stature of such Trees.

1. The Root. The Tree firmly rooted grows amain and prospers. Oh that this
were our case; this is that which the Apostle prays for heartily, and persuades
to seriously, Ephesians. 3.16. to 20. and Col. 2.6, 7. viz. That they may be
strengthened, well rooted, and firmly established in the faith, able to
comprehend, etc. So were most of the Martyrs and Professors of Jesus in all
ages; these could stand in a storm, and abide terrible blasts: Neither
Persecuters, nor Seducers could pluck them up by the roots: Such were some of
the Churches of Asia, viz. Smyrna, Thyatira and Philadelphia, Rev. 2.8, 18. and
3.7. yet had they Persecutors, Seducers, etc. To try what they could do: This
is the drist of the Ministry, Ephesians. 4.13, to 17. That we may become perfect
men, no more children tossed to and fro, and carried about, etc. But speaking
the truth, might grow up in Christ in all things. Now that you may be sure that
you are well rooted, look what faith you have, for Faith is a root, which in a
well grown Christian is very strong; it sends forth its suckers to the
Rivers, The waters of life which bring in supply, and do enable us to,

1. Great obedience, as in Abraham offering up Isaac, Genesis 22. The rich in
Faith, are so in good works: This Root yields abundance of good fruit: The poor
of this world that are rich in faith, are chosen of God, and Heirs of the
kingdom promised by him, Jam. 2.5. The rich in this world that have learned not
to be high-minded, nor to trust in uncertain riches, but in the living God,
etc. And to do good, to be rich in good works: These lay a good foundation for
the time to come, that they may lay hold on eternal life, 1 Timothy 6.17, 18, 19.
Poor Lazarus, and rich Abraham, both being rich in Faith, do enjoy the same
Glory with God, this is a good root, that sends up its branches and fruit as
high as heaven; this faith does perform.

2. Great Conquests over sin, and great corruptions. The Faith of Miracles
could remove Mountains, so can this. For by faith we do resist the Devil, 1
Pet. 5.8, 9. And put him to flight, Jam. 4.7.

3. To stand against great discouragement as Job 13.15. Though he slay me, yet
will I trust in him; and that woman of Canaan, Mat. 15.22, to 29. Who by faith
still waited upon Christ, against the discouragement of his not being sent to
such, and terming her a Dog.

4. And in great dangers: A good man shall not be moved for ever nor be afraid
of evil tidings, His heart is fixed, etc. Psalm 112.6, 7. And our Savior
advises viseth us. John 14.1, 2, 3. Let not your hearts be troubled: Why? Mark
their belief in God, believe also in me, and heavenly Mansions are prepared for
you, and you shall be with me.

Thus Faith is a blessed root; the Tree so rooted shall prosper: And concerning
this, we all had need to pray with him in the Go pel. Mark 9.24. And that with
tears, saying, Lord, I believe, help thou my unbelief: thus Faith is the
Christians root, producing Obedience, Courage, Patience and Peserverance.

2. Body: Look upon the body of a Tree, and Judge of its proficiency, so upon
the grace and strength of a Christian. In a tree that is now become Timber, fit
to be a Pillar, a principle beam in the building, which was but a Twig etc. In
Corn, When sown, and a while after we see little, or nothing; but when it is
grown, it is visible and sensible to all, though we saw not how it grew, Mark
4.26. to 30. So it is here. The Saints that lately were but Babes in Christ, 1
Cor. 3.1. 1 Pet. 2.2. are now become strong men that can wrestle with God, as
Jacob did, and prevailed, Genesis 32.24.

Quest. But how was this wrestling?

Answ. He wept and made supplication unto him; he found him in Bethel, i.e. the
House of God, etc. Hos. 12.4, 4, 5. So David also, in the temptation about the
prosperity of the wicked must to Bethel, the Sanctuary of God, Ps. 73.17. There
he prevailed and understood their end, how soon they came to destruction.

2. Satan also, and all his powers: for we wrestle not against flesh and
blood, but against principalities, against powers, etc.

3. Afstictions also, which the godly bear, as Sampson did the gates of Agazah,
Jud. 16.3. which would break the back of a child. Thus by the Body, you may
discern the growth of this Tree of Grace.

3. Bark, which of a thriveable Tree is usually smooth, and not mossy and
rugged, as of some other trees which prosper not.

Ap. So here, look upon the Deportment, the countenance and carriage; the
external profession, practice and dealing of the godly, is such, that their
profiting does appear to all, as 1 Timothy 4.15.

They are not Rugged, and overgrown with evil practices like others, whose
lives are spent in lasciviousness, lusts, excess, revellings, banquettings, and
abominable Idolatries; running into all manner of Riot, and speaking evil of
the godly, 1 Pet. 4.3, 4. as the Drunkards did of David, Ps. 69.11, 12. Whereas
the godly like Daniel and his Companions, Dan. 1.12, 13, 14. have a new
complexion of Soul, a smoothness, not of hypocrisy, but of sincerity. New
Tongues, Mark 16.17. such as they were not used to: For before they were
earthly, Joh. 3.31. he that is of the earth, etc. and worldly, 1 John 4.5. For
they of the world, speak of the world, etc. But now it is otherwise with them,
they have learned a new Language, for the mouth of the righteous speaks
wisdom, etc. And why? but because the law of his God is in his heart, Ps.
37.30, 31. A good fountain yields a suitable stream, so such an heart; and the
good woman opens her mouth with wisdom, etc. Pro. 31.26. and the Law of
kindness (not of scolding, etc.) is in her Tongue. Corrupt communication is
changed into that which is good for the use of edifying, that it may minister
grace to the Hearers, Ephesians. 4.29. They have put away, and (as it were) purged
out all those evil Qualities mentioned, Col. 3.8. anger, wrath, malice,
blasphemy, filthy-communications, lying, and the like; and have put on (as the
Elect of God) Bowels of mercy, kindness, humbleness of mind, meekness,
long-suffering, Forbearing and Forgiving one another in the case of Quarrel,
and above all, exercising charity, which is the bond of perfectness, Col.
3.12, 13, 14.

4. Branch; The flourishing branches of fruitful Trees, are a shelter and
refreshing to many. So is the prosperity of the godly, whether it be external,
or internal, if they flourish and prosper outwardly in the World, as well as
inwardly and spiritually in the things of God; and if God bless them with
abundance of outward things, then they become a shelter to others: as Job
29.12. to 18. to the poor, blind and lame, and men ready to perish: And as the
Lord himself, so they also in their proportion, do become strength to the poor
and needy, a Refuge from the storm, a shadow from the heat, when the blast of
the terrible Ones, is as a storm against the Wall, Isa. 25.4. to shelter it;
but that God restrains Wrath, Ps. 76.10. or, as good O badiah to the 100.
Prophets, whom he hid by fifty in a Cave, and fed them with bread and water,
and that in K. Ahabs time, when wicked Jezabel sought their destruction, 1
Kings 88.3, 4.

Ap. Thus these flourishing Trees, if they do abound in inward and spiritual
graces, viz. in Faith, Utterance, and in Knowledge, etc. as well as in outward
things, like Gajus, 3 John. 2. then you may be sure, they will abound in this
Grace also, i.e. in Charity and the Fruits thereof, Bounty, Liberality, etc. 2
Cor. 8.7.

5. Fruit: Every man will judge of the goodness of a Tree by its Fruit: if the
fruit be good, the tree is so also, Mat. 7.16, 17, etc. So these trees in the
Garden of God (whom the Apostle calls the servants of God) they have their
fruit unto holiness, and the end everlasting life, Romans 6.2, 2. their words
and works are holy: they bring forth good fruit, and shall (be sure) not to
lose their reward: no labor is lost in this kind, but shall be richly
recompensed. See 1 Cor 15.58. Therefore my beloved, etc. Men do not gather
grapes of thorns, and figs of thistles; it is only a good Tree that brings
forth good Fruit, etc. Mat. 7.16. etc. But when our Vines (the people of God)
as they account themselves) are of (or worse then) the Vine of Sodom, or field
of Gomorrah; Our grapes of gall, our clusters bitter, our wine the poison of
Dragons and cruel venom of Asps, as wickedness is compared, Deuteronomy. 32, etc. when
we bring forth fruit like that bad Vine Esaias 5.1. to 8. such wild grapes as
Mishpac for Mishpat, Tzognakah for Tzedakah, a wound instead of judgment, and
a Cry instead of Righteousness, as the elegant Evangelical Courtly Prophet
phraseth it; when the Lord looks for judgment, behold oppressions; for
Righteousness, but behold a Cry; this is a sad and bad return of Gods care
over us. When our fruit is like those naughty figs, which could not be eaten
they were so bad, Jer. 24.2, 3, 8, 9, 10.

Ap. How then can we account our selves trees of the Garden of God; and what
can we expect but that vengeance and those heavy Judgments threatened, Deuteronomy.
32.34, 35. Esaias 5.5. Jer. 24.8, etc. viz. that our feet shall slide, and our
calamity approach; That we shall be laid wast, our fence removed, and our walls
be broken down, our selves exposed to Briars and Thorns, to be eaten up and
trodden down by all, being left without Rain, and the husbandry of God, his
pruning, etc. denied to us: That we shall be exposed to captivity, to be a
Reproach, Taunt, and a curse unto others: and to be punished with the Sword,
the famine, and the pestilence, till we be consumed, ut locis citatis. These
things have befallen, and the like may upon the like sin, and occasions.

6. Stature; We judge Trees and other things by their stature, all trees and
men, etc. are not of the same dimensions of stature, yet they may have a
proportionable perfection suitable to that stature which they are capable of:
and that stature is Argument enough of their growth, strength and proficiency:
and a little man, a slender Tree, may be very active and fruitful, yet every
tree and man must attain to that fullness and perfection of stature allotted him
by Nature, and then they are of full growth.

Ap. So it is with true Christians (the Trees of the Garden of God) all have
not the same measure of grace, some have more, some less: as of faith, hope,
patience and other perfections, yet all must endeavor to a full growth, unto a
perfect man, unto the measure of the stature of the fullness of Christ, Ephesians.
4.13. Now this fullness of stature, this high measure of growth does refer to
1. particular persons as members, or 2. the whole Church, as the Body.

1. For particular persons the members of the Church; you must know that all
are not of the same stature, growth and perfection in godliness, some are of
one, and others of another dimension. Some are Babes in Christ, weak Christians
that must be fed with milk. Others are strong and tall in perfections, who feed
upon strong meat, having their senses exercised to discern both good and evil,
Heb. 5.12.13, 14. Yet nevertheless this Disparity, all have their growth and
measure of grace proportioned for them: though this measure, or stature of a
Christian in grace, cannot be stated in this life, because here we can never
attain to perfection; the babe has his fullness, and the strongest his wants:
other things attain to their Achme of Nature, the top of perfection. the
Christians top-stone is in Heaven, Ergo, whilst we be here, let us be still
growing, and learning to abound more and more.

2. As this stature does refer to the whole Body of the Church, together: Note,
That in Heaven every member shall be filled with perfection of grace and
godliness, and the knowledge of our Lord and Savior Jesus Christ: and then the
whole mystical body of Christ shall be completed in Glory, by the addition of
every member in perfection. To which end the Ministry is singularly useful to
the end of the World, Ephesians. 4.8, 11, to 17. You do know the point underhand,
the confirmation and application of it, the Uses are five: all which are
dismissed but the last, which I do now enter upon.

5. Use is of Consolation; the comfort cannot but be very great, to all that
find this growth and strength, this proficiency, and ability in themselves: the
measure of this stature in so large a proportion: Each proof and Argument,
Instance and Illustration of the point, cannot but fill them with abundant
consolation, and joy in the holy Ghost. The very sense and conscience of
well-doing is full of Comfort; The experience of a well-grown Christian, of his
own danger and deliverance, Conflicts and Conquests, besides the manifold
promises of God to them that overcome, that fight the good fight of Faith, and
run the Race set before them, that hold out to the end, and are faithful to
the Death, Rev. 2.3. Heb. 12.1, 2. Rev. 2.10. These are streams of comfort,
that refresh the souls of such with continual comforts that will never be dried
up; so that to such, light looks in at every crevise, and joy at every
loop-hole. A window is opened into the Ark of their Breasts, to assure them
that the waters of Tribulations, etc, are assuaged, and a wide door is opened
to them into the everlasting kingdom of the Lord Jesus Christ, 2 Pet. 1.11.
Therefore I need not speak much to comfort them, that are thus abundantly
comforted of God, and endowed with such fullness.

2, But this Use of comfort is especially intended to all such as write bitter
things against themselves, and deny their own mercies: nevertheless, that they
have much interest in the Comforts of God. They are full of fears and doubts,
and are apt to object against themselves in this (or the like) manner.

1. Touching this fullness, measure and stature of perfection; I fall so far
short of it, because of my corruptions and evils remaining, etc. that I do even
despair of ever attaining to it.

2. And as for growth, I fear Grace decays and Ebbs in me, because I am not so
affected, and earnest in the pursuit of it, and love of it, as I have formerly
been at my first conversion.

3. Besides, I do want that sense, sight and feeling of Gods Favor and
Loving Kindness, which he usually bestows upon good Proficients: as also of
my own full assurance of salvation.

4. Yea, I am exposed to Satan's Siftings, Buffettings and Temptations, as it
befell Peter, Luke 22.31, 32, 33, 34. Mark it: and Paul, that indefatigable
Apostle in the Work of Christ, 2 Cor. 12.7.

These, and the like are the usual complains of very precious Christians.

Answ. I answer 1. By way of concession, that all this may be: For God is
pleased sometimes to withdraw his own presence and to withhold our assurance,
etc. for special ends, viz.

1. To make us see our own weakness, in doing good, or bearing evil: how that
without him we move as Pharoahs Chariots did without Wheels: and when storms
and troubles arise and appear as imminent, we sink, or deny as Peter did, Mat.
14.30. and 26.7.

2. To seek, support, and strength of him, as Infants do to be upheld by the
Parent or Nurse, as David did, Ps. 51.12. and of which he was very confident,
Psa. 27.14, etc. and which God has promised so freely, Isa. 41.10. Fear them
not, for I am with thee, be not dispaid, for I am thy God: I will strengthen
thee, yea I will help thee: yea, I will uphold thee with the right hand of my
Righteousness.

3. To be more watchful against occasions, and Temptations to sin, ictus
piscator sapit, says the old Proverb; the Fisherman that has touched a
Torpedo (or Crampfish) will be more wary afterward, and the burnt-child will
fear the fire, say we, and he that has hurt himself by a Fall, will look to
his Feet hereafter. This is case: and the end of Gods withdrawing his Comforts.

4. For Correction, as to David, psalm 51.8, 12 whose bones were so broken, and
joys so eclipsed (you know for what) that he prayed heartily to God, to
splint, and to restore his joys again.

5. For trial of their Faith and patience, etc. as 1 Pet. 1.6, 7, etc. Thus the
Lord dealt with Job, Hezekiah, etc. See Romans 5.3, 4, 5. Tribulation produces
patience, Experience and Hope.

6. For prevention of pride, self-confidence, and other-like sins; Thus the
Lord dealt with Paul, 2 Cor. 12.7. Least he should be exalted above measure,
because of his Revelations, the Messenger of Satan was let loose to buffet him,
etc. v. 7, 8, 9, 10. And thus with Peter, Mat. 26.31.33, 34, 35. who was so
very confident of himself, that though all men yet he would never be offended,
but would rather die with, then deny his Master.

7. To work in us Commiseration, and pity toward others that are fallen, Not
to insult over, but to help and restore such persons, Gal. 6.1, 2, 3. if a man
be overtaken in a fault, etc. Yea, and bear ye one another burdens, etc. For
if any man think himself to be something, when he is nothing, he deceives
himself. We should be tender in such cases, and moderate severity, Salsedinem
correptionis amor Christi temporet; and Dilectionem proximi, Sal justitiae
condiat: Let the love of Christ, and of our Neighbor, temper and season the
sharpness of Reproof and punishment, for it may be our own case, and nothing
should incline us to mercy more then (proprii periculi cogitatio) that we are
in danger of the same, non ignara mali, etc. could Dido say, Virgil.

And Note, that they commonly are the most severe Judges of other men's faults,
that are most forgetful of their own: But it should not be so with us, we must
bear each others Burden, by having compassion of our Brethrens failings and
infirmities, and doing our best to relieve and restore them.

8. And lastly; To increase our love and thankfulness to God, when we are
restored and recovered, as David did when he had been near Hell, etc. Ps. 116.
per totum and Hezekiah, Esaias 38.9, to 21. when he was past all hope of Life,
and did chatter like the Crane, or Swallow, and had been in great bitterness,
yet then the Lord was ready to save him; and therefore, says he, I will sing
my Songs to the stringed Instruments, all the days of my life in the House of
the Lord, v. 20. He would praise the Lord both in public and private for so
great a mercy. Thus the memory of Gods mercies should abide with us, when the
Act is over, see Psalm 341, etc. as the savor does in the Box or Bottle, when
the Civet and hot Water are out or absent. Thus the Best may have their
Abatements, their Troubles and Trials, their Clouds and Eclipses in this Life:
And thus much be answered by way of Concession But now

2. As to the Thing objected: I do answer for mitigation.

1. To the first, touching the stature of perfection, etc. You must know, that
all have not the same dimensions of Grace; and that none can attain to their
full growth in this Life, do you endeavor it, and use the means, and you are
safe.

2. To the second, as to their fear of decay in Grace, and want of love to it.
Consider, that in Grace there is the newness of it at first, and the worth of
it always. Now in our first conversion, we are most taken with the Excellency
of Grace, though we may prize it at as high a Value, and worth ever after: As
we are with Land and Jewels, we are most taken with them at the first: yet we
value them at as high a rate many years after. The Schoolmen distinguish of
Love Intensive, or Appretiative Let your love to Grace set a value upon it,
though the ardour of your Affections do not always flame alike toward it.

3. To the third, touching the sense of Gods Favor, etc and the assurance of
our own salvation. You must consider, That no man is always alike, either in
Bodily health, or spiritual Comforts: we must expect vicissitudes and bear
them. And as to our assurance; Be sure to secure the Certitudo Adhaerentiae,
though the Certitudo Evidentiae be absent. The Assurance of evidence is
haveable by strong Christians, but all true Christians have the Assurance of
Adherence. They are sure, they do cleave only to Christ, and depend upon him
for their salvation, and upon no other, Saint or Angel, etc. And to him they
live, and apply themselves in their Conversation. This Assurance being secured,
the other will follow in Life or Death.

4. To the fourth, touching Satan's Buffettings, Temptations, etc. Neither look
to be fully freed from them in this world: the best have born them, but Glory
is coming that will free us from them all, Romans 16 20. Thus much in Answer by
way of Mitigation.

Now thirdly, I answer in the way of Consolation to weak Christians: That
nevertheless the forenamed Scruples, Doubts and Fears, etc. which may be their
great Affliction, yet their comfort is, and may be, that they shall not fall
away totally and finally from Grace, and that upon these Grounds, viz. 1.
Election. 2. Vocation. 3. Gods covenant and Promises. 4. Christ's
All Sufficiency; and 5. the Seal of the Holy Ghost.

1. Election of God, is firm and sure: an Act of Gods free Grace; Hence all
things work together for their good, etc. and who can lay any thing to the
charge of Gods Elect, etc. Romans 8.28. to 35. For the gifts and Calling of God
are without Repentance, Romans 11.29.

2. Vocation, Our Calling is unto Eternal Glory by Christ Jesus, 1 Pet. 5.10,
By which God infuseth into the Elect a principle of Duration and continuance:
and hereupon it is called Radix insita, a Root deeply fastened or settled in us;
Such have Root in themselves which the seed in the stony ground wanted, Mat.
13.20, 21. and therefore dured or continued but a while, Sermo insitus, An
ingraffed Word, which as a graff turns the stock into its own Nature: a
Metaphor from graffing, etc. James 1.21. Or an implanted Word, ((...)) which
will grow up, increase and continue long with you, Semen manens, and Immortale,
a seed remaining in us, 1 John 3.9. and we are said to be born again, not of
corruptible seed, but of incorruptible, by the Word of God, which lives and
abides for ever, 1 Pet. 1.23. For, as Psalm 119.89. We may all say, For ever,
O Lord, thy Word is settled in Heaven: as David did, Unctio manens, An Anointing
which abides in men, and teaches them all things, 1 John 2.20.27. the Word
and Spirit of God, will safeguard you from false Teachers. The Spirit that
Anointed Christ for a King and Priest, has also anointed you to be such
spiritually, Revel. 1.6. that you may be able to stand against false Teachers;
and from Christ, as from a Spring or Fountain, the Graces of Gods Spirit are
communicated to us, John 1, 16, Col. 1.19. For it pleased the Father that in
him should all fullness dwell.

This is no new Light, to make men contemn their faithful Godly Teachers (Sed
contra) but a true Light, to teach us to honor them, and obey their godly
Doctrine. Spiritus inhabitans, the Spirit of God dwelling in them, 1 Cor. 3.16.
and 6.19. A most desirable guest, which infuseth and supporteth grace in us,
and will not suddenly change his habitation: Let it be our care not to grieve
him, quench or resist his graces or motions, etc. but to please him in all
things. Fons aquaesalientis in vitam aeternam, Joh. 4.14. A well of water
springing up into everlasting life, i.e. The grace and spirit of regeneration,
with the blessed fruits thereof, with which their weary souls shall be so
refreshed, and they themselves so supplied, and furnished with all good, That
they shall be satisfied as in the presence of God, Isa. 49.9. So that as the
gift of Election, so also of our vocation which is of God, is without
repentance, Romans 11.29. For whom he called, them he also justified and
glorified, 8.30.

III. A third Argument of Comfort against all the Scruples aforesaid. Gods
Covenant and Promises which are irrevocable, irrefragable (or invincible) and
unchangeable, as the water of Noah, etc. Isa 54.6, 7, to 11. Nay, the mountains
may be removed, etc. But the kindness of God, and the Covenant of his peace,
shall never be removed from his people, but he will have mercy upon them, So
Jer. 31.33, to 38. God does covenant with his people, to write his law in their
hearts, and to fill them with knowledge. and to show how unchangable he is in
his Covenant and Promises; He compares them with the ordinances of heaven: So
that as sure as the course, which God has established in nature for the
constant motion and intercourse of the celestial Creatures, the Sun, Moon and
Stars, to give light by day, and by night, and for confining that vast body of
the Sea to the place, and limits assigned to it; as sure, I say, as these
things shall without interruption or intermission persist in their course unto
the end of the world: so sure is his Covenant with his people; nor shall it be
changed, till the heavens above can be exactly measured, or the foundation of
the earth searched out by us men, which can never be. So unchangable is his
Covenant with his people: As for those words in the Covenant, They shall no
more teach every man his Neighbor, etc. It is not to be conceived, as if they
should have no need of teaching at all in those times, or that the Office of
Teachers should then cease as superfluous. For while men live in this world,
they know but in part, 1 Cor. 8.2. and 13.19. Nor can any be so perfect in
knowledge or grace whilst they live here, but that they may grow further, Phil.
3.12. I have not yet attained, etc. 2 Pet. 3.18. And the Office of teaching is
to continue to the end of the world, Mat. 28.20. Ephesians. 4.11, 12, 13.

But to pass by the different conceits, and interpretations of many; This form
of speech may very well intimate the great measure of clear light that should
in those times be revealed, 2 Cor. 4.3, 6. If our Gospel be hid. etc. For God
who commanded the light to shine out darkness, has shined in our hearts to
give the light of the knowledge of the glory of God in the face of Jesus
Christ. The great measure of knowledge that should by reason thereof abound.
Isa. 11.9. As the waters cover the sea. So Hab. 2.14. The clearness of
understanding that many should be so possessed with, as if taught by
irradiation, rather than by any means of instruction. Call. 1.12. I received not
the Gospel of man, etc. but by the revelation of Jesus Christ. The numerosity
of knowing persons then above former times, yea, and amongst the meaner sort of
people, Acts 18.25, 26. And thus much by the way, for Explanation of that
phrase in the Covenant.

Now as the Covenant of God is unchangeable to his people, so for our constancy
in cleaving to him, (wherein lies all the doubt) we have a most gracious
promise, Jer. 32.40. That as God will not turn away from us to do us good, so
he will put his fear into our hearts, that we shall not depart from him, whence
conclude, that when a people are really brought home to Christ, they shall
never fall off from him again. Isa. 59.20, 21. The Redeemer shall come to Zion,
and unto them that turn from transgression, etc. Thus says the Lord, My spirit
is upon thee, and the words that I have put in thy mouth, shall not depart,
etc. from henceforth and for ever.

IV. Christ's fullness, and Al-sufficiency, his Potency and Prevalency: 1. In
satisfaction, For by him alone we have received the atonement, Romans 5.11. He
only has wrought reconciliation betwixt God and us, Col. 1.20. He is our High
Priest, who once for all, has offered up one sacrifice for sins for ever; by
which one offering he has perfected for ever them that are sanctified, Heb.
10, 10, 11, 12, 14.

2. In supplication for all Believers, and his prayers are prevalent, and were
never denied; See John 17. per totum, and Verse. 20. to 25.

V. The Seal and earnest of the holy Spirit in our hearts, 2 Cor. 1.22. that
ratifieth in us his Vocation and Election by the grace of regeneration, which
is a Seal-signing, or marking us for himself: as 2 Timothy 2.19. The foundation of
God stands sure; having this Seal, the Lord knows them that are his; and
let him that names the Name of the Lord Jesus Christ depart from iniquity.
This is the Lords seal: and his Earnest is much to the same effect; for as an
Earnest is a pledge whereby we confirm a bargain, or a piece of money, whereby
we assure the payment of the whole sum remaining.

Ap. So the Seal and Eearnest of our Regeneration, and the renewing of Gods
image within us, is the pledge of our whole Inheritance, and does assure us
more and more of the accomplishment of all Gods gracious promises toward us,
Ephesians. 1.13, 14. And as a deed after sealing is unchangable, and a Bargain
after Earnest given, is irreversible: So is the Sealing and Earnest of Gods
Spirit (like the Laws of the Medes and Persians which altered not, Dan. 6.8.)
unalterable; For true Believers are kept by the power of God through faith unto
salvation, ready to be revealed in the last time at Christ's appearance, 1 Pet.
1.4. when we shall be made partakers of that inheritance incorruptible, and
undefiled, and that fades not away, reserved in heaven for us, 1 Pet. 1.3. For
when Christ, who is our life shall appear, then shall we also appear with him
in glory, Col. 3.4.

Thus the comfort of a true (though weak) Christian, does spring from our
Election, which is of God, 1 These. 1.4. Our Vocation, which is heavenly, Heb.
3.1. Gods Covenant and Promises which are unchangable. Christ's sulness and
Al-sufficiency in satisfaction and supplication. The Seal and Earnest of the
holy Spirit in our hearts: so that though it may so befall, that as sometimes we
our selves do not see our own safety; yet others may, when we cannot not; and
though Grace be but small, and of slender growth in us, yet if it be true, it
will receive a blessing from God, and make way to eternal Glory. The
hindrances of our comfort shall be removed; such as Acts 26.18. Darkness; and
the power of Satan, etc. from whom we are called. Furtherance to duty is
afforded, Titus 2.11, 12, 13. For the Grace of God that brings salvation,
has appeared to all men, teaching us, that denying ungodliness and worldly
lusts, etc. looking for that blessed hope, and the glorious appearing of the
great God, and our Savior Jesus Christ, who at his coming, shall change our
vile body, that it may be fashioned like unto his glorious body, etc. Phil.
3.20, 21. And thus does he induct his servants into heavenly glory: God will
own and crown all his own works and graces in us, to our everlasting felicity:
Amen, Lord Jesus.

Thus I have done further speaking of the Apostles farewell, but I trust you
will never have done practicing what this Scripture has suggested, and
accordingly has been taught unto you, which will be of singular use to
preserve you from Atheism, Papism and Phanaticism, and to direct you in the way
that is truly Christian, where you may walk and please God, and abound in good,
till you may attain to glory, which the good Lord grant unto us.

FINIS.

