VENN AND HIS MERMYDONS: OR, THE Linen-Draper Capotted:

BEING A Serious and Seasonable Advice To the CITIZENS OF LONDON, Occasioned by
the Indirect Practices used in the late ELECTION of SHERIFFS.

Written by a Citizen of London.

LONDON, Printed in the Year 1679.

Serious and Seasonable ADVICE To the CITIZENS of LONDON, etc.
Friends and Fellow-Citizens.
THe End of these few Lines is to persuade Peace, which every man pretends to
covet; but the end is not attainable without the use, means, and avoiding that
which is of a contrary Importance. Some few things are here pointed at, which
have occasioned disturbance in Families, hatred and animosity among Neighbors,
disorders in the City, oppression and violence in the Nation. That such things
may not happen amongst us any more, is the design of this Paper, and shall be
the constant and hearty Prayers of the Author.

It behooves every good Citizen to have a watchful Eye toward such Persons and
Actions as would cast Scorn and Contempt upon the meanest Instrument of
Government. It is rare if any man be made desperately wicked at once. Evil is
propagated by degrees. Hard thoughts of our Superior, are often followed with
Hatred, and after with Sedition and Rebellion, great things taking their rise
from small and insensible beginnings. A Cloud of the bigness of a Hand, spreads
the face of the Heavens. Thus a disobedient Servant proves a bad Master, and a
worse Citizen. If we slacken in the least the Chain of our Duty, the Devil
quickly takes advantage. Some men who at first detested Rebellion, have laughed
and talked themselves into Disobedience, for which, perhaps, being worthily
punished, has so exasperated their minds, so as nothing wanted for revenge,
but an opportunity. Others there be, whose great felicity lies in hearing and
telling News: These are a sort of Busybodies, and men for the most part, of
small employment, and as little discretion, that receive all they hear
(especially such things as will please their Party) without examining the
probability of its being true or false; and having heard some odd Story, go
(big with it) to the next Club, where it is related with abundance of
formality; and if it be any thing relating to the Government, it is ten to one
but some Surmise or sad Descant, as bad as Malice can invent, is added over and
above. A ready way to introduce a disaffection toward those in Authority, and
prepare men's minds for Disobedience and Rebellion: Therefore such Malapert
Talkers, who are always finding fault, and like Flies, are apt to dwell upon
every Sore, ought to be Brow-beaten, scorned, and opposed by every honest
Citizen, as the Bane of Society, and Pests of the Commonwealth. Let us all
endeavor to live like Men, and Christians, and boldly reprove such as offer to
put Affronts and Contempts upon Authority: A far readier way to cure their
itching Malady, than by taking pleasure in their Fooleries and impertinencies.
Let every man in his station pursue those things that make for PEACE. We are
all Members of one City, Subjects of one Kingdom: all embarked in the same
Vessel, and if that suffers Shipwreck, none can promise immunity to themselves.
In a word, Let us fear God, honor the King, and not meddle with those that are
given to change.

There is also another sort of men among us, so well conceited as to think
themselves fit to be sharers in the Government, and are always complaining that
something is amiss. Men of petulant testy humors, and factious Spirits, never
contented, never pleased. Is it not a shame to think what a foolish and
ridiculous attempt was lately made to introduce an Officer among us? Did they
fancy the Government would be Trickt into a Sheriff? What was the Man? How
qualified, that such sinister and undue practices were used about his Election?
I believe but few men will bespeak him Master of any extraordinary measure of
Reason, Judgment or Piety. As for his Estate, that was granted deficient, even
by his own Faction, as appears by their Subscriptions toward the upholding of
his Grandeur. Certainly They have need of a Bird that give a Great for an OWL!
What then? Why the truth is, though nothing can be more ridiculous than Empty
Boldness, yet this man's confident and seditious speaking, which made him
obnoxious to the Law, has advanced his Reputation with some men to an high
rate, who otherwise might have passed along unobserved. Is this an Office to be
carried on with Contribution? Is it not one of the highest places of Trust in
this great City? Ought not he, whoever is Elected to that dignity, to be able
to bear the charge without auxiliaries, as well for his own security as the
Cities honor? For should he fail in that particular, he must not only be
ruined, but the Office fall lame by the way. Yet this man, till he saw his
Party confounded, offered without blushing to accept it. It is an Office of
that Trust, as ought to be committed to the care of none but persons of known
Integrity, Religion, and Honesty, that in times of danger and disorder, may
keep the Peace, and not encourage Sedition and Tumult: one firm in his
Allegiance to his Majesty, and a true Protestant according to the Church of
England. What design these men had in offering their purses so freely toward
setting up this Puppet Sheriff, God and their own hearts only know; but
certainly it has an ill aspect, for that during his Office he must have been
Pensioner to the meanest Tradesman of his Party. Some few Quakers afforded him
their Votes, but their frugality and principles, I suppose, would hardly, allow
them to club toward Feasting or Fine Clothes. Whatsoever their end was, they
are not to be approved, who seek to acquire good ends by bad means; and in this
Essay they showed the Popish party a new device (though they have already more
tricks than are good) by Subscriptions and Cabals to introduce some of their
Favorites into places of Honor and Trust.

Consider the danger and inconvenience that arises from the multitude of
Pamphlets that are published every day, filled with Lies and Falsehood, to the
dishonor of God and Religion: containing base and unworthy reflections upon
most men of the greatest Authority in the Nation, not sparing at some turns
(though in cunning and canting terms) the Person and Government of his Sacred
Majesty. Are not all public Actions turned into Ridicule by these petty
Scriblers, who have hardly Bread to eat, but what they receive for their Weekly
Copy? Do we not all know that not long since Poor Robins Intelligence was
Weekly published, where the Author took upon him to make a Laughing Stock of
any person, to whom he was prompted, either by money or malice, or to fill up
an empty space in his Pamphlet? And though he forbore to name the persons, yet
pointed at them by such Notes and Characters, as they were easily known by any
that were of the Neighborhood, to the great disturbance of Families and breach
of Charity among Citizens, till for abusing a person of Honor, Authority took
occasion to chastize his insolence by stopping the Press: which particulars, as
to him, had been omitted, but that he, or such another, has, and still does
take upon him to traduce and asperse the Justice of the Nation, in unworthy and
unseemly terms, not caring whether the matter be true or false, so it will help
to sell the Book. It is true the Lord Major has taken some care about those
Pamphlets, but still there remains a duty upon every private Citizen that may
tend much to suppressing the mischiefs thereby arising: for if in stead of
reading them with delight and complacency, they and their Authors were
discountenanced, it would contribute much to the quiet and tranquillity of the
City and Nation. Let each man observe this decorum; and for want of reward,
those that write them would soon be compelled to turn their Pens to some
honester employment. It is no small trouble to men that are peaceably disposed,
to see how eagerly the multitude pursue those mischievous vanities which
commonly the sharper and more Satirical they are against those in place and
authority, find the most ready and approved reception, though to speak plain,
it is a certain indication of a depraved constitution, when men are better
pleased with things sour and crude, than with what affords wholesome nutriment.
And the youth of this City, with some others, who are but Children in
Understanding, are as it were insensibly tainted with dislike of the
Government, by receiving those seeds of Sedition which afterward afford an
Harvest too plentiful, and upon every occasion and opportunity is ready to
break forth into open Rebellion against those, whom by the Law of Nature and
Religion they are bound to obey, esteem, and honor.

For my own part I am as deeply sensible of the late horrid and damnable Plot
against the person of his sacred Majesty, and the Protestant Religion as any
man, and am verily persuaded the King himself, and those about him, are
sufficiently satisfied how industriously it has been carried on, contrived,
and fomented by the Romish Emissaries both at home and abroad. But withal, I
do profess, I think it our greatest prudence and duty to leave the prosecution
of those villainous Conspirators to his Majesty, and those whom he is pleased to
authorize for that purpose, and not for us to meddle with censuring their
proceedings, either for Method, Place, or Time, but to rest satisfied with what
they shall think fit to do in the matter, lest we be found among the number of
those who are heady, high-minded, and speak evil of dignities, and that would
rob the King of his Diadem. For what is it less, if we cry out that those who
sit at the Helm are either ignorant, or abettors, or favorers of such horrid
designs; in the one case we presume our selves fitter to govern than they; and
in the other, we render them, so much as in us lies, odious to all men.

We all know the Romanists have been busy ever since the Reformation, to make
us again taste of their Colocinths and Gourds, yet through the goodness of God,
and the prudence of our Governors their most secret Plots have been
discovered, their Designs baffled, and all their attempts proved the rain of
the Contrivers. Neither have they been yet so formidable, as to offer at any
acts of open hostility, unless it can be said they made the Presbyterians and
Independents their Drudges in the late Times to do their work. And if so, when
ever you see them aga^^ lab^^ring at the same Oar, conclude they are still
serving the ends of the same Masters, or setting up for themselves. And here it
will not be amiss to consider how things stand now, and what motives were
frequently used for introducing the late unnatural War. Did not the Factious of
those Times seduce the people, by making them believe the late King, of blessed
Memory, was inclined to Popery, or at least a favourer of it? Were not Fears
and Jealousies the main Engines used by those bloody Miscreants to serve their
turns? And is there not strong presumptions that the same things are
endeavored by the same sort of men to be acted over again? Is it not daily
inculcated what danger we are in from the Papists, and many a dreadful Story
told of Slavery, Popery, Tyranny, and Arbitrary Government, and God knows what?
Does any man think that the Magistrates are swallowed up in a Supine
Negligence? Has his Majesty, think you, no care of us, nor of himself? Has he
not always with much fervor protested his adherence to the Protestant Religion?
Did he not graciously offer the last Parliament to sign any Bill they should
frame for security thereof after his decease? Is he then so zealous for its
preservation after his death, and shall we imagine he will not protect us in
the profession of it during his happy Reign? (which God long continue.) Away
then with these Fears and Jealousies which are formented by men of ambitious
designs, turbulent spirits, and aspiring minds. Look upon them all as Tricks of
the old Trade. Did his Majesty ever do any thing that looked like betraying us
into Slavery? For Gods sake, Sirs, Consider whither we are going; let us not be
undone again by the same methods we were before. Are there not some at this day
that long to be fingering the Crown Lands, and Bishops Revenues. Be not
ensnared with their wicked Contrivances, and specious pretenses; and let not us
deny that to our Sovereign, which by the common suffrages of Christ and his
Apostles was awarded to Heathen Emperors.

But it may be said, we are yet in danger of being outwitted by the Jesuits
and their bloody Crew, and the late Plot is not yet over. It is true, we may
yet be subject to some effects of their malice and fury. But we use to say,
when a Distemper is once discovered, it is half cured. Have not we been
hitherto delivered from those Lions and Bears? They contrive, but God
disappoints; and if their plotting and designing, though it takes no effect,
shall continually fill us with fears and jealousies, how much more should every
man be filled with affrightment at the least appearance of that spirit which
ruled in the hearts of those Children of Disobedience in the beginning of our
late troubles? Shall these men still impose upon us such dreadful apprehensions
of those, whose designs have hitherto been blasted, and must we be persuaded
that we are out of all danger from those who have so far succeeded in their
attempts, as to subvert a flourishing Kingdom, and overthrow both Religion and
property? Perhaps if these things were well considered, we should not be so
easily Cajoled by them, whose great Cry is for Liberty, when indeed they mean
nothing more than Anarchy and Confusion; against Popery, while they mean
Episcopacy; that while we are staring at the Romish Wolf, we may be surprised
by the Northern Bear.

We have had of late some Instances of Tumultuary Proposals and Applications,
that fell little short of the old Story of Venn with his Mermydons, as his late
Majesty was pleased to express it; which was only an Essay of the strength of
that Party that cast us formerly into Confusion. But they were seasonably
checked both by the authority and good affections of the City, to the Confusion
of their Hopes and Designs. Is not this like Absalom in the Gate? Is not this
the way to amuse and fright men from their Trade and Business? and in effect to
cry, as of old, To your Tents, O Israel? It is a dangerous thing to affect
Popularity, and to talk of Papists in Masquerade. But unless we had better
marks whereby to distinguish those sort of men, it can only serve as an odious
term to be fixed upon whom himself and his Party pleases; and when time serves,
expose them to the fury of an untutoured Zeal, and to be used as Malignant,
Delinquent and Popishly affected, were of late; which had no other effect, but
sequestring the Estates, and ruining the Families of persons so stigmatized;
though indeed they only were the true Lovers of the Protestant Religion, their
King, and Country. We are not to account a Vote of the House of Commons to have
the Authority of a Law, (as some would have a late Vote to be,) when as (the
Parliament being dissolved) it signifies just nothing as to the matter of Law,
though it was an honest and excellent testimony of their Zeal for the
preservation of his Majesty's person, and the Protestant Religion; for which
the whole Nation is bound to give them thanks, but I hope we shall never live
to see a Vote, no nor an Ordinance neither, pass for a Law; and I believe this
did not speak the sense of the House: and as little did the late outcry speak
the sense of the City, as appears in this, that there are not ten men to be
found that will own the action. Beside that, the Faction was overborn by a
majority of honest men.

I have no purpose to reflect upon any man's person. My design is only to
caution my Fellow-Citizens, not to have a hand in any action that looks like
Faction and Disorder, for from little sparks, many times, are kindled mighty
flames: and Solomon bids us, Shun the appearance of evil.

Frailty and Imperfection is justly inscribed on all things sublunary. Yet if
we could suppose a System of Rules and Laws infallible, even this could not
free the Government from miscarriages, it being morally impossible among such a
multitude of subordinate Officers (of necessity to be used) that all should be
furnished with Wisdom and Integrity sufficient for discharge of their duty, so
that there will always be cause of complaint, but no man can say, that such
things will discharge the Subjects from their duty. As to the Constitution of
our Government, it has been reckoned the best in the World; and for the
Administration, I dare appeal to any man, whether there is not more rigor and
severity, heavier Taxes and Impositions laid upon the People in the most
flourishing Christian Kingdom in the World, by three parts in four, than ever
we have yet met with, unless in the late Times of Defection. Is any thing
imposed upon us (which to remedy) will make amends for Tumult and Disorder, or
any danger threatened, or like to befall us, that can equal the mischief and
inconvenience of a Civil War. Consider this, Fellow-Citizens, and let not
ambitious men purchase their advancement with the price of your Blood and
Treasure. They may contrive with their heads till their hearts ache, but without
help of your hands, all their project will fall to the ground. I beseech you
therefore stand fast in your duty to God, allegiance to the King and the
Government established by Law. To the first you are obliged by Nature and
Religion; to the second, by Religion and Oath; to the last, by Prudence and
Interest.

It may be said by the Dissenters from the Church of England, that they are
willing to obey his Majesty, and observe the Law in all Civil Matters, but in
Ecclesiastical Affairs, and Episcopacy, they will not, they cannot yield
obedience. My business is not to dispute the point, but to persuade to peace,
and to warn you of such men as are like to disturb it. Let it be considered
that Episcopacy has received the same Civil Sanction with those Laws that
concern Liberty and Property. It is adapted into the Constitution of the
Government. Would they have his Majesty abolish Episcopacy by his own power?
Surely this would be to exalt Prerogative with a witness; and (as themselves
would say in other cases) contrary to Magna Charta. If not, let them cease
their murmurs, till some Parliament comes that will pull down that, and set up
a better, if they can tell where to find it. I confess if any man purely out of
conscience refuses to Conform, and the Laws against it rigorously executed,
his Circumstances are hard. But is that our Case? Is not every man suffered to
be as good as he will? Does not the clemency of our King admit every man to
hear and preach where they please? to follow their own Pastors, and their own
Discipline? And after all this, do you hear men cry out against the Government,
the Bishops, and the Clergy, men of honor and dignity in the Church, persons
against whom they have no exceptions, but their Office and Revenues,
persecuting them with the most vile and unsavory Language their malice can
invent. And is this out of Conscience too? Can any man think he that shuns a
Surplice, but can easily swallow a Lie, that exclaims against the
Common Prayer, yet is full of Envy, and hatred, is uncharitable to his
Neighbor, and constantly replenished with scurrilous and immoral expressions
against every one that treads not in his path: that this is the effect of a
Tender Conscience. Fly then the Society of this sort of men, for whatsoever
their specious pretenses may be, their thirst is after Domination and Plunder.
Those that trampled upon the Mitre overthrew the Crown, Monarchy and Episcopacy
both fell by the same hand: therefore it is not amiss to mind you once more of
Solomon's advice, Fear God, Honor the King, and meddle not with those that are
given to change.

When you reflect upon the Methods taken in the beginning of the late Wars by
an ill-spirited sort of men, whose delight was in Disorder, and aimed at
gainful Fishing, if they could but once trouble the Waters, that their first
endeavor was to raise a dislike against the Person and Government of the best
of Kings, and how the Grand Engineers stirred up the Citizeus and Apprentices
to popular Tumults, whereby his Majesty was invaded, and through fear and
force, banished from his Palaces, Cities, his Consort, his Royal Children and
Family, and at last himself most barbarously murdered. What contrivance, and
by whom carried on? Broils raised in Scotland, the better to distress his
Majesty, and after all this and much more, not to be mentioned without the
extremest horror and detestation; How the Actors thereof were unmasked, their
persons and designs discovered, their several Governments under their most
politic Establishment shaken to pieces as frequently as formed, and at last
both the one and the other, not by humane prudence, but by the mere hand of
God, destroyed and confounded. In all which mutations this City felt most
constant pains and afflictions; and the whole Nation, after all the vast
expense of Blood and Treasure, had purchased to themselves, nothing but Chains
and Fetters. When, I say, you reflect upon these things, it must needs excite
your singular care to preserve your selves from a subjection to the designs of
such men, as may have hopes to lead us again into the like Defection and
Inconvenience, and to be afraid of any thing that has a tendency that way.

FINIS.

