THE HISTORY OF THE Government of France, UNDER THE ADMINISTRATION OF THE Great
Armand Du Plessis, Cardinal and Duke of Richlieu, and chief Minister of State
in that Kingdom. Wherein occur many Important Negotiations, relating to most
part of Christendom in his time.

With Politic Observations upon the CHAPTERS.

Translated out of French by J. D. Esquire.

LONDON, Printed by J. Macock, for Joshua Kirton, and are to be sold at the
Kings Arms in St Paul's Churchyard. 1657.

EMINENTISSIMVS ARMANDVS IOANNES DV PLESSIS CARDINALIS RICHELEVS. etc.
G: Faithorne excud


TO THE RIGHT HONORABLE John Thurloe, Esquire. SECRETARY OF STATE.
SIR,
THe Illustrious Cardinal truly Eminent for his sublime qualities, presents
Himself unto You, in full assurance of a most ample Protection both to his
Memory and Fame: Generous and active Souls have a natural, and therefore
inseparable, inclination to the mutual Honor and Defense of each other. It
were injustice that that Pilot, who in his life time knew so well to sail with
security amidst the many turbulent and frequent storms of Fortune, should be
tossed and molested in his Urn, the Harbor where common humanity allows a
quiet Station to all: Be pleased therefore, Noble Sir, to undertake the
Patronage of this Great Person, in whose History you will encounter nothing but
what relisheth of an high Grandeur and an extraordinary Genius. Indeed the
clear and happy Justice of those affairs, whereon you are engaged, will not
find much here for your imitation, yet questionless many things there are,
which upon another account, may challenge your admiration and applause. The
Symmetrie of your Administrations does oblige you to accept of this Dedication
from him who devoteth himself to your commands in the quality of

SIR, Your Honors most humble Servant. JOHN DODINGTON.

To the Reader.
I Desire thee to excuse the many Errata's which doubtless thou will here meet,
in regard the Printer, in some places, has failed in point of Orthographie,
give him the allowance as in such cases are common, and the scales will be
turned: for other faults I must also Apologize, in regard of my own affairs,
which would not permit me to review my own Copy or Correct the Press. If thou
do then demand why I undertook it, I shall deal ingeniously with thee, and
tell thee, I was engaged upon it, by the importunate surprisall of a friend who
extorted a promise of it from me, ere I well knew what I had promised; I
beseech thee therefore to connive at what cannot now by either of us be
amended. Thus much more I thought good to let thee know, that if this find
thee merciful, I may perchance present thee with the sequel of the Cardinals
Administration until his Death, the manner of his Death, his last Will, his
Birth, and Youthful Studies, with diverse of his Letters, and many quaint
Observations upon his Life and Death, which I hope may better deserve thy
approval.

I. D.

These Books are lately Printed, and are sold at the Kings Arms in Paul's
Churchyard.
A Collection out of the best approved Authors, containing several Histories of
Visions, Apparitions, Prophesies, Spirits, Divinations, and other wonderful
Illusions of the Devil, wrought by Magic, or otherwise. Also of diverse
Astrological predictions, showing the vanity of them, and folly of trusting to
them. By G. I.

A Restitution of decayed intelligence in Antiquities, concerning the most
Noble and Renowned English Nation; by the Study and Travel of Richard Vestegan.

The History and Character of the Bishops in the Reigns of Queen Elizabeth, and
King James; Written by Sir John Harrington, for the private use of Prince Henry.

The Magistrates Authority in matters of Religion asserted: Or, the Right of
the State in the Church. A Discourse written by the Learned Hugo Grotius.

Of Government and Obedience, as they stand directed and determined by
Scripture and Reason. Four Books, by John Hall of Richmond.

Two Plays of Mr James Shirley's. The Constant Maid, A Comedy: and St Patrick
for Ireland.

That excellent Tragedy of Bussy D' Ambois, Written by George Chapman.

These now in the Press.
The Man in the Moon: Or, a Discourse of a Voyage into the Moon. By Domingo
Gonzales. Also Nuncius Inanimatus, or the Mysterious Messenger; both written by
D. F. G. a man of great parts and Eminency in his time.

The Indian History of Anaxandre and Orazia: Written in French by Monsieur de
Bois-Robert. Translated into English by a Person of Honor some years since.

THE HISTORY OF THE ADMINISTRATION OF THE Cardinal de Richelieu.
Anno 1624.
GOD, who is able only by the strength of his Arms to overrule Kingdoms
according to his own pleasure, has given some part of their Government to
Sovereigns, whom he has established as Vicegerents of his Power. The Love
which he bears to men has inclined him to admit them unto the pertaking of his
Authority. And if he has ordained intelligences in the Heavens to over-see
their motions; he has also decreed certain men upon the earth, who should have
the charge of reigning over Kingdoms. But though he has invested all Kings
with an absolute Authority, yet he has not endued them all with one and the
same Genius. His Prudence, which guides all things by Weight, Number, and
Measure, has affected, that as in Painting there are Raphaels and Titians,
whose pieces serve other Painters to learn the perfection of their Art; so
there should likewise be in Regality, Caesar's, Constantines, and Charlemains,
whose Actions might be recorded as examples for all others. As it is said in
Philosophy, (Perfectum in suo genere est mensura Caeterorum.) The worthiest
subject in every kind serves for a measure to all within its compass. And who
can refuse to rank in this number the present King, under whose Scepter the
Kingdom has the happiness to be now governed? To speak truth, his Actions
have fixed the Kingdom in the highest point of glory, that many ages have
seen; his Prudence, Valor, and Justice do shine with so much splendor, that
without doubt, they are sufficient to teach the Laws of Government to all other
Princes. He never affected any Title but that of Just; because he made choice
of Justice for the rule of all his Actions; knowing that it was the most
illustrious perfection in all Kings, that it was it, which rendered their
Majesty most venerable. That it was it, which gave a good success to all their
enterprises; and lastly, that this was it which was the strongest Prop of
Peace. But we should offend against that very Justice, if we should deny him
the Title of Great, which his Scepter gives to him: The Title of Invincible
which his Valor has merited; the Title of August, which his virtue has
acquired; the Title of Conqueror, which Fortune her self has bestowed upon
him. His dignity makes him the greatest of Kings; his Power the strongest; his
Conduct the wisest; his Treasuries the Richest, and his Virtue the most just.
We have seen some Clouds arise, which have seemed to obscure his light; but
they have only served to set off with advantage the wonders of his Conduct,
and he has ever dispelled from us all those Tempests of Misfortunes which
have threatened France. He has the Honor to be Son to a Father, to whom a
thousand ill strious acts have acquired the quality of Great. And I think it
may be said with truth, if Fortune d^id set limits to Philips Conquests, that
there might be some subjects for his Son Alexander to show his courage on;
Heaven did also set bounds to the glory of that grand Prince, in suppressing
civil wars, that our Lews the Just might have occasion to triumph over Heresy
and curb in the Ambition of the house of Austria. In prosecution of these two
designs, he began to overcome as soon as ever he knew how to mount on
Horseback: That he replanted the Standard of the Cross in Bearn; that he
disarmed Heresy, over all the Kingdom; that he has so often made the Spaniard
and King of Hungary to let go their Holds, and that he forced them to
relinquish the design which they had so long projected of universal Monarchy.
Heaven seems to have made a Bargain with him that he should overthrow whatever
resisted him, that his actions should be as so many miracles, and that his
reign should be full as happy in the obedience and love of his Subjects, as
illustrious by his victories and triumphs. Which being so, how can we pass by
so many glorious Actions without publishing his Wisdom and Generosity? were
not that not only to deny to his Valor the praise it justly vindicates, but
even to deprive Posterity of an example whereby it might learn what no books of
Policy can teach? It is not fit to publish the secrets of a Prince, but it is
just to declare his virtues: And if the first be forbid by the Laws of Secrecy,
the acknowledgement which is due to their merit, and the zeal of the Public
good obliges us to the second: This is the principal reason which has invited
me to publish the glory of his reign, and I would condemn my Pen to perpetual
silence, if it had been mute on this occasion; so necessary will it be to
those, who shall govern France in future Ages, to follow those footsteps which
he has left behind him. I confess, I am not able to find words equal to the
greatness of his Actions; but I had rather want words, then acknowledgements
for my King, and affection for my Country. but I shall nevertheless hope to
acquit my self so much the more fortunately, as the heroic Actions of great
Princes, have often rendered those eloquent who have undertook to write them.

A Prince who would signalize himself by an extraordinary conduct ought to
choose Ministers, who are sufficiently able to assist him with their counsels,
and to put them in execution. For the better choosing of whom, I think it
convenient to observe with T. Livy, that there are three sorts of them.

The first Eminent, who are able to govern all by their own discretions, and
who have a Prudence vigorous enough, to advise of themselves whatsoever is
necessary for Government without being beholding to others; who see all,
penetrate into all, judge of all, and whose Genius is strong enough to bear up
the weight of the greatest affairs.

The second may be called Indifferent, who have not sufficiency enough to judge
of all things, or to execute them, but have a good capacity to apprehend the
judgments of others in their Counsel, and so to govern affairs by their
directions, that they are often times successful in the greatest enterprises.

The third and last have so little Judgment, that they are neither able to
manage affairs by their own, or the advices of others; whence it happens, that
they are apt to commit very deplorable faults, and to put all things into
Confusion. Of the first rank ought a Prince to choose his ministers, if he
would design any great attempts, or carry them on to a good success. If he
himself too, be of this number, they will bring wonders to pass, if he be not,
he has so much the more need to have persons of this temper near him. For God
who has naturally subjected little things to great, seems to have given
Letters Pattents to eminent spirits, to govern; if not by their Authority, at
least by their Counsels, the rest of Mankind. It is a dangerous fault to choose
Ministers at a venture; and for that reason Aristotle blamed the Athenians, who
chused their Magistrates by Lot, it being absolutely necessary to elect them by
Prudence, and still to prefer the most capable. The Proverb says, Ex quolibet
ligno non fit Mercurius, a Sowes Ear will not make a Silk-Purse; and true it is,
that not all are proper for all affairs. Men must be fitted to their
Commissions, least they not having abilities proportionable, do not only ruin
the most glorious designs, but withal, make them end in great misfortunes. If
men have never achieved any thing greater then States and Empires, surely they
cannot do any thing more glorious, then to govern them well; and since Causes
ought to be proportioned to effects, it is necessary to employ great Persons in
great places. That sight which should pierce into the remotest Objects should
be the sharpest. That Arm which should throw furthest, ought to be strongest;
that light which should shine in many places, ought to be liveliest; and
generally all causes which should have most force in their operation, should
have most vigor in then power. Which being so, ought not the understanding of
a Minister to be quicker, then that of others, seeing be is to dive into
truths? His Memory, ought it not to be stronger, seeing it ought to preserve
more Species? ought not his Soul to be more capable, seeing it ought to be more
Universal? ought not his Wisdom to be greater, since he must comprehend more
reason? and ought not his Prudence to be more perspicacious, seeing he is
obliged to provide for the greatest and most important affairs? An ordinary
capacity of mind is sufficient for the guiding of a private life, but he who
has the charge of governing a State, ought to surpass all others in the
strength of his Genius. God who is the first reason and mover of Nature, may be
his example in this kind, and of necessity who so does serve next under him in
the Administration of a Kingdom, ought to be endued with a more vigorous
wisdom then others; that he may be as the understanding Soul in a civil
Society, and a guider of all others motions by his own Councels. Not to follow
this rule, were to put all into confusion and disorder, and one of the greatest
vanities which is under the Sun, says the Spirit of God in the Scriptures, is,
To place Fools upon the Tribunal, and to leave Wise men standing upon the
ground. It were to set a Sailor to the Helm, and the Pilot to the Oar; it were
to commit the guidance of the Primum mobile, to the last or the least of all
the Celestial Spheres.

The Reception of the Cardinal into the Administration of the STATE.
THose eminent qualities which raised the Cardinal from above the pitch of
other men, induced the Queen mother to present him to the King her Son, to
assist his Councels, which qualifications, had not been alone sufficient for
the Administration, if not accompanied with Fidelity. Although this Virtue
seems to have less splendour then others, yet this is it which is so needful a
quality, that the greatest Souls are not proper for that condition if their
Ambition, Covetousness, or their private interest, are able to divert them upon
any occasion whatsoever. But in whom did it ever appear with so much splendour,
as in the Cardinal, who did always make it his end, never to seek for Honor
and Wealth but in his Majesty's service? Which his Majesty had very singular
proofs of, by his management of those important Affairs, whilst he was
Secretary of State, and he had one most ample particular assurance of it, in
his removal from the Court; during all which time, his Majesty could never find
that he held the least intelligence with the Queen Mother, or those Grandees of
State, to make Cabals contrary to his Authority, though he had understanding
enough not to be ignorant of some means which serve to imbroyl things on such
occasions. At first he was contented to Officiate like a good Prelate in his
own Diocese, without meddling in any public affairs, but those which are common
to all good French men, who have any knowledge thereof; and being afterward
removed into Avignon, he had no other intention, but of conversing with his
Books, and such virtues as are required in those of his Coat; testifying by
this great reservedness, that he was so much the more worthy of those
employments, which had formerly been conferred upon him, according to that of
the wise Politicians, There are none fitter to command, then those who obey
with moderation and fidelity; the reason is, in obeying they learn to command,
and that all men do willingly submit to them, who being private men have lived
modestly and in-offensively. But how could the King be capable of the least
suspicion of his Fidelity, after that one Procedure of his which was seen by
the whole Nation, when he was recalled from Avignon, to divert the Queen Mother
from those designs, which they who had advised her to withdraw from Bloys to
Angoulesm, did persuade unto her? It was no little honor for him, to see that
they who had so ill created him, did yet believe he had sincerity enough to
serve them in such an occasion as that was. He got an accruement of Glory too,
by his Loyalty in his quick dispatch to that great Princess, and by declaring
to those Grandees then with her, that whatever opportunities he had to make
them repent of those injuries they had done him, yet he would never deceive or
betray them.

The Queen Mother was in a good Hold, the greatest part of the Princes and many
Lords offered her their service; insomuch that would he have joined the
faculties of his mind to those forces which they might have raised, he might
have held them so much play, that they would have found themselves entangled.
It seemed he was invited to testify a sensible apprehension in the Queen his
Mistresses behalf, he having received from her hands many signal favors in
recompense of the services he had done unto her, and that then he had nothing
to hope for but her good opinion, so much had those Gentlemen thwarted him. But
neither the resentments of former indignities, nor his endeavors in his
Mistresses behalf, nor the hopes of a greater Fortune, nor the consideration of
his own interest, could ever so little shake him in his Fidelity. After he was
arrived at Angoulesm, and that his own merit had restored him to that place of
esteem, which he formerly held in her Majesty's good favor, he proposed no
other end in his discourse, but to set her right with the King. He presently
assured her, that he suffered in the disasters to which her enemies had brought
her, and not resting barely there, he made use of this compassion, to
insinnuate himself more effectually into her soul, and to gain a greater power
over her spirit, that he might improve to advantage the charms, which his
complaisant humor had given him, and showed clearly to her, that if she
thought it her misfortune, not to be Mistress of his Majesty's Person and
Council, her condition would be much more to be deplored, seeing she was no
better then a Slave to the designs and Wills of those who hurried her into
broyls, and that she could not choose a worse party into whose hands she might
commit the management of her own interest. He made it evident to her, that
Arms were but a weak means in France to restore people to the Government,
seeing his Majesty's have been ever Victorious; they who provoke him do but
totally destroy themselves. Of this truth, he produced several examples, which
are recorded in all Revolts from time to time: Lastly, he convinced to her,
that she might with ease reassume that Authority from whence she was fallen,
would she but reunite hers with the Kings interests; that if she should not
obtain all at the first dash, she ought to expect some thing from time, but
with confident assurance, that the King her son had such natural resentments
for her, that they alone would force him, to accord her whatever she could with
reason expect, though he were not invited to it by her prudence, or the
Counsels of those who had the honor to be her servants. That during her
separating her self from his Majesty, she could hope for nothing but scorn and
debility, whereas she should no sooner oblige his Majesty by restoring to him,
her heart and affections, but she would find her self attended back to the
Court, honored and obeyed by all the world as she was formerly wont to be.
These were some of those reasons which he laid before her; and true it is, that
his Prudence animated with his Fidelity, induced her to resolve upon that
Accommodation which has so long kept their Majesty's in a strict union, and
France in so sweet a repose.

His Majesty did better understand then any other person, all the particulars
of the Cardinals negotiation, and apprehended so great an esteem of his
Fidelity, that he thought no consideration able to undermine it; and seeing
that one, accompanied with many other eminent qualities, he was easily
convinced, that he had not in his whole Kingdom, a person more capable or
worthy of the Administration then himself. Who can describe with what dexterity
the whole face of Affairs were changed, which before were managed but lamely
and by halfs? Whereas he conforming himself to those inclinations, which
carried his Majesty to great designs, persuaded him to set them forwards, and
assisted him in their execution. Formerly all affairs were carried without
secrecy, so that strangers had all the intelligence of their resolutions; which
they dis-appointed and obstructed, before they were in a forwardness to be set
on foot. But this great Minister, knowing secrecy to be the Soul of Counsel,
and that none are better then those which continue unknown even after the
execution, brought forth every day wonders effected by his Prudence, of which
the Grandees themselves had not so much as a thought. Indeed it was so much the
easier for him so to do, his Majesty being the most secret Prince that ever
was. Formerly, every one was impatient at the obstacles and delays of the
Marquess de la Vieville; whereas after his establishment, all those who had any
affairs to negotiate or represent, for his Majesty's service, were over-joyed
that they were to Treat with a Minister, whose Countenance was a Throne of
sweetness and bounty, and whose words have so powerful a Charm, that they
still went away satisfied, what ever difficulties were proposed by them.
Besides, they were constrained, as it were to pay him all respects; and the
Gravity too, which the Graces have bestowed upon him, is so agreeable and
taking, that the respect which it begets in the souls of men, never thwarts
that love which is due unto him, and that love does not at all hinder them from
fearing to displease him.

The ancient Allies of this Crown, formerly left for a prey to their enemies,
began to be confident to him, as soon as ever they had known him, and finding
that his Genius did not terminate in a mere defensive, they betook them to
their Arms, not only to oppose those unjust Usurpations, which were made upon
them, but also to assault and set upon those who had began them. In short, as
he never declared himself to be for any Faction; but on the contrary, showed
himself much averse to all Rebellions; both the Grandees of the Kingdom and
Hugonots too, were not long to learn that it would become them for the future,
to live within the limits of their obedience: And lastly, not being able to
away with any Mutiny, he soon began to make them take some course of living,
which is the surest foundation of Peace in a Kingdom: so that every one had
the content to see France flourish, both at home and abroad, and to acquire its
former luster, which has always made it acknowledged to be the first Kingdom
of Europe.

The Marriage of the King of England with the Lady Henrietta Maria of France.
THe first considerable affair, which presented it self after the Cardinals
admittance to the Administration, was the Marriage of the Lady Henrietta Maria,
his Majesty's Sister, with Charles Prince of Wales, the present King of Great
Britain. The Spaniard had a long time feared it would be made up, knowing that
if France and England were leagued together, they would become so considerable
as that they would without difficulty frustrate and bring all his designs to
nothing; so he endeavored to hinder it by pretending a desire himself had to
contract an Alliance with England; and accordingly he proposed to match his
Infanta with the Prince of Wales, giving some hopes by Paraquance, that he
would restore the Palatinate, though he had as little mind to deliver it, as
the King of Great Britain had earnest Passion to recover it. He held on this
Treaty at least twelve years, yet finding every day new excuses, to defer the
conclusion of it: But at last the King of Great Britain, detected his deceit,
which had lain hid under those delays, and found out, that his design was only
to gain time, until all the daughters of France were married elsewhere: at
least he had great conjectures of it; to clear all, and bring it to a
conclusion, he thought good that the Prince of Wales, should in person go into
Spain. He had not been there many days, before it was known, both to himself
and those of his Counsel, that they had been until that time entertained with
vain hopes, however he would not make known his resentments in a strange
Country, where he might receive much damage by it, but being returned into
England; he informed King James his Father of it, with so much anger, that they
resolved to break with him, rather sooner then later to avoid exposing
themselves to the dis-esteem which other Princes might have of their management
of this affair; and withal to countenance the breach by the Parliaments
approbation. This resolve was as soon executed as concluded, and King James
having summoned a Parliament, at least to consult on a means for recovery of
the Palatinate, informed them of the many reasons which he had to believe, that
the Spaniards had no intention of concluding those Propositions of marriage
which had been so long in Treaty; that the only end of their design was, to
gain time and to fortify themselves in the Palatinate, and so to settle
themselves there, that shortly it would be impossible to remove them thence,
and therefore he thought it fit no longer to hearken after it. The Parliament
were induced with so much the more ease, to believe these reasons, they having
testified on diverse occasions, their suspicions of the Spanish tricks, and in
conclusion, thought good not to regard any more their Propositions of the
Match. But the King of Great Britain stayed not long there, for the Prince of
Wales his son (who had now good esteem of France, and a liking for the Kings
Sister whom he had seen, as he passed thorough that Court, without discovering
himself) had persuaded him to give him leave to seek for that Princess in
marriage, which was proposed in Parliament, and carried without much difficulty
for many reasons which were there alleged; particularly, That the French being
accustomed to live with those of their Religion, it was to be believed, they
would not make such extraordinary demands in behalf of the Catholics, as the
Spaniard would have done. It was then resolved to dispatch an Ambassador into
France, who might lay the first foundation of that Treaty; so that the King
forthwith made choice of the Earls of Carlisle and Holland. The latter set
forward about Mid-May. He had order first to wait on the King alone, and to
pretend the interests of the Palatinate, but indeed to discover how they would
resent his Proposal, and if rejected, not to make any more noise of it;
accordingly he met his Majesty and Compiegne, he began to consider about means
to recover the Palatinate, and then acquainted him with a great deal of
dexterity, that the King his Master desired his Son the Prince of Wales might
marry his sister. The King who understoood that Proposals of this nature, how
remote soever ought not to be received but with honor, testified that he had a
great esteem of it, and forthwith debated it with his Ministers, to give him an
answer; it was concluded, That this Match was very convenient for the Quality
of his Majesty's Sister; That in the whole Empire there was not any more
hopeful: That History records above twenty Alliances between France, England,
and Scotland: That it would be easy to assure her Ladyship the exercise of her
Religion, considering what had been granted to the Spaniard: That great
Princesses are in this particular, in a worse condition than Ladies of a meaner
Quality, by reason half an Age hardly produces a Match correspondent to their
Birth, so that having once lost their opportunities, they live to see the
Harvest of their Beauties reaped by years, without ever marrying; whereupon it
was resolved to see what particular Proposals would be made, this result was
signified to the Earl of Holland, who assured them that the King his Master
would receive it with much joy, yet deferring to enter into any further Treaty,
until he had received particular instructions from his Majesty. Who upon the
receiving of that news, dispatched with all diligence, the Earl of Carlisle,
with full power to conclude the Match. The Earl of Holland went to Amiers to
meet him, that they might confer together what they had to do, and afterward
being come near to Campeign, the King hearing of it, commanded the Duke of
Cheuruse, to go receive them with twelve Coaches full of Nobility, and withal
to entertain them magnificently, and defray their charges during their abode at
Court. The day after their arrival, they had Audience given them, and the
Proposals which they made appeared so reasonable, that the King presently
judging that they might easily be resolved, appointed Commissioners to treat
with them. The Cardinal was at that time newly advanced to the Administration,
but he made it apparent, that he was not a Novice in the management of it; for
the King desiring his opinion of this Treaty, he not only added many other
reasons to those alleged in the first consultation; but moreover suggested to
his Majesty such judicious means to carry on the business, that he could not
enough admire his Prudence.

Amongst other reasons of the commodiousness of this Match, he represented to
him, that England once leagued with France by this Alliance, there was hopes
that they would join their Forces to assist the German Princes, since it was
yet more for the Interest of England then France, to re-establish them; which
being so, their powers would not only balance those of the house of Austria,
but overpoize them too, with never so little assistance from those Princes:
That the happy success which would follow, would add as much Glory to his
Crown and State, as discredit and confusion to his enemies: Moreover, that it
being very expedient to curb the Insolences of the Hugonots, this marriage
would be of great use, as well because it would withold the King of Great
Britain, from assisting them, as also, because it might be a means to procure
shipping from him for the reducing of Rochel; in short, That there was great
hopes to believe, the Princess might much advance the Catholic Religion in
England, if as there was no doubt she were beloved by the King and the Prince
her Husband. So that of all sides there was nothing Prognosticated but great
happiness, judging it requisite, to use address and prudence for the speedy
effecting of it.

The King did very well relish the Consideration, and thereupon commanding him
to have a particular eye upon the Treaty, his judgment which presently
penetrates into affairs, and quickneth expeditions, did negotiate it with so
ready a Conduct, that he shortly brought it to such a pass that it might
receive a Conclusion; and that which I find in it most to be admired, is, That
the success has showed he was not mistaken in his conjecture. England also did
forthwith join with France, to give means to Mansfield to enter with a puissant
Army into Germany, that he might attempt the re-establishment of the Palatine;
and the year following, the King of Great Britain sent ships to the King,
which helped him to gain a glorious Naval victory against those of Rochel. The
same effects had assuredly continued without the Intregues of Madam de
Cheuruse, without the ill conduct of some who accompanied the Princess, and
without the death of King James. For his Majesty from that time showed himself
so affectionate to France, that one day he openly said before diverse Lords of
the Court, that the King had gained more upon him, then any of his
Predecessors, and that he would not only employ his Subjects lives, but his
own too, in defense of his interests, and to oppose the Rebels who should
attempt any Insurrections in France; and less could not be expected from the
Princess in the behalf of Religion, if death had not prevented that Monarch
from seeing the marriage consummated; for the Passion which he had already in
her behalf, though he had never seen her was so sensible, that he was heard
say, with a great deal of tenderness, which was taken notice of amongst other
discourse of the same nature; That he would quarrel with her because she would
not read his Letter, nor that of the Prince his son, without leave from the
Queen her Mother, but withal that he was much bound to her, because after she
had read them, she laid his under her Pillow, but his sons in her Bosom, to
show that she did rely upon him, and lodge his son in her heart.

Politic Observation.
ALliances with strangers by Marriages have passed amongst others for the
Principal means, which are thought proper to augment the Peace and Power of a
Kingdom. By them it is, that we often see those great fires of War which
consumed them, extinguished, and the sweetness of a happy Peace restored to the
people. Thus Hugh the Earl of C^a^lins son, by his Marriage with Alice,
Inheritrix of the Earldome of Bourgogn, restored peace to both, who had along
time groaned under the miseries of War. Thus those great enemies which
exasperated the houses of Bourgogn and Orl^ance were allayed for some time, by
the Marriage of Philip Count de Vertus, second (son to the Duke of Orleance,
who had been slain by the Duke of Burgogn) with Katharine of Burgogn. And to
reinforce this truth with ancient examples. Thus Argas King of Cyrene promised
to bestow his only daughter Beonice, upon the son of his Brother Ptolomei,
whereby to obliterate, the memory and resentment of the hatred which had been
between them. But Peace is not the only benefit recorded to attend Marriages.
For how often have Princes enlarged their bounds by that means? Who knows not
that the House of Austria, had not been thus Potent, but by Alliances, and that
the marriage of Heti^gis* Inheritrix of Vltrich, Burg, Longravat, and Alsace,
with Albertus surnamed the Sage; of Elizabeth Inheritrix of Austria, Carintia,
Tyrol, and Goricie, with the Emperor Albertus the first; of Jane Inheritrix of
Castile, Arragon, S^cili^, and Naples, with Philip Archduke of Austria; of
Anne Inheritrix of Hungaria and Bohemia, with the Emperor Ferdinand the first,
brother to Charles the Fifth, have been the true Rise of its Grandeur, which
was inconsiderable at that time, they had no other honor, but that of being
issued from the County of Abspurg in Switzerland? Besides, Princes allied by
marriage commonly joining their Forces together, do not a little help to defend
one another upon an occasion, and even to favor those enterprises which either
of them shall make to increase their power. Lewis the second well knew how to
break off the Match, between Charles Duke of Burgogn, with Margaret daughter to
Richard Duke of York, and Sister to Edward King of En^l^nd, which would have
joined the English Forces with those of B^rgogn, by demanding that Princess for
Charles his brother, though he had no intention to marry him to her, he being
too too prudent to match a Brother so inclinable to Rebellion, with an enemy so
Potent as she was. It is true, if the Aliance of France with England, was then
thought to be disadvantagious to the good of France; yet now, that which may be
concluded on with them, is of so much the greater concernment, because having
nothing more to do, then to balance the house of Austria, it could not gain a
greater advantage in relation to that design, then by this means; for this
being one of the powerfullest Kingdoms in Europe, will turn the scales to that
of the two Crowns, with which it shall be joined in Alliance. France cannot
hope that England would (upon any consideration of marriage whatsoever)
relinquish their own particular interests, seeing Sovereigns have nothing which
is dearer to them; but it will have good reason to believe, that it will never
invade us unless provoked by honor, or some great Consideration; and on the
contrary, that they would assist us with a good will in such enterprises, where
they could receive nothing but Glory. After all, F^ance will have this benefit
to hinder their being leagued with our enemies who joined with them, might much
damage us, and it is advantage enough to avoid those mischiefs, which would
follow, if it were left undone, and by that means to prevent the uniting of our
enemies with them.

The Cardinal knew, That that Minister who has a care of the Church interest,
draws down a thousand blessings from Heaven upon the State* Accordingly, he did
particularly employ himself, to get as much liberty as possibly he could in
England. The Earls of Carlisle and Holland came with confidence, that there
could not be any great strictness used in that particular, but imagined as
their Master did, that the diversity of Religion which was in France, would
induce them, not to be too earnest; only of an Assurance, that the Princess and
those of her retinue, should have free liberty to exercise that Religion,
whereof they made profession; but the Cardinal quickly told them, That the King
his Master, being more obliged by diverse Considerations, to procure greater
advantages to the Church then the Spaniard, they ought not to hope that he
would be satisfied with less then they.

He represented to them that his Majesty, being the eldest son of the Church,
and bearing the Title of the most Christian King would be much blamed, if he
proceeded upon other terms; besides, that this Alliance could not be concluded,
without the consent of the head of the Church. That it would be ill received at
Rome, if it should be proposed there with conditions less favourab^e to the
Catholics, then those which were granted to the Spaniards. To which for the
present the Ambassadors replied, That the King their Master, had not procured
the Parliaments consent for this Alliance with France, and breaking off that
with Spain, but in consideration, that they would not have been so strict, in
requiring so many favors in behalf of the Catholics; and withal, that it was
held there as a fundamental Law not to grant them any freedoms by reason of
many great inconveniences, which would in time happen to their State. The
Cardinal was not wanting to reply, that he was well informed neither the King
or Parliament, were induced to break with the Spaniards until they were
convinced, that their Treaty was only feigned, and that they had other
designs, then of giving the Infanta to the Prince of Wales, and as for what
related to the Peace of the State (he answered) that the liberty which was
granted to the Catholics, could not trouble it, seeing experience has
evidenced it on a thousand occasions, that there is not any thing which does
more stir up People to Commotions, then the restraint which is imposed upon the
exercise of religion, That, that is it, which incites people to shake off the
yoke of their obedience, and that never any thing but misfortunes have
followed that Prince, who would force men in that belief which they had a long
time embraced: That in truth, Religion might by fire and sword be destroyed and
rooted out, before it be fully settled in the soul; but after that, it will be
so far from being changeable by force, that rather on the contrary, violence
will but ferment and fix it so much the more; because those things are more
difficult then the, care which ought to be had for their conservation. That in
effect, this Maxim was verified in France, where the liberty which was granted
to the Hugonots by the Edict of Peace, had converted a far greater number then
all the rigours of punishment and war. These reasons were so strong that the
English Ambassadors found themselves unable to answer any thing against it.
But it was not sufficient to persuade them, the King of Great Britains consent
was needful. It cannot be denied, but there were great hopes of obtaining it,
considering his particular inclination, he himself being well disposed to be
converted, and that he was also satisfied in Conscience concerning the
principal difficulties, in the Catholic Belief, and had permitted the
Archbishop of Ambrun (sent at his entreaty by the King, to sound him upon some
other points) to administer the Sacrament of Confirmation to above twenty
thousand Catholics in London; indeed it was apprehended a little hazardous,
lest the Parliament should not consent to it, they having a great power in the
resolution of affairs. This difficulty induced the King after the Cardinal had
informed him of it, to send the Marquess de Effiat into England, in the quality
of an extraordinary Ambassador, to negotiate all the affairs which related to
the marriage. In his instructions were particular orders, to endeavor to
persuade his Majesty of Great Britain, to like well of those reasons which the
Cardinal had imparted to his Ambassador, and moreover, to tell him in
particular, that considering the Parliament was composed of Protestants and
Puritans, he ought to suspect them on this occasion, that himself being party
against them, there was no appearance of any reason, to delay that which
concerned the Catholics Interest; Moreover, that it was dangerous for a
Sovereign, to use violence toward his subjects in matter of Religion, seeing
that it teaches to despise life; and who so despises his own life, is master
of any other man's, of what condition so ever he be. That this constraint is
repugnant to the safety of Kings, of which in History are many examples,
especially in these latter ages. These reasons were very considerable, but
withal the Marquess D' Effiat, followed them home with such address, and
vigor that they made the same impressions upon the Kings, as they had done
upon his Ambassadors minds, who indeed did much contribute by their Letters,
to bring it to a resolution.

Articles of Marriage, between the King of Great Britain, and the Princess
Henrietta Maria of France.
THe Negotiation was so fortunate, that the King consented to all those
Articles which were demanded in behalf of the Catholics, and accordingly, his
Majesty gave command to his Ambassadors, to accord it, and on the 10th. of
November, they were signed by them with the Cardinal, upon these conditions:
That the Kings Sister should have all manner of liberty to increase the Roman
Catholic Apostolic Religion, together with all her Officers and their
children; that to this purpose, she should have a Chapel in every of the Kings
houses, a Bishop and twenty eight Priests, to administer the Sacrament, Preach
Gods Word, and do such other Offices as their Function required.

That the children which should be born of this marriage, should be brought up
in the Catholic Religion until the age of 13 years by the Princess.

That all the Domestics which she carried into England, should be French and
Catholics, chosen by the most Christian King, and they dying, she might take
others into their place, French and Catholics, by and with consent of the King
of Great Britain.

Moreover, that both the King of Great Britain, and Prince of Wales his son,
should bind themselves by oath not to attempt, by any means whatsoever, to make
her change her Religion, or to force her to any thing which might be contrary
to it, and should promise by writing upon the faith and word of a King and
Prince to take order, that all those Catholics as well Ecclesiastic as
secular, which had been imprisoned since the last Act made against them should
be set at liberty.

That the English Catholics, should not be any more hunted after for their
Religion, nor constrained to swear any thing contrary to the Catholic
Religion, and that such seizures of their Goods, as had been made since the
last Act, should be restored to them.

And generally, that they should receive more liberty and favor, in respect of
the Alliance with France, then had been promised them upon the Spanish Treaty.

This was as much as could be desired for the present, in behalf of Religion,
until the Princess (who was endued with all the qualifications both of Body and
Soul, which could render a Princess beloved) should have acquired a good power
over King James his spirit, and the Prince of Wales her husband, and so finish
the remainder, which the King expected both from her zeal and behavior, with
the more confidence, because Ladies have a great hand over their husbands, and
Father in Law, when they are once entirely loved by them.

Politic Observation.
THere is good reason to hope for the Conversion of a Prince, from the Princess
whom he marries; Women have so natural an art to persuade men, and to lead them
to what they desire, that there is hardly any thing impossible for them to do:
Their beauty alone has such strong charms, that they imprint in the soul, by
their eyes, all the affections they have a mind to, and the Love wherewith they
are cherished, gives them so great a power, that if they have never so l^ttle
ingenuity, one cannot defend himself from their persuasions, and if it be thus
true in general, it is not less in the particular of converting their Husbands
or the People who are subject to them. History, is so full of Proofs of this
nature, that one must be altogether ignorant, if he knows not, that the divine
Providence, has diverse times made use of their means for this glorious
purpose. Thus Clotil^a daughter to the Duke of Borgogn, was the occasion that
Clovis one of our first Kings her husband, embraced the Christian Religion, and
banished Idolatry out of his States.

I^g^nd Sister to Childebert King of France, being married to Hermenegild, King
of the G^ths, converted him to the Holy Ch^ist^an Faith.

Chie^umte, daughter to the King of Mer^e in England, married a King of the
West Saxons made him become a Christian and she her self a Saint.

Th^^d^linda. wife to ^^g^lulph, King of the Lombards, persuaded him and a
great part of his people, to lay by their false Gods, and to live under the
L^ws of he Gospel.

Gizel, daughter to H^nry Duke of Bavier, and Sister to the Emperor, Henry the
first, being married to Ste^h^n the first of that name, King of Hungaria, made
him and his whole Kingdom resolve to in ^race the F^^th of Jesus Christ, and
thus many others of the like examples do verify, that Q^eens have ever had a
great power in this particular, and the spirit of God which has made use of
them for such glorious effects says, The unb^lieving Husband, shall b^
sanctifiedly the believing Wife. Heaven it self fights for them in such
occasions when they labor for his glory, besides it cannot be denied but that
their Rbetorick is persuasive, that their accord do some time pass or current
and undeniable reasons, that their words are charms and that their address is
able to master the greatest courages.

In the midst of this diligent care which the Cardinal took for the Interests
of Religion and the State, his Prudence was not forgetful of any thing which
might be thought in favor of the Kings Sister. It was agreed in respect of
eight hundred thousand Crowns, which his Majesty gave her in marriage, that she
should renounce all successions either Paternal, Maternal, or Collateral, which
might befall unto her; and accordingly after she had received leave from her
mother, the Queen Mother, so to do she did renounce, and the King of Great
Britains. Ambassador, did ratify it, that in future no such pretensions might
arise, to trouble the quiet of the Kingdoms, as formerly had been. Withal, he
took such tender care of all advantages for her, that she could not suffer any
inconvenience by any accident whatever.

It was agreed upon by his care, that the Prince deceasing without issue, the
money should be totally restored to her, to be disposed of according to her own
will whether she did live in England or in France.

That if he had children by this marriage, there should only be two thirds of
her Portion returned, the other being moveable, that the last twenty of the
third part, should be made a yearly rent to her, during her life, that her
Dower should be eight hundred thousand pound sterling, por annum. returning
French money, at sixty thousand Crowns rent, which should be assigned to her in
Lands and Houses, one of which should be such, and accordingly furnished that
she might make her usual residence there.

That the King of Great Britain should be obliged to treat her and her Family
with that Port which was fit for one of her quality that there should be fifty
thousand crowns in Jewels presented to her, by the King of Great Britain, as a
marriage favor, which should remain to her and hers, as well as those which
she then had, as also such as she should have in future.

That she should have the free disposal of Benefices and Offices, in those
lands which should be given her in Dower, and that one of those lands should be
a Duchy or an Earldome, that it should be lawful for her in her Widdow-hood,
to return into France, whether she had children, or not, that in case she
should return, the King of Great Britain should conduct her at his own proper
charges to Callis, with such honor as should be fit for one of her quality.

That her house should be furnished with such dignity, and should be filled
with as many Officers, as any Princess yet had, or as had been accorded to the
Infanta of Spain, upon the late Treaty which had been proposed. Briefly, that
for the assurance of these conditions, he, of the two Kings, who should be
deficient to accomplish what belongs on his part to do, should be bound to
pay four hundred thousand crowns to the other, as a penalty for breach of them.

This was as much security as could be had for the present, but one thing is
not to be forgotten, which was, that all the Treaty, all the promises given and
taken, and all the Acts which were concluded on, passed in the Kings name, as
the Person, to whom the marrying of the Princesses of the Blood did really
appertain, and which he might do according to his own pleasure, and upon such
conditions as he should think fit; whereas they are only concerned to give
their consents both to the Persons and Articles which are resolved on.

Custom, may raise obstacles against marriages and make them void* if there
be any defect of following the usual order which is prescribed. The Popes have
found by the Canon Law, that they have this Power: Particularly Alexander the
third, who when a Bishop asked him the Question, whether Marriage between the
Children of two Gossips were allowable, answered him, yes, in case the custom
of the Country did permit it. But I shall say moreover, that the same Pope has
declared that there might be such Customs in France, which might annull
marriages, though on the other side, those of Rome may license them. According
to that answer, which was made to the Bishop of Amiers, who desiring to know if
a marriage made with a Eunuch were good, was answered, that the general custom
of the French Church, was to dissolve it, and he was contented so to permit it,
though the Roman Church used the contrary. It is the Custom of France, that no
Princesses or Ladies of great quality, whose marriages may be of concern to the
State, may marry, but by and with the Kings order and consent. The second Race
of our Kings furnishes us with an example very remarkable, in the marriage of
Judeth Widow of Edmulph King of England, who being married without the consent
of Charles the Bauld, with Bauldwin grand Forrestier, and afterward first Earl
of Flanders* he declared the said marriage to be null by the Prelates and Clergy
of France. assembled at Senlis, though she were at her own disposal, by her
first marriage and royalty, though Pope Nicholas the first, would have picked a
quarrel at it, and have confirmed it. Some one perchance, not well informed,
may suppose, that this Pope wanted courage, but there is no reason for it:
seeing he had spirit enough to excommunicate Lotharius for marrying a second
wife, leaving his first, though his Clergy at Merz and Calogue* did favor him
to constrain him to quit his last Wife, and to receive his first; as also to
dispossess two Bishops, who had Abetted the disorder; the true reason is, he
knew that the Custom of France did not permit Judith to re-marry without the
Kings consent. The third Race, affords us another proof, reported by a
Historian* who deserves so much the rather to be credited, he being generally
known for one of the enemies of France. It was the marriage contracted by
Proxy, between Maximilian, and Anne of Britain. It Is true, it was not
consummated as that of Judith was; but because it was concluded without the
consent of Charles the Eighth one of our Kings. His Majesty making use of his
Power, declared it Null, by reason of that default. In fine, it was allowed for
naught, and both parties remained Free, Maximilian afterward marrying Margaret
of Milan; and Charles the Eighth married the same Anne of Britain, and no one
doubted the validity of either of the marriages.

If these examples evince to us, the Antiquity of this Custom, and how the
Church has allowed of it, we cannot suspect or doubt, but that they are
grounded upon just reasons, seeing the marriages of persons of such quality,
are of great importance to the State, and ordinarily are the originals of Peace
or War, and serve for a Staircase to such, who aspiring higher then they
ought, raise enterprises against the Sovereignty, as Cornelius Tacitus has
observed; it does therefore rest safely to be concluded on, that the
Princesses of France cannot lawfully marry without the Kings consent. So that
neither men or women who have had them in their possession, did never make a
difficulty to promise, either by Oath, or any other assurance, that they would
not contract them in any marriage without their consents and approbation.

Philippes Auguste, took security of Mahaut, Countess of Flanders, that if it
should happen that she and Eude the third Duke of Burgogn, should separate, she
should not re-marry without permission. Philip Earl of Namur, promised the same
King that he would not marry Jane or Margaret of Flanders, his Neeces, whose
Guardian he was without his consent. Jane Countess of Flanders, promised by a
particular instrument unto St. Lewis the King, that she would not marry with
Simon de Montfort, but with his allowance. Jane daughter to Philip of Burgogn,
being delivered to King John, by the Treaty between him, and the Earl of Savoy,
amongst other things it was then concluded, that she should be married where
his Majesty should think fit^^ provided it were not to the Daup^ine his eldest
son. And Francis Duke of Britain, engaged by a Treaty with Charles the Eight,
not to marry either of his two daughters, without his advise, under the penal
forfeiture of two hundred thousand crowns of Gold, and for the greater
security, he bound unto him the principallest Towns in his whole Dutchee.

The Deputation of Father Berule, to his Holiness, to obtain a Dispensation for
the abovementioned Marriage.
THe respect wherewith the King had ever honored the Holy Father, made him
resolve with the English Ambassadors in the first Article of the Treaty, That
in consideration of that diversity of Religion, between the Princess and the
Prince of Wales his Majesty should send to his Holiness to procure a
Dispensation before the Marriage were effected, to obtain the said
Dispensation, the Cardinal proposed to the King, to send Father Berule,
Superior General of the fathers of the Oratory, and to commit the charge of it
to him, as a person capable of such a negotiation and whose Piety (which
amongst the People is extremely recommendable) might take off all shadows or
apparencies, which the weakness of their senses, or the malice of the Spaniards
might raise abroad concerning it. It should seem he did foresee that Fury,
wherewith the Spanish Partisans writ against this marriage. So angry they were,
that they had not prevented it, not reflecting, that for eleven whole years
they had testified to the world, that they would have done the self-same thing.
But that I may not be hindered by those outrageous speeches, which proceeded
from those spirits puffed up with Ambition, who then began to discover that
France had a Minister capable to countermine them, and to oppose their unjust
designs. I shall inform you, that the instruction, which was give to Father
Berule was, to go to Rome with all diligence, and to obtain the Dispensation
from the Pope, to which purpose he was to represent to his Holiness, That the
King of Great Britain, having demanded the Princess Henrietta Maria the Kings
Sister, in marriage, for the Prince of Wales his son, his Majesty was the more
inclinable, to hearken to the Proposition, because he looked upon it as a
probable means to convert the English; as heretofore a French Princess married
into England, had induced them to embrace Christianity. But that the Honor
which he owed to the Holy Chair, and in particular to his Sanctity, who had
formerly held him at the Font of Baptism, in the name of Pope Clement the
Eighth, had not permitted him to conclude upon the Treaty, before the
obtainment of his Dispensation. That this Marriage ought to be regarded for the
Interest, not only of the Catholics in England, but of all Christendom, who
would receive great advantages by it, that there is not any thing of hazard for
the Princess, seeing she is as firm, as could be desired both in the Faith a^^
Piety. That she should have a Bishop^ and eight and twenty Priests, to do all
Offices. That she should have none but Catholics in her Household. That the
King of Great Britain, and the Prince of Wales, would oblige themselves by
Writing and Oath, not to solicit her directly or indirectly, neither by
themselves, or any other persons, to change her Religion: Moreover, that there
being nothing to be feared in relation to the Princess, there were great
hopes, that she might be entirely beloved by the King (who was well disposed
already to become a Catholic) and by the Prince of Wales, That she might the
more contribute to their conversion, in regard that women have very great power
over their Husbands and Father-in-Laws, when Love has gotten any power in
their affections. That for her part, she was so zealous in Religion, that there
was no doubt but she would employ her utmost industry in so pious a design:
That admitting God should not succeed her i^tentions either upon King James, or
the Prince of Wales, there were hopes her Children might become restorers of
that Faith which their Ancestors had destroyed, seeing she had the education
and bringing of them up in the belief and exercise of the Catholic Religion
until they were thirteen years old; and that their first seeds of Piety, having
being instilled into their souls, and cultivated with carfulness, when they
became capable of good Instructions, might infallibly produce stable and
permanent Fruits, that is, so strong a Faith, as might not be shaken by Heresy
in a riper age. And after all, That the Catholics of England would forthwith
receive great advantages by it, seeing both the King of Great Britain* and the
Prince of Wales, his Son, would oblige themselves by wor^ and deed, not to hunt
them out* or when they were discovered, to punish them: To free out of Prison
all such as were laid up; to restore them their Moneys and Goods which had
been forced from them after the last Act, if they were possible to be had; and
generally to treat them with more favor, than if the Treaty with Spain had
gone on. Lastly, he had order to inform the Pope, that to render a greater
respect to the Church, he had conditioned, that the Princess should be
affianced and contracted according to the Catholic form, like that which was
observed they Charl^s the Ninth, in the Marriage of Margarice of France with the
late King Henry the Fourth, then King of Navarr.

These things spoke in their own behalf, and were so eminently visible, that no
doubt could be made of them. The Father Berule too, wanted neither Ability nor
Good Will, but represented them to his Holiness with such dexterity, that his
Sanctity gave him hopes of a favorable answer. It Is true, the Pope would not
grant him a dispense without conferring with the Cardinals, that he might give
no jealousy to Spain, who had been dealt with in the very same manner, when
they desired a Dispensation for the In^anca, but they were of his own naming,
and such as no one could think, were more subject to Passion than Justice. So
they met diverse times about it, and though it were with the ordinary delays of
the Court at Rome (without which they esteem no affair, can be discussed and
judged with Prudence or Majesty enough) yet in sine, they referred the
expediting of the Dispensation to the Popes pleasure. All that was cross in the
business, was barely this. Father Boriel^ being naturally addicted to refine
all things, was persuaded, that there had not been assurances strong enough,
obtained from the English for the securing and hindering the placing of
Protestant Officers over the Princesses children; the solicitation of Officers
to change their Religion; the continuation of forcing English Catholics to
take Oaths of Abjuration against the Catholic Religion, and the holy See,
though indeed it had been expressly concluded and agreed on, That the King of
England and Prince of W^l^s should engage both by Writing and Oath, not to
enforce them any more. However this induced both the Pope and Cardinals to
think fit (not acquainting the ^ieur^d^ Bethune with it, though the Cardinals
Prudence had tied up the said Father B^rul^ in his Instructions, not to do any
thing without him) to oblige the King in the Instrument of Dupensation, to
procure from the King of Great Britain new assurances in these parcicu^ars. So
that he following his own sense, and specious reasons, upon which he relied,
his Holiness dispatched him upon those conditions, and sent him back to the
King with all diligence.

Politic Observations.
IF Piety prohibit Ministers to do things contrary to Religion; Prudence
obliges them to refer the management of affairs to Persons who have the
reputation of an extraordinary Honesty, especially to the transacting of such
things, which notwithstanding their innate Justice, may provoke any evil
spirits: For though the most upright regulate their Judgments by some
Principles, which serve them as a Law in the Government of a State, yet the
most part, ghuessing only by their own senses and apprehensions, judge of the
Affairs by the Persons who conduct them. Opinion guides the whole world, and
sets a price upon virtue it self; and the reputation alone of him who
negotiates, may cause his designs to pass under the notion of good and lawful.
If the Foxes good counsel be once suspected by a man, he will be hardly
persuaded, that a Person replenished with all the ornaments of a singular
integrity, will engage himself in unjust designs. The repute of such a person
sets a value and a price upon his words and actions, and the opinion which is
conceived of him, is so absolute an Empire, that there is no Appeal from his
Judgment. It is an ancient saying, Truth is the strongest thing in the world:
But however, if once Opinion has fixed her Throne in the minds of the people,
Truth will have somewhat to do to disappoint her. The prescriptions of a
Physician who is in esteem, do even pass for good: And the Acts of a person
who has the credit of a sublime Virtue cannot be found fault withal. The
wiseft of the Pagans were not ignorant hereof, but made great advantages by it
as occasion offered it self. Scipio the African, would sometimes be a long
while together all alone in the Capitol, pretending he did conferr with Jupiter
concerning the affairs of the Commonwealth, and all this he did, that he might
be thought to be endued with a more than humane Piety. Minos the Lawgiver of
Candia went down to make Laws into a subterranean Cave, which he called
Jupiters Grot, and thence brought them all written, persuading the people to
believe that they were inspired into him by that Divinity: And this was an
easy way to persuade the people to whatsoever they had a mind to, God himself
has thought it very proper too, when he would bring any great thing to pass,
for he has chosen usually such men, who by their eminent virtue are able to
make all people believe that whatsoever they declare, could not be but truth:
He has commanded the Prophets and Apostles to publish such sayings as would
jarr and clash with the senses of most men, and yet he has replenished them in
respect of his choice, with the many graces, that it were almost impossible for
the most part not to believe them.

The deputation of the Sieur de la Ville-aux-clercs to the King of England in
the quality of an Extraordinary Ambassador.
AFter the King had paid this respect to the Pope, and that the Articles of
Marriage had been coucluded, upon the twentieth of November, His Majesty cast
his eyes upon the Sieur de la Ville-aux-cler^s, one of his Counselors and
Secretary of State to dispatch him into England as an Extraordinary Ambassador.
He gave him particular order to testify unto the King of Great Britain and the
Prince of Wales, the great affection which he had to live with them in a strait
and near intelligence, and to assure them that one of the chiefest reasons
which drew him to agree to the Marriage, was the consideration, that as one link
of their Friendship was tied by Blood, this would render it indissolvable.
After these Complements were once past, he commanded him to procure the
Articles of Marriage to be ratified, and to obtain their Oaths and Promises by
Writing according to what the Ambassadors had engaged their words. He
discharged himself with honor, both to the one and the other Commission; and
having several times entertained them with the Content that his Master would
conceive by their Alliance; he at last concluded with such dexterity, that he
had instilled into them all sorts of good will and affection for France; and in
particular for his Majesty's Interests, and so invited them to a quick
consummation of the Treaty, that the sudden chances which usually happen to
affairs of this consequence might not breed any alteration or change. This was
the groundwork upon which he founded his demands for their Instruments and
Oaths which had been promised, and which both of them were readily disposed to
effect, and accordingly they promised upon the Holy Evangelist not to attempt
by any ways or means to induce the Princess to change the Roman Catholic
Apostolic Religion, or to force her to any thing which might be contrary to
it. They likewise promised upon their Faith and words of Princes to grant to
the Catholics more Liberties and Franchises in every thing which concerned
their Religion, than had been given in favor of the Match with Spain, not to
force them to take Oaths contrary to the Rules of the Roman Church, and to take
effectual care that they were no more troubled in their Persons or Estates for
their Religion, provided they exercised it in private, and lived in obedience,
as good Subjects ought to do; and finally, both of them signed and delivered
two Deeds, for the better assurance of their Oaths and Promises. After all
this, his Instructions did not oblige him to be contented with words only as
to that which concerned the Liberty of the Catholics, so that he proceeded
with great earnestness to obtain the effects of it; and he was assured that
upon the conclusion of the Marriage, there should be a Patent of Enlargement
granted to all such as were Prisoners for their Religion-sake, without being
any more troubled for the future; and for what related to all in general, there
was a Deed made under his Majesty's own Hand and Seal, directed to the Lord
Conway, Secretary of State, commanding him to signify to all whom it
concerned, that it was his Majesty's pleasure, no farther prosecution should be
made against them: and accordingly the Lord Conway gave notice hereof to the
Chancellor, Treasurer, to the Archbishops of Canterbury and York, and to all
other chief Officers; principally requiring the Grand Treasurer, to restore
unto them all the moneys which had been forced from them and paid into the
Exchequer, with order not to do the like hereafter; and thus by obtaining their
Promises Words, and Assurances, they had as much security as they could wish
for, could they but be contented to exercise their Religion in private and
without noise.

Politic Observation.
THe word of a King has always passed for so sacred, that ours have sometimes
scrupel'd at the confirmation by Oath, of what they once gave upon their words.
It was for that reason Saint Lewis would not swear in his own person to the
League then made with Henry the third King of England, at the Camp near St.
Aubin, Anno 1231. but desired it might suffice, if he caused it to be sworn in
his name and presence, by the Prior of St. Martin the fields. Indeed, there
being nothing more inviolable than the word of a Prince, it were an offense to
doubt of his fidelity, or to desire his ratification by Oath. The Genius of a
Prince was heretofore held in such veneration, that another swore for him; now
to desire that he himself should swear, were to decline that respect which is
due unto him. However, the Infidelity of some has made it a custom, that all
should confirm their Treaties by Oath, when they are of any great importance;
which Oath is the strictest tie which they can be bound in. The Laws look upon
it for so venerable* that they never permit it to be broken, what ever
advantage happen by it. Perjury is condemned as a double sin, because it not
only violateth that Religion which is due to God, who is invoked as a witness,
but also Faith, which is the most sacred Bond of humane society. Which Laws
too, do oblige Princes much more then other men, to keep their Oaths, because
if they once forfeit their reputation of being faithful, they have not any
thing left them which is considerable.

Christians ought to be most precise in this point, if they would not be put to
the blush, at the many examples of Pagans and Infidels. It is much to be
lamented, that most men make no difference between deceit and dissimulation;
that they make no bones of infringing their Oaths, if they may but get any
thing by it, they do much rather incline to follow the opinion of Marius,
(though discommended by all the Sages of Antiquity) who thought the Art of
well-lying, a great piece of virtue, and that it was an Index of a good Wit.)
then that of the Commonwealth of Rome; which was so religiously faithful for
their words, that Ptolomey King of Egypt, left his young son their tuition and
protection, without the least apprehension of suspicion. Neither was he
deceived in his confidence for after they had administered his government with
integrity, as soon as he came of age, they delivered up the Kingdom into his
own hands.

The Renewing of the Alliance between his Majesty and the States of Holland.
AT the same time that the English Ambassadors arrived at Compeign, the Sieurs
de Nortwijck de Paw, and d' Esten, extraordinary Ambassadors from the States
of Holla^d came likewise thither, to desire his Majesty's Assistance, and the
renewing of the ancient Alliance. The League being ended, and the enemies of
their Liberties, beginning to execute the designs which they had hatched for
their ruin. The King who has never less inclination to assist his Allies,
then to keep his own People in obedience, received them with all kind of
favor, and forthwith gave them great hopes of obtaining their desires. His
Majesty knew, that their Protection was Honorable, that there is nothing more
glorious for a Sovereign then to shelter under his Power those who are
oppressed, that what Assistances he gives them, are most assured signs of his
greatness and generosity, and withal that it was full of Justice. The History
of Holland had taught him, that the Princes of Austria, by their altering the
Fundamental Laws, and oppressing the public Liberty of those Countries, had
thrown themselves out of that Power which they once had over them, that the
Hollander had reason sufficient for their Authority, to shake off the yoke of
their obedience, by those Laws which are as ancient as the quality of the Earl
of Holland. An ancient says, that Power is full of equity, which is employed
in defense of the weak and feeble, and there is not any thing more just then to
conserve to ones Allies, those Liberties which belong to them time out of mind,
and by the Fundamental Laws of their Country. This in particular was so much
the more assuredly just, for Princes who possess a Country by Treaty with the
People, and upon Conditions cannot infringe them, and not lose their Authority;
and especially if they break Covenants, which does absolutely discharge such
Subjects from their obedience. The Hollanders were acknowledged for Free and
Sovereign People, in the Treaty of the League made, Anno 1609. by the Kings of
Spain, and Archdukes of Flanders. And in the same quality have the Kings of
England, De^mark, and Sweden, the most part of the Hans Towns, the
Commonwealth of Venice, and many Princes of Germany, ever treated with them;
whence it appears a work of Justice to aid them in main taining their
Franchises. A work of Justice so much the more certain, for that liberty has
been ever esteemed a just cause for a War, every one concluding it more
glorious to die then to live in servitude, from which his Birth and the
Privileges of his country have exempted him.

Besides these important reasons, the King was no less informed of the
especial advantages which France might make, by defending of them, that it is
above threeseore years together, that they have obliged not only this State,
but the most part of Europe to assist them, to balance the Power of Spain, and
so to find his Armies employment in that Country, that his designs elsewhere
might be frustrated; besides, that it was now much more necessary, in regard
the Garrisons were to be established in the Valtoline, and it would concern the
State to make him some diversions, that might entertain his Armies elsewhere;
withal he found, that if he did assist Holland with these succors, it would
engage them to do as much for him, when occasion should require it, which was
no inconsiderable thing, as Henry the Great found by experience, when he was by
them assisted, against those unjust oppositions which were formed by the League
to thwart and cross him: He himself too might fall into the same necessities,
seeing the prosperity of Kingdoms, is like a Calm at Sea, which as it is often
over-blown with storms, so that too, is no less subject to interruption, by
civil or foreign Wars. These reasons were indeed too too weighty to reject
that people demands. And his Majesty whose greatest pleasure consists in doing
such things as might testify both his Justice and Courage, gave all sorts of
Assurances to their Ambassadors, of a strong succor, and thought good to make
a Treaty for the renewing of the ancient Alliance.

His Majesty gave the Cardinal power to conclude on the Conditions with them,
and this great Minister, who had not a little fortified his Majesty in that
resolution, having determined them, concluded it in the month of June at
Compeign, by which he bound himself to deliver them by way of Loan, three
Millions, and two hundred thousand Livers in three years. On condition, that
they should re-imburse them, three years after the War was ended. That they
should neither make Peace or League with any one what ever, without his advice
and interposition. That if he had any occasion of Ships of War, they should
furnish him either for sale or hire, at a reasonable Price. That in case he
himself were engaged in any Wars, they should repay him one half of the said
sums of money or assist him with Ships, according to the Proportion of that
which was lent them. That they should cause such French Regiments as should be
entertained in Holland, to be conducted to Calais or Diepe. And thus in one and
the same month, the Cardinal made his entrance upon the Administration very
remarkable; by the resolution of the Match with England, which engaged the King
of Great Britain in his Majesty's interests, by the entertaining of the
Spanish Forces in the Low Countries, by which he diverted them from assisting
the Valtolines so powerfully as otherwise they had done.

Politic Observation.
IF Marriages serve to augment the Power of a King, certainly those Alliances
which are made with neighbor States, for reciprocal assistance in War, do no
less contribute toward it, provided they be well established. Two States well
united, are undoubtedly stronger then one alone, and as an ancient Author
says, if an enemy should prevail against one, yet two would be able to oppose
him. Partnership is that which inricheth Merchants in Trading, and Alliances
enable Princes to make foreign invasions with their Forces, and if there be
such profit to be made out of it, I suppose they are very necessary; for the
divine wisdom has so disposed all Kindomes, that they have all need one of
another. Aristotle says, nibil p^r se subsist it, nothing is able to subsist
by it self only, and if in the Microcosm, every part is needful for one
another, not excepting the most noble. God has also imparted Power to
Sovereigns, with such equality, that they are never able to increase it,
without mutual assistance from one another. Upon this foundation it is, that
all Alliances are established. It is absurd to believe, that the bare
friendship of Princes, can be a sufficient Bond, seeing that it is interest
which only ties them effectually, as is apparent to all men; for that they
usually break them, when once they appear against their concernments. If ever
there be occasion to unite them together, it is chiefly when there is danger of
a common enemy, and that they would hinder his growing strength, and prevent
him from making attempts upon their bordering neighbors, and consequently upon
themselves.

In fine, it was upon that score that the I^alian Ambassadors persuaded King
Antiochus to league himself with them against the Romans, representing to him,
that if he did not keep them in continual exercise, they would render
themselves Masters of his Allies, and then enter upon his own Country too: And
it was for the same reason, that the Princes of the house of Orleans finding
themselves too weak to make head against the Burguignions, allied themselves
with the English, though otherwise they hated them; and that Ferdinand King of
Naples, allied himself with Lewis Sforza Tutor to John Galeazzi his Nephew, and
Laurence de Medicis, that they might oppose the French, who then threatened them.

Colonel Ornano is made Prisoner in the Bastile, and thence sent to the Castle
of Caen.
VVHilest the King negotiated these two important Treaties, and that the
Cardinal gave a happy progress to them by his Counsails, the Marquis de la
Vieville, who for the two last years had a great hand in the affairs, informed
the King, that the Colonel d' Ornano, Governor to the Duke of Orleans, his
Brother, took such a course as would in time trouble the State: The he had not
forgot any artifice to render himself agreeable to the Monsieur, and to gain
such a power over his spirit, that the Honor which he had to be his Governor
gave him a great power in his Family: That before he had gained the Mounsieurs
affection, he made his brags openly, that he would get the Mastery over him, to
the intent he might raise his fortune to a higher pitch: That he began to sow
distrusts in the mind of that Prince, and to extinguish the seeds of that
Respect, Love and Obedience which Nature had given to him in creating him: That
he took advantage of his good favor, to make himself feared; and that he
vaunted to have done many things contrary to his duty, of which there were many
particulars, and that he was observed to take great care to hold Intelligence
with the Grandees of the Court. This was so much the more to be feared, for
that the greatest misfortunes, and the most part of Civil Wars have no other
beginning, then misunderstandings of Princes against their Kings. The King
thought good to impart it to the Cardinal, and having demanded his advice, of
what was proper to be done in that occasion, he did not at all dissemble the
danger, it would be, to permit this procedure of the Colonel: But the
moderation of his spirit would not suffer him to carry him on to use such
violent remedies as others did advise him to; but on the contrary, he
represented to him, that the Laws of Mercy obliged Kings to pardon the first
faults of Grandees, provided that they would confess their errors, especially
if there be a means to prevent any consequence of danger: That the wisest are
sometimes subject to miscarriages, and are also capable to repent them; and
afterward to do great services: That the moderation which many wise Princes
have showed toward such offenders, has made them more faithful and
affectionate then those who never committed any miscarriage at all: That this
Repentance, was the more reasonably to be hoped, from the Colonel d' Ornano,
who till then had lived within those limits, which ought to be observed by
those of his condition, that his Father had given him a good example, by those
services which he had done until his death: That he had indeed forgot himself,
but that his omission might be remedied which seemed to deserve pardon so much
the more, in regard it is almost impossible for the greatest part of Mankind
not to forget themselves, whenas fortune shall advance them into a place of
Eminency: Moreover there was reason to hope, that the only removing him for
some time from the Monsieur would make him reassume his former countenance,
would make him sensible of his fault, and he himself would easily be induced to
judge that this embroyl wherein he had suffered himself to be surprised would
undoubtedly precipitate him into utter ruin, instead of raising him into a
higher condition.

This counsel was accompanied with a much Prudence as Moderation; and the King,
who is ever carried of himself to follow the best advice, only commanded the
Colonel d' Ornano, to retire himself to his Government of Pont-Sainct-Esprit,
until he were permitted to return to the Court, but the Colonel being
confident, that there were nothing but surmises and conjectures against him,
had the boldness to refuse obedience to this order, persuading the Monsieur to
keep him near him, and to procure from the King by any extraordinary instances,
that he might not be forced from the Court. The Monsieur beseeched his
Majesty's with all possible affection. However, the King gave him to
understand, that his removal was very necessary to divert those mischiefs which
he did not yet suspect, especially to preserve that near friendship, wherein
they had always lived: So he had nothing to reply, and his Majesty to punish
the insolence, which had given so much boldness to the Colonel d' Ornano to
resist his Majesty's will, commanded him to be made Prisoner in the Bastile,
and shortly after in the Castle of Caen.

The displeasure which he conceived at his Imprisonment opened his eyes, he
looked upon his fault with so much resentment, that there was not any
protestation of fidelity left unmade by him, from his friends to his Majesty;
and finally, having recourse to the Cardinals intercession, that grand
Minister, whose Counsels are never accompanied with rigor, unless, when he is
enforced by Justice, dealt so with his Majesty, that at last he procured his
liberty. After the Marqness de la Viville who had diverted him, had been so
unhappy, his Majesty caused him to be brought out of Prison, and believing his
Promises, restored him in his place with the Monsieur; and withal, gratified
him with a considerable sum: Whereas he, instead of making any advantage of his
imprisonment, of his Liberty, or of the Benefits, which he afterward received;
threw himself upon the Intregues of women, and some Fantastical hair-brained
young men, who put it into his head, that he was much redoubted on his Masters
account, which made him conceive so great a vanity, that he boasted in many
places, that he would further those motions which some Grandees made to the
Monsieur, to carry him from the Court, unless himself were made a Marshal of
France.

The Colonel d' Ornano, is made Marshal of France.
THE King upon advice had, was counseled by people of Quality, either to
Arrest him, or make him Marshal of France, otherwise some great mishap might
follow. The King was inclined to chastise him, not being able to endeavor or
consent, that any such honor should be granted to him, out of fear, or to
hinder his doing of more villainies. However, his Clemency moderated his just
indignation, and prevailed with him to bestow upon him a Marshals Staff, to
reduce him within his duty, and to make him carry himself better for the
future. It is true, the Cardinal settled and fixed him in those thoughts, and
withal begged him to pardon him, seeing in creating him a Marshal, there would
be no cause of fear, for that it would be as easy then as before, to clap him
up into the Bastile, and that what punishment should be inflicted on him, would
appear the juster in the eyes of all the World, in respect of those great
favors wherewith he had been obliged; so he pardoned him and made him a
Marshal, signalizing his Conduct by acts of mercy, not less considerable, then
the wisdom which he had made appear in those two negotiations before mentioned.

Politic Observation.
IT is a great impudence to Court a Prince, with design to prevail against his
Sovereign, for besides that, a Sovereign grows quickly jealous, if he find any
to partake of that Honor, which is due to himself alone. Which one thing is
the ordinary fomentation of Civil Wars. Tiberius testified a great resentment,
for that their Chief-Priests, making their prayers, to the Gods for his health,
took the boldness to add the name of Nero and Drusius, though they were near a
kin to him, and the next successors to the Empire, he acquainted the Senate
with it, as also the Priests, and briskly told them he was offended at it. The
same Emperor seeing the Senators prepare great Honors for his own Mother,
did he not make them apprehend by a very neat discourse, that those Honors
which were given to Women, should be moderate, and that he himself too would
use the same modesty, in those which were offered to him? When he beheld Macron
the Captain of his Guards, courting Caligula, did he not rattle him up with
high language, for that he forsook the Sun setting, to adore him Rising:

Kings are so sensible in this particular, that it is not without trouble, that
they permit Courtship to be used to their own Children: Thus, though Philip of
Macedon, did entirely love Demetrius his son, yet he was much offended, when
the Macedonians followed him in Troops, and showed an earnest desire to
insinnuate themselves into his good favor. But admit this jealousy do not
spring up, however such like actions ought not to be allowed, seeing infallibly
it will breed broyls in the State. It is also true, that (men not being less
capable to quit their wicked designs, then to hatch and contrive them) it were
dangerous to drive things to extremity, and to ruin them at the same instant,
they were discovered. That Physician has but a small portion of discretion,
who makes use of violent remedies, upon the first beginning of a sickness,
without staying to expect what Nature might do of her own self, and that
Minister is too severe, who discovering some designs against his Masters
service, presently destroys the Authors of it, without giving time, that they
might repent themselves. Cecinna is much blamed by Tacitus, for taking a
barbarous revenge upon some disorders, before he had given leisure to those who
were guilty, to repent: But on the contrary, Julius Agricola, is much
commended, in that he was most commonly satisfied with acknowledgment of a
fault, and did not cruelly chastise any, when there was the least hopes of
amendment; above all, a Minister is the more obliged to this moderation, when
he is newly admitted into affairs, and it is conducing to his Masters service,
in regard it is a means to render himself beloved. The Sun at his Rising never
appears burning hot, his heat is welcome and favorable, and he seems like
Roses and Pearl to the World; and a discreet Minister conforms himself to so
agreeable an example, and ought to take it for granted, that whatsoever favors
he shall do at the beginning of his Conduct, will gain him the affection of the
People, and in prosecution will heap up upon him, as much Happiness as Glory.

The Marquis of Vieville is made Prisoner at St. Germans, and thence conducted
to the Castle of Amboyse.
THose several agitations whereunto Fortune had exposed the Colonel d' Ornano,
which sometimes seemed to throw him headlong down, and then again to raise him
up to great Honors, were not the only marks of the Inconstancy which that
flattering Goddess made appear during this year: For after she had raised up
the Marquis de la Vieville just to the Administration, and to the
Superintendance of the Treasuries, she was pleased so to cast him down, that
the King caused him to be arrested at St. German en Lay about the beginning of
August, and sent Prisoner to the Castle of Amboyse. To speak truly, it was no
such great cause of admiration, seeing this Inconstancy seems to have chosen
Princes Courts for the place to exercise her power in, and to have taken a
great delight, as it were, to raise several men unto a high point of favor to
expose them shortly after to the greater overthrows, every one had reason to
attribute it to her most usual conduct, which accustometh all men to this Law,
that being once mounted to a certain degree of Honor, they must then of
necessity fall back again, and that sometimes with such violence, that they
fall into as great a number of miseries as they formerly had of felicities. No
one can be ignorant of this truth; but as Envy does frequently asperse the
principal Ministers of a Prince, so she gave the impudence to a Pen envenomed
by the Spaniards, to write, that the Cardinal was the cause of it, by reason of
the fear he was in, least the Marquis de la Vieville should rob him of the
Ministerial honor.

But how little has this Enemy of this King, as well as of his Ministers,
proved his discourse so contrary to the Truth? After the disrepute which they
in whose behalf he writ, had of the Marquis, they made no long use of him,
without being sensible that he was not an Instrument any way proper to raise
their fortunes after the ruining of his own out of a Gallantry of Humor only.
He went from St. Germans too with too much flowting, ever to invite his Majesty
by his services, to make him the Minister of his Intentions. Besides, could he
be so extreme ignorant of the Cardinals high and eminent Genius, in persuading
himself that the Cardinal could be any ways suspicious of the Marquis's
undermining his Fortune? It were to persuade the Sun that the least Stars would
obscure his light; it were also to accuse the King himself of great Imprudence,
seeing it is to declare him incapable of distinguishing whether the Marquis of
Vieville or the Cardinal were more proper for his Affairs. Certainly if the Sun
discovers the deformity of a visage which had layen hid during the night, and
makes the Stars, which twinkle in the dark, to withdraw themselves upon his
first approach. The Cardinal entering upon the Administration, and discovering
to his Majesty the incomparable discretion of his Counsels, was enough to
detect the little sufficiency of the Marquis, and to hide under the vailes of
an obscure darkness, those advices which his vivacity and promptness of
discourse did make appear with some splendour, might give his Majesty just cause
to make no greater esteem of him: And who so would accuse him in this occasion,
must also reproach the Sun for having too much light, and to call that in Great
Persons a Crime, which renders them the more to be admired. Every one then knew
the true causes of the Marquis's disgraces, the King having given an Account of
it to the Parliament the very day after his Arresting; that he might be
accused, as his Majesty observed, to that Illustrious company for his evil
conduct (which indeed was such, that all men of any sense thought him incapable
of long subsisting) That he had changed those very resolutions which were made
in his Majesty's presence, without acquainting him with it: That he had treated
with Ambassadors resident near him, contrary to his order: That he had
oftentimes cast that hatred which he had contracted, in exercising his
passionate disgusts against some particular persons, upon his Majesty; and that
he had feigned several advices with design to induce him to be jealous of
those, in whom he might put a most entire confidence, all all which is so
true, that the King, that he might not take him unprovided, had often given him
advice to alter his behavior, and to become more exact in prosecution of his
Orders, and more reserved in his words, and in his procedure, as his Majesty
had signified in the same Letter.

After all which, his faults were so much the more known to the King, he having
contracted the enmity of most part of the Grandees of the Court, by those
outrages wherewith he had provoked them, when they demanded those gratuities
which his Majesty had granted to them, and by that excessive rigor wherewith
he would cut off the Pensions and other Benefits, which they had formerly
obtained of his Majesty, as soon as ever he was entered upon the Treasury. For
they being once so provoked, wanted no address to acquaint his Majesty with it,
and also to accuse him of diverse other unhandsome Carriages by several
informers, who offered to prove that he had diverted great sums from the
Service of Spain, to his own profit and his Father in Laws, the Sieur de
Beaumarchais, one of the Treasurers; all which carried on his Majesty to clap
him up in Prison.

Politic Observation.
NO one can doubt, but that a Minister who upon his first entrance into
Affairs, finds them in disorder, is obliged to apply necessary remedies to
them; but the Laws of Prudence teach us, that it ought to be with moderation
and affability, without which, he does like a rash Physician, who by giving his
medicines in too great a proportion, and using too much rigor toward his
Patient, does so move and heat his natural temperature, that his sickness by
it, is rather increased then diminished. It is very dangerous to force men to
pass in an instant from one extremity to another, and who so attempts it shall
never escape the darts of Envy and Hatred, which will not only render all his
designs and labor to no purpose, but also expose him too to very great
dangers. The first Actions of a Minister are they, which lay the Foundation of
that Love or Hatred, which he shall afterward reap from the people: a harsh
rigorous procedure, can procure him nothing but ill will, and it is impossible
for him to escape the doing many ill-offices near this Prince; and though those
Customs and Uses, which he would alter, be abuses to the State; yet the
Plurality of the People will hardly be conduced to think so when they have been
accustomed to those others a long time together; upon which consideration it
will be absolutely necessary, to give them time to know better, and to disuse
them by little and little. The wise Tatitus says, he who finds an estate in
disorder, shall do much better at first dash to submit himself to the violence
of inveterated Habit, and redress it afterward with dexterity, rather then to
fall presently aboard it, and to break all in pieces by a precipitated
rashness; and he furnishes us with two examples, both very considerable for
their contrariety: The first is Tiberius, who finding the People in a great
licentiousness, which the long Peace and meekness of the Emperor Augustus had
brought them too, seemed at first not to regard it; his Prudence making him
judge it improper, to treat them with severity so soon, and that it was fitter
for him to dissemble with them a little while; which procedure of his gave an
advantageous issue to whatsoever he designed: Whereas the Emperor Galba,
though a better Prince then Tiberius, was as unfortunate as rash, in that at
his very first coming to the Crown, he attempted with his utmost power, to
redress those dis-orders which he found: He spilt the blood of such as were
Malefactors, with much severity, and showed himself to be very covetous; which
behavior of his rendered him so odious, that not many months after, he was
slain in the midst of Rome by his own Soldiers. It is with the People, as with
a sick man, who if in a Dropsy, he have not water given him to drink, though
in it self very hurtful, throws himself into dangerous extremities, so they,
if presently restrained from those Liberties and Freedoms which they had used
to enjoy, do run into Desperation and Fury, and eagerly push at the destruction
of those, whom they suppose Authors of the Alteration. Above all, it is
necessary that a Minister, who would change the face of affair with time,
should use a great deal of sweetness, and a singular Lenity in it, because
insolency and impetuousnesse are evil qualities, which do not at all conduce to
the dispatch of Affairs, and have no other operation, then to render them
odious who use it. It makes the most justifiable remedies insupportable;
whereas courtesy and kindness, sweetens any anguish, and makes it pass for
very reasonable. People do in some sort, rather love disorder in a Minister,
provided he be tractable; then virtue, if he be hard of access, rough, or
insolent. His commands will carry more Power with them, if they be accompanied
with gentleness, then if set on with Force and Fury. For which reason I should
wish to him the temper of Aristides, who amongst other good qualities that he
had, was master of a great affability, which gained him the heart of all the
World, so that afterward he might do what he would himself; or the Humanity of
Pompey, which was such, that never any one went dis-satisfied out of his
Presence; or the courtesy of Augustus whose Gates were ever open to all who
would make addresses to him, and whose Petitions himself received with an
admirable courtesy. It is to the examples of these wise men, he ought to
conform himself, not with an easiness or too great a facility, that rather
foments public dis-orders; but with the noble courageous sweetness of Brutus,
who according to Plutarch was beloved of all People, for his natural goodness,
though the intention of his Will was so upright, that he knew not what it was
to stoop to the toleration of any disorders.

The Sieurs de Champigny, and de Marillac, are advanced to the Superintendency
of the Exchequer.
AFter the dis-favour of the Marquess de la Vieville, his Majesty being
necessitated to put into his place a super-intendent; upon whose Prudence and
Fidelity in the Administration of the Finances, he might safely rely, took
advise of the Cardinal, well knowing that it is in vain to choose Officers if
the are nor able well to execute their places, because they are as it were the
Soul and main-spring, by which he shall arrive to any good success.

This grand Minister then discoursing with his Majesty upon this subject did
not any longer conceal those aggrievances, which several men did complain of in
the Marquess de la Vieville, but thought it necessary to set two in his place.
His reason was, That the regulating of the Finances, was much different from
that of the Administration of the State; because if the division and envy which
should arise between two Ministers, would draw on many inconveniences; yet the
misunderstanding which might make a separation between two super-intendents,
would be the more advantageous, it being somewhat impossible, that two men, who
are grown jealous of one another, should divert the moneys from the Treasury,
either of them fearing, least his Fellow-brother should detect him. His advice
was, to choose two such as were of great Honesty, because admit that one should
be corrupted in his Office, yet the other might stand firm. Besides this, he
advised him to cast his eyes upon such men, whose age and experience had made
them of good capacities. He thought ancient men, and such as were versed in
affairs, more proper then others, because they are naturally inclined to more
stayednesse, and have a greater respect and authority then young men to move
the people, to submit to those Impositions, which shall be charged upon them:
That the experience which they have by age, is the more needful in affairs of
concern, for without that experience Age does rather make men unweildy and
unapt for business; and that this same experience, is known for one of the most
solid Foundations of Wisdom, of which no one can be more assured, then he who
had often been deceived by Fortune, and who has found to his cost, that he
ought to trust but a few, and to be confident but of a little. Moreover, he
proposed too choose such, as were neither too poor nor too rich; not very poor,
fearing least the power of disposing the Treasuries, might work upon their
dispositions, to mis-imploy it to their own uses, that they might raise
themselves out of their Poverty and Needinesse; not very rich, least the power
and Authority which they possess might invite them to attempt whatever should
be suggested to them: Above all, he advised his Majesty, not to place in such
Offices of charge and trust, any, but men of understanding, and such as bad
some government in their own affairs, there being no reason to entrust the
second affairs of the Kingdom with people of but an indifferent Capacity; nor
no hopes but of ruin and confusion from such whose life has been disorderly,
and these are the chiefest good qualities of which a Super-intendent of the
Finances ought to be Master.

The King was not ignorant of these truths, but was glad to find them confirmed
to him, by the approbation of this grand Minister, and in prosecution of it,
desiring him to name some men in particular, upon whom his Majesty might cast
his eyes, to fill up those vacant Offices. He proposed to him the Sieurs de
Champigny, and de Marillac, as persons in whom these qualities were eminent.
Their Age and Experience had made them ripe for all sorts of business; their
Birth and Fortune had favorably imparted to them the gifts of Body and Mind.
Lastly, that most men gave them the Honor of esteeming them both Valiant and
Loyal; so his Majesty, equally depending upon their reputation, and the
Cardinals advice, honored them with the Super-intendency. It cannot be denied,
but that most of the Cardinals faithful creatures, reflecting upon the little
service, which the Sieur de Marillac, would have done the State in his own
person, took occasion to talk of it, that the should be so preferred into
affairs, without remembering those extravagancies of his, during the
Confederacy. But such ought to consider, that resolutions ought not to be
judged by the event, that the wisest Counsels are sometimes attended with ill
success, as well as the most rash and unadvised attempts; and I shall tell them
withal, that the Cardinal could hardly have imagined, how much it was to be
wished, that the Sieur de Marillac would have rebated some part of that unquiet
and rebellious spirit of his, which he manifested during those troubles, in
relation to that reservedness and moderation of which he was known to be
master, when he had no other Office but that of the Requests and Counselor of
State, which moderation of his, gave good cause to hope that his riper Age, had
totally extinguished that sedicious fire which had almost consumed him in his
younger days.

Politic Observation.
SEeing there must of necessity be limits and Bounds in that distrust, which is
had of persons chosen to serve in public affairs; as also, that it is a great
fault to trust every one and a greater to trust none, or to remove a person
from the Government, whose reputation and conduct, seems to engage a Trust in
him; so on the contrary, the confidence which a Minister has of a person, who
has the repute of a great virtue (though peradventure there might have been
some miscarriage in her former conduct) is no slight testimony of her own
integrity. A depraved Nature can believe no one, hardly himself, whereas a
virtuous oble disposition honors such as have the reputation of being
fincere and Loyal with so much respect, that there need no great labor to make
them be credited. I cannot more properly compare distrust to any thing then to
those Poisons which Physicians sometimes use in their Medicines which
administered with discretion and by weight do cure the most dangerous
sicknesses; whereas given in a little excess, they presently kilso does
distrust it is one of the best supports in a Ministers conduct if he uses it
moderately, and on the other side, if too much made use of, it causes a
thousand disasters both to the State and the Minister himself. He who is too
distrustful has never any quiet; he never looks on any thing but it
disturbs him; no one comes near him, but he suspecteth it is with some ill
design; if any one salute him with a little more then usual respect, he
presently fancieth such a one will cheat him, and virtue it self passes for
Hippocrasie in his opinion: And if by this means he creates a Hell to
himself, his suspicions too are offensive to all who have any manner of
conversation with him. I pass by those inferior persons who do oftentimes
render great services to the State, and yet being denied the liberty of
presenting themselves, do at last hate the chief Minister, when they think
themselves dis-respected. On the contrary, confidence puts the mind in great
repose, gains affection from all the world, induces to employ all such as are
able to do service with Freedom, and many times makes enemies themselves to
change their designs, and to prosecute instead of persecuting his interests.

The Romans were not sullied with this diffidence, for they never made any
difficulty, to re-place those again into their Offices, whom they had formerly
removed. They recalled Camillus whom they had banished, made him Dictator,
honored him with the Consul-ship, and General of the Army under Marcus L^vius
command, whom they disgraced: And the Emperor Augustus, instead of punishing
Lucius Cinna, who whould have attempted upon his person, had such confidence in
him, that he not only did not distrust him, but advanced him to the
Consul-ship, and by that manner of proceeding so won upon him, that he was ever
after very faithful, and very affectionate to all, which concerned him: Men's
inclinations are not irrecoverable, and they who have heretofore been
incendiaries, may turn to be faithful servants: Whence it comes, that the Rule
which ought to be followed in distrusting of men, is that it be not with
excess, not totally and absolutely to lay by, and reject all who have been
culpable of evil management, but to examine the true cause of their disorder,
whether their fault were committed by inclination or accident, if the occasion
which induced them, be removed or not, and whether there be good ground to
believe, that their virtue has been set right and amended after their bad
disposition, judging so much the more favorably of those who are reputed
virtuous, because the integrity of a Prince, and his principal Minister of
State, is judged by the Qualities and Conditions of those Officers whom they
employ; but withal still retaining a power to curb their evil conduct, if they
abuse that confidence which it had of them.

The Guard de Seaux d' Haligre, is advanced to the charge of Chancellor of
France, by the death of Monsieur de Sillery.
FOrtune having made way by the disgrace of the Marquess de la Vieville, for
the advancement of these two Counselors of State, death would also take its
turn to show its power; giving occasion by the decease of Monsieur de Sillery,
to advance Monsieur Le guard de Seaux de Haligre, to the charge of Chancellor
of Franch. This great man was laid a sleep in his Tomb, after he had been known
for one of the prime spirits of his time, both in matters of his Counsel, the
Seal, and his own particular importment: whence it happened that the disgrace
which befell him, not long before by those bad Offices, which the Marquess de
la Vieville did him (who was not able to endure that any man's discretion should
over shadow him) was but a Triumph to his virtue. He was removed by the
Artifices of that Minister, to go spend the rest of his days at his house of
Sillery, that he might be eased of the trouble of the world. He made known both
to his confident friends who visited him, and to such with whom he held an
inter-course by Letters, that this change, wrought not upon his Constancy, and
that his disgrace did not at all alter the temper of his mind. He told them,
that he had always held it for a maxim, to consider Accidents by their true
cause, which is the divine Providence, and seeing that no man ought to repine
at that which he is forced to suffer, it were but reasonable to conform our
wills, to those orders which are established here upon earth; that he was not
ignorant how that huge multitude which follows those men who are in great
places, does not follow so much their persons, as their fortunes; and that the
solitude wherein he now was, made him find it so by experience, that he did not
think he had the fewer friends in having so few Visitants; that in fine, he
in-joyed a great liberty, such a one as he had never tasted in his most
honorable employments; that the sweetness which he found in it, invited him
to lament their condition, who were still bound to such Slaveries: And that
lastly, the preferred his disgrace before the highest dignty.

It was a midst such prudent meditations, that he entertained himself near a
whole year in great content from the Court, until at last death came to put a
period to his days, but left his Glory and Reputation fresh and alive in the
memories of all, who knew him. After his death, his Majesty gave the
Chancellorship to Monsieur de Halligre, which was done by the Cardinals advice,
who would by no means divert his Majesty from raising of him unto this utmost
pitch of Honor, which was usually accorded unto such as were Treasurers at
that time, and upon such an occasion; not that he was ignorant, that his Age
rendered his Mind somewhat too weak for the weight of such a charge; for the
well performance of which, it was not enough, barely to have acquired the
Ornaments of a singular Honesty, which was however very commendable: But he
could not resolve to dis-countenance him, it being his first entrance upon the
Administration, and early days with him; so that he rather aimed to supply the
others defects, by his own proper ingeny, which was able enough to defend the
State from suffering, as to hinder him from his advancement; withal he hoped,
that giving him often, the honor of admitting him to be near him, he might
form him by his Counsels, and render him more capable and vigorous in the
trans-acting of great Affairs. He though too, that his redoubled cares for some
small time, might be requited in future, which invited him to take that trouble
upon himself, as also, because he would not cast off a person, whom he found
Keeper of the Seal, and in reputation of a Sublime virtue.

Politic Observation.
TO judge with certainty of the ability or insufficiency of a man, for
management of great affairs, is a thing very difficult. If it often happens
that the most active souls do not well away with affairs of little concernment,
it is not less common, to see some who make themselves be admired as in
indifferent employments, who being raised to those of a little higher degree,
acquit themselves very badly. To verify which, Vespasian being over-seer of
the Scavangers (before he came to the Empire) committed so many mis-carriages,
that the Emperor commanded his clothes to be daubed all over with filth and
dirt; but when Fortune had once raised him up to be Sovereign, he soon made it
evident that the evil conduct, for which he was once blamed, proceeded from
nothing but to show that he was not born for love and mean actions. Men of
great merit behave themselves so negligently in small, low employments, that
they give but a slender character of their abilities: On the other side, some
have attained to a great reputation, in the discharging of small affairs, and
in prosecution of time being advanced to those of greater weight, have found
their ruin and confusion in them. Galba may serve for an example of it, seeing
before he was Emperor, he showed so much Prudence in the dispatching those
affairs which were committed to him, that every one conceived a very great
esteem of him, but being come to the Empire, he soon lost it. If any one demand
a reason of it, I suppose there is none but this; that as there ought to be a
proportion between Causes and Effects, that they may operate within the Sphere
of their power, so men ought to be adopted to charges in employments,
conformable to their capacities and sufficiencies; for that men's minds have
certain bounds prescribed to them, within the limits of which they are able to
acquit themselves with credit and applause; but if you advance them above, or
depresse them below those Spheres, they show nothing but debilities and
mis-carriages. It was in this respect that Tacitus speaks of Poppeus Sabinus,
when he said that he was sufficiently capable of those employments which were
entrusted with him, but not of any higher. Titus Livy was not much out of the
way too, when speaking of the Dictatorship of Lucius Quintius Cicinnatus, he
said, that he had a courage equal to his charge, but not great enough to be
General of the Army. Now in this incertainty, it should seem to relish somewhat
of injustice; peradventure too of imprudence in a Chief Minister, to oppose
the advancement of a man whom he finds in employment, and in the reputation of
an honest integrity. It would relish, as I said, of Injustice; because his
integrity and conduct, reduct, represent him for deserving, and of imprudence
too, because virtue having the property of pulling down a hatred upon those who
oppress it, it will certainly gain him the dis-esteem and dis-affection of the
people, should he have hindered the to others good fortune; besides the noblest
glory of a powerful man consists in being able to hurt, but at that same times
to do most good to all men, especially to those who are virtuous. A man may
easily be persuaded that a Minister is virtuous, if he favors persons of
merit; and on the contrary, that he has none but wicked designs, if he bring
them into disgrace, and of this he ought to take the greater consideration upon
his first entrance into the Government, because he has then the fittest
opportunity of gaining upon the Peoples affections. Alexander knew of what
concernment this particular was, when as a certain Lord of his Retinue
complained that he gave no estate to any but persons of great virtue, he was
answered by him that he courted virtue, that she her self might pay him Homage
over all the world.

Enquiries into the Misdemeanors of the Finances.
THE Sieur de Marillac being honored with the Super-intendency of the
Finances, his unquiet spirit could not rest long time without giving some
object to his violence, the Finances he levelled at, and soon set them into
such confusion, that they who behaved themselves in their charges with the
greatest innocence, knew not where to hide their heads, It is true, that it was
so much the more important, to the good of the State, to repress those
mis-demeanours of many, who did openly squander away the Kings moneys (which
are the Sinnews both of the State and War) in that their ill management did
necessitate the imposing of new Taxes upon the People, in that they deprived
particular men of such sums as the King had granted them, not only by way of
gratification, but sometimes of justice; and in that these unjust dealings gave
means to many amongst them, to make vast expenses (a dangerous example to the
public) Yet should he have had for-born driving those enquiries to that
height which he did, and from infusing into the Kings Soul such a sharpness
against them, that they all past for criminals indifferently together in his
Majesty's opinion.

The order which was followed was this, There was out of each Parliament one
Counselor elected by them, who was reputed of extraordinary integrity to be
formed into a Court of Justice to them, were joined certain Masters of
Requests, and two Presidents of the Chamber of Accounts of Paris. Leave was
given to all Informers, who would appear to give in their complaints against
any Officer, or his Deputy, to the Procurator General, and there was so exact
an Inquisition made of all their deportments, that there was hardly one of them
which did not run away to save themselves from the storm, which was falling
down upon them. This Court continued from the end of October of this year,
until May in the year following; however it was with more threats then
punishments, there being only one put to death and some few in Effigy.

Monsieur the Cardinal did for some time behold this Tempest not giving way to
his Prudence, to employ that Benignity which is natural to him, toward the
moderating his Majesty's just anger against them, as well to testify upon his
first entrance into the Administration, that it was not his intention to
protect such Malefactors; as also in regard it was necessary to terrify and
affright those who were culpable, to the end they might for the future live
with more Integrity and Justice. But in the end, seeing that the Principal
Actors began to be touched to the quick, with an apprehension either of loosing
their Honors, or their lives, and to compare themselves in good earnest, as
much as could possibly be desired, and withal to propose to his Majesty in
behalf of their persons, to establish such orders in the Treasuries, that it
should be impossible to divert any of the moneys, or to defraud any persons of
such sums, as his Majesty should order to be paid unto them, he then became
the Mediator of their Peace. It is true, it was not without making their Purses
pay for what was past, and setting up a better order for the future; for he
brought them to condescend to give hit Majesty seven Millions of Livers, and
for the better keeping them in aw, it was ordained that every ten years a Court
of Justice should be set up, to inquire into their Actions, and he procured
such order to be established in the Finances, that it was impossible for them
to relapse into their former errors. The King was so exasperated against them,
that it was no little difficulty to persuade him to grant them that favor and
grace which they begged for. But he, knowing that the ways of reason, are
those by which his Majesty is to be regained; he so followed them, that he soon
re-placed him in his usual moderateness of temper, and representing to him,
that it was Clemency was that virtue, which made Princes like unto the
Divinity, that it could not but be glorious to pardon those Officers, how
culpable soever, that their offense was not more criminal then that of
Rebellion, in which the major part of the French, had in several Wars
heretofore been imbroyled, that he would have so much the less reason, ever to
repent of the favor he should do them; for that the late King his Father was
highly praised for what he once said to Monsieur du Main, after he had reduced
him to his obedience, viz. That the greatest pleasure he had in making a Peace,
was the pardoning of Rebels, That the Laws of the Romans seemed to invite him
to pardon, seeing they had no other punishment then Banishment for Robbing of
Public Treasury. That the end of a great Prince, is rather to make his
Officers good, then to chastize them. That it was enough thus to punish their
Purses, so that they might both remember it, and suffer for it; that Vespasian
had given him a very commendable example, when as he thought it more proper to
preserve then destroy Treasuries, in saying he esteemed them one of the
strongest props of an Empire, and that he looked upon them as a Meadow, which
is mowed at some time or other, or as upon Spunges which are squeezed, when a
man would get any thing out of them.

These reasons were so unanswerable, and made such an impression upon the Kings
mind, that following the instincts of his natural Bounty, he resolved to pardon
them. Accordingly, he Repealed the Chamber of Justice, and accorded to them the
favor which they desired, and they established such Orders and Rules, which
have tied up those who were most wedded to their own interests, to live very
stayedly.

Politic Observation.
IT is no new thing to see the Public Exchequer ill governed. The Treasury was
common amongst the Greeks, as Polybius and Chirisophus, in Zenophon witness,
the latter of which reproacheth them with it, that there was hardly a man
amongst them of any mark, who might not be reproved for it. Aristides general
Treasurer of Athons, manifested publicly, that all those who had managed the
Treasury of that Republic, not only in his time, but before, had robbed them
of a good quantity, not so much as excepting Themistocles. Gylippus, did divert
a great part of those Riches; which Lysander had hid by a Slaves means of his,
under the Tyles of his house. When he said, if one should look in such a place,
he might find good store of Owls; meaning Gold and Silver, upon which the
Grecians stamped an Owl, by reason of the Athenians, which was accordingly
sifted out, and delivered into the hands of the Ephores, who punished him very
severely for it. For the same fault amongst the Romans, was Sylla accused by
Consorinus, who grounded his indictment upon this, That he having but little
wealth left by his Father, insomuch that he was forced to lodge in a hired
house, and was now become excessively rich. It would be easy to produce many
of the like examples, not but there have been in all ages, honest, upright men,
in whose hands the Public Treasuries have been regulated, with much fidelity,
and who have not deserved less praise then Pericles, of whom Thucydides
reports, that he had not increased by one only dragm of Silver, the Estate
which his father left him, notwithstanding the great employments he had in the
Treasuries. But I can tell you, there have been some Persons in the Ages last
past, who have made so little difficulty of diverting the Treasury, that they
have gloried in being made rich by it.

If this Crime then be so ancient, the use of punishing them, being once
convict is as old, the Grecian and Roman Laws assure us of it, in the examples
of Gylippus, Lisander, and many others; but must he not needs be very
imprudent, who would not punish them at all, seeing the defrauding of a Treaty,
is a Poison, which depriveth the State of the use of her Sinews and Muscles:
And lastly, which decays its vigor, that it is rendered incapable of attempting
any thing either great or glorious. Vespasian, as Suetonius says, enforced the
Receivers of his Treasury, to render an account of what they received from
their fathers, and to restore him the surplusage, as if they had robbed him of
it.

The Laws of France are more severe, and they have been often executed, against
the greatest of the Kingdom, amongst others, Father de la Berche Engneraud de
Marigny, le Sieur de Giac, and Camus de Beaulieu, were convicted of this Crime,
under King Philip, Lewis his son, and Charles the 8th. and accordingly condemned
to die for it.

Philip de Valois made an Assembly very remarkable, of the three States, in
which it was resolved to make the Treasurers, render an account, and to entrust
the disposal of the Public Money, into the hands of the Ecclesiastics and
Noble Men; who it was hoped, would manage them with more Fidelity. In fine, a
Commission was granted to the Abbots of Marmostier and Corby, and they had
joined to them for Counsel, four Bishops, and four Knights. Pierre des Essars
Treasurer of France, was then clapped up in Prison, and several Financiers
condemned to pay great Fines.

The Affairs of the Valtoline.
AFter the declaring what Empires Death and Fortune exercised during this year
in the State, the prosecution of Affairs ingageth me to inform you of what
passed in the business of the Valtoline; but that I may write it with more
perspicuity. I think it necessary to take the rise of this Affair, and to
observe to you, that the Valtoline is a Country situated at the foot of the
Alps, not unlike a great Ditch, separated by the high Mountains from the
Grisons, and those which are on the Coast of Italy. It is not of very large
extent, not being above twenty leagues in length, and one in breadth, but is
very fertile, and of great importance, serving as a Gate to the Spaniards and
Venetians, to bring Forces out of Germany into Italy, as well to defend as to
increase their States. The Venetians were not ignorant of it, when they were
imbroyled with Pope Paul the fifth, Anno 1603. they made a League with the
Grisons who are natural Lords of it, to have free passage through it, as their
occasions should require, though France had the only Power to dispose of it,
according to the Treaty made with them by Lewis the 12th. and renewed by Henry
the Great, Anno 1602. during the time of his own life, the life of the present
King, and eight years after his decease. Which Alliance with them, gives great
offense to the Spaniards, which caused them to make another League with the
Grisons, to whom the same Passages were assured, for the safeguard of Milan:
However after a long Treaty made in the year, 1631. these two new Alliances
were turned topsie turvey, and that of France re-setled; it is true, it was not
for any long time, because the Venetians having been at variance, with the
Archduke Ferdinand, and the house of Austria, sent Secretary Patavin to the
Grisons, who contracted another league with them, which made the Spaniards
reassume those former intelligences of theirs, insomuch that there were two
parties formed amongst them; that of Plauta for the Spaniards, and that of
Deslia for the Venetians, which kindled such a fire as could not be
extinguished to this present day. The difference was such, that from the year
1617, to the year 1621. there were nine insurrections among them, in which
sometimes one party, sometimes another had the better of it. At last the
Valtolines, annoyed by the Injustices and Extorsions, which the Protestant
Grisons used over them, and otherwhiles pretending that they would abolish the
Catholic Religion from amongst them, they made a general revolt, and at the
persuasion of the Governor of Milan, massacred all the Protestants they met
with. In July 1620, the Grisons could easily have chastised them for this
cruel act, whereas they to secure themselves, from the revenge which they
expected, had recourse to the Governor of Milan, who glad at heart to make an
advantage in this occasion, was not backward in sending them soldiers, and
building them Forts in their Valley.

The King being then engaged in re-taking those Towns which the Hugonots had
gotten into their possession, could not succor the Grisons with his Armies;
but however he sent the Marshal de Bassompiere, extraordinary Ambassador into
Spain, to require, and in his name to demand that the Valtoline might be
restored, and all things re-placed into their former state and condition. The
Marshal took extraordinary pains to procure it, and at last obtained it, and
accordingly it was signed at a Treaty in Madrid, in May 1621. on condition that
certain great Liberties might be accorded to the Catholics there, and with a
Proviso, that the Cantons of the Swisses and the Valtolines should incline the
Grisons to consent to what had been agreed upon.

But the Spaniards proceeding with little Faith to execute the Treaty, procured
the Catholic Cantons, by their money, to deny their consents, which one thing
being deficient, they would put off the whole execution of the Treaty; and
moreover, made one at Milan, with the Deputies of the Grisons, and two others,
with the same Grisons and the Archduke Leopold, by which they got great
advantages in those Countries, and so kept to themselves the power of passing
any Forces thorough that Country.

This Procedure made the Duke of Savoy very jealous, as also the Princes of
Italy and Germany, which were not interessed in the designs of the House of
Austria, and having made their complaints to his Majesty, his Majesty, who is
as much concerned for them as the Grisons, concluded a Treaty of Alliance with
the Duke of Savoy and Republique of Venice, in February 1623, for the executing
the Treaty at Madrid, and the re-establishing the Grisons in their Sovereignty
of the Valtoline.

This League made the King of Spain suspect, that they began to smell the
Usurpation which he had made, so that ghuessing he should find a hard task to
preserve it, ^he offered the King to put all those Forts which the Governor of
Milan had built, in deposit in Pope Gregory the fifteenth's hands, and those of
the Holy Seat, to be by them kept until the conclusion of the Treaty, which
should be made to end all those differences. The King could hardly be drawn to
agree to to the deposit, both because there was no need of any other Treaty
then that of Madrid, as also by reason of the liberty of passages which the
Spaniard would keep. However, his Majesty being pressed unto it by the Pope,
consented to it, upon condition that all those Forts should be demolished
within three months, during which time, the Articles of Accommodation should be
agreed on at Rome. The Commander of Sylleri was then Ambassador at Rome for
France, and the Duke de Pastrane had the same charge from Spain, and both
having received power from their Masters to treat and negotiate this Affair,
there were diverse Proposals made; France never made any difficulty of according
to any thing which might contribute to the exercise of the Catholic Religion
in the Valtoline, or for security of all such as made profession thereof: But
they would never agree to those demands which the Spaniards made concerning the
having of Passages, with so much peremptoriness. During which time Pope Gregory
the fifteenth dyed, and Urban the eighth being set in his place, after his
first entrance upon the Popedom, proposed new Articles of Accommodation, which
comprised as much as could be of advantage for the Church and Catholics,
which were readily accepted to by France, but as stoutly rejected by the
Spaniards, for that it did not grant to them the enjoyment of the Passages.

Their Refusal surprised the Pope, but he being made by some of their
Ministers, who had represented to him, that those Passages were the least
recompense which they could pretend to, in lieu of many Millions which they had
expended for the defense of the Catholic Religion in the Valtoline. His
Holiness proposed to them, to grant them passage for their Soldiers into
Germany and Flanders, in behalf of the War which they should make against the
Heretics, but upon no other occasion whatsoever. To this the King would in no
wise agree, because to have granted them free passage there, upon what occasion
soever, were to give them the whole end of their design, which was to unite the
Estates which the House of Austria has in Germany to those in Italy, as we
shall ^lswhere declare, and by that means to expose the Princes of Italy as a
Prey to the Spanish Ambition; more especially the Venetians, who (should that
thing be assented to) have good cause to complain of France: Besides, that
Article was quite contrary to the Treaty at Madrid, for the execution of which,
this Treaty was only intended. That withal, the King was in a League with
those of Venice and Savoy, and had engaged his Word, his Honor, and his Faith,
to resettle things in their former state. It is true, the Commander of Sylleris
had been surprised by the Spaniards, and had consented to those Articles
wherein the demand of those Passages was included, but however had not signed
them, and the King disowned them, and declared, that he having done it contrary
to his order, he was not bound to ratify it, and principally seeing he himself
too, had not assented to them, but after he had understood of the disgraces
which had befallen the Chancellor his Brother, and the Sieur de Pisieux his
Nephew.

Politic Observation.
IT is very dangerous for a Prince to sit still, and see another invade his
neighbors for certain Passages or Countries, which may lay his States, as it
were, hedge by hedge, and especially if those places may serve for a Inlet, or
Door to give succors to his own Allies, such a thing were to give him leave to
turn his weakness into strength, for that united States are stronger then when
disunited. Great Rivers whilst they are in small Brooks, are fordable by every
one, and are not feared at all, until all their waters run in the same channel;
and divided Estates may easily be surprised, whereas if united, they are
capable of giving jealousy to their neighbors, as also to make attempts upon
them.

It is a common saying in Philosophy, Vis unita fortior, united Power is much
stronger than when divided into several particulars. Sertorius evinced this to
his Army for a Truth by a witty Invention; he commanded two Soldiers to pull
off a Horses tail, both which he chose for the purpose, of a different humor
and strength; the one of them weak, but ingenious, the other strong, but rash;
the latter, in obedience to Sertorius command, took a whole handful of the
Horses tail, and tugging with all his force, could not pull it off; the second
took a quite contrary way, he pulled them off hair by hair, until he quite made
an end; whence Sertorius took an occasion to exhort his Soldiers never to
separate themselves either in a Fight, or upon a March, he told them, they had
seen, that united Forces are hard to be vanquished, but easily overcome if
disunited. If this reason be sufficient to warrant a man, from permitting an
Invasion in any Country, it is the more necessary to be prosecuted, when it
serves for a mutual passage for France to assist its Allies, and to receive
succor from them, for that these Passages are of as great concernment as the
Allies themselves, for once being lost. Allies can neither give or receive any
succors at all. That Prince who suffers them to be usurped, exposes his
ancient Allies to be made a prey, and cuts off one of his own arms, wherewith
he might have defended himself.

For this very reason it is, that our Kings having often discoved the Spaniards
designs of invading Savoy, have presently been on foot to defend it, as the
usual Gate of Communication between France and Italy, which once lost, they
knew that all the Princes of Italy would quickly be reduced to the mercy of the
Spaniards, seeing they could not be assisted by France, which has ever been
their Protectrix, as also, that France, if occasion were, could not receive any
succors from them.

The Deputation of the Sieur de Bethune, to Rome as Ordinary Ambassador, and
the Revocation of the Commander of Syllery.
THe Commander de Syllery being thus surprised, the King was obliged to call
him home, and to send in his place Monsieur de Bethune, a man of great
judgment and reputation, to whom he gave express order, to declare very
resolutely to the Pope, that he would never consent that the Spaniards should
have passage in the Valtoline, and to beseech him in his Majesty's name, that
he would use his authority to enforce the execution of the Treaty of Madrid,
that according to the rules of Justice, the Grisons might be restored to that
which had been usurped from them, both in the Valtoline, as also in the rights
of the League at Caddee. A little after his departure, his Majesty received
advice, that the resolution of denying those passages, was approved of at Rome,
so he dispatched one to him upon the way, that he might every day be more
resolute, and that he publish it aloud to all the world, to stop the Spaniards
mouths, who made people believe, that at last we should give ground and accord
it to them.

The Sieur de Bethune being arrived at Rome, acquitted himself so worthily of
that which was give him in charge, that the Pope no more doubting of his
Majesty's resolution, told him, he would forthwith discharge himself of the
Forts in the Valtoline. The Sieur de Bethune, was for the present satisfied
with it, and gave notice of it to the King, But upon receiving his Majesty's
further pleasure upon that particular, he very briskly told his Holiness, it
would be a thing of very ill consequence, to deliver them into the Spaniards
power, seeing if it were once done, a breach between the two Crowns were not to
be avoided. That it were no less against the Interest of Religion, to
surrender them to the Grisons who were Heretics, and that the best expedient
which could be taken was (but by the By he proposed it only as from himself)
either to raze them, as by the Treaty of Madrid was agreed on, or to leave them
to the Valtolines themselves, seeing there might be an easier agreement made
with them, then with any others. The Pope found himself so entangled, that he
knew not what to resolve, so that the business, had been Wyer-drawn into a
great length of time and delays, if he had not been pressed by those
Protestations, which were several times represented to him: That the King his
Master, after he had employed all the means of a Treaty to no purpose, would
have recourse to those to his Arms, without any more ado, to obtain that by
force, which was denied to the justice of his Reasons.

His Holiness being thus hard put to it, would willingly have delivered up the
Forts into the hands of the Valtolines; but one thing which hindered him was, he
would be re-imbursed of those Charges which he had expended, for their
preservation during the deposit. The Spaniards offering to give him
satisfaction in it, did invite him to deliver them up to them. But the Sieur de
Bethune, making him the same proffers from the King, did so puzzle him, that
afterward he could not deliver up the Forts to one, without offending the
the other, and without making a breach between them. Now to dis-ingage himself
from these broyls, he made diverse Proposals, but all tending to delays, the
Sieur de Bethune, acquainting the King therewith, received express Order, not
to consent to any expedient of that nature, and rather to press his Holiness,
to leave the Fort in the Spaniards hands, then to use any longer delays;
because his Majesty was fully resolved, not to let the year pass away without
somewhat of Action, and in case he could get no other determinate resolution,
that he should write to the Marquess Coeuures, presently to enter with an Army
upon the Valtoline.

Politic Observation.
IT is usual with Princes, who are Mediators of Peace between other Sovereigns,
to amuse those Ambassadors which are with them upon that account, with diverse
new Proposals, which themselves judge not to be feasible. When they find things
hard to be concluded on, they hope, that time may in fine produce some
agreeable overture, both to one and the other, which may induce them to lay down
their Arms; or else, they endeavor by this means to give time to him, whom
they would incline to favor, to draw his forces together, and put himself into
a posture of defense. In such Encounters an Ambassador ought to be both
Prudent and Stout: Prudent he ought to be, that he may dive into the qualities
and consequences of such Propositions as shall be made unto him, either to
reject them, if inconvenient, or to make appear that it is on good grounds, he
does not accept of them. Courageous too he ought to be, to maintain his Masters
Interests, with strong Reasons and Generosity, without fear of being
importunate, and without making a scruple of speaking out, when need requires.
If he discovers any weakness, ir-resolution and dullness of Soul, if he be slow
in finding out expedients, or do not well discuss such propositions as are made
to him, he cannot escape the censure of the World; on the contrary he will gain
the more honor, if by his vivacity, address, and vigor, he shall effect with
ease, those affairs, which otherwise would be intricate and Thorny, and free
his Country from Wars, and allay the exasperations of his enemies; and in fine,
reduce the most obstinate to be governed by the Rules of Reason. It w^ll be an
act of Prudence in him, not to bewray the least apprehensions of fear, to see
his Master engaged in a War, which if he should, his enemies would soon make
advantage of it; on the contrary, he ought rather to imitate the resolution of
Quintus Fabius, who being sent from the Romans to the Carthaginians, presently
told them, that he should be most glad, if there might be any expedient found
out for an accommodation, which would be for the good of both parties, if it
might not be, he there presented them too Gages, one of Peace and the other of
War, that they might choose which they pleased. He will be much blamed, who
suffers himself to be amused with frivolous Proposals, made only to gain time;
as it befell the Ambassadors of Dyonisius the Tyrant, who being sent to the
Syracusian to treat a Peace, were entertained by Dion General of their Army,
with several specious Propositions but without any conclusion, until he had
re-edified a good part of the Wall, by which the Town should have been taken,
and then had no other answer but this, That the Syracusians could make no Peace
with Dyonisius, unless he renounced the Sovereignty, and content himself with
some meaner Honors. An Ambassador ought sometimes to excite and press that
Prince with whom he treats, when he cannot draw any reason from him, and if his
Instances shall be looked upon as importunities by him; yet his master will
esteem them for marks of his Courage and Fidelity; however, such remembrances
ought to be with respective honor due to Persons of Quality. For being a
little touched, they rouse up themselves, but if provoked by offenses, they run
into extremities. An Ambassador of Genoa, did heretofore suggest as much to
Galeas Duke of Milan, by a witty invention, when he was so obstinate that he
could not procure so much as Audience from him; he presented him (among other
things) a Vessel, on which he had laid a Basil-plant, the Duke was surprised at
it, and knowing not what it signified, sent to know the Ambassadors meaning,
the Ambassador willingly waited on him, and told him, that the Genoveses were
as all other Princes, like that Plant, which if a little rubbed in the hand,
sends forth a very sweet smell, but if pressed until the juice come out, it
breeds Scorpions; thus he obtained much of what he desired by this means. To be
short, Kings are of that humor, that if an Ambassador should be so
inconsiderate, as to domineer and use outrageous speeches; it would only breed
Scorpions, that is Bloody Wars, by provoking of their anger; but if he be
Prudent and Generous, to press with dexterity and moderation, they will become
sensible, and be reduced in fine to whatsoever shall reasonably be desired from
them.

The Marquess de Coevures, is sent to the Cantons of the Swisses, for the
Grisons affairs.
THE orders in this negotiation, were executed with a great deal of Prudence
and Courage; however all would not do, to obtain any reason from the Spaniards,
who never want opportunities, of making advantages out of the rediousness of a
Treaty. The Cardinal who knew of old, all their tricks, advised the King, not
to stand dallying upon the means of a Treaty, as formerly; but forthwith to
make use of his Arms, to reduce them to terms of Justice.

This way of proceeding, was much different from those which had heretofore
been used; the intent of it being, to raise up the Renown and Reputation of the
French, amongst strangers to make no difficulty of taking up their Arms, to
obstruct the enterprises of the house of Austria, rather then to suffer their
allies to be longer oppressed; the Ruin of whom, would undoubtedly shake the
Foundations of this Empire it self. This Generous resentment, was concurrent
with his Majesty's inclination, so that he resolved to send the Marquess de
Coevures into Swizzerland, at the same time that the Sieur de Bethune was
dispatched toward Rome. There were two Instructions delivered to him; by the
first, he was ordered to reunite all the Swisse Cantons, with his Majesty, to
dispose the Catholics, to give their assent to the Treaty of Madrid; and to
espy if in this reunion, there might not some way be found out, for to
re-place the Grisons into the Sovereignty of the Valtonine.

The second was to be kept private, if the first took effect, else he was
commanded to encourage the Grisons to rise, who should receive assistance from
his Majesty of such Troops as should be necessary, according to such orders, as
should be received; there went with the Marquess, all the Grisons Captains, who
were at that time in the Swiss Regiment, who were thought most able to be made
use of in the Valtoline, to fish out any thing which might be thought proper to
be known, and to give intelligence to the Marquess of those Countries. But that
which was the best guide of all, was to see six hundred and sixty thousand
Livres, pass in a Convoy to be distributed some part amongst the Swisses, upon
whose natures nothing has so great an influence as money; and the other part
upon the first expenses of the war, if there should be any occasion to begin it.

Upon his coming into Swisserland, he found the Spaniards had made strong
Parties there, so that it was impossible for him, on the sudden, to open the
peoples eyes, that they might see how they precipitated themselves into their
own ruin. He employed the Sieurs de Mesnim, and du Mesnil, to negotiate with
them in small Assemblies; and presently after his arrival, he went to Baden, but
it was with little success until the General meeting in August at Souleur. In
the ixterim, he labored very diligently to gain the Principal Captains, either
by distributing the Kings money amongst them, or by instilling such other
reasons as might be able to move them. To the Catholics he gave assurances,
that his Majesty did not interess himself for the re-stating the Grisons in the
government of the Valtoline, but withal necessary conditions, for the exercise
of the Catholic Religion, which made those suspicions which had been infused
by the Spaniards to vanish. As for the Interest of the Church, and the good of
their State, it was evidently demonstrated to them, that the loss of the
Valtoline, would presently be followed, by that of the three Grisons, which
were inleagued together, and of which the Archduke Leopold had already gotten
a good part, That after the dis-uniting of those confederates, the Spaniard
being master of the Passages, would not much trouble himself about those little
Cantons, which brought into them a great profit, and made them upon that score
very considerable. In brief, that it would quickly be easy for to invade their
Country, and that he would the sooner attempt it, for that he did not want any
pretensions, to entitle himself to the Mastery of it. These important reasons,
strenthened with the payment of their Pensions, did so shake some of the
Cantons, that those of Berne and Zurich did first consent, that there should be
soldiers levied for the King, and such Provisions of Ammunition, as every
place should require. But the Martquess chief endeavor was, at the Assembly at
Souleur, where he showed a Masterpiece of Prudence, speaking very highly of
his Masters name and succors, and making use of the money which he had brought
with him, both together served him to good purpose for obtaining of them, if
not all, yet the most part of his desires. The Catholics accorded to ratify
the Treaty of Madrid, declaring however, that they did not intend to become
bound to recover the Valtoline by force. Then he got such assurances as himself
liked from those of Berue and Zurich, for the Levies of those Soldiers, which
they had promised; and withal, got it to be approved by all the Cantons, only
that of Souleur excepted, which by the means of Ladnoyer Rool's Faction,
refused to declare it self. It is true the Catholics consented to it, but upon
condition only it were for France, but there was a little more then so
intended in it, for the Marquess demanded them for the service of his Master,
and of his Allies, without openly declaring that it was for the Grisons.

In Prosecution of time, and not hoping to procure any greater assistance, he
began to prepare all things to enter with an Army upon the Valtoline; but
however it was, after he had informed his Majesty of the condition of affairs
amongst the Grisons, where the Sieur de Land^e, and de Vaux, employed by his
Majesty, had put things into a very good posture, and until he had received
his Majesty's express orders and commands.

Politic Observation.
COmmonwealth^, especially Popular are hardly persuaded to any great
undertaking^, they are naturally so in love with Peace, That there is not any
War how glorious or profitable soever, which they would prefer before it.
Princes are capable of being engaged upon diverse considerations, either for the
love which they bear to their Allies, or out of a sense of honor which they
are commonly touched with; or out of an apprehension of what may follow; or out
of such jealousy as a puissant Neighbor may oblige them to have, or by
neernesse of blood, or by the compassion which they have of others miseries,
and the Ambition to become Protectors of their States. But Republics are not
touched with any of these considerations. All such as are called to a Common
Council, think of nothing but their own particular Interest, and they imagine
that whatsoever hinders the enjoyment of their Revenue, or stops their
Commerce, or their Labors, as War is a greater and more considerable evil then
any others, which you can make them sensible of, and they can be drawn to
nothing, but in case of absolute desperate extremity. Not but that there may be
amongst the people some Souls and Courages more daring then others but as most
voices carries it, not their merit who advise it, so they are no more regarded
then Reason is, when as a multitude of different Passions, entertain the Will
upon some pernicions object. It is to no purpose for a man, to attempt to show
them any consequences which may happen in future for their spirits, have not a
thing so noble as to look further then the time present, they are sensible of
nothing but what is beaten into them, and they will much sooner be persuaded to
believe that Fortune, who they thinks disposes of all humane affairs; because
themselves want wit to govern them, will defend them from those evils which
they are threatened with, then be induced to take their own defenses by Force of
Amrs. Moreover, their closer covetous homou, abhominates any thoughts of
expenses, without which War cannot be maintained, and the noise of Guns and
Drums only, do so beat their Imagination, that if perchance they hear talk of
a Siege or a Battle; poor ouls it quite skareth them out of their little wits.
It were to be wished they had smore heart and foresight upon such occasions,
for the length of time, which they ever take; before they make any resolution;
is an enemy to good success. Deliberation ought to be taken, and that with
great Prudence, but to spend too much time in it, is very dangerous, because
opportunities are lost by it, and peradventure such opportunities as the like
are never afterward to be met with, for putting a design in execution.

The Florentines showed a remarkable example of this particular, when as Lewis
the 12th, passed into Italy, against Lodowick Duke of Milan: The King desired
to make a League with them, that he might make use of their Passages for his
occasions, so they sent their Ambassadors to treat with him. Now the
Ambassadors, having agreed to remain Newters in the thing doing, and that the
King passing into Italy should take them into his Protection, they delayed the
ratification of the Treaty for so long, that they could not fully resolve any,
until his Majesty was upon the point of getting the Victory. Whence the King
judging that they rather sought his Alliance by force, then by friendship,
testified by his carriage the little esteem he made of them.

The League between the King, Duke of Savoy, and Commonwealth of Venice, for
the restitution of the Valtoline.
UPon the advice which the Marquess de Coevures had sent the King, of the state
of affairs amongst the Swisses and Grisons, his Majesty commanded the Cardinal,
to consult with Signeur Marco Antonio Moresini, the Venetian Ambassador, and
the Abbot Scuglia Ambassador of Savoy, upon reasonable Propositions and
Articles, for the effecting that design of a League, which had been formed
amongst them, for the restitution of the Valtoline. This Grand Minister,
following the inclinations of his great Soul, which will not let him endure,
that strangers should find any thing, but what was full of Generosity in his
Masters Affairs, gave a quick dispatch to them, and withal imaginable
Prudence. The sum was, That the Arms of France, Savoy, and Venice, should come
to a Rendezvous upon the 15. September. Those of France at Bresse, those of
Venice about Milan, near the Valtoline and Grisons, and those of Savoy between
Milan and Genoa: That there should be drawn out of the Army at Bresse, a
Regiment of 1000 or 1200 foot and 400 horse, to march with the Marquess de
Coevures into Swizzeland, the rest to remain under the command of Monsieur de
Constable, which should join with those of Savoy to enter upon the State of
Genoa, and make a strong diversion there, and entertain all the Spaniards
Forces which were in Italy, and deprive them of the Valtoline. That order
should be given to the Marquess de Coevure, fortwith to raise 3000 Grisons, and
3000 Swiss. That it was agreed between one and the other, that these Levies
should execute the whole design, under the name and colors of the King, and
the said States Confederates, that all the charges of the enterprise, should be
born by them three, to wit, Venice should furnish the Cannon, Ammunitions of
War, and all necessary Provisions of Victuals, but the charge of it to be
divided as before, it being unreasonable, that she should pay all. Besides
Count Mansfield who was then in France, offered to maintain an Army of 25000
foot, and 7000 horse, under the Prince Palatines name, they paying him three
hundred and sixty thousand Livres a month, to invade the Countries of the
house of Austria, in Germany, and to enforce them to a rest^tution of part of
the Palatinate, by this forcing in upon them.

The Cardinal represented to the Ambassadors, that these Proposals could not
be but glorious, seeing the end of them was, to assist a Prince their Ally, and
one despoyled of his estates; but moreover, very advantageous, because
prosecuting those designs, they should so divert the Armies of Spain, that they
would never be able to address themselves to recover the Valtoline. This was
unanimously agreed upon amongst them, and in fine resolved, that each of them
should contribute to the payment of those 360000 Livres a month, viz. the King
180000. Venice 120000 and Savoy 60000. It true, commonwelths do hardly resolve
on great enter prizes, especially when there is a necessity of great expense.
So Venice made a denial to contribute to this charge, as also to make one in
the diverting which was made about Genoa, but laid all upon the King and Duke
of Savoy, as shall be declared in the year following. These orders being thus
put in execution, the King writ to the Marquess of Coevures to testify to him,
how much he approved of this negotiation, and of those means which he had
proposed to establish the Grisons in their ancient authority, and commanded him
to take the field with such Troops as he should levy, and such others as
should be sent to him, seeing the Sieur de Bethune had given him to understand,
that there was no more hopes of doing any thing by the way of a Treaty. He was
also informed of those conclusions which were made with Venice and Savoy, that
he might govern himself accordingly; and lastly assured him that he should want
for nothing.

Politic Observation.
THough most Leagues which are made between Princes upon any design, are blamed
by many, by reason of the short continuance of them, as also of the little
success which usually has attended them; yet they are not only profitable on
many occasions, but also very necessary. Defensive Leagues ought to be so much
the more esteemed; because (as Aristotle says) no Country is able to subsist
of its own proper force. And offensive too are not less considerable; seeing
they give means to Princes, to make such Conquests, as without them they durst
not attempt. The first of these Truths may be authorized by the example of the
Samnites, who resisted the Romans by their own proper strenth, as they told
Hannibal. as long as they were able to defend themselves; but in process of
time, finding themselves too weak, they associated themselves with King
Pyrrhus, and to make way for the the other. It is not most certain that the
association of Christian Princes, gave them the means to carry away from the
Turks, a most signal Victory in the Battle of Lepanto, which neither of them in
particular could with reason hope for. It is true, the effects of Leagues, have
not been always over happy, because several Princes making them for different
interests, easily break them as soon as they have gotten their pretensions, be
it by force or composition. But the disgraces of this kind, ought to be laid
upon the right horse, that is, upon the Imprudence and want of foresight of
those who have managed them, not on the Leagues themselves. It is not enough to
contract them, but they ought to be prosecuted with favorable Conditions, and
with Persons from whom assistance may be had; and who, if they should slip
their necks out of the Collar, might not do us any displeasure in it. They are
very necessary with the neighboring Princes, upon a place, which is designed
to be assaulted, either in relation to Passages, or in respect of having from
them Ammunitions, both of War, and necessary victuals, as there shall be
occasion. Hannibal knew this full well, when as he was upon his expedition into
Italy, and made a League with the French and Spaniard; he took Hostages of
them, and for better assurance left Garrisons in many of their strong Holds. The
Romans did the same, when they made war upon the Lacedaemonians, by making a
League with Ptolomy King of Egypt, without whose assistance that would have had
somewhat to do to have passed on. Besides when there is cause of suspicion of
their fidelity, it is necessary either to take some Persons or Places of them,
by way of Hostage; to the end, that their interest to perserve them, may compel
them to continue firm in their first resolutions. If many of our Kings who have
made expedition into Italy, had taken such a course as this, were it only in
point of Passages, we had not seen them exposed to so many dangers, nor indeed
to so many disgraces; yet in case by their receding they cannot cause any great
incoveniences, there will not then be so absolute a necessity of such security
and assurances: However, as it ought to be taken for granted, that they will
start aside. in case the enemy give them satisfaction, to their interests, so
there ought still to be Forces ready which may clap in upon them, and supply
their deficiencies. It is a trouble to see them break their words, yet a Prince
shall reap this profit from a League, to make it serve to give a happy
beginning to an enterprise, by means of such assisting forces as may be drawn
from it, and by dividing expense between them, which else must be undergone by
one alone. It will not be presently fit to defy them for that would be a means
to make them take to the other part, but it will be needful to have an eye
upon it, and to be prepared for the worst. Moreover, it is profitable to make
Leagues, not only with States, but with Princes and their Successors, and to
contract them with greater certainty, then Edward the fourth King of England
did, who having recourse to one of our Kings, after he had been despoyled of
his Kingdom, had not other answer, but that the League was made with the King
of England and his State, and that he being no longer King of England, France
could not without breaking the Laws of Alliances, employ their Arms against
him, who was present Master of the Crown. To be short, it is good to be
careful that the diverse constructions which may be made, may not serve for a
pretext for them who would fall off. There must not be so much as the least
starting hole left, for them to creep out, or to break their words, especially
if they make any account of their reputation, which is inseparable from their
fidelity, for without that they will perchance hardly resolve to run Counter.

The Marquess de Coevures takes the Field to make himself Master of the Forts
in the Valtoline.
AT the same time, that the Kings orders were delivered to the Marquess de
Coevures, he received a dispatch from the Sieur de Bethune; which told him,
that he despaired of getting any reason from the enemy, by those ways which he
had till then tried, so that now he must have recourse to Nostre Dame de Frappe
Fort; who as soon as he had received this piece of Rallary, he resolved
forthwith to take the field, concluding there was no reason any longer to defer
it, and that if he could surprise the places unexpectedly, without giving them
leave to provide themselves, he should strike a great stroke in the business
without any great trouble. He had long before given order to 3 Swiss, and 3
Grisons Colonels, to raise each of them a Regiment of a 1000 men, so that he
had nothing else to do, but to send them word to be ready; on the other side,
the Residents of Venice and Savoy, being come to him, they had agreed upon all
things together: The Sieur de Mesnil, had order to make a Magazine of
Ammunition at Zurich; for the Swisses and Grisons forces, and the Resident of
Venice, undertook that the Commonwealth should make another at Bergamo, for
such forces as should march into the Republic; that which was most
troublesome, was there being a necessity of discovering the design to several
persons, it would be impossible to keep it from being known, and to hide their
intentions of the time when they would enter upon the Valtoline. The Popes
Nuntio, called Scapy, and the Marquess d' Ogliani the Spanish Ambassador had
notice of it, who made strong endeavors to pervent any Levies amongst the
Swisses, or the marching of any Troops which the King should send; but all
would not serve the Levy could not be obstructed, for the Cantons of Berne and
Zurich where they were to be made, had given too particular an assurance of it;
by means of the money, and the promises which were made them, that they should
be seconded with a puissant succor, against any who should attempt any thing
against them upon that account. But their Contrivances and Cabals were so
powerful, that the Catholic Cantons resolved to stop their Passages upon
them; so the Marquess was forced to his shifts, that his Majesty's Commands
might not be ineffectual. His remedy was to cause his Horse to march four by
four (that is all such as were sent him from Bresse) and to secure the Canton
of Bern, for the conduct of Vaubecourt's Regiment; seeming after he was once
entered, as if he would force his way either by Fair or Foul means, to the
Grisons. It was enough that these Cantons were by several Treaties bound to
open their Passages to his Majesty's Forces, upon so just an occasion as this
was, and it made no great matter whether they refused it or not, seeing if they
should, they might be forced to it, without breaking the Laws of Equity. Thus
he, being well informed of the resolution which the Nuntio and the Marquess de
Ogliani, had induced them to take, resolved not to demand it, until he were
upon the very point of passing; because they should be better advised, then to
deny him, when they find him in a condition not to be hindered, they not having
the least time to prepare themselves against it,

All things being thus in a readiness for the beginning of the design, he sent
the Sieur de Land to Zurich, to discourse with the chief of the banished
Grisons, and to persuade them to rise, and then he commanded the Sieur de
Harcourt Marshal of the Field, and the Sieur du Land to join with Colonel
Salis, to enter into the Grisons to seize upon the Passages of Steitch, and
Pont du Rhin, and there to fortify themselves, which was presently dispatched
accordingly. They seized on them with such dexterity, that little or no
resistance was found in the doing of it. At the same time too, the Marquess of
Randan. advanced with those Forces which were bout Zurich, and the Cantons did
not oppose their Passage in the least, they being not in a condition to deny
them; from thence he marched to Meinfi^ld, where he took no small pleasure to
see himself amongst the Grisons: And being not ignorant how needful it was to
keep these people united, because dividing of them leaves them liable to the
mercy of their enemies, that he might render them more affectionate and procure
succors from them; he took great care to set all right in this particular; and
indeed his Prudence took so effectual a course for it, that a few days produced
very happy effects of it. He was nimble enough to make them shake off the Yoke
of the Archduke Leopold's Officers, who had usurped upon them the
jurisdiction, to make them renounce the Oath of Obedience, which was unjustly
exacted from them; to reunite the three Confederate Grisons into their ancient
Corporation, with those Liberties and Soveraignties which they had enjoyed
before the late Wars; to establish their ancient Seals of Leagues; to obtain a
General Pardon for all their Rebellious Subjects in the Valtoline, Chiavennes,
and Bormio, and to confirm the ancient Alliance with the Crown of France,
except those Hereditary Countries of the House of Austria, and their
Confederation with the Swisses. During this, all the adjacent Forces were
gotten in a Body, and leaving 2000 foot and a 100 horse, under the command of
the Si^ur de Harcourt, for the guard of Coi^e, and those Forts of Pont du Rhin
and St^itch, he advanced upon the 25. November, toward the Valtoline, with
6000 foot, and 300 horse. It was debated what place should be assailed; after
each one bad delivered his opinion, he followed his own inclination, which was
to march toward Tiran, to open a Passage for inter-course with the Venetians,
and to draw assistance from them, as occasion should require. As soon as they
were advanced to the Valley Du Monast^re, the Garrison in the Fort discovered
them, and set in on fire, not staying to expect their coming. Thence he passed
to the Valley of Poschain, and forced the Soldiers who were gotten into the
Tower of Casaccio (with a resolution to stop the Passage of the Mountains) to
dis-lodge the next morning * so that he became Master of the place. These were
the beginnings of this victory: But the people of the Country of Bormio,
terrified at the sight of the Kings Army, presently waited upon him, and sent
their Deputies to him to beseech him in all their behalfs, that he would be
pleased to receive them under his Majesty's Protection. They were received into
his Favor, with confirmation of their ancient Liberties and Privileges, and
assurance of the only exercise of the Catholic Religion; withal he left
there some Companies in Garrison, who were to keep the Passages. That which did
trouble him amidst this Prosperity was that he had only 4000 men left; however
his valor would not give way that he should lose the day after so fair an
advantage, though he had no more Cannon, without which the Forts in the
Valtoline seemed impregnable, yet he resolved to supply this defect by the
Courage of his Soldier. Piautermala was the first place, which he met in his
way, which was so fortified that he might have been stopped there, had but the
soldiers within behaved themselves as they ought; but he made his approaches
so resolutely, that the Soldiers seemed to be made all of Brass, so little did
they esteem or care for the Musket shot, which struck such a terror into
them, that they left the place, and gave him free liberty to enter, which he
did the same day with most of his Companies in the Valtoline.

The Marquess de Bagny General of the Popes Army, gave presently an Alarm to
all the Valley, who finding himself unable to make resistance; especially,
seeing the Venetians joined with him, sent sveral Proposals of agreement. But
the Marquess de Coeuvre guessing it was only to amuse him, and give time to
Serbelon Captain of the Spaniards to advance his Companies, presently commanded
Colonel Salis to make the approaches to the Town with his Regiment; during two
days there past many skirmishes between them, the success of which forced the
Marquess de Bagni to retire into the Castle, but the Marquess de Coeuvre
presently entered the Town, and forthwith constrained him to render, though
indeed upon honorable terms, granted in favor to the Pone, to whose Ensigns
the King had commanded all sort of respect and honor should be paid.

The quick surrender of this place invited the Marquess de Coeuvre to prosecute
his designs, and having sent his forces toward Sondrio, the Inhabitants had
forthwith opened the Gates, if the Governor of the place had not opposed;
though he too was not long before he delivered it up. For the Marquess having
Planted those Cannon which he had received from the Venetians, saluted the
Castle with 40 or 50 Cannon shot, which dis-mounted all their Guns, and hurt
and killed many of their Soldiers, and forced the Governor for to march out
upon composition.

These were the principal Exployts of War, which the little season of the year,
and the Snows then falling, would permit him to do, but it was a sure gage of
the Conquest of all the Valtoline, which was taken (as I shall hereafter
declare) in the 3. first months of the following year.

Politic Observation.
NO one but a great Captain knows how to manage an enterprise to advantage; It
is an effect which proceeds not but from a Prudence raised above the common
pitch, and which is only proper to an extraordinary courage. The order which
ought to be observed in such occasions is, principally to conceal as much as
possible may be, the real design under some imaginary apparencies and
pretenses, which may be thought specious. It will be a difficult thing thus to
do, in respect of those many persons, to whom there is a necessity of imparting
it, to dispose of things for action; however one may dissemble the time and
place of execution until the very last, and admitting things begin to be ripe,
it will nevertheless be expedient to do some such things as may persuade the
world, that every thing will not be yet a while concluded on; and when it is,
it must be given out to be in other places then those which are designed to be
assaulted. This will be a means to take those places unprovided, and those who
keep them being unprepared for a defense, will be forced to surrender. The
Romans judged this thing to be of so great importance, that they consecrated
all their enterprises to Silence; and in fine, there are few men who have been
sorry to have kept their designs private, but many who have received great
losses by their making them public. Perseus King of Macedon, purposing to fall
upon the Romans, had not discretion enough to keep his design private; so that
the Senate hearing of it, gave such effectual orders for the making a defense,
that the Commonalty of Rome, did sooner hear of the Victory against him, then
of the beginning of the War. All such as follow his Imprudent example, can
expect no better a success from Fortune; after this once done, he must go seek
a new opportunity, and a favorable occasion to put his resolutions into
actions: It being most certain, that opportunities are the greatest weights in
affairs, and that from thence it is, that the good or ill success most
frequently does depend. God has chosen Times and Seasons which are most
proper, for that which he would bring to pass; and a wise man shall make no
small advantage by it, if he take time by the Fore-lock, for having once turned
his back, it is impossible to effect any thing to advantage. If Trees put forth
their Blossoms, either too soon, or too late, it is a great chance if there
be any fruit at all; just thus the good success of a business, is so
restrained and dependant upon Opportunity and Time, that a few days will either
make or mar the whole design. It was for this reason, that Julius Caesar, as it
is delivered by Suetonius did not so much look after those times, in which he
had resolved to execute his designs, as after those opportunities which Fortune
should present to him, his usual course being to choose such times as were the
most dangerous, and when one would have imagined he would not have taken the
Field. Place too, is not of less consequence then Time, experience frequently
evidencing it for truth to such as are in the Wars, if it be either in a March,
in Quarters, or Battle, which are the thrre principal Actions of War. It was
place which gave the English the advantage of getting a Victory against King
John, and to take him Prisoner, which glory they had never got, had it not been
for their seizing upon certain rising grounds and Vineyards, which were near
the place of the Battle. But when as time presents a favorable occasion and
place too, then it is, that all expedition ought to be used, not to lose them;
for the delaying of a business Mines the most hopeful and glorious
expectations and designs: whereas diligence gets a thousand advantages and
victories. Had the Sieur de Chaumont furiously marched on against Bolognia, he
had certainly reduced the Pope to that extremity, that he must of necessity
have made a Peace, there being but a very few people in the City; whereas going
on but slowly toward the siege, he lost the opportunity which Time had
presented to him.

It is necessary to accompany this Promptitude with vigor and courage, such as
may astonish an enemy, and surprise him; for though Fortune be a friend to the
courageous and daring, yet all must make way and give place to the valor of
him who attempts with resolution; and this virtue is known for one of the most
assured beginnings of a victory. To be short, if a man has made himself once
Master of any place of Importance, he ought not to rest there, but he must
prosecute his advantage, and improve it to the very utmost with vigor and
strength, that he may reap those fruits which usually attend such actions. If
the Christians had done so, after the Battle of Lepanto, they had in reason
reduced the Turk to strange extremities, but their defect in that particular,
gave him leisure to recruit his forces, and to make himself presently as strong
as ever.

The Hugonots Man several Vessels under the Command of the Sieur de Soubize,
and seize upon the Port of Blavet.
WHile the Kings Armies were thus busied in the Valtoline, the Hugonots who
have ever taken the advantage of Foreign Wars, would not lose this opportunity
of doing something conducing to their designs; it was with great regret that
they beheld the Fort St. Lewis built some years past, before Rochel, which so
checked them, that they were forced to keep within their duties. But their
insolency was great enough to complain by their Deputies, that it had been
promised to them by the Treaty at Montpellier, it should be razed: To which it
was answered, that the Promise was made to them, upon cond^tion that they
should establish the exercise of the Catholic Religion in Rochel; that they
should restore those Goods to the Church, which they had usurped from it; and
that they having been defective in performing what ought of their parts to be
done; so that they could not pretend his Majesty ought to demolish it, seeing
they had treated with him upon even terms: This answer was full of Justice, but
it not being correspondent to their Rebellious Humors, they could not think
themselves contented, so that finding his Majesty's Armies busied abroad, they
resolved to seize upon some place or other, the importance of which should be
such, that it should compel his Majesty to raze the Fort, that he might get the
other place out of their hands. In order to which design, they armed several
Vessels of War, under command of the Sieur de Soubize, pretending to make some
long voyage, but resolving to send the Fleet toward Britain to make
themselves Masters, if it were possible of Blavet, otherwise called Port-
Lewis. This enterprise was carried with such secrecy, that neither the.
Rochelois, nor the rest of their Party did know it; to the end that if it did
not hit right, they might dis-own it; but in case it should succeed well, they
were then to rise in Languedoc, Zantoign, and Poicton, thinking that his
Majesty not being Potent enough to follow the War in the Valtoline, and against
them too, would quickly consent to the razing of the Fort, to draw them to lay
down their Arms. In order to this design, as soon as ever the Sieur de Soubize,
heard that the Marquess de Coevure was at it tooth and nayl with the Marquess
de Bagny, he presently put out to Sea, and dispatched two small Vessels before
him to Blavet, to understand the condition of the place, which they would find
more liberty to effect, then those who should conduct them by pretending they
came from a long voyage. But the night following, he coming thither about nine
a clock, and upon the intelligence which they gave him, that it was very ill
guarded, he marched into the Port with about a thousand men, besides the Seamen
upon the Ships. There wanted nothing necessary for a surprise, he seized upon
six ships, belonging to the King, and Duke of Nemours, and presently after
landed and took the Town, there remained nothing but the Fort which he did not
get by a happy default of his Conduct; for had he forthwith assaulted it, it
was so slenderly guarded, that he had entered without any resistance, but he
having first given the Allarum to the Town, he who commanded the Fort had the
leisure to put himself into a Posture of defense, and to shut the Gate; but the
Sieur de Soubize did not long keep the Town in his power; for the Duke of
Vendosm then Governor of Britain, hearing of it, presently sent to all the
Nobility of the Province, with order to bring all the men they could, every one
of which came with great diligence. The Duke of Vendosm coming Post, found
that the Sieur de Querrollin entered into the Fort, with store of Soldiers,
Victuals, and Ammunition. The Duke of Rets and Brissac, came at the same
instant of time, as also those Gentlemen who were in a condition thereabouts,
and the chief amongst them being in Counsel together, it was concluded to build
a new Fort just over against the old one, with intent to batter the Ships of
the Sieur de Soubize, and to sink those with more ease which he should attempt
to carry out of the Port, as also to assault the Town in six several places.
The Fort was finished in a trice, and a Battery presently Planted, but as soon
as ever the Town should have been assaulted, both he and his Soldiers forsook
the place. Withal, to bring the design to a good pass, they played with their
shot day and night upon the Ships where he was, and the Cannon did such
execution, that he was forced to hoise Sail, which he did by the help of a dark
night, and a strong wind, which carried him over the Cables, that were
overthwart the Port, though the Cannon indeed sunk the best of the Duke of
Nevers Ships, and forced four of the greatest on Shore at the mouth of the
Port, which were taken; and in fine, he sled toward Rochel, who were not
behind hand, as also the whole body of the Hugonots, to disown it; by their
Deputies, and by their Declarations which they sent the King.

Politic Observation.
IT is a dangerous Deficiency in Governors of Provinces, not to keep good
watch and ward in times of Peace, upon places of importance, especially on the
Seacoast, and such States as are subject to be agitated with Civil Wars. For
what neglect is committed in this point, does much help and assist those who
would imbroyl things, and who may come by Sea upon a sudden to surprise them.

Holy Writ tells us, That they of the Tribe of Dan, being informed that the
Inhabitants of Laish, were secure and suspected nothing, went, assaulted them,
took their Town without resistance, put them all to the Sword, and burned their
City. Did not Francis the first, upon his expedition into Italy, and by the
surprise of Villa Franca, teach all Governors of all Places, that there is no
consideration whatever can exempt them from always being upon their Guards,
and that it is without reason, that they think themselves secure, either by the
strength of their Fortifications, or by the far distance of their enemies. For
Prospero Collonna, who commanded that Town, and making merry without the least
suspicion, upon confidence that the King was far enough off from him, was
surprised by the Sieur de Palisse, which he heard not of before he saw him in
his Quarters. It is true, he himself might be excused, in regard his Sentinels
were taken, and that some of the Inhabitants held Intelligence with the Sieur
de la Palisse, but however the whole misfortune was laid in his dish: though he
was a brave Commander, yet he was much blamed, it being not permitted to a man
of that condition to say, I did not think I was in any danger. For this very
reason it was, that Iphicrates, one of the Athenians most renowned Captains,
would have his Army always upon their guard, or in a posture to fight, during
times of Peace; in the same manner, as if in the heat of War; and he answered
some who misliked his curiosity, that one ought always to suspect who would
not be surprised. Indeed vigilance is one of the most necessary qualities for a
Governor of a Place, he ought to esteem that the honor which he has in
commanding to be but a glorious servitude. That in Commanding all, he is bound
to watch for all; that he remember Governments are called charges, and that the
name of Charge which he has, ought to teach him, that it is a burden
committed to his Prudence, and that the place which is entrusted with him, is
not barely recommended to him, but he to the place, to be guarded and conserved
with his best care.

Anno Dom. 1625.
EVERY one takes delight in the Spring time, to consider the Face of the World,
when as the hand of God guides the Sun a little nearer to us, to behold that
fair Star, establishing a serenity and calmnesse in the air, before troubled
with Tempests; to see the Earth replenished with a thousand Ornaments of Beauty
before, languishing, and quite decayed by the bitterness of Winter, and to
view Plenty introduced in the room of Barrenness, which the Hoar Frosts, and
Snows had left behind them. But how much more delightful was it to look upon
France, presently after it had pleased his Majesty, to advance the Cardinal to
the Government of Affairs, who like a Sun which should be the greatest
instrument of his glory, began to reassume his ancieat Splendor, and to
dispel by little and little those causes of Civil Wars, which did every year
renew themselves in the State, to set bounds to the ambition of strangers, and
to establish such an order under the Kings authority, which is not only the
happiest but most Illustrious of all other Kingdoms. The increase of glory,
which his Majesty every day gave to this Minister, did serve to augment his
courage, and raised new lights in his Soul, subtilized his Prudence, and
furnished him with occasions, to demonstrate to the World, that he was amongst
those Ministers of whom History gives us such commendations, to be as the Cedar
amongst the Hysop. He could not be enough admired, seeing his whole life was
nothing but a Public employment, and who absolutely renouncing the idle
voluptuousness of several other Favorites (who seem to think on no other
thing then to indulge themselves with those favors which fortune presents to
them) had his mind without any intermission still affixed upon high designs
tending to the glory and Grandeur of his Master. He knew that immoderate
unseasonable delights did rob Ministers of State, of a thousand fair
opportunities. That it is impossible to serve the Public, and enjoy the
pleasures of this life, he made open profession he had none but such as were
necessary for an honest diversion, and certainly if pleasures could not bewitch
him, interest nor profit could never Charm him, or get any power over his Will.
Honor was the chief aim, which he proposed in all his actions, which he sought
for in his Masters glory, and he scorned all profit which did keep him off from
it: But that, which from the beginning gave the greatest admiration of all to
his conduct was, that imitating that manner of operating used by the Divinity,
which is invisible as his Essence. There were every day wondrous effects of his
Prudence brought to light, before any resolutions were heard of, or before any
Orders taken were perceived; whereas before, there was not any thing concluded
on, which did not make more noise then the effects. We shall proceed to
consider the particular in the Process of this History, and I shall satisfy
my self with laying down this positive ground. That the King having given him
the Honor of all his Trust, after he had known the eminency of his Genius, the
wisdom of his Counsels, his fidelity not to be shaken, the dexteriousness of
his Conduct, which has nothing parallel with it, he likewise totally gave
himself up to his Majesty.

Politic Observation.
A Minister is obliged in the same manner, to make his Masters greatness, and
that of the State his principal aim and end; he ought to remember that Kings
are the lively Image of the Divinity. That then Ministers are the Suns, which
their Kings glory does form for the good of their People. As God has created
that Star which overrules the day, to show us here beneath one Ray of his
infinite Splendor, and to be the Author of all those blessings which are
communicated to us here below; but ought he not to know before he attain the
honor of the employment whereunto he is arrived, that private Interest which
does serve to enrich Families, is the greatest enemy of State in the Soul of a
Minister, and that the Administration of a Kingdom ought to be done as the
Tutillage of Orphans, which is granted not for the profit of the Guardian, but
of those persons who are entrusted under his Tuition. Glory is the only thing
which is permitted him to aspire to, and how can he hope to atchieve that,
without transacting many things which may give a Reputation to his Master, and
his own Ministration. The Cardinal d' Amboyse lost a great part of his glory in
Italy, by preferring his own, before his Masters Interests.

The Reputation of a Minister cannot be eminent, unless he be entire to the
Prince whom he has the honor to serve. He who is truly generous expects no
other recompense for his Actions, then the honor and satisfaction to have done
them. Also he cannot be ignorant, that Virtue does scatter such rays, as make
her venerable in the sight of all men, and in this consists in the height of
glory.

Particular between the King and Cardinal, for the good of the STATE.
MOnsieur le Cardinal, knowing there was nothing more pernicious to Kingdoms
then the want of Generosity in Ministers, who content themselves by living in a
lazy Peace; in which time, they give leave to strangers, to increase their
powers, and instead of cutting off the Causes, do only skin over disorders in
the State, did not imagine it sufficient to keep things in their former
indifferency, but brought the King to apprehend great designs toward the
procuring that ancient luster once again to France, which it had in the
beginning of its Empire. It is natural to a man to be more apprehensive of
those dangers, which are nearest, and as it were at hand upon him, then those
which are further off, though they be of a worse consequence, and at this pass
had things been a long while together: Whereas the liveliness of the Cardinals
Soul, which penetrates into the Ages to come, presently discovered to his
Majesty the dangers of this nature, and made him apprehend the other the more
easily, in regard his Majesty was not engaged in them, but only by the
weakness of those who had the management of affairs. He made it quickly
apparent to him, that they who show themselves so over-affectionate of Peace,
do by little and little weaken and decay the State, without being aware of it,
that they do mollify the Courages of the people by a sloathfull repose, who by
such ways are exposed to the violences of strangers, who have in the mean
while exercised themselves in Arms, and acquired force enough to make an
attempt upon their neighbors. His Prudence imitated that of a discreet
Physician, who that he may persuade his Patient to take such things as may be
convenient for his sickness, discourses to him the causes of his
indisposition, and then leaves in to himself to judge if they be not proper
for him.

Sir, said he one day to his Majesty in a particular Counsel, though a King who
looks after nothing more then quiet, has reason to bestir himself when he
finds his Ministers, have brought his State into disorder, because there do
every day arise to him new causes of discontent; yet he who seeks Glory ought
not to be much troubled at it, for that such disorders are the Ground-works
upon which he may raise Trophies as marks of his Prudence and Generosity; so
your Majesty need not be at all troubled for those defects which have happened
to your Estate, by the faults of those whom your Majesty has employed, who
though they have been very affectionate to your service, have not however had
Souls high enough to second the Generosity of your intentions. You may easily
remedy all this, according as you have designed, there need only well to know
the Causes, and to apply such remedies as may be agreeable, and the State will
soon be in safety. Your Majesty may command me any thing, for that I dedicate
all my cares and all my endeavors to you, and I cannot have any greater
pleasure, then to sacrifice my life to your glory. And seeing you do me the
honor to hear me discourse, what I think to be most considerable in the State
of Affairs. I shall not imagine my self deceived if I shall tell you, that I
have observed four things, which are the principal Causes of the weakness and
disability of this State. The first is Foreign, and is nothing but the
unbridled Ambition of the Spaniard, which makes him aspire to the Monarchy of
Europe, and carries him on to attempts upon your neighboring States, which are
as the out-skirts of the Kingdom, of which too he hopes to be one day Master,
when he shall once have fortified himself upon the Frontiers, and made it
destitute of succors from its Allies. The other three are Domestic and at
home, which serve for supports to all Rebellions and Revolts, which are like a
Lion bred up in the Kingdom, from whence nothing but misfortunes can arise.
The second is, the excessive licenciousnesse of the Grandees, who do so much
detract from your greatness, by so much as they assume to themselves more then
they ought. The third is, the want of disciplined Troops who should ever be on
foot to oppose any enterprises, which may be made against your Majesty or your
Allies. The fourth is, the want of considerable Foundations in the Treasury, to
commence War upon occasions, and to supply them as long as need shall require,
I suppose that these are the original Sources, from whence do flow those most
dangerous misfortunes which threaten France, and I imagine, if your Majesty
can but drayn them up, there is nothing more to fear: But on the contrary, all
sort of Prosperity and Glory to your Majesty's Crown much to be hoped for. The
Attempt which the Sieur de Soubize made upon Blavet, whilst you were
succouring the Grisons, testified sufficiently to your Majesty that those of
their Party, would take all advantages, whenever your Forces should be
entertained in Forrrign parts. Those Civil Wars, which the Princes do yearly
renew, are those which reduce your Majesty to that weakness, that you cannot
enterprise any thing abroad, nourishing the people in disobedience, and giving
means to the Grandees to partake of that honor with your Majesty, which is
only due to your Majesty's Scepter. In the same manner, the Usurpations which
the House of Austria makes upon all the neighbors of France, will in fine give
them means to usurp that too; at least strenuously to attempt it, if your
Majesty makes not timely opposition. In fine, the small number of exercised
Companies which are ordinarily on foot, and the small Revenues in the Treasury,
do reduce your Majesty to that impotency of resisting strangers abroad, or
revolts at home. Therefore my chief advice is, that your Majesty would give
orders accordingly, and do persuade my self you will soon see France change
its countenance, and become as terrible to strangers, as they have boldly
offended it. This Counsel was a rare and strange effect of his Prudence, which
had discovered the true causes of France misfortune. The King whose Soul is
truly Royal, understood the sageness of it, and having discoursed with him more
at large, he resolved to do accordingly, as we shall in the prosecution of this
year.

Politic Observation.
THere is no one sign more certain of a decaying State, then to see a Minister
take no other care, then to make it subsist in a lazy Peace; for as States
ruin themselves by Wars rashly undertaken, so they weaken themselves by
idleness. The greatest Monarchs which are governed, without some high designs
of enlarging themselves, have never continued any long time without
misfortune, and that fair weather in which one strives to keep them, is a
Presage of a dangerous turn. They who think on nothing but Peace, do by little
and little unawares weaken them, and reduce them to impotencie, then soften and
alter the temper of the courageous youth, by idleness and want of Employment,
and by this means leave them for a Prey to Forrainers, who make themselves
strong in Arms. Have not heretofore the Romans entertained Wars with their
Enemies, knowing it to be needful, to keep their Soldiers in breath, and to
prevent growing sloth which commonly breeds greater inconveniences with it, as
also to vent the violent heats of the youth, who wanting employments fly out
into Rebellions and Civil Wars? It is said to be for this reason, that Edward
the third, concluding the Treaty at Bresigni, would by no means comprehend the
Treaty of Britain: And that Philip the Fair, made his Son John pass the Sea,
that he might exercise his Arms. And who knows not, that if Henry the 2d.
after the Peace Anno 1509. had employed the French Arms abroad with strangers,
and opposed the Ambition of the House of Austria, by carrying his Armies out of
France, the State had not been so afflicted with Civil Wars, which were upon
the point of destroying it. It is not the Property of humane Affairs to subsist
long in the same degree, and who attempts so to conserve it, designs an
impossibility. States like those who float upon the Waters, are in continual
motion, and that Minister who has not courage enough to raise a State to a
higher Pitch of Glory, shall soon see it unravelled to nothing, when he would
stop there, he will find it sliding back. How can a Kingdom be kept in the same
Condition, when all its neighbors have their Arms in their hands to go still
onwards; and seeing whoever is content to see Forrainers increase their Power,
shall soon see himself exposed as a Prey to their Ambition. That Minister
commits a great fault, who does not consider what is within the compass of a
State, seeing the Grandeur of a Sovereign does not only consist in his own
Forces, but in the ruin of his enemies, and that his greatest Power is in
their greatest weakness. He ought not to be less circumspect in opposing any
Foreign Usurpation, then in eying his Masters own subjects, and to keep them
in obedience; who neglects one or the other, shall soon see his master exposed to
dangerous storms, his authority despised, his power weakened by the strength of
strangers, and his Kingdom assaulted by his enemies.

New Orders sent to the Marquess de Coevures, to prosecute his Conquests in the
Valtoline.
WE have seen about the end of the last year, the resolution which his Majesty
took to assist the Grisons, oppressed by the House of Austria, and to send the
Marquis of Coeuvres to them with an Army, to recover the Valtoline. I shall now
proceed to add, that looking upon those just considerations, (which I shall now
tell you) proposed by the Cardinal to his Majesty, necessitated the dispatching
several commands to the Marquess de Coeuvres, to advance and prosecute the
conquest, so happily begun. The Marquis not to lose any opportunity, took time
by the foreloc^, and making advantages as the conjuncture of affairs did
offer, and according to his Majesty's orders and instructions, he reduced in
the three first months of this year, all the places, were they never so
little considerable, which had been seized upon in the Valtoline; as also in
the Avenues, the Fort of Rive only excepted, bearing a great respect to the
Popes Ensigns, which were never so much as touched. He began this conquest
about December in the last year, by the taking in of Planta, Mala and Tyran;
and in the beginning of this he prosecuted it, with so good success, that every
place was under his Majesty's obedience. After the reducing of Tiran, the Army
drew toward Fondrio, which Town surrendered at first summons; but the Castle
was fain to be battered with the Cannon, and a breach being made, they were
obliged to force it, and carry it by assault, which they did with such
advantage, that there were only six of the Kings soldiers killed in it.

This struck such a terror into the Towns of Morbeigne, Travona and Orbino,
that they sent their Deputies, to render themselves. But he following his
course toward Bormio a Frontier of Tyrol, he assaulted it, and found more
resistance then in any other place, whether it were because the place was well
fortified, or because they within, had resolved to defend it: he took the
pains to plant some Cannons upon a Battery, and to make a breach for an
assault; but they seeing themselves a small number, and that they wanted
several necessaries for a long siege, rendered themselves upon composition. The
Sieur d' Harcourt Marshall of the Camp, was sent by the Marquis to make
himself master of Chiavenue, whilst himself was at Travone, which he forced
after a long siege; so that there only remained the Fort of Rive, toward which
he advanced the Army, but it was expedient first to pass by Campo, where the
Spaniards had taken up their Quarters, and to force them out of it: The
resolution was taken to fight them, and orders given accordingly, which the
Spaniards perceiving, they clapped some Regiments into Campo, to fortify it, and
seeing our men come on, they sallyed out about 200. paces from their works,
and received them with all the marks of a resolute courage, but without any
advantage, for that ours assaulted them so strongly and courageously, that
without longer holding the business in suspense, they forced them to retire in
disorder; and being desirous to prosecute the point of their victory, they
would still have gone on, but were met with by fresh Spaniards, who beat them
back to the foot of the mountain, but with little success too; for ours being
presently seconded, killed many of them, put the rest to flight, and followed
them 500. paces on the other side of Campo: The Marquisse who knew his men were
used to pillage, and that victories ought not to keep an Army in negligence and
security, presently sent de vaux Aid de Camp to rally the French together, who
were dispersed up and down; but this could not be done so soon, but that the
Spaniards being ashaned of their flight, returned and fell upon them, killed
some and put the rest into disorder: However it is true, this advantage lasted
not long, for our men fought so stoutly, that the Spaniards lost more men then
we, and resolved to quit Campo the day following, and to retire themselves to
Rive. Their successes were very happy, and they who would know the true cause
of them, must understand, that though a very great share may be attributed to
the good conduct of the Marquess, and to the valor of his soldiers, yet the
Cardinal deserved the greatest praise, who advised to this enterprise, who
contrived the means, and removed all obstacles, and began it in such a time,
when all the Emperors and King of Spaines forces were before Breda, and who
were persuaded we would not have attempted any thing upon these Forts, they
being in the Popes hands, with whom the Spaniard had so wrought, that he should
not part with them, either by terrifying him, that they would relaps into the
power of the Grisons, who were Hereficks, or by giving hopes, that in the
conclusion there would be some means of accommodation found out, but all was to
keep them in their own power.

Politic observation.
HE who guides and directs great enterprises by his Councils, has more share
in the glory of them, then they who execute and act them: It is Prudence which
prevents an enemy, and takes him at unawares, which diverts his Forces, and
which knows how to fight and with such advantage, that he is easily overcome.
Hereupon Guicciardin says in his History, that the Prudence of one great
Personage in a State, does more then all the Arms of the world; and
Philosophy teaches us, that counsel is the most heavenly thing in all the
world, that is it which renders men most like the Deity, whose property it is,
as the Apostle says, to do all things by the Counsel of his will. T. Livy
being much of the same mind, says, he has often heard it reported among
Soldiers, that who so knows best to command, deserves the first place, and
who so to obey, the second place: It cannot be denied, but that there is as
much need of executing, as giving good advices, because if there were no one to
put them into action, good Counsels would be to no purpose; but withal it must
be concluded: That Counsel is so much the more excellent, in that it is the
Child of the first and chiefest virtue, which is Prudence, whereas action the
effect of it, is the Child only of force, which is much beneath it. The Seamen
indeed are in continual motion in their Ships to given order for several
things, sometimes laboring to turn about their Sails and Cords, and anon
mounting up into the Bound-house to discrie the enemy, by and by to stop some
leak in the Ship, where the water breaks in, and thus they have much more
labor then the Pilot, whose mind though is in more agitation then their
bodies, he working in his thoughts and judgment to keep all safe from the
storms and Rocks, to guide her home without being wraked, by those operations
of his, which are so much the more noble then theirs, by how much the acts of
the Soul, surpass those of the Body. Who can without injustice, ascribe more
honor to those who execute an enterprise, then to him who by the fullness of
his Soul, first contrived it, digested it by his Prudence, found out means by
the power of his judgment to set it on working, removed by his ingenuity all
such obstacles as might oppotse it, foresaw all difficulties in it, and gave
necessary orders for the carrying of it on, to a happy success? To speak truly
it cannot be, without robbing him, of that which justly belongs unto him. But
who can doubt of this truth after he, who amongst Kings was accounted the
wisest, and whose Pen was guided by the Holy Ghost, the Author of Truth, has
said it? Wisdom is more to be esteemed then force, and a wise man deserves
more honor, then he who is esteemed valiant.

The Pope seems to the Cardinal de la Valette and the Sieur de Bethune, to be
very angry that the King should attempt upon the Forts in the Valtoline, which
were in his keeping.
THE Pope was very much troubled at the first news which he heard of those
succors, given to the Grisors by his Majesty's Arms, leagued with those of
Venice and Savoy, for recovery of the Valtonine. The Sunday following he was
seen in his Chapel to be very mellancholy and cloudy, he made heavy complaints
to the Cardinal de la Vulette, that those Forts in his Custody should be
assaulted, being guarded by his Ensigns, testifying to him a great desire he had
to see the Sieur de Bethune, that he might tell him how much he resented it.

The Sieur de Bethune hearing of it, sent to demand audience, not so much to
give any satisfaction to his grievances, as to discover his disposition, which
anger would lay open sooner then any thing, and to fortify him against such
discourses, wherewith the Partakers of Spain, would endeavor to exasperate him.

As soon as the Pope saw him, he told him, he could never have imagined, that
the Arms of France would have fallen upon those of the Church: but his Holiness
was not long unanswered, the Sieur de Bethune telling him; That the King his
Master was far from doing any such thing whereof his Holiness complained; that
he was so backward from making war either upon the Church or his Holiness in
particular, (whom he honored with extraordinary respects) that on the
contrary, he would employ his Arms and his utmost power to increase their Glory
and Authority: That his Holiness had no just cause to complain of a surprise,
in regard he had been often times told, that in case the Spaniard would not
yield to reason, the King his Master could not suffer the Grison to be any
longer deprived of their Forts, which lawfully belonged to them, that they
could not be looked upon as any longer in his Holiness power, seeing the
deposit was ended by those several instances and reasons, which were
remonstrated to him; as by urging him that they might be re-delivered to the
Valtolins, of the Justice of which his Holiness himself was satisfied: and that
afterward the deposit could not be any longer continued or prolonged in his
Holiness hands, by reason of that great difficulty, which the Spaniards made to
assent to it; and seeing it was pretended, and that upon good reasons, to
re-take them from the Spaniards themselves, who had found a trick to keep them
by his Holiness name, though he was engaged to dispossess them of them, which
being so, he ought to be so much the less scruple at the King his Masters
proceedings, in regard he being only as an Umpire, who created between them in
the quality of a Common Father, he could not with Justice keep them after the
deposit was expired, or give opportunity to the Spaniard to make advantages to
the detriment and dishonor of France.

These reasons were so considerable, that the Pope could not but have rest
contented, had he not been pre-possessed by the Spaniards; but however he made
great complaints from time to time of the Kings proceedings. And the Sieur de
Bethune returning not long after for a new Audience, did not find his Holiness
so moderate op civil to him as he had formerly used to be; but on the contrary,
his Holiness told him that the Cardinal Borgia had been with him, and touching
upon the point of that little respect which had been showed to his Army, hoped
he might have induced to proceed against his Majesty by was of censures, if he
should not withdraw his Army, and told him in a Spanish Rodomontado, that
seeing he had permitted the French to take them upon one account, the Spaniards
should make them pay for it again, and should do that which their Interests led
them too, without being withheld by any consideration; and in fine, protested
to him, what ever instances were made to him that he would still continue
Neuter. But however as he was always guided by the opinions of the Roman
Doctors, who cannot endure there should be any State affair, and not subject to
his Will, he could not away with the taking of the Forts out of his hands by
force. The Sieur de Bethune endeavored by his Prudence to allay by little and
little his heat, in evincing to him the Justice of his Majesty's reasons;
sometimes by offering to him his Masters Arms and Authority to invest him in
the Dutche^ of Vrbin; and other times by assuring himself of the Affections of
the Cardinals Barbarini and Magalotti, who had some influence over his
Inclinations, by the Protestations which he made to them, that the King his
Master had an earnest desire to oblige them upon occasions; and by diverse
Presents which he gave them in behalf of his Master; which however were refused
by them, that they might not appear to be partial; as also by offering
Mademoiselle de Rieux, who was one of the richest Matches of France, to his
Nephew Don Thadee, who did not a little like of it, though he accepted not of
it, he then having a design upon the heir of Stilane.

Politic Observation.
IT has been a common Custom amongst Princes in War, who should not agree
upon certain places, to put them in deposit in a third persons hands, and he
who is the Depositary, ought to know that he has no further Authority then to
keep them, so long and upon conditions as are agreed upon between the Parties.
Antiquity looked upon Deposits as sacred, and has condemned those who would
usurp them of Sacrilege, and one of the Depositary Laws, is declared to be,
that who so refuses to render them, renders himself culpable of a great
Injustice; because he would usurp against natural Reason, that which does not
at all belong to him. Amongst the Grecians by the Laws of the Pisseans; he, who
denied the Deposit was condemned to death; and Herodotus says, that one
Glaucus of Sparta having refused to restore a certain great sum of money, which
he had received of a Milesian, consulted the Oracle of Apollo, to know what he
should do in the business; who was thus answered, That neither he nor his
family, could any long time live upon the face of the earth, and that in effect
they were already rooted out. Whence he concludes, that it were best for him
who has a Deposit, to design nothing but the making of restitution to him who
ought to have it. And how well has Aristotle deciphered the enormity of this
Crime, when he says, that that man who becomes guilty of it, is much more
unjust, then he who refuses to repay what was lent to him; because he not
only violateth the Laws of Equity, as he does who denies what was lent to
him; but also those of friendship and fidelity; in consideration of which the
Deposit was entrusted with him. I shall only add this, that the Depositiorium
ought as well to be kept against those who have entrusted it, he having no
right to become their Arbitrator, unless they agree among themselves; as to be
really and without delay restored to them, when they shall have agreed upon
condition between them. It is however, dangerous to choose a Person for a
Depository, who pretends a Superiority, or such a one to whom one ows an
extraordinary respect; because as it is natural to a person of eminent dignity,
to desire that his advice might pass for a Law amongst others, so it is
hazardous, least he pretend at last to become an Arbitrator. Whence it happens
that if one of that Quality be chosen Depositary, it ought to be included in
the Instrument, that he shall not become Arbitrator upon any difficulties that
may arise. Above all this, one thing ought to be observed, when as the Pope is
Depositary, as was practiced when the Hostages in the Peace of Quieracco were
entrusted with him; for that he in some sort pretending a Power over Kings, he
puts himself on as a common Father to judge of their differences, and withal
may become Partial. Which being so, such Princes who have chosen him for
Depositary find themselves impeded, by reason of the difficulties of getting
reason from him by force without raising great broyls. There are but a few
Princes of such Fidelity, as that of the late King Henry the Great, who having
leave to pass with thirty five thousand men into Geneva, when he besieged Fort
St. Katharine, was solicited by some of his Captains to seize upon it, which
they assured him was easily to be effected: He answered them, that it would be
a most unjust action, to repay with Infidelity and Treachery, that Confidence
and Trust which they of the City had reposed in him.

The Pope sends toward the King, the Sieur Bernardino Nary, to testify to his
Majesty the discontent he took at the Proceedings of the Marquess de Coevures
in the Valtoline.
Whilst they were hard at it in the Valtoline, Cardinal Spada the Popes
ordinary Nuntio in France, made great complaints to the King of the Marshal de
Coevures proceedings, and the Pope likewise dispatched the Sieur Bernardino
Nary to his Majesty, to testify to him his great discontent at it. But they
were replied to, with such force and strength of reason to vindicate all the
passages of the business, that their complaints served only to evince the
clearness and equity of the whole proceedings. They were very briskly told that
his Majesty had not permitted the rising of the Grisons, to aid their
Auxiliaries, but only at the very last extremity, and after he had seen several
fair proposals neglected, which he had offered with intent to end the business
in a fair way; That as for the Mareshal de Coeuvres proceedings, they had been
such, as had deserved if rightly understood, more to be commended then
condemned; That he had began his enterprise by uniting the three Grisons into
their ancient association, to obtain of them a pardon for the Valtolines; That
he had settled the Roman Catholic Apostolic Religion in and amongst the
Grisons, in all places where formerly it had been banished, and as for that
particular place of the Valtoline, he had permitted the exercise of none, but
that of the Catholic Religion; That if he came with men armed against his
Holiness his People, he was provoked to it, by those attempts and incursion
which they had first made upon his Majesty's Allies, and against his own forces
to, whereby they openly made it apparent, that they moved by no other wheels
then those of the Spaniards: yet withal that these actions of theirs, had not
diverted the Marquis of Coeuvres from treating the Marquis de Bagny, and all
others who were under him in the Vallee, not only with civility, but with as
much reverence, as if the Pope himself had been there in the persons of those,
who were sent in his behalf. That after all, the deposit of those Forts having
only been for some time in the Pope hands; that whilst there were means of
accommodation, his Holiness had no reason to complain, that he had been any way
neglected, until the time which had been concluded on, had been expired, and
that there were no hopes of an agreement. All those which were proposed being
hitherto refused, or retarded, which gave advantage to the Spaniard.

These reasons did evidence the integrity of the Kings actions, but however as
his Majesty had even showed an extraordinary respect to the Holy Seat, and had
then particular occasion to make use of his Holiness, for the obtaining of the
dispense for the match with England; he hearkened to the proposals of the
Cardinal Spada, and the Sieur Nary. The principal one, and upon which they most
insisted, was an Article for suspension of all acts of Hostility for two
months, in the County of Chiavenne, in which time the Pope hoped that all
things should be accommodated, which being thought reasonable, his Majesty
assented to it, and a Post was presently sent to the Marquis de Coeuvres, to
stop his farther proceedings. It is true the Post came not, til after Chiavenne
was taken, so that the Cessation was void in that particular, but it was
afterward executed in respect of Rives, during the whole term of the said two
months, to give his Holiness all possible satisfaction.

Politic Observation.
THat King, who undertakes any affair of weight, which may provoke his
neighbor Princes, ought to fix himself in a steady resolution, not to be
shaken by any Propositions or complaints, which shall be made to him. He must
take it for certain, that all who are any way concerned, will send their
Ambassadors to him, as soon as ever he shall have declared his intentions, to
represent their interests to him, and to press him to be mindful of them; but
on such an occasion he ought to be like a good swimmer, who being once in, and
to pass over some Arm of the Sea, lets the Tempest whurle, and the waves swell
up as they please, he not thinks on any thing, but how to get on shore; The
same reasons, which were the grounds of his resolution, ought to be the rules
of his answers, which he shall make to such Ambassadors; and if it be but well
considered, all their urgencies and instances, ought to be the more suspected
by him, that they were only made to amuse him, if possible and that they
themselves are many times deceived, by the Princes who send them. The
Lacedaemonians were much troubled that the^ had given audience to Themistocles,
who was sent to them from the Athenians upon an Embassassie, to make delays,
and that in the means time they might fortify themselves. Themistocles
accordingly entertained them with discourses a long while, making him believe
he only expected some other Ambassadors, whom the Athenians had commanded to be
joined with him, but in conclusion they smelt it to be only a fetch to get time
for to fortify the City of Athens.

The Order which a King should take in such a business, is above all things to
discover if Ambassadors are sent as Spies, to discover his intentions. If they
are only of spy, as it many times happens in war, under pretenses of making
proposals of Peace, my advise is to return them back again, as quickly as the
Romans did those of Perseus; withal to cause them to be watched, and to have an
eye upon all their actions. Thus the Athenians were very circumspect that those
Ambassadors, who were sent from Xerxes, to hinder their associating themselves,
with all the other Towns of Greece, should not speak with any particular man,
during their short stay in the City. I think in case it be certain they only
come to stop the course of his proceedings, he ought to receive them with
honor, to treat them magnifiently, and to give them a favorable audience, that
they may not complain, there was any deficiency, of paying them all the duties
of hospitallity: But as to the subject of their negotiation, he ought to oppose
his reasons to theirs, with as much courage as prudence, to fortify his Soul
with such motives, as engaged him in his enterprise, as with so many
impregnable Bastions, without letting his first resolutions be wavering by any
means or devices whatever, but to prosecute his work, till he be come to the
very end he had proposed to himself, or at least so near as possibly he may,
withal remembering that he may perchance have formerly heard it said, every one
who fights does not conquer, and the Conquerors, do not always were the
Garland.

The King of Spain to break the League between his Majesty the Duke of Savoy,
and Commonwealth of Venice, negotiates another between himself and the Princes
of Italy.
THe King of Spain was not a little surprised to see himself destitute of that
Passage which is the surety of his States in Italy, and concluded that in case
that inlet should be stopped up, it would be a great inconveniency to him, so
that without making himself sure of the Popes Protection, he gave Orders to his
Agents to treat a League between himself and the Princes of Italy, to oppose
that which had been concluded between the King, Duke of Savoy, and State of
Venice, and at the same time, he summoned all his Estates, and the principal
Signeors depending upon his Crown, to contribute their utmost toward the
charges of the War. Thus they gave an Allarum to Italy and made them all
believe that the King, Duke of Savoy, and Venetians would divide it between
them; so every one of those little Princes, being touched in his own Interests,
was very glad to enter into the League for his own defense. The Partisans of
Spain say, that this Alliance between their King, the Duke of Parma and Modena,
the Commonwealths of Genoa, and Lucqua, had concluded to raise an Army by Land
of 24000 Foot, and 6000 Horse, which should be commanded in the Emperors name
by the Duke de Teria, Governor of Milan, and a Navy by Sea of 90 Galleys, who
should come to Genova, and be there commanded by the Marquess de Saint Croix,
who was to be Admiral, they reported too, that all the Kingdoms of Spain, and
the Grandees of the whole Nation, were taxed with great sums for the keeping of
an Army of above 100000 men. But all these black stormy Clouds, vanished
without any noise at the splendor of his Majesty's Arms, and he had more
victories then Rodomontadoes, as shall be made appear in the Prosecution of this
year.

Politic Observation
THE Affairs of Christendom, were brought to that pass, that the two Crowns
of France and Spain, did partake with the Interests of all other Princes. The
one is bound to assist those who are assaulted by the other, and never did either
of them attempt any thing which ought not by reason of State be opposed by the
the other. If any one ask a reason hereof, it may be ascribed to that emulation,
which for above a hundred years has been nourished between them, so that
neither can endure to see the other increase his strength or power; but to speak
more rightly, the reason is not one and the same between France and Spain, for
that either of them have their particular motives. The Spaniards like the
Lacedaemonians, have fixed the highest part of their Monarchy, not in that which
is so much just as profitable for the enlarging of it, and consequentially,
they do easily violate all Rights and Justice, not reflecting, that the
Commonwealth of the Lacedaemonians, stood but a little while, it being settled
upon so ruinous a Foundation, which was the destruction of their Power: Now
with France it is quite otherwise, whose State being grounded upon Justice,
does not hurry them on to snatch up their Arms, but only when their own
defense or that of their Allies calls them to it. France has no design but to
preserve it self. Spain to increase it self; France knows that safety
consists in an equal ballancing of the Powers and strengths of one another; and
therefore it is, that France thinks her self concerned to obstruct Spains
growing too Potent, that he might not pretend to have any advantage over her,
or her Allies. Spain on the other side, which has long since formed and
contrived a design of making it self master of all Europe, conceives that
there is wrong done him, if at any time France does uphold her Allies in their
just Possessions of their Estates, or take up Arms for their defense. Now to
cement them in this dispute, either of the two Crowns have their Allies, which
are tied to them by several Bonds, that is, by different considerations France
has such for her Allies, who suspect the Power of Spain, and fear they shall
be set upon by it: Spain has others, who take part with the Interests of the
House of Austria, as issued from thence by some relation or other, and who are
so far from France, that being not easily releeved, they are forced to keep all
fair with them, and serve them in their designs, under the hopes, that by this
means they may at least procure that favor, which the Cyclop promised Ulysses.
In this last from I range the Italians, who having experimentally found how
little favorable the Protection of France has been, has been to them, by
reason of their distance from one another, and the difficulties of passing
Forces into their Country, do tie themselves so much the stricter to the
Spaniard, it being easy for him to seize upon their States, Milan and Naples
lying so near upon them. Experience has made it evident, that they were never
faithful to the French. They have sometimes engaged our Kings in enterprises,
by allying themselves with them, but after they had occasioned great expenses,
and all to no purpose, they fell off from their words, as Lewis the Moor, Duke
of Milan, and then he of Milan who presently turned tail to the Interests of
Henry the 2d. though he had secured him from the violences of the Emperor. The
only means to unite them really with France, and to draw them off from the
Interests of Spain, whom they have no great inclination to, were to have a free
open Passage for the Soldiers, which might be quickly dispatched from
Languedoc and Province, which happiness France now has by the Prudence of the
Cardinal, in the possession of Pignerol.

The Spaniard spreads abroad defaming Libels against the League of France,
Venice, and Savoy.
AS Defamatory Libels are the most subtle Artifices, which are used to surprise
the minds of People, and the Firebrand which have been always thought most
proper to inflame their Courages to War: So the Spaniards were not backward to
countenance their designs, by dispersing several of them abroad against the
League between France, Savoy, and Venice; and with all that Justice might
appear to be with them, to make use of Religion and Piety, as a Cloak to their
knavery. They cannot but well remember that the same pretext served their King
to invade the Indiaes; That it was very advantageous to Philip the 2d. to make
himself Master of France, and that very lately it gave them an Inlet to the
Palatinate, and that they now hope by the same means to recover the Valtoline.
It gave their Libellers opportunity to say, that the King of Great Britain, and
the Swiss Protestants were engaged in the same League, though in truth, there
was only the King, Duke of Savoy, and State of Venice comprised in it. They
called it by the name of the Protestant League, but with so little truth, that
there was no appearance of it; and less reason had they to call theirs the
Catholic League, seeing they had on their party the Elector, the Princes of
Upper Saxony, the Dukes of Luneburg, the Landgrave Lewis de Hesse de Armstadt,
and the most part of the Lutherans of Germany, so that all that did not favor
their Party must needs pass for Heretics.

By which one might believe, they would place even God himself amongst this
number, because he appears sometimes contrary to their designs. They declared
every where, that their only intention for their parts, was to settle the
Catholic Religion in the Valtoline, and to root out Heresy, though that
Combination and Cabal which they kept up fomented, and which gave them most
advantage, was headed by Rodolph, Planta, and several other principal Heretics
of that Country. Neither did they stick to say, that the Catholics were
oppressed in the Valtoline by the Grisons. But they went not away without a
reply made to them, which was this, that the Catholics both Spiritual and
Temporal were never ill entreated, but when they contrived Combinations against
the State, and when at any time there were any Protestants discovered to have a
hand in any such Cabals, they were equally punished with the rest, without any
respect had to their Religion. To be short, they endeavored to beget in the
souls of all People, Compassion and Pity in behalf of the Valtolines, though
for the most part, those Officers which they entertained of the Crisons, were
Heretics; desiring to make People believe, that in truth they were troubled at
the exercise of the Catholic Religion. But besides, that this Proposition was
quite contrary to the truth, any one might easily know, that all Magistrates
were indifferently chosen, either Catholics or Heretics, and that the
exercise of Religion was absolutely free; so that it was easy to answer them,
that look upon those Magistrates who were established by Sovereigns (before any
consideration could be had of what Religion they were) as Gods Lievtenants, and
as the Apostles have taught us in their Holy Writ, and by their deeds, no one
had any cause to complain of them at all; and thus all their Reasons tended
only to surprise peoples understandings, who were weak, but were discovered by
all who had never so little understanding, to be contrivances forged in the
fire of their Ambition; and indeed they themselves discovered the Fraud, when
as his Majesty had proposed to them a most certain way for the assurance of
Religion, and the Liberty of Catholics, which they refused to accept of as to
the Valtolines, or to lay down their Arms. And thus did they use their utmost
endeavors to impede the late King Henry the Great, from obtaining his
Absolution from Rome, after his Conversion; though they every where Proclaimed,
that the design of their Army in France, was only to oblige him to become a
Catholic.

Politic Observation.
IT has been a usual trick amongst Ambitious men, to cover their designs with
a cloak of Religion. So in the Heathens time, the Governors of the City of
Rome, after they had, to no purpose, used their utmost endeavors, to hinder
the People from being elected into Offices, had at last their recourse to
Religion, and made them believe, that they having consulted the Gods on that
affair, were assured by them, that to communicate the Honors of the Republic
to the Commonalty, were to profane them; which being so, says T. Livy, they
forthwith desired them, to recede from their pretentions, they feigning that
they did it more in order to the Will of the Gods, then of their own particular
Interest. They well knew that the people were much addicted to Religion, and
that it were so much the more easy to surprise them upon that account, they
having but a little knowledge of the Interest of Princes, the genuine reasons
of State, or of Religion it self. Thus Ottho desiring to get the Empire, was
not contented by his pretending a great Treason, to speak aloud his Affection
to the Emperor Galba; but moreover told the Soldiers, the more to inflame
them, that the Gods had declared to him by a remarkable Tempest, that his
Adoption of Piso was agreeable to them. After all, these fetches can only
surprise silly people, they who are raised never so little above the ordinary
sort, are not ignorant that in point of State-dissimulation, they ought more to
regard their actions then their words. They learn by experience that such kind
of People, cannot be better compared then to Coyners of salfe money, who daub
over their base allay, with Leaf Gold to hide the falsenesse of it. But Princes
are now so accustomed to see through their disguises, that they are no more to
be overreached by them, and that without being stopped by the murmures of the
people, they surcease not to take up Arms for the defense of their Allies.

Intreagues of the Spaniards with the Hugenots.
THere need no more to prove, that Religion served only as a mask to the
Spaniards, to hide the injustice of their designs, then the bare intelligence
which they had with the Heretics of this Kingdom of France, which when
undivided, has been always so potent, that it has impeded the course of their
proceedings; and therefore it was, that they endeavored to make parties amongst
them, as soon as ever they were drawn off toward the Valtoline. Those great
losses, which the Heretics continually had had, for some preceding years in
Bearn and Languedoc, always kept them waking, especially after the Peace of
Montpellier, they well perceiving that those small Routs, which they had
suffered, did threaten their party, with an utter destruction.

The Spaniards finding this disposition amongst them, were not backward to
foment it, and labored very much, to get the Sieurs de Soubize and Rohan, who
were the only eminent persons, to command their arms. Their design took
effect: These two Brothers, being met at Castres, to consider on such
Propositions, which were made to them on their behalf about Autumn in the
foregoing year, resolved to raise those of their Party, the one by Sea at
Guienne and the other in Languedoc. The attempt upon the Fort of Blavet
otherwise Port St. Lewis) of which we have already spoken, about the end of
the last year was an effect of that resolution, as also the endeavors of the
Duke and Duchess of Rohan began about the same time in Languedoc to draw in
more Towns into their party. This Duchess, that she might use her utmost
diligence, went most commenly by torchlight in the night time in her Coach,
which being in mourning, and withal furnished with eight black Horses, served
rather to strike a terror into the Country people, (who were not used to see
such spectacles) then to gain any the chief men of their towns. But the
Cardinals vigilance, was the principal obstacle, which rendered all their
Combinations void. He induced the King to send with all have, about the
beginning of the year the Marquis de Ragny into Languedoc, with certain
Regiments, to oppose the first commotions, and to employ many persons of
discretion, to assure himself of the Counsels of the Chief towns, and by this
means most of them kept within their duties. The Sieur de Soubize published a
Manifest, which founded an Allarm to all the Hugonots party, and made them
believe, that their utter ruin was concluded on in the Kings Counsel; That the
loss of their Religion was inevitable, if they did not defend themselves by
Arms, and that the raising of Fort St. Lewis built by Rochel, was an assured
sign of it, as also those other advantages which he had taken against them. He
prevented them in believing his Majesty's Edicts and Proclamations, by that
supposition which he instilled into them, that the Catholics were of opinion
in most of their books; That they were not obliged to keep Faith with
Heretics. It Is true these reasons were deduced with such palliations, that
most were taken with them, particularly because the Duke of Rohan clapped into
some Towns, certain Gentlemen and Captains of his own Religion, to encourage
them, and to stir up the Popular Ministers, who after this looked for nothing
but when to rise, not considering that the insurrections which they were
carried to, were contrived by the Spaniards, who make open profession of being
their ennemies, and who pretended not, to make use of them, but only to divert
and draw off the Kings Arms from Italy.

Politic Observations.
NO one but a King ought to take up Arms: As formerly among the Romans, it only
belonged to the Consuls, who had the superintendency of State, to open the two
gates barred with Iron, and fastened with a hundred hinges, which were opened in
token of war: so when Caesar began the war against the Gauls, it was Cato's
advice to recall the Army into Italy, and to leave that great Captain to his
enemies, because he had attempted it, without the command of the People and
Senate. Seeing Kings are constituted by the hand of God, no one may rise
against them upon any cause whatever, without rendering themselves guilty of
Rebellion. True Religion it self is not a sufficient reason to raise a War, how
much less then may Heresy make use of it as a Pretext? And those Heretics
who make profession of following the Doctrines of the Holy Writ, have ill
studied it, if they have not observed this truth in it, that one is no less
obliged to obey Princes though Infidels then others. God says in Esaias,
speaking of Cyrus Monarch of the Medes and Persians, who had no knowledge of
his holy name. I have called thee though thou have not known me, I have named
thee by thy name, and have raised thee up to honor and power, though thou have
had no knowledge of me; and I will, that both they of the East and West shall
know, that it is I who have established thee, and that there is not any
Governor upon the Earth, that has not received his Power from me and my hand;
and afterward he adds, that he has anointed him and placed him on his right
hand, that he might bring the Nations into Subjection, whose presence abateth
the hearts of other Kings, who breaks the Gate of Brass, and bursteth the
Bars of Iron, to whom all things are manifest, and nothing is concealed from
him. Thus though Nebuchadonozer was a most detestable Tyrant, and the greatest
Infidel of all Princes that ever were. Though he had destroyed the Land which
God had chosen, besieged, taken and pillaged the City of Jerusalem, razed the
Walls, demolished the Houses, burned the Temple, profaned the Sanctuary, took
and carried away the Vessels which were consecrated to Gods service, killed the
Kings Children, with the greatest part of the Priests of the Temple, and
carried the re^t Captive into Babylon: Though he had likewise caused his own
Image to be set up and worshipped by all people as a God; yet here behold the
words of the Prophet Jeremy and Baruch, saying, to the intent to make known the
honor which he had by being chosen by God to command his People; God who has
created men, and the beasts of the Field by his great power, and stretched out
Arm, has given it to whom he pleased, and has placed it in the hands of his
servant Nebuchadonozer. He would that all Nations should honor him and his
Son; submit your necks therefore to the King of Babylon's yoke, and serve him;
and whosoever shall not submit himself to his Yoke* God will visit him with the
Famine, the Sword, and the Pestilence: Pray to God for the life of
Nebuchadonozer and Balthazar his son, to the end they may live as long upon the
Earth, as the Heavens shall endure. Which being so, can it be lawful or in the
power of men, for any reason whatever to rise against their Kings? Shall
Subjects assume upon themselves Authority, to give them a Law contrary to Gods
command? In St. Paul's time, and the rest of the Apostles, there was not any one
King who had embraced the true Faith, yet they commanded that they should be
prayed for, and that they should give them all manner of Honor, Subjection,
and Obedience, and to bear themselves humbly before them, for the love of God
and a good Conscience: Whence it is, That the wisest Politicians have accounted
it intolerable, that Subjects should attempt to shake off the yoke of a
Prince, under whom God has subjected them, or to assume to themselves any
power over him, to whom they ought to give an account of their Actions.
Subjects have not by the Law of God, any other defense then flight. That is it
which the Apostles have permitted to Christians, and if this flight be
shameful in the Wars between Prince and Prince, or Commonwealth and
Commonwealth, yet it is not so in regard of subjects to their Sovereign.

The King for many considerable Reasons causes the City of Genoa to be
assaulted.
THat fomentation which the Spaniards gave to the Hugonots, whereby to force
the King to draw off his Army from the Valtoline, obliged his Majesty to do the
like by him, in assaulting the Commonwealth of Genoa. It is true that was not
the only consideration which induced the King to commence the War, but the
weakness of those Forts in the Valtoline was the first; a weakness worth the
observation, in regard there was not one Fort there, excepting that of Rive,
which could endure any long Siege: So that it is to small purpose to seize upon
them, unless their Arms who would re-take them, be so strongly diverted, that
they may be hindered from coming to them: Besides the Spaniards usurping of
those Forts before they were deposited in the Popes hands, was a sufficient
token of his design, long since concluded on in his Counsels, of making himself
absolute Master of Italy; it being most probable, that who so once seizes on
the door, would likewise enter upon the whole house. It being thus manifestly
necessary to oppose the progress of this ambitious design, it could not be
better effected then by the assaulting of Genoa, which is the only Port of
entrance on this side of the Alps, which being shut up, and preventing his
ingress on that side, he could hardly bring in any Troops at all, especially if
the Forts of the Valtoline were no longer in his possession. Withal, the State
of Genoa did not only serve the Spaniards as an Inlet into Italy, but also to
convey soldiers into Germany and the Low Countries, and for a Mine from whence
they extracted good store of money, so that the depriving them of it would be no
small weakening to him: These were the true reasons which invited the King to
this attempt which were so just, that it appeared lawful, that State being the
only Flower, which the negligence of some of our Kings have suffered to be
pulled out of this Crown, and the Spaniard could have no more reason to
complain of his Majesty's entering upon Genoa, which was under their Kings
Protection, then the King of France had, to lament his seizure of the
Valtoline, of which his Majesty of France had had the Protection for many years
together. The King was necessitated to make use of the Duke of Savoy in this
affair, both that he might have free passage thither, and also furnish himself
by that means, of Cannon and provisions for the Army. The Cardinal persuaded
the King to make him chief of the expedition, whereby the more to engage him.
All this was dispatched in a conference had with him at Suze, by the Constable
of Lesdig^ieres. The Marshal de Crequis returned to the Court after October in
the last year, to give an account to his Majesty of what might be expected from
him, and the Sieur de St. Gerry, was sent back to the Duke and Constable, with
those resolutions which had been concluded on, in relation to their Proposals,
and with order to the Constable to raise forces necessary for the design. The
Duke was the more inclined to it, seeing the injuries which the Genoeses had
done him but lately, were a just cause to begin a War. He declared in his
Manifest, that they had destroyed the limits, which parted the Lands of Genoa
and Piedmont, and had incroached upon his Territories, that they had violently
taken away the Fee of Zuccarel, and withal offered indignities to his
Effigies, as a mark of the hatred which they did bear him: These just offenses
did oblige him to resent them; but he being too weak to carry on a War against
them, where he should quickly find the Spaniard in the head of them, was very
glad of the Kings assistance and willingly accepted of the honor of commanding
in chief all such Forces as should be sent, which being thus contrived, they
could only pass under the notion of Auxiliaries: And if it were honorable
for the Duke to be the head of such an enterprise, it was not less
advantageous for the King to raise by this means a diversion, able to find work
for all the Powers of the House of Austria, without making an absolute breach
with them. The Cessation preserved at that time the Forts in the Valtoline, and
engaged the Duke by so many Interests and concerns in the War, that it was
impossible for him to fall off or be unfaithful, and not find his own ruin in
it. And the Cardinals counsel in this particular, passed for an effect of his
incomparable Prudence.

These things being thus concluded on, and orders given out accordingly, the
King commanded the Marshal de Crequis to return back to the Constable of
Lesdiguierres, with further confirmation of what ever had formerly been sent to
him by the Sieur de St. Gerry in order to his Proposals. It would not have been
amiss to have engaged the Venetians in this design which was attempted, but
Commonwealths are so long, and so hardly induced to resolve upon any great
affair, that it was done without them. The Constable passed over the hills,
about the beginning of the year, with ten thousand foot, and two thousand
horse, and there met with the Marshal: On the second of February, the whole
body of the Army consisted of five and twenty thousand foot, and four thousand
horse, every one ready to march about the end of February, which struck such a
terror into Rome, that the Pope and the most part of them, knew not what to
think of it, but apprehending that they should shortly see all Italy in a flame
of War, and fearing lest the sparkles of them might fall on them, and consume
that sweet repose which they then enjoyed.

Politic Observation.
IT is great Prudence in a King who would enterprise a foreign War, to make
himself sure of that Prince which is nearest the Country he would assault; it
was for this reason that Scipio designing to carry the War in Africa, against
the Carthaginians, procured a League to be made between the Romans and Cyphax,
but as it is a thing very difficult to keep Princes Confederates in a War any
long time together, in which they have little interest: So it is a great piece
of Wisdom to make him chief of it, when a design cannot be executed without
him, by reason he is master of the passages, and it is from him only that
recruits can be had, as also Ammunitions of War for the subsistence of the
Army. To avoid the ordinary misfortunes of Leagues, it were necessary that
those Princes with whom one does engage, were obliged by other ties then those
of Fidelity which is due to their words; and if it be so important for all
Allies, it is much more necessary for him. Had Lewis the Moor, Duke of Milan
been touched with this fear, and believed he could not have broke off the
Alliance with France without losing his Estate, he had never been worse then
his word, with those of our Kings, who had not carried their Arms into Italy,
but upon the assurance he had given him of his Fidelity. And who sees not that
the King that does thus, has an advantage of assaulting his enemy, without
making an absolute breach with him. He has an advantage very considerable
seeing it serves him to put his own Estates in safety, and that he does engage
that Prince so much the more strictly, whom he makes chief of his design, to
keep his word with him; because if he once break off he may freely abandon him,
and suffer him to perish under his enemies Arms, without putting himself to the
trouble of making a Treaty of Peace, or breaking the Laws of Alliance, which do
not oblige to any further assisting of him, who has once broke his word.

The Pope sends the Cardinal Barberine in the quality of a Legate into France,
to negotiate the Peace between his Majesty and the King of Spain.
THE Pope, who is equally qualified with the Title of Common Father to
Christian Princes, as well as that of Sovereign Bishop, was much displeased to
see the war was upon the point of flaming, out both in France and Italy. The
condition of France moved him with pity, it being both against the Church, as
well as against the Kings authority; but besides that this piety did not make
him less sensible of the War in Italy. He had some apprehensions to for his own
States, doubting lest they after those of Genoua might become the Scene of this
Tragedy; this was it which obliged him to send a Legate into France and Spain,
or into some other neuter place, where the two Kings Deputies might be found,
to negotiate a Peace; as the Cardinal of Florence was heretofore sent to treat
a peace at Vervins, and Aldobrandine, for the Peace of Savoy; His Holiness
spoke of it to the Sieur de Bethune, as a thing which he had resolved on, and
told him, that he desired to make use of one of his own house for this
employment, and that he would willingly prefer his desires, and that the
affections which he had for peace more then any other. He presently proposed to
him his Brother the Cardinal de Saint Onufra, to which the Sieur de Bethune
only answered, that he was very capeable of the Legation. But that they that
have been so long in a Cloister, living in such an extraordinary Piety as he
did, would commonly judge by the rules of devotion, which being so, it might
happen that he would not consider at all the affair of the Valtoline, more then
by the specious pretext, which the Spaniards had given out for their invasion,
and thus considering all in a spiritual way, without regarding those interests
of state, which would happen, there could hardly be found all the necessary
qualifications, to make the peace between the people, who should be interessed
it it. It was said in few words, and no reply on the one side or the other. The
Pope then having changed his discourse soon after altered his design, and
proposed to send the Cardinal Barberin his Nephew, who earnestly desired to be
employed in this negotiation, and to make the voyage between France and Spain.

Although the Sieur de Bethune honored him as one of the most virtuous
Cardinals of the Consistory, yet he knew that he wanted experience in affairs
to negotiate this business. Besides finding the Spaniards indisposed to
renounce the passages of the Valtoline, he easily concluded that the voyage
would be to no purpose, but however looking upon the inclination of him to this
voyadge, he would not testify to his Holiness, that he misliked his choice,
only upon the first motion of it, he expostulated it with his Holiness, and
represented how much it troubled him that his Holiness should give this
commission to a Person, who being so nearly related to him, could not but be
very dear to him; thinking that the consideration of that one thing would work
more with him, then all others; and then he added to the intent his journey
might be the shorter, that it would be proper to draw up and agree upon those
points with the Spanish Ambassador, in which the greatest difficulties were
contained, without which finding the business all confused and undigested
either in France or Spain, it would of necessity follow, that he must be a
long whiles absent from the Court: But the Pope who had been propossessed by
the Cardinal his Nephew, who took a singular delight to please him, took no
notice of it, and a few days after conveened an Extraordinary Consistory to
deliver him a Legates Cross, and caused him to be conducted in Pontificalibus
by all the Cardinals, out of the gates of Rome, according to the usual custom.
They who had been upon the same employments before him, returned back to Rome
for a few days, that he might take orders for their occasions, but did not
appear on any public employments. The great affection which the new Legate had
to the journey, made him prolong it no more then one day, so that he set out
immediately punctually observing his Holiness command, of using an
extraordinary industry, to prevent the progress of the war in Italy, to
administer on his part the offices of a Common Father, by procuring a Peace
between the Kings of France and Spain.

Politic Observation.
IT is no less Glorious, then profitable to the Pope to mediate Peace between
Princes; one of the best and noblest properties of the Sun, is to establish
such a Temperature, and moderation amongst the diverse and sundry Elements, that
they may all subsist together, and contribute to the preservation of the
universe; for without this as the Naturalists have observed, the Elementary
World would revers to it is first nothing, by reason of the disharmony which
would remain between them: Just so the moderation which the Popes (who are in
the Church, as the Sun in Heaven) shall use amid'st the broyls and wars, which
shall at any time arise amongst Christian Princes, is a work which contributeth
to their great glory and splendour. If it be honorable to them, it cannot be
less advantageous to, seeing their authority, is never so considerable as in
times of Peace, and that their Oracles are no more heard or regarded in war
then a civil Magistrates command amidst a mutiny or insurrection. Certainly
nothing can so well befit them as this, they having the honor to be Christ's
vicars here on earth, who took the flesh upon him, that he might bring peace to
all the world, which also he recommended to his Apostles, as the thing he would
have most cheri^hed: Thus to do, is to follow the glorious footsteps of their
Master: this is to follow his intentions, and to prosecute the ways which he
has prescribed; but that they may effectually instill this moderation into the
minds of Princes, they must needs dis-roab their own selves of all sort of
interest: For as the Sun if he were clothed about with any of the Elementary
qualities, would not be able to reduce them to a moderate temper: so the Popes
cease to be any longer entrusted by Princes, when once they take part with any
particular interest: for who so once appears partial, is no longer fit to be
credited, or to make any proposal which will not be suspected.

Father Berule arriveth at Rome, to obtain the dispense for the Lady Henrietta
Maria of France, to be married with the Prince of Wales.
LET us give leave to Cardinal Barbarin, to make his journey into France, we
shall anon overtake him at the Court, and take notice of what passed in his
negotiation. Let us now speak of another important Affair, which was treated on
in the Court of Room for Madam the Kings Sister: we have already told you about
the end of the forgoing year, that the match with the Prince of Walls being
concluded, Father Berule was sent to Room, to procure a disperse for it, where
being arrived and presented to his Holiness by the Sieur de Bethune, he
supplicated his Holiness, on his Master behalf, that he would be pleased to
grant him the dispensation for it.

The Pope received him, with such honor, as is due to those who are sent from
the first of Christian Princes; and as to that which concerned the dispense,
his Holiness told him, that he having already accorded one of the like to the
Spaniards, when as the Match with the same Prince was upon the point of
conclusion with the Infant of Spain, he had done it with the advice of the
Cardinals then, and could not now conclude it, without acquainting them with
it; but however promised him, that they who were suspected to be against the
French interest, should not be called to the consultation, but that others
which favored it should be put in their places: but withal to testify his
good will to the King, he would do one thing which he had not accorded to the
Spaniards, that is, he would convocate the Consistory of Cardinals in his own
presence, that he might give the quicker dispatch to it. Within in a few days
after, he named the Cardinals, but he was not so good as his word in
convocating them before himself, whether it were that so extraordinary a grace
might have exasperated the Spaniards, with whom he had no great mind to embroyl
himself, or because he imagined the Cardinals would not meet with any so great
difficulties, as might require his presence for the granting of the dispense:
and this was as much as passed upon the first motion, though afterward many
disputes did arise, either because it is ordinary with those who judge of
affairs in the Court of Room, to seek all advantages for Religion, and to
raise questions where there are none, that their final results may be the more
vallid; or else because Father Berule treating with the Cardinals in private*
had persuaded them to ad some other things in the dispense, then had been
concluded in the Articles. These difficulties thus risen, engaged the Sieur de
Bethune, who understood not whence they came, to join himself to the Father
Berule, and that he might overcome them he often represented to his Holiness,
that the great zeal his Master had for the Church, had induced him to take a
great deal of pains, for the obtaining the most advantageous conditions in the
Articles, that could be hoped for by the English Catholics. That the
Spaniards having consented that such children as should be born of this
Marriage, should be brought up by the Queen, only until their age of twelve
years, but the King not contented with that, had obtained it until the
thirteenth year, which was no inconsiderable business, because in that age it
is that children take such impressions of Religion, as will not easily be
rooted out in future. He was not deficient in representing to him, both the
hapiness and glory, that it would for ever be to his Popedom, if the eldst son
who should be born, should religiously preserve those instructions in his riper
age, which the Queen should give him, and at last establish the Church of
England in it is liberty and splendor. That the fruits of this Alliance were to
be considered by the advantage, which might happen by it hereafter, especially
seeing in the last Article, the King of Great Brittany promised to treat with
more sweetness, and allow more liberty and freedom to the Catholics, in
behalf of the alliance with France, then otherwise he would have done, for that
of Spain; that he was bound by oath to perform it; that it was true, the
Spaniards had demanded more, that is, a public Church in England, but withal
they could not procure it to be granted, and that indeed there was not any
thing more to be expected, then what had been alreaded concluded; that all
which is to be wished, is not always possible; and after all, that the three
principal things which ought to be considered had been agree to, which was the
assurance of the Princess her conscience, the education of such children as God
should bless her with, and the liberty of Catholic: he also went and related
the same to the Deputies. At last after three several meetings upon the
business, they thought (so much had Father Berule possessed them with hopes,
when he discoursed with them in private) that neither they nor the Pope himself
could safely grant the dispe^se, according to those Articles which had been
concluded between the two Crowns: but they would needs have this added, that
those servants, who were to wayt upon such children as God should give to the
Princess, should be Catholics and chosen by her, during the age that they
were to be under her government. That the English should not by any means
endeavor, to draw off the Princesses servants from the Catholic Religion,
nor those of the Messieurs her Children, whilst they should remain with her.
Lastly that the King of England should swear not to fail in either of those two
things, and that the King of France, should promise his Holiness to cause those
Articles to be observed, to which the King of England should oblige himself.
The Sieur de Bethune did much wonder, that they should so earnestly ad those
Conditions to the Articles, which were not only capable of retarding, but also
of quite breaking of the match, and consequently bring the English Catholics
into a greater persecution then ever. But all was an effect of Father Berules
zeal, which was a little too hot, and which prepossessed both the Pope and
Cardinals, with such strong impressions, that they were irresistably bent upon
it, this good man making it appear by his transaction, that the most spiritual
men, are not always the most proper persons to be employed in negotiation of
State; by reason of the subtlety of the spirits, which do refine things a
little too much, and their perverseness in opinion which is common to them with
all others, and which does often keep them off from complying with the Laws
even of a necessity it self.

Politic Observation.
IT is a great Imprudence in an Ambassador, to move contrary to his
Instruction, and to raise difficulties in a business which is committed to him
by following his own sense: Orders are to Ambassadors as Compasses to Pylots,
and as a Pylot exposes himself to the danger of Shipwreck, when as he will
take no other guide in his voyage but his own Caprichio, so an Ambassador
endangereth the success of his negotiation, if he does neglect to follow those
Orders which are given to him: he ought to consider, that the person who
imploys him, has more knowledge of the Affair then himself. That he not having
given him a full Liberty to do whatsoever he should think fit, those are the
only means which he is commanded to follow, that must guide him to the end of
his Affair, and that if he does not adhere to them he does not only run the
hazard of losing himself, but also of bringing his Master into such trouble, as
he will have somewhat to do ere he get clear of them. The Athenians did
heretofore, think this to be a business of so great importance, that they
condemned their Ambassadors to die, whom they had sent into Arcadia, for only
returning home by another Coast, then that which they were commanded, though
they had well dispatched the Affair they were employed on, as it is reported by
Elian. It is true, the face of things may alter after an Ambassadors
departure, and if so, he must have his eyes in his head, it being permitted him
to vary the means which are prescribed to him, for the easier obtaining the end
of his Affair: But in case Affairs be not altered, he is bound to stick close
to his Instructions, under penalty of being very faulty; Manlius did not spare
his own son, for fighting with the Enemy contrary to his order, though he got
the better of them; for a Captain never ought to assault an Enemy contrary to
his Generals command, though he be assured to overcome him: And that Ambassador
deserves severely to be chastised, who shall propose things contrary to those
which are commanded him; for the management of a Treaty is sometimes not a jot
less considerable to the good of a State, then the Conduct of a War. Those
spirits which are most acute and subtle, are most subject to slip into this
defect, because they are more wedded to their own opinions, and will ever be
refining of things more then need requires, esteeming more their own thoughts,
then all the orders which shall be given to them; and this is it which made
Thucydides say, Those Souls which are a little more steady, are propperer for
negotiations, then those which are so full of mettle and sprightfulness.

The difficulties which did arise in pursuance of the dispense for the Match
with England.
THE Dispensation was sent to the Nuntio, with express order not to deliver
it, until the King of England should engage himself by Oath, to observe those
Conditions which his Holiness had inserted, and until the King of France had
given it under his hand, that he would undertake and promise to see all the
Articles, to which the King of England should engage, to be fully accomplished.
The Nuntio gave notice of this order which the Pope had sent him to the King,
and his Majesty was not a little surprised at it, to find himself reduced to
the making of new conditions with the King of England, and to seek for a new
dispense from Rome, when some months had been passed over in the soliciting
for the former. Indeed it was so much the more troublesome, in respect, that
these obstructions might totally break it off, which might not only breed
quarrels between the two Crowns but diverse misfortunes upon the Catholics in
England. A Conference was at last had with the Nuntio, and it was there
represented to him, of how little importance these new Articles ^ere, in
comparison of the danger of a total breach to which it did expose things,
especially seeing that the Children were to be brought up by the Princess, that
is, by her Domestiques and servants, and by those of the Princess were to be
Catholics, which did tacitly imply; that the Children should be brought up by
Catholics. This was easy to be demonstrated, but the Nuntio being of an
impertinent nature in affairs, as also obliged to follow his Holinesses
Interests, beseeched the Ministers to find out some expedient to satisfy his
Holiness, without imbroyling the business with the King of England; promising
that he would write to him very effectually about the necessity that did
appear, for the taking away all obstructions and difficulties, which might
bring any delay to the marriage. In prosecution whereof, the Earls of Carlisle
and Holland were consulted with, and the King writ to his Majesty of England,
to desire him to condescend to those alterations which the Pope had made,
letting him see how frivolous they were.

The King of England did not receive the news without much wonder; but however
seeing it had been agreed, that the children who should be born of this match,
were to be educated by the Princess, until their respective ages of thirteen
years, and that her servants were to be Catholics, and to have all freedom
for the exercise of their Religion, he consented to all that was desired; as
that the Officers of those Children should be Catholic, and should have no
trouble in their Religion; accordingly he sent all manner of assurances to the
King, but not a word of swearing to it, which was enough without urging him to
take his oath for performance. The King gave all those assurances in writing
which his Holiness expected; the Princess also writ a Letter to the Pope,
wherein she promised upon her Parol, not to choose any Officers for those
Children which God should hestow upon her, but such as should be Catholics.
All Conditions being thus resolved on, it was verily believed, there could be
no further difficulties raised at Rome. There were two extraordinary Courtiers
dispatched one by Sea, the other by Land, to the Sieur de Bethune, with Orders
to procure the dispense to be amended withal expedition, and to beseech the
Pope in his Majesty's name, to dispatch it according to the Articles, which had
been newly agreed on, without exacting a new Oath. The Sieur de Bethune having
received one of these Dispatches acquitted himself of his duty with all kind of
Prudence, and did not forget to use his very utmost diligence to procure that
satisfaction for his Majesty; he spoke to the People with a great deal of
affection, by re-presenting to him those great blessings which heaven had
bestowed on the Church since his Majesty came to the Crown, and with what zeal
his Majesty had employed his Arms against the Heretics; all which ought to
make him be much esteemed by the holy Chair, in regard his demands could not be
refused without some kind of injustice, both in relation to the
acknowledgements which are due to him; as also, because his Actions gave great
assurance, that he would never omit any occasion, which might tend to the
advantage of the Church. He forgot not to represent to him, the dangers that
would ensue from a total breach, by the longer retardment of concluding the
marriage, and the severe usage that the Catholics in England would
consequentially lie under. That what his Holiness had thought fit to add to
the Articles already concluded on, was in a manner included in them already,
and that the chief executing of them would rest upon the discretion of those,
who should have the honor to be near the Princess; however, that his Master
the King, that he might testify the respect which he bore his Holiness, had
written to the King of Great Britain who had consented to it, excepting only
in the point of taking a new Oath, which he would no more press him upon, in
regard of that Oath which he had already made in respect of Religion, the
Princess and her servants, and the Liberties of the English Catholics; and
seeing that this new Oath was comprised too in some sort in the first Oath.
That there was sufficient provision made, both in relation to Religion and
Liberty of Conscience, for her Domestiques and Children, seeing they were to
remain mayn with the Princess, as well as the children; which being so, it
would of nenessity follow that there could be no trouble brought on them in
respect of their Religion. He told him likewise, that the King his Master being
bound to his Holiness, for the observation of those things which should be
agreed to by the King of Great Britain, was an assurance not less valid then
that of an heretic King. That his Majesty had commanded him to supplicate his
Holiness, with all earnestness, and not rest barely there, but to tell him that
his Holiness was the more obliged to grant him his request, seeing he begged
the confirmation of it rather out of respect then necessity, seeing that
several famous Doctors were of opinion, that Catholics in Heretics
Countries might freely contract Marriages, without any dispense.

These were the chief reasons, which the Sieur de Bethune represented to his
Holiness, and likewise to the Cardinals, who were deputed in the business of
the dispense. They soon apprehended the Justice and importance of them, and
testified a great readiness, to do that which was desired of them. The Pope
sent word to the Cardinals, that they should give a quick dispatch to the
business, that he desired to give the King all the satisfaction he could wish
for, both that he might acknowledge those great benefits which his Majesty had
procured to the Church, as also because he knew there could not any other thing
be desired from those of England. Accordingly they met together, and concluded
on it as the King desired, and dispatched it with a great deal of diligence to
the Nontio, that it might be delivered to the King, who as quickly gave
intelligence of it to the King of Great Britain.

Politic Observation.
IT is not ever expedient in a design to propose the utmost advantage, it being
sometimes necessary to leave a little to be hoped for from time. No Affair can
oblige to the making of Resolutions contrary to honor and justice; but several
things may intervene to obstruct the effecting of all that might conduce to the
good of a great Enterprise. He who does not take this truth, for a rule in his
Conduct, will be subject to commit great faults, and will in it Proclaim aloud
to the World, That he is ignorant of the many difference between Gods and Man's
Will; he doing whatsoever best pleases him, but the latter, is obliged to
necessities, and bound to proportionate his resolution according to the
Possibility of things. Thus though it be allowed such men, on whom the dispatch
of Affairs dispends, to raise up some scruples and difficulties, whereby to
enhance the price and esteem of the thing doing (it being usual with most men,
little to regard those Offices which are granted with ease) yet when it is once
evident, that the present time and conjuncture of Affairs, will not consist
with the longer denial of what is desired from them, they then ought to comply
and apply themselves to the effecting of it: For what refuse they shall
afterward make, will appear rather to proceed from a spirit of contradiction,
then that of Prudence.

The death of James King of Great Britain, and the Marriage between the Prince
of Walls his Son, and the Madam Henrietta Maria of France.
DUring the negotiation for the dispense, King James of Great Britain, fell
very sick at Theobalds, twelve miles distant from London. After he had passed
over three weeks with a Tertian Ague, which weakened him exceedingly much, he
caused the Prince of Walls his Son to come unto him, and discoursed to him with
a great deal of reason, and recommended to him those Officers, who had
faithfully served him. But especially his little grand children, the Infants of
the Electrix Palatine his daughter, encouraging him to make use of that power,
which he should leave him, for the re-establishing of them, in their Fathers
Dominions; and then finding himself declining into his Agony, he gave him his
blessing, wishing him a happy prosperous and successful enjoyment of those
Kingdoms, which he should shortly leave to him. About the end of March he died,
at which instant the Heralds (according to the custom of England) proclaymd the
Prince of Walls King of Great Britain, who presently took the ordering of all
affairs upon him.

He having a great desire to be married, the first thing he did was to dispatch
full power to the Duke de Chevreuse, to betroth and espouse the Princess in his
name. The King too desired to see an end of the business, so that upon the
first arrival of that power, the execution of it was no longer deferred. The
Betrothments were made in the Lovre on the eight of May, in the presence of the
King the Queens, all the Princes and great Lords of the Court, by the Cardinal
de la Rochfaucaud, who likewise celebrated the Marriage Ceremonies, on the
Sunday following, being the eleventh of May, in the Church of Nostre Dame, in
the quality of Great Almoner. I shall not need to relate with what magnificence
these things were done, only I shall say nothing was omitted. The Espousals
were made upon a Theater, raised for the purpose over the great door of the
Church. Then the Mass was said with great Ceremony, where the King and three
Queens were assistants. Though the Duke of Chevreuse and the Extraordinary
Ambassadors of England were not there, who after they had waited on his Majesty
to the door of the Quier, retired to the Archbishops Palace during the Mass,
as representing the King of Englands Person, who was of a different Religion;
but they went again to receive his Majesty at the same door, as soon as Mass
was ended, and to wayt on him to the Archbishops hall, where the King dined
with the Queens, his Mother, his Wife, and his Sister, the Duke of Chevreuse,
the Earls of Carlisle and Holland, the Ladies Dutchesses of Guise, Elboeuf,
and of Chevreuse, with the most magnificencies, that the best versed in Royal
Ceremonies, could invent. There were Bonfiers made all the while throughout
Paris, and the Cannons made such a noise, as if Heaven and Earth would have
come together.

The Duke of Buckingham is commanded by the King of Great Britain, to go over
into France, and to conduct the Queen his Wife over to him.
THese things thus past, the Duke of Buckingham (the King of Great Britains
favorite) was commanded to go into France, to desire the King, that the Queen
his Wife might set out from the Court as soon as might be, to come to him. He
arrived at Paris about the end of May, and during that little stay which he
made, he was entertained with all imaginable Magnificency. The King granted him
his demands, and the Queen of Great Britain departed about the beginning of
June. She was accompanied on the way by the Queen Mother, the Queen Regent,
Monsieur the Kings Brother, and almost all, who were considerable in the Court:
going thorough Amiens, she was received there with the same honor, as is do to
the King himself, he having so commanded it. In this place, she took her Leave
of the Queen Mother, but the Queen Regent accompanied her two leagues farther
on, and Monsieur the Kings Brother attended by most part of the Court,
conducted her to Boulongne, where she was embarked, in the greatst Ship of the
Ocean, which was richly prepared for her. The Winds were so favorable, that
the whole Fleet came safe to Dover without any let, where the Cannons Drums and
Trumpets, endeavored in emulation of one another, to testify their noise,
which should most welcome her, with there greatest mirth at her first entrance.
The King had caused a house to be built of Timber work upon the Rivers side,
where the Perfums and pleasant smells, might make her an exchange of those ill
sents of the Sea, into an air of Amber, Orange and Jessamy Flowers. The King of
Great Britain, whom she had sent to entreat, he would be pleased to stay until
the morrow before he saw her, by reason of the disorder she had been in upon
the Sea, came accordingly the day after to meet her, with all that was
Illustrious in his Court; and showed, That Love and Gallantry did equally
possess his Soul, by those respects and extraordinary inventions, to render her
first entrance pleasing to her. They dined together, and that night lay at
Canturbury, where the Marriage was consummated to the equal contentment, of the
two Crowns of France and England.

Politic Observation.
MAgnificence is one of the greatest virtues, which gives most luster to Kings,
who are no otherwise esteemed great, but by their abilities to do greater
things then others. That is it, which makes their names glorious amongst
Strangers, and likewise procures them more respect from their own subjects.
Philosophers say, actions ought to be proportionate to the quality of the
subject, which produces them; whence it comes to pass, that that of Kings
being the most eminent of al others, they should not do any but magnificent
things: and thus the Emperor Dioclesian said publicly. If this virtue be well
beseeming them they are not at any time more obliged to exercise it, then at
their own, or those of their Families marriage, for at such times most
especially it is, that strangers and their own subjects too, do resort in
greatest abundance to their Courts; which at other times they themselves are
but seldom seen; so that it cannot but be a thing of great concern, then to
give them impressions of an extraordinary respect, to the doing of which, no
doubt but the luster of noble and magnificent Actions, does very much
contribute: Withal, if expenses ought to be regulated by the occasions upon
which they are made, what more honorable and worthy subject can they be
bestowed on, then either their own, or the marriages of those of their Blood?
Besides, seeing Wealth is not given them by Heaven, but only to be honorably
employed, how much would any niggardliness be exploded and found fault with, on
such occasions as those are? would it not pass for an extreme meanness of
spirit? The goods of private men are their own, and for their own uses,
insomuch that they have full power to dispose of them as they please; but it is
not so with Kings, they are obliged to employ that which is lent them, toward
the acquiring a respect necessary for the impressing of that Reverence and
Honor into the Minds of the People, which is due unto them. Those great Costs
and Charges, which are laid out on frivolous matters, are as soon forgotten as
the whistling of the Wind, neither do they carry with them the reputation of
being magnificent; but it is not so when well used, and when they are expended
upon urgent occasions and great affairs. It is to imitate God (if done in
order) who has not only the power of working outward Miracles, but also of
doing them with weight, number, and measure.

It is most certain, Kings cannot in any thing more imitate the Divine Majesty
then in rendering themselves admired amongst men, by their magnificent Actions,
to which purpose a noble expense, does extraordinarily much conduce.

Intreagues of the English Ambassador with some Ladies of the Court,
discovered by the Cardinal.
THe great Delays which were used in the Court of Rome, in the procuring of the
dispense for the Marriage, forced the English Ambassador to a long stay in
France. Now whether it were for diversion, or to make any advantage by their
stay, they struck into acquaintance with certain Ladies, under pretense of
Gallantry; but indeed that they might dive into the particular Affairs of
France, and to get into the Power of such who were able to make Intreagues,
that they might do something as occasion should serve for their Masters
advantage. Their meetings were so frequent, that it gave a cause of suspicion;
especially to those who were not ignorant, that Women do neither want Craft or
Malice in their Souls, to raise Factions and foment them. There were many
entertainments made at the Court, to serve for a pretext to their interviews.
It was well known, that there had been diverse Essays made, to gain such persons
as were near to those Ladies, and had some share in their belief, and withal,
some small beginnings of discontent; insomuch, that the King was acquainted
with it, and concerned to redress it by removing some of those Ladies further
of, amongst others, the Dame de Vervet was one, and to foresee that, the
excess of their conservation might not produce other effects, then those of
Gallantries. But as they verily believed the Cardinal, to have been the
Promoter of his Majesty's resolution in that thing, so they conceived so great
a hatred against him, that they had much ado, to be induced to pardon him,
though he did not for his part much trouble himself at it, for that he only
acted for the service of his King, and the good of the State.

Politic Observation.
THough Women are evidently known by Wise men to be incapable of conducting any
great Affairs, yet they are sufficiently able to breed divisions, and broyls,
as also to disclose any secrets. Their Souls are naturally replenished all over
with deceit to ensnare, and that Love in which they are dexteriously skillful
to engage men, gives them so absolute an Empire over them, that there is hardly
any thing which they cannot discover, or persuade them to do, if once they make
it their business. That weakness of theirs which lays them open to be Preyed
upon, is the thing which gives them most Power over men's Souls; were they but a
little stronger to defend themselves from the contrivances of those who have
designs upon them; they would not have so great an influence in persuading most
men to what ever they desire. I could say it was for this reason that the enemy
of our Salvation, designing to involve us in sin, made his first addresses to
Eve, rather then upon the man, knowing she would easiliest contribute to the
effecting of his intended end, if he could but once make himself Master of her
Will. But without being beholding to examples of invisible Spirits; who knows
not that the Emperor Augustus, affected to make himself be beloved by several
of his enemies Wives, not that he might indulge his Senses, or delight himself
in Voluptuous Pleasures; but that he might fish out of them, any Resolutions
which were taken to his dis-advantage or Ruin? and Tacitus is the man from
whom we learn this excellent device.

Open War in the State of Genoa.
Whilst Love was filling England with Mirth, Mars was kindling a Fire of War
in Italy. The Duke of Savoys Army assisted by the French, being all well
provided, the General would no longer defer the advancing of his Troops into
the State of Genoa, the rather because the Spaniards were employed in other
places, and the Genoveses had but a few Forces to defend themselves. The Prince
of Piedmont was with the Duke his Father, and the Marshal de Crequy, with the
Constable his Father-in-law. The King, in Consideration of the Alliance between
Savoy and France, consented that the Duke should give the word, and that the
Marshal should likewise pay the same respect to the Prince of Piedmont. The
Order which they observed was thus, That the Constable should march with the
Avaunt guard, toward the Coast of Loppiata, and his Highness with the body of
the Army toward Cremolin. The Constable coming before Loppiata, the
Inhabitants made some small resistance, but they were soon forced, and their
Town Pillaged, to strike a terror into others: this induced those of Gua, a
City belonging to the Territories of Genoa, to send their Keys to the Duke, who
when he sent the Marquess of St. Reyran with his Regiment, to Quarter there,
found some resistance, for that Nicholas Doria in the mean time, had put in
some Forces there, to defend it; so the Duke commanded the Count of Veriie, to
march thither with certain Companies, which struck such a fright into Doria and
his Forces, that they presently lest the place, and Captain Martin Corseque,
delivered it at the first summons. The City of Novy which is very large, sent
at the same time, to the Constable to assure him they would open their Gates;
and accordingly he seized on it, and then turning toward Gavy, he defeated in
his march five Companies of Neopolitans, whom the Spaniards had sent to secure
the place, and shortly after the Duke of Savoy joined with him to encounter
with six thousand men part being of Colonel Gasees, some Modenois, and other
some Parmesans, who pretended to defend the Town. But they soon cut one party
of them in pieces near Ottage, in a fight which lasted near two hours, and then
falling upon four Squadrons of Horse, not far off the same place, they routed
them with such good success, that they took the Town and Castle of Ottage with
three and twenty Colors, killed above two hundred Neapolitans and Genoveses
upon the place, took above a thousand Prisoners, and amongst them the chief
Commanders. Upon this defeat, they concluded to make themselves Master of Gavy,
which was absolutely necessary for their marching up to Genoa. The Castle is
built on a Rock, and the Town well fortified; insomuch that many were of
opinion, it would be a hard task to take it, seeing too that Barbarossa in the
expedition which he made in the time of Francis the first, into the River of
Genoa, could not take it in. But the Constables courage, which was not used to
stoop under any Fear, did not forbear to make his approaches upon the Town. He
who commanded it, made a Sally, with about three hundred men, of which two
hundred were slain in the place, which so terrified those of the Town, that
they sent an assurance that they would open their Gates; provided they might be
protected from being Plundered and maintained in their ancient Privileges,
which was granted to them; and the Constable being got into the Town, began to
besiege the Castle. At the first, the Governor pretended a Resolution to
defend it, discharging several shot into the Town, believing that the Castle
could not be battered, and supposing there were not any points of Rocks, upon
which any Cannon could be mounted to command it; but the Constable soon let him
see that there was not any thing impossible to the courage of the French; for
in a few days he had raised a Battery upon certain Rocks, which did so awe him,
that he was forced to surrender upon Composition on the last of April. Some
Spanish Relations say, that the Governor was rather frighted with Pistol shot,
then forced by the Cannon to surrender; but their anger was at the Constable,
who had made himself Master of the place. After these happy exploits, the
Prince of Piedmont took ten thousand men of the Army, to go force the Passages
of the Mountain Griego, where the Genoveses were entrenched, and to make way
for the Siege of Savonne. He presently forced their Trenches, so that he had
full Liberty to march as far as Pleve a Town situated in the Mountains,
defended with a good Castle, and several small Forts, his courage made him
resolve to carry it by assault, after he had taken in those little Forts,
though it seemed capable of holding out a longer Siege, which was executed with
so much resolution and good success, that the place was won in an instant, the
besieged yielding themselves (as soon as they found the Gates and Walls were
already secured) upon condition of saving the lives of all such as should be
found without Arms. All which was done with no small resistance, for there were
at least two hundred killed and taken, together with seven Colors, which were
sent by the Prince, to the Princess of Piedmont, and afterward to the King,
together with those three and twenty others, which were taken at the defeat of
Ottage, and the Staffs of two Masters of the Camp, Caracciolo and Catanda, fent
by the Duke of Savoy, as the the fruits of those Victories, which his Majesty's
Armies had obtained, with a Letter in answer to that which was brought him, by
the Marquess de Saluce. The Prince of Piedmont having suffered his Army to
Pillage for about six and thirty hours in Pl^ve, he destroyed the Country
toward Albengua, the Magistrate of which place, sent to offer to him the
obedience of the Inhabitants; accordingly, he entered into the Town with some
few Troops, and from thence went toward Orvietta, which the Genoveses had
newly surprised, but he forced it in a few days time. After this once done, he
summoned the City of Ventimelia, the inhabitants made some show of resistance,
but the Prince being come within a League of it, they soon sent their desires
to be admitted to Composition. The Castle made some difficulty of surrendering,
but when the Governor had once seen a Battery raised on the points of the
Rocks, where five hundred Nissars had drawn the Cannon by the strength of their
Arms, he resolved to do as the Town had. Thus in the months of March, April,
and May, did the Armies of Savoy, overrun in the State of Genoa, all that did
resist them, and made themselves Masters, not only of the places by us named,
but of diverse others, to the number of one hundred seventy four, strong and
weak, so favorable is Fortune to those who undertake any thing with
extraordinary boldness and courage.

Politic Observation.
FOrtune, or to speak more properly, Divine Providence does commonly favor
those, who being truly generous do attempt any great enterprise. Not that God
works miracles, for the crowning them with success; but indeed, because
couragiousness gives them great advantages; especially, when it is accompanied
with Prudence, and that the Divine Providence cooperating with second Causes,
does assist their endeavors, Courage begets a certain hope which like a
Spur stirs up to great attempts, from which Fear had formerly diverted them;
courage alone is sufficient to strike terror into an enemy, who fighting more
by constraint then good will, do usually give ground, when once they find
themselves vigorously assaulted. Who knows not that it is courage which
persuades to invade and subject other Countries. Experience has often
evinced, that an invading Prince has a great advantage over him, who is only
intent how to defend himself; especially if he be Prudent in falling on him, in
a favorable conjuncture of time, as when his forces are diverted into other
employments, or worn out or unarmed. They who have most judiciously weighed the
Victories of Caesar, do much ascribe them to his native Generousness, which
carried him on to attempt any thing, without the least fear; insomuch that he
despised the un-relenting fury both of the Sea and Winds, which spare no man,
and commanded the Pylot who conducted him, not to fear, since he carried
Caesar's Fortune in his Boat. Never did his Soldiers show their backs, no
danger could affright him, well he knew death to be the end of life, but not
that it was a misfortune. He built his Glory upon Conquests, and the
difficulty of his enterprises re-doubled the Force of his Courage. Fortune was
always his friend, and he made it apparent, that nothing was impossible to a
man of Resolution.

The Prosecution of War in Italy.
FOrtune indeed did much add to the Courage of the Arms of France and Savoy,
for the obtaining such great Conquests in so little time, but much of the
honor must be ascribed unto the Cardinal, who first advised the expedition,
who issued out all Orders under the Kings Authority, who executed them in so
happy a conjuncture of time, that neither the Spaniards or Genoeses, could
possibly defend those places which were assaulted, by reason of their want of
Forces: And lastly, who had so good intelligence in the States of Genoa, that
he did not a little contribute to the good success of this design. Yet however
Fortune, or rather Divine Providence, which over-ruleth Armies, does but laugh
at man's Wisdom, and seems to delight in distributing both good and bad
success to their designs: Thus was it, with the French and Savoyards, for the
Scales seemed to turn against them, and their Conquests came to a Period. The
Fame of these great Victories did so trouble the house of Austria, that
extraordinary preparations were made in Germany, for the sending of a Potent
Army, under the command of Feria, Governor of Milan, for the assisting of the
Genoeses. The Marquess de St. Croix, was likewise commanded to put to Sea, a
Fleet designed for that purpose, who had embarked near four thousand Soldiers,
in twenty five Galleys, and five Gallions of Sicilia. These Forces of the Enemy
came with a great advantage, the Plague having consumed at least two thirds of
the French since their arrival in Italy. The Marshal de Crequy fell sick of it,
and not long after the Constable. Besides, diverse Cities of Genoa, seemed to
shake off the yoke of their Obedience, with joy and delight, they turned about,
and before the end of June, rise against their new Governors and Garrisons with
great violence, as if Fortune had purposely done it, to show that misfortunes
seldom come single. And lastly, the ill-management of the Artillery, and want
of Wagons for the Carriage of Provisions for the Army (of all which the Duke
of Savoy was in fault) occasioned more disasters then all the rest; besides the
jealousies which grew between him and the Constable, did not a little add to
complete them. Things being in this posture, did much encourage the Spaniards,
and the Duke de Feria, that he might not lose the advantage of it, entered into
Montferrat, about the beginning of July, where he took Spione by force, and not
long after Acqui, which the Constable had made his Magazine of Arms, and had
therein placed 3. Regiments to guard the munitions which he had there stowed up.
The taking of this place necessitated the Prince of Piedmont, and the Constable
to recall the Forces then marching toward Savonne, that they might jointly
fall on upon the Duke of Feria; but they found him encamped so advantagiously
at Ferzo between Bistague and Acqui, that they could not possibly come near
him, the Passages being so narrow, that only two men could march a Breast.

At the same time, the inhabitants of Albengua, Novy, and Acquy, revolted
against the French Garrisons; and shortly after, diverse other less places, and
six thousand Genoeses coming before Gavio, the Governor and his son, cowardly
surrendered the place, upon condition to be carried safely into France. The
Genoeses received them upon this Composition, and conducted them accordingly;
but being there arrived, their Treachery was not long unpunished by the
Parliament of Provence; Gonvernon the son being hanged, the Fathers body taken
up, burned, and his Ashes thrown into the Air (death having prevented the
execution of judgment upon him.) True it is, Courage does oftentimes compel
Fortune to be favorable, and the French Army, though thus persecuted, did yet
make head, against the Duke de Feria, and prevented his further progress, so
that he was forced to make some other diversion, by entering upon Piedmont, and
lying down before Ast, with design to besiege it. The Constable was yet there,
very weak, it being thought he would have died, so that he went off, and the
Marshal de Crequy, upon the thirtieth of August, came into his place with four
thousand French.

The same day he made a Sally, with the Prince of Carignan, forced the enemy
from a Bridge, which they had kept six days, and made them run away with
shame, though they had eighteen thousand foot, and seven hundred horse. Was not
this a generous exploit of the French, and did it not sufficiently testify,
that had they been near enough to have had recruits and ammunitions from
France, or had the Duke of Savoy caused those refreshments to have been brought
for the Army which by the Articles of the Treaty he was obliged, they had not
so easily lost, what they had so happily obtained. But they were induced to
under go those disasters which are incident to all men, who invade a Foreign
Country upon the hopes of a League.

Politic Observation.
ALthough those Wars, which are begun by Princes leagued together, have
oftentimes happy beginnings; yet it seldom comes to pass, that they do end in
a good success. There need no other proof then that of the Wars, which our
Kings have made in Italy, for six score years last past. But that we may not
dwell upon examples, is not that Prince who trusts in the promise of his
Confederates, like the man who exposes all his Goods upon the Sea in a leaky
Vessel? Experience has showed us in a thousand incounters, that Princes have
so many overtures made, by which one may win upon them, and withdraw them from
Leagues, that it is almost impossible to have any absolute assurance of them.
One of the chiefest ties which holds them fast, is to have in possession some
strong place, for a gage of their Fidelity; but there are few who will thus
dispossess themselves; doubting least he, into whose hands it be entrusted,
will retain it for good and all, by saying or persuading them that they have
been defective in their word, in some one thing or other; as Charles the eighth
did, after he had received the Florentine Towns in deposit. It is likewise
dubious, lest the several Troops or diverse Princes in an Army together, should
grow jealous of one another, and then the least distrust or broyls which might
arise between them, were enough to withdraw him, who imagines himself
offended; and if there were nothing else, there need no more but this to draw
off Confederates from a League, barely to satisfy them in their particular
Interests; for seeing that is it, which is the only end and aim of all
Princes, they will no longer hold together, then it may be for their
advantage. There do oftentimes too happen very great inconveniences;
especially, when their united Forces are to march into far distant places, they
who border upon those Countries which are to be assaulted, take no care to
refresh themselves, either by new troops or necessary provisions for the War,
for that those who inhabit further off, not being easily able to provide for
this defect, fall into ruin of themselves, or else their enemies quickly put
them to flight. Many united Princes are never comparable to one alone, nor ever
capable of encompassing such great enterprises, as a single Prince with his own
Subjects, though much inferior to them in point of numbers.

The Hugonots by the Spaniards Instigation, Arm themselves very potently
against the King.
Whilst Italy served as a Theater for the acting of several Warlike exployts,
the Hugonots inspired not only with that mutinous humor, which is common to
them, but also incited by the contrivances of Spain, used their utmost
endeavors to divert the Kings Army, as also to fortify and strengthen
themselves both in Languedoc, and Poictou. The Duke of Rohan, and the Sieur de
Soubize, were the chief of the Revolt, the former took the Command upon himself
of those Forces in Languedoc, the latter those in Poictou. Now though the Sieur
de Soubize, had been repulsed from before the Port of Blavet, yet he got no
small advantage by it; for by that means he made himself Master of six great
Ships which were the Kings, and the Duke of Nemoure, which gave him opportunity
of doing very considerable damages. He had formerly got together, about eleven
Ships of War, all very good, and a greater number of Shallops, and small Boats
which being assisted with these, he had the ambition to hope he might become
Master of the Ocean: In conclusion, he roved up and down upon the Coasts of
Poictou and Guien, and committed such savage Cruelties, that more the Turks
could not possibly have done, and to secure himself of a near and safe retreat,
he seized on the Islands of Ree and Oleron, where he hastened on with the Forts
which those of his party had began to build: Withal, finding the Duke of
Espernon, drawn off toward Montauban, whither he was gone to ransack as shall
be anon declared; he assembled together a Fleet of about seventy four Sails, of
all Sizes, and entering into the Girond toward Bourdeaux, they landed about mid
June, three thousand men in Medoc, and seized on the Castle, a small place
situated on the Rivers side, where he entrenched himself; and so overrunning
the Plains, where the Burdelois have several houses of Pleasure, he Pillaged
them, and committed all other imaginable outrages. But he soon found the Sieur
de Thoyras in Front of him, to whom the Cardinal had given Orders from the King
to fall upon them, in case they should make any incursions thereabouts, who
presently went to find them out with his Troop of light horse, and thirteen
others of the Regiment of Campaign, one Company of the Garrison of Bergerac,
commanded by the Sieur de Plessis, sent by the Duke of Espernon, and some few
others, who had been raised thereabouts for the same purpose. Now the Sieur de
Thoyras finding himself backed with these Troops, fell upon him so resolutely,
that he forced him to give ground, and to weigh their Anchors, and fly toward
Rochel, leaving good store of Arms, Cannon, Ammunition, and their Baggage in
their Trenches behind them. This Rebuke was so sensible to him, that he was
possessed with an extreme desire to be revenged for it; so that seeing the
Sieur de Thoyras retire, he let go some of his Ships, and sent them under the
Conduct of Verger Malagn^t, to make a second attempt on Medoc; who accordingly
landed about the Point of Ambes, and committed great Devastations about the
plain Country. But the Cardinal had caused Order to be given to the Country
people, to be always in a readiness, against any who should attempt upon
their goods, who compelled them presently to re-imbark, and join with the
others under the Sieur de So^bize; by both which it was apparent, that there
was no accident, which the Cardinal did not foresee, and apply a remedy to
before they did appear.

Politic observation.
A Grand Minister is obliged, incessantly to watch after the necessities of the
State, for prevention of any enterprises which may be made, it will escape him
very narrowly, if (taking an especial care to be informed of all Passages in
the Provinces) he be not acquainted withal the Combinations and Contrivances
which are on foot, as also the preparations which are in agitation for a
Revolt, it being impossible that those several Artifices, which are used for
the gaining in of diverse and many men, and the most secret preparations of War
should be concealed from him; which once coming to his knowledge, he ought in
a trice to dispatch forces to that very place, where the Insurrection is
designed to be. The only sight of them may perhaps break the neck of the whole
design; and if not so, yet they will at least prevent the enemies Troops to
join together, and will cut them in pieces one by one, before they will be in a
capacity of attempting any thing whatever. Without th^s diligence he will soon
find the State, and his own reputation exposed as a Prey. An Eye watching over
a Scepter, and the Lion King of Beasts, who sleeps not but with oyen eyes,
were the Hieroglyphics, which the Egyptians made use of, to express
foresight, and to teach Grandees that it ough^ to be inseparable from their
Authority, if they would not have their people exposed to great misfortunes
both by Domestic and Foreign Wars. The Sun which governs the Elementary World
in the highest Heavens, goes every day from one end of them to another, that
he may make all here below, sensible of the Effects of his Influences; and
that Minister who has a State in charge, ought to employ all his cares, all
his mind upon every City, upon every Province, and indeed upon the singular
houses of every great man, that he may know what is done there, and apply a
remedy to their contrivances. Me thinks they of Syracuse, gave a notable
example of this kind of Conduct, when they had received intelligence, that the
Athenians would war upon them, and that they already were upon the Sea with a
Puissant Fleet, making toward the Coast of Sicily. Hermocrat^s a great
Statesman, was not backward in exhorting them, to give necessary Orders for
their defense, and to press the Senate accordingly: Whereas Athenagoras on the
other side, descried it as much, and showed them sundry reasons, why the
Athenians could not arrive to the end of their design and demonstrated to them
that it was impossible, endeavoring to dissuade them from making any
preparation of War. But the Senators, somewhat wiser then himself followed
Hermocrates his advice and resolved to give necessary Orders for defense, that
they might not afterward be forced to do it in a huddle, or to continue in the
danger. They began to discuss the business, that in case the news of the
Athenians Fleet were true, it would then be needful to make some preparations;
if it were false, those preprrations would no whit dis-advantage the City: And
that last of all, it is better to suspect then to slight dangers, but not to
show the least Fear, by doing any Action unbecomming a Generous Courage.

The Duke of Rohans Attempts in Languedoc, with the Process in the Parliament
of Toulouse, against him, and all his Adherents.
ABout the same time in the end of April, the Duke of Rohan, having contrived
several Cabals in the Hugonot Towns of Languedoc, began the War, and got
together about two thousand men, near Castres the chief place of his Retreat,
and where he had a full Power, by means of those Consuls whom he had procured
to be elected. He gave out, that the Rocheloiis had taken Arms, and sworn a
League with the Churches of his party, that he might by this pretense get a
like Interest in some other Towns, which he had an eye upon; and accordingly,
he went to Puilaurens, Ruel, Soreze, St. Paul's Leviate, and Briteste, and made
the Consuls swear to the Confederacy, afterward came before the Gates of
Lavaur to surprise it, but his design took no effect.

The Cardinal having sent out Orders from the King, to the Governors of the
Provinces, to fall upon him, as soon as ever he should appear in the Field. The
Count of Carmain Governor of Foix, was presently upon his skirts, and impeded
not only the Progress of his Rebellion; but also, getting into Ruelle and
Soreze, after the other had forsaken them, he so dealt with the Consuls, that
they confessed their fault, and protested not to take part with him any more.
And as the Authority of Parliaments on such occasions, ought to uphold the
Courages and Fidelities of those who Conduct the Kings Armies; so that of
Toulouse, was not wanting to command the Soldiers who were assembled with the
Duke of Rohan to separate themselves, and to give Orders to the Nobility and
Commonalty to fall upon them, to forbear all sort of Commerce with those of
Castres, and to translate the Royal and Ecclesiastique jurisdictions, and the
Receipt of the Kings Moneys unto the Town of Lautrec, with command to all the
Judges and Officers to come thither, as well to prevent the Kings moneys from
falling into their hands, as also to preserve Justice in its Integrity, and to
diminish the Force and Power of that Rebellious City. The same Parliament too,
granted an Arrest for the seizure of all the Goods, any ways belonging to
those who were revolted, both to punish them, and deter others who were ready
to follow them. The Half divided Chamber of Beziers, half Hugonots, and half
Papists, did as much, and declared (according to the Kings Edict, of the 25th.
of January the same year) the said Duke to be guilty of Laesa Majestatis, to
be a troubler of the Public Peace, as also all his Abbettors and Adherents,
and Prohibited both Cities and particular persons, to hold any communication
with him, and injoyning all his Majesty's Subjects, to fall upon any Troops
that should injure them, to cut them in pieces, and to pull down the Houses and
Castles of such Noble men as were of that Faction.

But the Order which the Cardinal persuaded his Majesty to send was more
powerful then all those others; for the preventing the further progress of
this Rebellion seeing it was accompanied with an extraordinary diligence. The
King sent a Commission to the Marshal de Themines, whom his Majesty sent to
those places, to observe what passed, to raise such Troops as were already in
the Province, and to advance such others as might form the Body of an Army,
which might cut off the growth of this Rebellion in its Cradle. The Marshal had
the Marquess de Ragny, and the Count de Carmain for Marshals of the Field, and
that no longer time might be lost, he soon after came to the place, where he
had designed the Rendezvous for the whole Army, and upon his way forced the
Castles of Blauc and Dovac, which served for Retreits to those who were
revolted. After the Companies were assembled together, and a review taken of
the whole Army, he made his Forces before Castres to Plunder the Country. The
Sieur de Ferrieres who commanded the Rebels horse, made a Salley upon the
Marshal, as soon as he came within view of the Town, but they were forced to
turn back again with more have then he came out, and not only so, but himself
and three or four more of his own party, were lest wounded upon the place. The
Pioneers and Plunderers played their parts under the Protection of the Army,
which countenanced them in it; and notwithstanding the many shot and
skirmishes, in which many were hurt and slain, both of one side and the other,
they did their work so exactly, that there was not a Tree, Vine, or Stalk of
Corn standing any where near the City. In this interim, the Duke of Rohan
attempted to become Master of Sommieres, and led up his Army to it, and coming
thither just upon day breaking, he approached it by one of the Gates, which
being soon thrown down, made way for his entrance; but thinking to surprise the
Castle too, Masillac the Governor of it, repelled all his Attempts with such
Courage, that having received the succors of ten thousand foot, which the
Sieur de Valensay had sent to him from Montpellier, the Duke was forced to
retire to Anduze, where he was not well received. After this, the Marshal de
Themines went without more ado to besiege St. Paul and Miatte, which lie upon
the River Langoust between Castres and Lavaur; when he had Quartered his Army
before St. Paul, he forced it in few days, and rifled diverse of the
Inhabitants that were got into Miatte; but they had small hopes of any comfort,
so they sent to the Marshal to desire Articles, which being granted, he entered
and took possession of the Town.

But all this was nothing worth, if he did not attempt to fight the Duke of
Rohan, and cut off his Forces, so he resolved to follow him, and over-taking
him at Vianes in Albigeois, he set the Army into Battalia to fight him. The
Duke was Quartrred in Vianes, and about two thousand of his Foot were at
Peyresequade, which is at the Foot of the Mountains whereon Vianes is
situated. The Count de Carmain went to view them, and having reported to the
Marshal the Condition in which he found them, it was resolved to fight them.
The Marshal with his Sword in his hand marched in the Head of the Army. The
Marquess de Cragny and the Count of Carmain, took their Stations one upon his
right, the other upon his left hand, and at the same instant, the whole Army
courageously advanced toward the Enemy, with so much Resolution, that nothing
more could have been wished, but only that they had made a little more
resistance, for that there was not one single man of them saved; for whilst
those who made the first encounter were at it, the rest got into Vianes, who
were however so closely pursued by the Marshals forces, that the Regiment of
Normandy was hard at their heels, entering into the Town with them. Thus he
remained Master of Peyresequade, where there were about one hundred and fifty
of the Rebels Soldiers killed and hurt, all which the Duke of Rohan beheld
from a Fort in Vianes where he then was, from which time forwards he began to
despair of doing any great matters for the future, especially since he saw
himself so closely followed, and that the Cardinal had taken such a course in
Languedoc, that the King could have raised more men in twenty four hours, then
the Duke in a whole month.

Politic Observation.
HE who revolteth against a great King, seeks his own ruin. He cannot hope
for Glory from his enterprise, seeing he is neither accompanied with Prudence
nor Justice, and he cannot expect any profit by it; for besides that, the
weakness or indeed impossibility, unto which he is reduced by the quality of a
subject, he forces as it were his Sovereign to punish his Rebellion, by making
him lose both his Life and Estate. Mahomet Prince of the Turks, had all Rebels
in such detestation, that he cut off two Falcon's heads for having stooped at
an Eagle, the King of Birds, that he might by this teach his Subjects, who
durst have the rashness, to follow that example, that they must expect the
like punishment; for both Prudence and Justice oblige a Prince to chastise
those, who shall take up Arms against his authority. Some Grandees puff up
themselves, with the Greatness of Alexander: who with a few Forces which he
drew out of Macedon, overthrew the Power of Persia; as also with that of the
Romans, who from being at first Masters but of one City, became Lords of the
whole World: But they ought to know, that neither the one or the other of them,
were presently set upon by any great Prince, but extended their Power by little
and little, ever proportionating their Attempss to their Forces. It is true,
Fortune and their own Courages did not a little contribute to their successes;
but seeing Christianity teaches us, that this same Fortune is not any thing
else but divine Providence, with what reason can he who revolts against his own
King, hope for favor from heaven, whilst he does act against the Laws, and
indeavoureth to subvert that order which this Divine Providence has
established in all Kingdoms.

The Spoil made about Mountauban by the Duke d'Espernon.
THE Duke of Espernon was neither wanting in the Testimonies of a good Conduct
or success in the Pillaging of Mountauban. According to the Orders which he
had received, he made his Approaches near it about the beginning of June though
there were good store of Soldiers clapped into the Town, for defense of it,
this being next to Rochel the greatest prop of the Revolted Party. His design
could not be brought to any good effect until after several skirmishes, and
sustaining diverse Sallies out of the Town. That of the fifteenth of June gave
them some advantage over him, for they then killed ten of his, and carried with
them as many Prisoners, amongst whom were the Sieurs of Miraude, and de St.
Omer; but they were soundly paid with Interest too in those following
conflicts; especially in that of the twenty seventh of the same month, when
they left about two hundred dead, besides wounded on the place, and about forty
prisoners; shortly after the Duke caused a fair Meadow to be mowed about a
quarter of a League from the Town, to draw out the Rebels, but they had not the
Courage to make any more Sallies as as yet. But understanding that the Duke had
laid up good store of Corn about a League off, they contrived to surprise it,
by the help of a dark night, hoping that it would fall out for their advantage.
Now some Scouts of the Dukes about the Town, having perceived what passed, gave
intelligence of their being gone out, so they were quickly snapt: The Fight
indeed was hot, but at last la Roche who commanded them, being hurt with three
Carabine shot, and taken Prisoner too, they presently fled, and left about one
hundred dead and wounded on the place. Insomuch that not being able to Reap any
Wheat or Hay thereabouts (so exactly had every thing been Pillaged) that at
last they began to be in very great necessities.

Politic Observation.
AMongst the several ways to reduce a Rebellious Town under Obedience, the
devastation of al fruits which are upon the earth near thereabouts, is one of
the best and most absolute. The Losses which the Rich receive by it, will
engage them to master the Commonalty, and to repel Mutineers by force, and to
bring them under the obedience which they owe to their Sovereign. There are but
a few who can resolve to lose their Goods, to satisfy the rage of an unbridled
People. Commonly none but they who are like to get by it, do follow any
Revolter. Man is naturally so careful of his own Estate and Goods, that there
is hardly any thing which he will prefer before them. But if Devastation be
not able to reduce Revolted Towns into their Obedience, without using other
force of Arms, who knows not that by a close besieging of them too, they will
come to find themselves so destitute of Victuals, that it will be impossible
for them any long time to hold out? And thus one need not doubt, but that it
will in fine bring them down unto their Obedience, either by Force or for their
own Interest. As for Rules to be observed in Forraging there are not any; only
to destroy all the Fruits thereabouts, to Reap if possible all the Wheat, else
to burn it; to make the Grapes into Wine, or else to cut up the Stocks, as also
all other Trees that bear Fruit, or from which they may make any advantage. It
should be done as near the Walls as possible might be, to take away all
conveniences from them; and whilst that the Pioneers are at Work, the Army
ought to be at hand to defend and shelter them, but in such places where the
Cannon shot may not reach them.

A Victory Obtained by the Duke of Montmorency against the Hugonot^.
THese Victories which the King got against the Revolted, were not
inconsiderable, but that which the Duke of Montmorency got, assisted by the
Sieurs de St. Luc, de la Roche Foucaud, and de Thoyras, was much beyond them
all. The Marshal de Preslin, had been the most part of the year in the Country
of Aunis, and the Sieur de Thoyras had been in Fort Lewis before the Gates of
Rochel, both to pillage round about that Rebellious Town, whereby to reduce
them to such want, that they might not long hold out, as also to prevent their
making of any attempts thereabout.

The Sieur de Soubize finding little assurance on the main land, had fortified
himself in the Isles of Ree and Oleron, it was the more important to remove him
thence; because else it would be impossible to reduce Rochel into its
obedience, so easily and abundantly might he recruit them with necessaries from
those fertile Islands. But to give a good success to the business, there was
need of a Fleet: To which end his Majesty got together good store of ships, of
which one twenty were lent him by the Hol^anders, according to the Treaty which
had been concluded with them the foregoing year. His Majesty committed the
Government of it to the Duke of Montmerency Admiral of France, with order to
fight the Sieur de Soubize, and to cause the Sieurs de St. Luc, de la
Roche-Foucaud, and de Thoyras, to pass over with some part of their Forces,
into the Isle of Ree, to drive out those Rebels, who were in Garrison in the
Forts there, and to fortify themselves. The Sieur de Soubize who had then
great and small only thirty nine Vessels, would not expect the coming of the
Admiral Montmorency to the Kings Ships, though he had procured a promise from
the Sieur Hautyn the Hollanders Admiral, under favor of the conformity of
their Religion, and had likewise passed his own Parole, that neither part
should attempt any thing until the Treaty of Peace, which was agitating at
Court, were either absolutely concluded or broken off; which he did not
faithfully perform on his part; for taking advantage of his promise given, he
took occasion to come upon him unprovided, and on the nineteenth of July he put
forth to Sea, and having the Wind and Sea favorable, in half an hour he came
up to the Hollanders Ships, and sent two Fire-boats chained together full of
Artificial Fireworks, to fall on the Admiral, whom they burned quite down in a
very little while, not giving liberty for to save any but such as could swim,
so that above a hundred were drowned in it.

This Action full both of Insolency and breach of Faith, engaged the Kings Navy
to pursue them four hours together. The Air did ring again with the Cannon
shot, which sunk some of their Vessels, and killed diverse of their men: But the
season was so favorable to him, that he got into St. Martin de Ree, and to
Chef de Bay. The Duke of Montmorancy after the first news of the Encounter, was
ordered to speed away, and to give them Battle. He was received with a great
deal of joy by the whole Fleet, who were very impatient to be revenged on
Soubize, for the affront he had put upon them. The Duke put forth to Sea, the
Sieurs de Saint Luc, de Roche-Foucaud, and de Thoyras made themselves ready to
go on shore, under the favor of the Admirals Arrival. And on Sunday the
fourteenth of September about eleven at night, the Duke having given the sign
for falling on, they went to Attaque Soubize's Fleet, which lay at Anchor in
Loys Channel, under the Island of Re. Upon the first approach near the enemies
Vessels, there were so many Cannon shot discharged on them, that they were
forced to retire to the further end of the Channel, and the Sea falling off,
they all stuck on the Shelf. The Duke finding them in this Condition, made his
Ships advance to shelter the landing of the Sieurs de St. Luc, de la
Roche-Foucaude, and de Thoyras, amid'st the smoke of the Powder, which hindered
the Rebels from discovering it. There were also ten other Ships sent out, who
were to go to the Road of Chef de Bay, to take order, that the Rochelois might
send no new Troops to the Isle of Re, who forced back into the Port the Count
de Laval, who was going out upon that design. The Kings Army being landed, the
Enemy quickly perceived it, and as soon came to receive them, and used their
utmost to repel them. The Combat lasted three days outright, with a great
deal of obstinacy on both parts, the Rebels defending themselves in every
place, that was never so little tenable, but it ended to the great advantage of
the Kings Army, which must be ascribed to the Valor and Conduct of those who
commanded it; for that they presently made themselves Masters of the Isle of
Re, cutting some part of the Enemy in pieces, taking other some Prisoners, and
letting the rest escape into their Ships. The Sieur de Soubize was one of
those, who escaped into Oleron, such care he had, that he might not be taken,
that he never came into the Fight at all. They who had got clear into their
Ships, would have tried one bout more to have had their revenge, the wind being
fair for them: But the Duke kept the Army in a readiness to fight, gave the
signal and fell upon them; the Seamen were so dexterous, that they got the wind
of them in less then two hours, there were above two thousand shot made; and
though the night came on, yet the Fight ended not; for the Duke perceiving nine
of the greatest Ships retiring toward Rochel, pursued them with such good
success, that he came up with them about day break, and two others of their
biggest Ships, were not able to get off, for want of water, and so stuck on
ground, but long they did not so continue before they were taken. It is true,
those of the Army who were got upon the Orelop, and having killed all they met
with, the Soldiers who were in the Hold, set fire to the Powder, and blew up
all above with such force, that the Splinters of it were carried a quarter of a
League off, three of the Kings Ships were burned with it, and above three
hundred men lost, amongst which were the Count of Vauvert, the Sieur de Ville
Neufeu, and Veilon a Captain of Holland. This accident did much take off from
the content of the Victory, yet it cannot be denied but that it was glorious
enough for the happiness of France, in reducing the Rebels to that pass, that
they could not any more make any attempts by Sea. Thus the rest of their
Vessels which were of no great consequence retired, some to Rochel, and some
into other places, according as the Wind did drive them, but never durst
afterward appear any more. These things thus ended, the Duke of Montmorancy,
landed at Oleron, where he met with no resistance, the Sieur de Soubize having
withdrawn himself into England, so that the whole Province was settled in quiet
both by Sea and Land, of all which his Majesty was very certainly informed, who
received the news with much joy.

Politic Observation.
WHatever joys or delights Fortune insinuates into those who revolt, yet it is
usually seen, that all their designs end in ill success. Experience has made
it often manifest, that such Crimes seldom go unpunished, and that Heaven has
used to sacrifice them to example. They cannot more properly be likened to any
thing, then to those high Mountains, the points of whose Rocks seem to hreaten
Heaven, and which sending forth store of Clouds out of their Bosoms, seem to
obscure the light of the Sun, though at last they are all dissipated by that
fair Planet of the day, who making those very same Clouds into Thunderbolts,
causes them to fall down upon them for to chastise their Insolency: And is it
not the same thing with Grandees who revolt and Rebel? After they have made
some attempts upon the Authority of their Sovereign, are they not in fine
ruined and brought into extremities by the Power of his Arms, who takes
occasion to crush them to pieces with that Power, which they would have usurped
themselves, and did not of right belong unto them? History abounds with
exemplary Proofs of this Truth, the many that are, would spoil the design of
quoting two or three only. But for the greater illustration of it, I shall say
thus much, the injustice of a Cause, is almost an infallible sign of an ill
success, seeing Heaven does commonly confound what Man has wickedly built: If
at any time they shall become so powerful, as to secure themselves from the
hazards of Battles, yet they can never obtain a remission from Heaven. They who
attempt to grow great by unjust means, will in fine meet their utter ruin. God
does peradventure suffer them for the punishment of States, to obtain
advantages for some time; but at last, the violences which they Act fall upon
themselves, and they become a just subject for their Sovereigns Revenge.

The Arrival of Cardinal Barbirini in France, as Legate from the Holy Chair,
for the Affairs of the Valtoline.
Whilst the Fire of this Civil War was burning up of Languedoc. The Cardinal
Barbarini Legate from the Pope, arrived in France and came to Marseille, where
he was received with great honor, as also at Lion, according to the Orders
sent by the King. He came to Paris the one and twentieth of May, and his
Majesty caused his entrance to be made with the most Pomp that has been seen
for a person of his condition. I shall not need insist on the relating that he
is bound by the Laws of the Kingdom, before he Officiate the Function of a
Legate to present the Brief, which the Pope has given him for the employment
to the Parliament of Paris, which is a Custom so ancient, that I shall omit
speaking any more of it; but I shall observe that the Pope having ommitted in
the Brief, to give the King the Title of King of Navar, which could not be
denied to him without Injustice, the Parliament refused to acknowledge it, and
obliged him not to make any further procedure in the business until it were
amended. The Legate coming to Paris, alighted at St. James de Haut-pas, where
the Clergy of the City, the concourse of the Court, and other Officers to the
number of twelve thousand went to salute him and receive his Benediction. After
this, the Prelates of Paris came to do their respects to him; there was a
little dispute in what habit they should appear before him, the Legate desiring
they should be in their Rockets and Camail covered over with a Mantlet, as a
mark that they had no power in his presence; but the Prelates not being able to
stoop to this Order, by reason it was contrary to the Rules of the French
Church, it was concluded in the middle way between both, to give some
satisfaction to the Legate, that they should go so habited to salute him, and
that they should accordingly accompany him in the Cavalcade to Nostre-Dame,
where being come, they were to take off their Mantlets, but all was done under
a Proviso of saving their ancient right. The King sent the Duke of Nemours, the
Sieur de Bonnevil, the Introductor of Ambassadors, and several other Lords of
great quality, to receive him at his first arrival.

At night Monsieur the Kings Brother, waited on him with a great number of
Lords, and saluted him with extraordinary respects, and one his entrance
accompanying him, gave him the right hand. The same day he had Audience from
the King, where nothing passed only Complements; but the next day he proposed
what the Pope had given him in charge, he exhorted the King in general terms
to Peace, he urged his Majesty to restore things in the Valtoline to their
former State, as they were before the Army of the confederated Princes entered
into it, and beseeched him to grant a Cessation of Arms in Italy. His Majesty
answered to these three Propositions, that he was ever inclined to Peace, and
that he would still be induced to it; provided it were for the Public safety,
and honorable for him and his Allies. That as to what concerned the Valtoline,
the Treaty of Madrid made but a few years before, had made provision for all
those difficulties, which have risen ever since, and that he desired the
execution of it, as to the Cessation of Arms, that he could by no means hearken
to it, by reason of the prejudice it would be to himself and his Allies and
the great advantage those of the adverse Party might make out of it. This was
the sum of what passed on both sides. The King adding in conclusion, that he
would send some one of his Council, to wait on him, and try if there might be
found out any way of accommodation.

Within a few days the Cardinal, the Marshal de Schomberg, the Sieur de
Herbant* Secretary of State, went to wait on the Legate from the King* and upon
a conference he came to these two points: The first was, to demand the
cessation of Arms in Italy; and the the other concerned the giving his Holiness
satisfaction, pressing that the places in the Valtoline might be delivered into
the Popes hands, and that the King should make some excuses to him for the
proceedings of the Marquis de Coeures.

M^nsi^ur the Cardinal answered, that the King had declared openly enough in
his audience his intensions concerning the cessation of Arms in Italy, and that
if he should submit to it, it would be a means of giving his enemies time and
leisure to gather their forces together, and to fortify themselves against his
Majesty and his Allies: That the Peace would as easily be concluded on as the
War, if either party would but hearken to Reason, seeing the principal
difficulties of State had been concluded in the Treaty of Madrid. That there
need nothing but some provision to be made in point of Religion, to which his
Majesty was much inclined: That as to what he desired satisfaction in to his
Holiness, his answer was, his Majesty never having consented to the deposit in
his Holiness hands any longer then the time limited, in which he ought to have
caused the Treaty of Madrid to have been executed, his Holiness had not any
reason to complain* and especially too considering the several declarations
which had been made by the Sieur de Bethun in his Majesty's name, That the King
could not any longer suffer the Grisons to be dispossessed of those Forts which
did belong unto them; Declarations which his Holiness himself thought to be
reasonable, for that he had upon them sent for the Spaniards to chide them for
it: Besides the respect which the Marquis de Coeures showed to his Holynesse's
Arms and Ensigns in the eye of the whole world, did defend him from any blame
which might be laid to his charge, for having been defective in giving due
honor to the holy Chair. But that notwithstanding all these things his Majesty
did bear so great a reverence to his Holiness, that he would cause his
Ambassador, to say all those words of respect and civility which should be
thought fit; as also that after the peace should be concluded, his Majesty
would consent to deliver up into his Holyness's hands, the Fort of Chi^nuennes,
provided that the Spaniards would at the same time do the like by that of Rive,
to the intent both of them might be demolished, which once done, he would
deliver all the rest up, one after another, until they were every one razed,
and that this was the most could be hoped for.

The Legate had other audiences, and other conferences past between him and the
Ministers, where nothing more was proposed nor answered: But the King being at
Fountainbleau, the Legate made a third proposition, which concerned the
security of the Catholic Religion in the Val^oline, requiring for that
purpose that the Sovereignty of the Grisons over the Valtolines should be
moderated, without which he supposed there could be no settlement. His Majesty
clearly declared unto him, that the Interests of State and Religion were not to
be mingled, and that he would never grant any thing that might impair the
Sovereignty of the Grisons, his Allies, over the Valtoline.

A while after he caused a conference to be had betwixt him, and the Ministers
upon that subject, where having made the same proposition, the Cardinal delated
hmself upon the reasons of the Kings answer, and told the Legate, that his
Majesty having taken the protection of the Grisons, he could not consent to the
diminition of their Sovereignty, especially since it had been conferred unto
them by the Treaty of Madrid, since which time nothing had been altered in
point of Religion: That the Treaty was to be observed, and that his Majesty
could not depart from it without staining his Honor and Reputation; offering
notwithstanding his authority to give all sort of security and freedom to the
Catholic Religion. The Legate then declared the Pope was Head of the Church,
and could not suffer that the Valtolines should he reduced under the dominion
of the Grisons, and that his Holiness having consulted with some of the Clergy
at Rome, they had told him, that in conscience he could not consent thereunto.

The Cardinal was not wanting to tell him, that the divine Laws did oblige the
Redelivery of that which did justly belong to a Sovereign, of what Religion
soever he be; so there could be no scruple of conscience for the restoring of
the Valtolines to the Grisons, their lawful Masters, and that in effect the
Treaty of Madrid, by which it was granted to them, had been approved of at Rome
by the Pope, as also the said Treaty had not been resolved on, but after a
consultation with the Clergy, who found no difficulty in the thing, and that
the truth being still the same, his Holiness had not any reason to be
scrupulous of it at this present.

This the Cardinal spoke so smartly, that the Legate perceived that there was no
more to be expected in that particular; so that from that time forward they
were finding out new ways for the security of Religion; yet still declaring,
he would not recede from his first Proposals, but under the Pope and holy See's
censure. He proposed several Articles upon that score, to which the King
assented; That leaving the Sovereignty to the Grisons which lawfully belonged
to them, there should be such provision made for the safety of the Catholics
in the Valtoline, that the Grisons should give them full liberty for the
exercise of their Religion; that they should not send any Governors amongst
them, but such as were Roman Catholics; that all degrees both Secular and
Regular might inhabit there with all kind of Freedom; that no Heretics, or
their Adherents should buy Houses, nor that those who had then any in
possession, should any longer live there, or enjoy their goods but only in the
behalf of Catholics. To be short, that there might be a perpetual
establishment of the whole business, his Majesty promised to become pledge for
the Grisons, and to persuade them to consent to the utter loss of their
Sovereignty in the Valtoline, in case they should break the conditions, of
which the Pope and his Majesty were to be joint Judges. Nothing more could be
desired. But however the Legate, whether it were because he was somewhat
cautious, or reserved, or because he had not as yet any great experience in
businesses of importance, or whether it were by reason of his Instructions from
the Pope, which peradventure might be limited, was very fearful to engage
himself to any thing in which he suspected he might be disclaimed; and more
especially seeing Count Gondamor, the Spanish Ambassador, then at Court,
declared openly, that he was prohibited by his Master to meddle or make in the
Treaty; for that his Catholic Majesty would never treat at all until those
places were restored into his Holyness's hands. The King had no great reason to
be satisfied with this manner of the Legat's proceeding, seeing he every day
created new difficulties. It was well known that the Orders which he received
from the Pope, was one cause of it. His Holiness apprehending that in case he
should consent to the delivery of the Valtoline to the Grisons, the Spaniards
would disable the Counsel, in regard several of the Roman Clergy were of
opinion, that he could not with a safe conscience allow of it, as also the
continual suggestions of the Spaniards, did mightily molest and trouble him.

The unexpected departure of the Cardinal Barbarini from the French Court.
NOtwithstanding all this the King did him all honor, caused him to dine with
him, sent to visit him in his lodging at Fountainbleau, and made his Officers
treat him with extraordinary splendor: But at last they were to settle upon
some resolution. The King pressed him, but he instead of facilitating the
business, stood firm to his first demands: to which he was answered, that his
Majesty had conceded as much as could be reasonably expected, so that he might
not hope for any further condescending to them. Whereupon the Legate on a
sudden resolves to return to Rome, and having public Audience on the two and
twentieth of September, he took leave of the King, giving him great assurances
of his Passion for the service of his Crown. His Majesty likewise testified to
him, that he had a great kindness toward his Person, a great respect for his
Holiness, and an extraordinary devotion for the Holy Chair. And lastly told
him, that the Affairs which he had been treated withal, were so important to
the public good, that he would gladly before he had made his Final answer,
have assembled together the chief Officers of his Kingdom, and of his Supreme
Courts to take their advices* and that he would gladly have seen him once more
to have acquainted him with their resolution. It was hoped he would have
expected the result of them, but he departed before it was suspected, and his
Officers who were left behind him, could give no other reason for it, but that
he did it to avoid the usual Complements at parting.

Politic Observations.
GOD has established two sorts of Powers, for the Government of the Universe,
and he has had so great a care over man's vanity (as the learned Hinomar,
writing to Carloman, and the Bishops of France, says) that to the intent he
might preserve them in obedience, he would totally separate and distinguish
the Functions of their respective Authorities. The Persons who have their
powers are subject reciprocally each to the other, Kings to Ecclesiastiques,
and Ecclesiastiques to Kings, yet not that their Powers have a reciprocal
dependence upon one another. It is true, the Spiritual is superior to the
Temporal, according to the order of dignity* but not according to the rule of
Subjection and Authority; insomuch, that who is endued with it, may not despoil
Sovereigns of their Temporal Power nor moderate it. It is very necessary to
distinguish between the Subjection of Persons, and that of Powers; for though
Jesus Christ has resolved that all persons of the World should be subjected to
his Ministers, and all his Ministers to Kings; yet he has not ordained that
these two Powers should be subject in the same manner; but he has given to
them both an equal Authority to discharge their Functions, without bestowing on
either power to destroy the other.

Which being so, the head of the Church may not assume to himself any other
Quality with Temporal Princes, but of a Mediator to end their differences. He
has Power indeed over their Consciences, but not over their Estates, or that
Authority which they have received from God for the government of them. It is
to no purpose for him to snatch away the Scepter out of their hands, and
whatever Proposal he shall make to them, can be received but as Councels. It is
Glorious for him, as we have said, to accommodate differences, but he may not
pretend to do it by his Authority: Out of zeal he is bound to forecast the
difficulties which he may meet with, in the persuading both Parties to agree to
his Proposals; seeing those which are commonly made to two Princes at Enmity,
are like a Medicine which ought to be administered to a person whose Liver is
very hot, but his Stomach extremely cold and weak; for the ordering of which,
the Physician finds himself much puzzeled, by reason of those remedies which
refresh the one, are commonly stark naught for the other. And thus it is
seldom or never seen, that those Propositions which are made by Arbitrators do
please both parties. The highest point of Prudence in this case, is to imitate
the discreet Physician, who cannot bring to pass his intent of curing his
Patient, but by prescribing to him such things as may comfort one, and not
annoy another part; for thus it is, unless those Propositions which a Mediator
shall lay down, be weighed with Justice; Equality, and Moderation, they will
rather provoke, then allay the angers of those Princes who are concerned in
them.

An Assembly of the Nobles, by the Kings Order, upon the business of the
Cardinal Barbarin's Legation.
ALthough it were not very needful to take any further advice for a resolution
to those Propositions made by the Legate, so evidently dis-advantagious were
they to France and her Allies; yet it was not thought amiss to call a Chief
Assembly, where the chief Lords of the Court, and the principal Officers of the
Kingdom, might understand the true state of the case; and to prevent that the
keeping of it secret, might not give the Spaniard the liberty of reporting over
Europe, that Cardinal Barbarine had made very reasonable Proposals of Peace;
but that the King had absolutely refused them, by which he did declare his
resolution of continuing the War. Which was not only clear contrary to the
Truth, but against the honor was due to the Kings Justice, which had ever
induced him to settle Peace among his neighbors, when he might do it without
offense to his Reputation, or the Interests of his Allies; as also in regard of
the great respect which he had showed to the holy Sea upon this very occasion,
as also in all others which presented themselves, so that it was not reasonable
to let his glory lie under such a blemish. Now the only way to secure it, was
declaring the whole Passage before a Council, where should be the major part of
all the Nobles; and the Cardinal persuaded the King, that they should be
assembled in his Majesty's Presence. They who received this command, were
careful to be there accordingly: and the Council being met, the King told
them, that he had caused them to be called thither, to consult on the Affairs
which might relate to the Public good, upon such Proposals as the Chancellor
should make unto them, who beginning at the Treaty made with the Grisons, and
renewed from time to time, by which they tied themselves to give a free passage
thorough their Countries at all times, for his Majesty's Armies to go into
Italy; as also, not to accord the same to any other, without his permission,
showed at last to them, how the Spaniard to the prejudice of these Treaties,
had ever endeavored by fair and foul means, to procure the same Passages might
be granted to himself, to further his intended Conquest of the rest of Italy,
as occasion should invite him to it; to which purpose he had usurped the Forts
of the Valtol^nes, and that his Majesty for the recovery of them, had been
constrained to send the Marquess de Coeuvres thither with an Army, that before
his Majesty had made use of any force* he had consented that the places should
be deposited in the Popes hands, for a certain time, and upon certain
conditions; which conditions being accomplished, and the limited time expired,
the Spaniards had however found means to persuade the Pope to retain them yet
longer, though of right he ought not so to do, for that they were only
deposited with him. That his Holiness had been often urged to return them unto
the Spaniard, and that his Holiness had moved them to receive them, which they
had refused to do, for that they esteemed them more secure in his Holinesses,
then in their own keeping: After which his Holiness being unwilling to disseise
himself of them, the Marquess de Coeuvres was forced to enter upon them by
strength of Arms: That but very lately the Spaniards had also induced his
Holiness to send his Legate, to try if he could obtain from his Majesty, out of
the respect which he did bear to the Holy Chair, that he would surrender up the
Forts again to his Holiness, and suffer the Grisons to be deprived of their
Sovereignty of the Valtoline. That these Propositions seemed to be so much the
stronger, in regard it implied, that his Majesty must give way to the Grisons
(who were his Allies) losing of that which was their indubitable right: That
his Majesty had still endeavored to preserve them by the strength of his Arms,
and to surrender up into the Popes hands all that did not belong to them. But
that to return all, which did belong to the Grisons could not be done, unless
to the great prejudice of the Grisons, to the advantage of the Spaniards, and
to the absolute loss of his Majesty's Reputation. That it was upon these
Proposals his Majesty did desire their advices, to know whether it were fitter
to condescend to them, or to continue the War; desiring every one of them to
speak freely what he thought proper to be done, that a conclusion might be had
and sent to the Legate, who would not stay to take along with him the Result of
this Council though he had been importuned to it; but however, he had promised
to expect it at Avignon.

The Marshal de Schomberg took hold of the discourse, and amongst other things
told them, That having several times been by his Majesty's command to treat
with the Legate, he had smelt out, that his designs were always in the
Spaniards behalf, as much as possible could be, of which there needed no other
proof, then the two Propositions which he had made to deprive the Grisons of
their Sovereignty, and to restore the Forts to the Pope, that the Spaniards
might gain time to draw their Forces together, and retreat them, and his sudden
departure after he had been refused, though it had been as shameful for the
King to have granted them, as it had been hurtful to the Grisons to have
endured it. That for his part he was of opinion rather to resolve on the War,
and that for diverse reasons, which he there alleged, which testified as much
Courage as Prudence, then to make a dishonorable Peace, by assenting to
Propositions contrary to the Honor and Justice of his Majesty. The chief
President of the Parliament of Paris, speaking in the name of all the Officers
of the Sovereign Courts, said only thus much, that the King had ever made such
good choice of able worthy Ministers, that it would be a piece of Prudence to
follow their opinions, and particularly, that he thought what the Marshal de
Schamberg had said, was very just and reasonable.

The Cardinal de Sourdis was of a particular opinion by himself, and proposed
for the Cessation of Arms, alleging the inconveniency of the season: But they
considering it as a thing which was earnestly desired by the Spaniards, only
that they might get time, and draw their Forces together both in Italy and the
Valtoline, it was hearkened to but by a very few persons, nor seconded either by
the Cardinal de la Valette, or the Marshal of Bassompierre, who were both of
them well acquainted with the Spaniards Interests and designs, the one by his
being at Rome, and the other in Spain; and so delivering their opinions against
him, carried it in conclusion for the war. The Cardinal that he might give them
the more liberty to speak freely, withdrew a little aside, and coming near
the King, testified to him how much he esteemed Peace: That it was his opinion
always to prefer it before War, if it could be obtained with safety to his
Majesty's honor and reputation, and without hazarding the good of the
Kingdom, which was inseparably united with that of his Allies: But that he
perceiving nothing in the Legates Proposals, which did not undermine both one
and the other, and which only designed the procuring of Glory and advantages to
the Spaniard, and which tended to the ruin both of France and his Majesty, or
the detriment of his Allies, he could not submit his thoughts to Peace. That
for his own particular, he was more against it; for that every one who had
never so little acquaintance with the affairs of Spain, well knew, that their
chief drift in forcing the Valtoline out of the Grisons Power, was only that
they might bring what Troops they had a mind to into Italy, and that by this
means they might become Masters of it: That this their design was of no small
importance to the Crown of France, which would have somewhat to do, to defend
it self from his Arms, if he could once bring it to pass. For a place once
taken on the Borders, will serve the enemy to fortify himself and strengthen
against him. After this, he gave his Majesty to understand, that he was not
ignorant of the many difficulties which would arise for the continuance of the
War, and that peradventure the Rebellion of the Hugonots might divert the
sending of some part of the Power of France into the Alps. But he added, that
the Reputation of a King being to be preferred before all things; for that once
gone neither his Authority nor his riches, nor his Arms would be regarded: he
was of opinion, and it seemed most expedient to him, that the War should be
continued for the preserving his Crown in its luster, rather then conclude a
Peace, upon such shameful Conditions, as those which had been proposed by the
Legate. That his Majesty should send such recruits, as should make his Army be
feared. That the Super-intendents would assure his Majesty, he had Treasure
enough for the discharging of four Musters, without touching any thing of the
present Incomes. That the Clergy offered six hundred thousand Crowns as a
Contribution toward it. That the Hugonots were so abased by those signal
Victories which his Majesty had obtained over them that they could never rise
again, and that seeing every thing did thus contribute to the carrying on of
the War, it was his advice to conclude on it, before any other thing whatever.
After he had ended, no one spoke any more, judging that there could not be any
other thing worth further Consideration in the business, so the King told them
he would give notice of their Result to the Legate, and entirely prosecute what
had been then and there concluded.

Politic Observation.
WHat ever great parts a King or his Ministers may have either by nature or
experience; yet he ought not to ateempt any important affairs; especially if
they carry any danger along with them, without assembling the Grandees of his
Kingdom, and consulting with them on it. This I think to be profitable not
only for the good of the State, but also because it cannot be doubted, but
that Counsel has been ever found and adjudged by wise men, to be the most
assured stay, not only of Kingdoms but of particular families. Salust writ to
Caesar, that not only Kingdoms but private Towns too, enjoyed prosperity,
whilst good Counsels were in force; and that nothing but misfortunes had
befallen them, after that compliance fear, or pleasure had been introduced
amongst them: Not that a Sovereign is bound to resolve with a great number of
Counselors, of what he should do, but I say he should deliberate with them,
and afterward resolve with his Ministers, what is fittest to be done. He need
not fear, that in so doing he does discover any weakness, or insufficiency for
that he is bound to it, by the very Laws of Prudence, and it is argument
enough of his ability if he ground his resolution upon the advices and
consultation of several persons. Though the Sun be clothed with a wonderful
brightness, which ravisheth the eye to behold it; yet God has not forbidden
the Stars from partaking of the government of the Universe; because they have
particular Influences which though inferior to those of the Sun, yet do they
not cease to be useful for the perfection of the World: Just so too, though
Counselors who are called to deliberate on Affairs, may not be compared for
understanding or Soul, with the King or a grand Minister; yet as the Earth
brings forth several Plants which are particular and proper to it, so their
apprehensions and minds may be replenished with such thoughts, as would not
perhaps have fallen under the considerations of others; and yet do not for all
this become less useful or unprofitable to the common good. But besides this
Consideration is it not evident, that Council is necessary to be taken by a
grand Minister, if only for his discharg? The most part judge of Advices by the
Events, though no rule can be more uncertain, whence it happens, that if any
one alone shall pretend to advise his Sovereign, and things fall out contrary
to expectation, he will be infallibly blamed for it: And in case there be no
great difficulty in affairs, yet it were not amiss to do so, for the
satisfaction of the Grandees of a Kingdom. Grandees for the most part, though
very expert both in Politic and Military Affairs, are of such a humor, that
nothing will like them, nor no Resolution please them, unless they have a hand
in it, and they will be most commonly sure to work advantages against that
Minister, who shall have persuaded his Sovereign, if the Affairs fall out
otherwise then was expected. They are of the same humor, as Cornelius Tacitus
says Cornelius Lacon was of, who being Captain of the Emperor Galba's Guards,
was an enemy to all Counsel how good soever, if it came not from himself.
Nothing can be more proper to defend a man's self from this blame which is
sometimes very troublesome, as also important to ones fortune, then sometimes
to assemble an extraordinary Council, when there is any question does arise: As
once when the Spartan Ambassadors came to Rome, accompanied with a certain
Captain, whom Porus had sent to give a true account of the affairs in Armenia,
though it was not at all needful to call any extraordinary Council to resolve
on the War, for that the condition of Affairs did oblige to it; yet Nero called
the Principal men of the Town together, as Tacitus reports it, and
deliberated with them, whether it were more proper to run the hazard of a
doubtful War* or make a Peace with the Enemy; where it was unanimously
concluded to carry on the War, and not a man of the contrary opinion.

The Deputation of the Valtolines toward his Holiness.
IF those Proposals made by the Legate were repugnant to the Glory of France,
those which the Valtolines Deputies made at Rome, to his Holiness, and the
Sieur de Bethune, were absolutely unjust. The Spaniards had excited and wrought
the Catholics of those Countries upon the score of Religion, to offer the
Sovereignty to his Holiness, and to declare by their Deputies to the Sieur de
Bethune, that it was not to be hoped they would ever submit themselves to the
Government of the Grisons, a thing they could not do with their Consciences.
They also framed a long discourse, in which they pretended to show by many
reasons, that the two Crowns of France and Spain, not being able to agree upon
the Interest and Right which either pretended in those Countries, there could
not be a more proper, more plausible or just expedient found out, then to put
themselves into his Holiness hands, who treating the two Kings as a common
Father, might grant them passage, as it should seem best unto him, and when he
should find it proper for the good of Christendom. This discourse conducing to
the Popes Interests, did not a little elevate his thoughts, and he had made no
great Bones to consent to it, had not the Sieur de Bethune once and again
dexteriously hinted to him a reason which could admit of no reply, which was
this, That the Valtolines could not with Justice assume the liberty of putting
themselves under the domination of any one whoever he were, they being born
true and natural Subjects to the Grisons, and that the King his Master would
never give way to it. He well knew, that to put the Valtoline into the Popes
hands, would be the same thing as if they were given up to the Spaniard, for
that the Popes are either by affection or fear, more inclined to the Spaniard
then to the French. But it was very ridiculous to see the Artifices which the
Deputies did use to persuade the Sieur de Bethune, that the Proposal they had
made was for the Kings advantage. They several times protested to him, that
they themselves and all the rest of the Valtoline, did bear so great a
submission to his Majesty's judgment, that they would wish for nothing else,
but only that his Majesty would pass his word for the Grisons accommodation,
which if he would, they would then do whatever he would command them. But in
conclusion, they added that his Majesty would be pleased with their resolutions
of neither submitting themselves to the Grisons or Spaniards. Because they
evidently knew, there would be little security or advantage to the French,
either in one or the other of these expedients; withal, that to oblige them to
come under the Grisons, were to force them to fly to the Spaniards, which if
his Majesty should do, they must of necessity run to them for assistance; for
that they could not trust themselves under the Dominion of the Grisons, for
that there was not any other Prince near them, from whom they might receive a
more ready or favorable relief. That they would full willingly have desired
his Majesty to protect them; but that they doubted it would be a means to
engage his Majesty in a perpetual War in their Country against the Spaniard,
who would never consent to it; and that all these considered, there could not
any other party be found out more proper or fit then the Pope, and that France
had some reason to accord to it, in respect that the Pope showed himself very
favorable to the French Interests. The Sieur de Bethune, answered them with
Civilities, nothing inferior to theirs, assuring them of the affection, which
his Majesty did bear to their concerns, and obliging them to be confident he
would never abandon them, and that his Majesty would never consent to any
Peace, by which they should not have a full and perfect Freedom for the
exercise of their Religion: But as to the groundwork of the business he
discovered to them, that in case they could find a means to be assured of this
Liberty, that then they had no reason to exchange Masters; and especially,
seeing they were not in a condition to dispose of themselves. He openly
professed to them, That his Majesty did not pretend in the least to the Supreme
Power over them, but that his resolution was to preserve them to the Grisons,
procuring to them full Liberty for the free exercise of their Religion, and
that he would never consent the business should be ended upon other terms. This
answer was both resolute and full of Justice; but however, as Passion takes
away the use of Reason, so they seemed not to apprehend the reasonableness of
it; as also they thought good, That the Spaniards should cause a second
discourse to be writ, by a Prelate of Milan, in which they endeavored to clear
by several reasons, which were willingly assented to by the Pope. That the King
had no right in the Valtoline to hinder their giving up themselves to the holy
See, so unjust and unreasonable is the inconsiderate zeal, into which men do
sometimes suffer themselves to be carried for Religions sake.

Politic Observation.
ZEal is a Passion very commendable, when it is confined within the limits of
knowledge and Charity; but without this it passes only for an unreasonable
fury, not a virtue. The Apostle would have it accompanied it with these two
qualities, and judges it to be blame worthy if without them. Indeed it is like
Oil cast in the Fire, it provokes and raises up such heat in their Courages,
that it hurries them, both beyond Reason and Justice. That people which knows
not how the son of God has commanded to honor all Kings of what Religion
soever they be, as they who are established by his hand, of which himself
showed an example, as also his Apostles do animate themselves with an
indiscreet zeal, for the Interests of Religion; if they follow any ways
contrary to them, they do easily suffer themselves to be hurried on to shake
off the yoke of Obedience to take up Arms to resist them, to conspire against
their persons, to ruin all with Fire and Sword, and to over run the whole land
with those misfortunes which ever attend on Civil Wars. This is that which
made the learned Origin to say, the zeal of God is nothing worth, if it be not
accompanied with the knowledge of God, introducing the Jews for an example, who
by an inconsiderate zeal for Gods glory, made themselves culpable of the most
horrible Sacrilege that ever was yet heard of against his Son. I shall add
only this, that such a zeal is not only unprofitable for Gods service; but
also very dangerous and prejudicial to the good of those States and Churches
where it is, by that heat of it which hurries on to extremities, and serves for
a Torch to kindle Civil Wars, which undermines the Foundations of States, and
Religion it self, and furnishes them whom it possesses with pretenses for the
doing of any thing, which Fury it self can be capable of.

The Hollanders send Deputies to his Majesty to engage him in a League
offensive and defensive against the Spaniard.
VVHilest the Legate was at Fountain Bleau, the Ambassador of Holland came
thither upon very different thoughts he only designing to bring things to a
peaceable conclusion; but they to engage the King in an Offensive and Defensive
War against the Spaniards, and desire him to fall in upon their Countries.
There had been a Defensive League made with them the foregoing year, which was
sufficient to entertain all the Spanish Forces in those Countries, and to give
advantage to the States to make some further progress. But as it is troublesome
to continue a War any long time, without obtaining some Victories, they having
lately lost the Town of Breda for want of good Conduct, made it their earnest
desire to the King that he would declare a War against the Spaniards, that they
might be revenged on them, The Ambassador represented to the King and the
Cardinal that the States Signiories and Lordships, were not the only places
the Spaniards had designed to invade, but that France too was comprised in the
same design; that the attempts which they had made but lately in Germany, in
the Valtoline, and in Italy, were only to make sure of the out-skirts, that
they might afterward with the more ease make themselves Masters of France:
That he would not enter into any further proof of it, seeing he was assured it
could not be unknown either to his Majesty or his Ninisters; only he beseeched
his Majesty to consider, that it was more proper to go find them out in their
own Quarters, then to stay until they entered upon theirs. That that which gave
them so great advantage in their Conquests was because none had attempted any
thing on them, every one keeping himself upon the defensive posture, but that
when any thing should be attempted on them, the Palms of their Victory would
soon be snatched out of their hands; that they are not really so potent, but
only because they dare affault the whole World, and that they have the Courage
to fall on others, because none fall on them: Which was too evident to be
doubted, That it was impossible to let them any longer follow the course of
their Victories, without being a Trophee for their Arms. He did excite and stir
up his Majesty upon the score of Glory, representing to him the lives of Cyrus,
Hannibal, Alexander, Caesar, and diverse illustrious Roman Captains, who had
been eternized and made famous by invading of their enemies. That there was
only this wan^ing to add to his Majesty's glory, whom Heaven had created for
the only good of all Europe, and to preserve the Liberties of his neighbors.
Their Artifices were so great, that nothing more could be wished for, only
that he would embrace the design. He alleged that England would Potently
assist it, That Flanders being subjected under the Spanish Yoke, would gladly
be delivered out of it, and would be induced to do any thing which might tend
that way; and that for the expense there need no great care be taken for it,
seeing the French Soldiers were not harder to be pleased then those of
Hannibal, who being asked upon his putting off from Africa, with what he would
pay his Army, answered with the Army it self; for as soon as ever he set foot
in Europe, the Air, the Earth, the Fire, and all the Goods of those who
inhabited it, should be common to them; and in the progress of that affair, he
made it evident that he was not mistaken; for during eighteen years that he
maintained War both in Spain and Italy, he never received any Supplies from
Africa. The most part of these reasons were so true, and the rest so specious,
that the King must needs have wanted Courage, had he not been persuaded with
them; and especially-seeing his Majesty had often spoken to the Cardinal upon
this very point, and that he was sufficiently convinced of the necessity for
the Princes of Europe to assault the Spaniard, that they might at last put some
limits to his Ambition; as also in relation thereunto, that he had assaulted
him in the Valtoline, by stopping the progress of his proceedings. But on the
other side, his Majesty was not ignorant, that those enterprises which he had
already commenced were very great, considering in what condition France then
was, and that it would be difficult to undertake any more, until the Hugonots
who took advantages of his Wars abroad, and who stayed part of his Forces at
home to keep them in obedience were totally ruined. That withal it were
absolutely needful, before any thing could be attempted on Flanders, to employ
the Arms of the House of Austria, in Germany, and to secure the Passages, by
which releef might be sent to them, so that it might be impossible for them to
hinder the Conquest of it. His Majesty relying on the Advices of the Cardinal
kept himself off from engaging himself in this same offensive League: And the
Cardinal took upon himself the trouble of making the States Ambassador
understand the reasons of it, who found them so strong that he had not a word
to reply against them; but the King desired the State to be assured, that he
would never be deficient in sending them men and moneys, according as he had
promised by the Treaty of Alliance; as also; that when a fit opportunity of
Time should present it self for the taking of any advantage, he would most
certainly engage in it, for that his own glory and their good way interessed in
it.

Politic Observation.
IT is a small matter though a Sovereign have a generous resolution, which
leads him to make War, if he have not discretion to choose a fit opportunity
for the taking of advantages upon his enemies. It is not always seasonable to
take up Arms, and to make Leagues or to break Peace. Before a design be
attempted, it should first be known whether it be sure, profitable, and
honorable, and if it may be effected with little or no hazard to the person
who advises it, and whether he runs any part of the danger, and above all it
would be known, and that exactly too of what force the enemy is, what succor
he does expect, the diversions which he has in other places, the advantages
which he may have in Combats, by what ways those Troops must pass which come
to defend him, from whence he may draw Provisions for his Army; and in short,
all the particular estate of the enemies Affairs. A War never ought to be
begun, but with Prudence, that it may be ended with advantage. A resolution
ought not to be taken, but on the present State of Affairs, ballancing Reason
with hope, comparing the present with past, and never proposing those things
for easy, which are seen but by halves, otherwise the success will
demonstrate, that it was began with too much heat, and too little Prudence. The
French never did so ill as when they broke the Peace with Charles the Fifth, in
the year one thousand five hundred fifty five, in confidence of the Counsels
and Promises of Pope Paul the Fourth, of the Family of the Cara^fi; for having
done it upon like reason and without consideration of his Power whom they set
upon in that conjuncture of time, the success of it proved more to their loss
then advantage. Hannibal was much to be commended, as T. Livy says, that in
all his Conduct he was acquainted with his enemies intentions, as well as with
his own. That Prince who ingageth himself in a War, without such a knowledge
seeks after his own ruin; and if there be any affair from which he ought to
retain himself, certainly it must be when a Proposal is made to him, grounded
on a League; for that offensive Leagues do not always end according to the
hopes of them who are Interested in it. If the enterprise will be of long
continuance, then only the different Interests of several United Princes, will
force them to break off. Besides Time, alteration of Affairs, and the Artifices
of the enemy who is assaulted, do commonly work some change. In short, the
difference of things and Nations do breed jealousies, and then every one
retires to his own Quarter, so that after a great attempt, there is but small
success.

The Hugonots finding their weakness to their own costs, have recourse to the
Kings Clemency.
THe signal Victory which his Majesty had obtained by sea before Rochel, and
the Isle of Ree, together with the impossibility whereunto the Duke of Rohan
was reduced, of attempting any thing in Languedoc, so closely was he followed
by the Marshal de Themines, forced the Hugonots to have recourse to his
Majesty's Clemency. They begged his Majesty's pardon by their Deputies, whom
they sent to him, to testify the sense they had of their fault, and to assure
him of their future fidelity and obedience. His Majesty was well pleased with
it, and the Deputies coming to him at Fonntain Bleau, about the end of August,
whilst the Legate was there, there was no kind of acknowledgements and
submissions, which they did not make; both in behalf of themselves, as also of
the Duke of Rohan, and the Sieur de Soubize who sent to supplicate him by their
particular Deputies, that he would be pleased to employ them in the War of
Italy, that they might testify by their Passion to serve him, that there was
not any danger in the Sea or Land, to which they would not cheerfully expose
themselves, to contribute to his Glory. After they had made their speeches,
they presented the Paper of their Complaints, humbly beseeching his Majesty to
have regard to it; for that they were grounded upon several Graces, which had
been conferred on them by the Edict of Nants, and several other Grants. The
King received it, and appointed it to be examined.

Now although the sweetness of Peace, which charmeth the mind, the Poverty of
the people, and those enterprises which the Spaniard made upon the Allies of
France, did generally invite all the French; to wish, that his Majesty would
accord to them the pardon which they desired, yet some there were, who were
divided in opinion, what was most fit to be done upon that affair; one part
conceiving, that Rochel having received so great a rebuke, and finding
themselves without Island, without Sea, without Soldiers, and without Vessels,
they ought not to let slip such an occasion: The reason was, that in so doing
they should loose a very advantageous opportunity, to force the City by a Siege
which could not hold out above six months, to demolish their Forts, and reduce
them under the Kings obedience; which once done, the whole party of the
Hugonots would be quite ruined; their other Towns disabled to make any
resistance, and that thus, the Regal Authority would not only receive a great
accruement of Power, but the Church too would receive a very great benefit by
it.

These were the opinions of vulgar thoughts, which look on nothing but what is
before them, and just in their noses, but want discretion to look a little
further; they considered not that it would always be in his Majesty's Power to
take up Arms against the Heretics, seeing now they behaved themselves
otherwise then they used to do, as has been often seen; and that his Majesty
might easily keep those advantages which he had upon Rochel, by fortifying the
Isles of Ree and Oleron, and keeping a small Army in Fort St. Lewis, and in the
Country about Rochel, but that it would not always be seasonable and timely,
to oppose the Ambitious design of the Spaniards upon the Grisons or the
Valtoline. That the King could not without dishonor, leave off those glorious
enterprises which he had already began, and that in case he should, it would
give full Liberty to the Spaniards, to make themselves Masters of the
Valtoline, as well as of the rest of Italy, where they had already sent their
Arms, and had also strongly fortified themselves. That this affair was more
important then that of the Hugonots, for that a more favorable opportunity to
gain a happy success could not be had when one had a mind to it. Besides that
it was not sufficient to be hurried on by an inconsiderate zeal, without any
regard had to the Interests of the Kingdom, seeing that their Religion made a
part of the Estate; and that also it very little concerned Religion to defer
for some time the ruin of the Hugonots, for that War and Violence, did never
yet conduce to their Conversion: Heresy being like Saffron, which grows the
faster, the more it is trodden under foot, that when Heretics have been
burned, they have lived like Salamanders in the fire, when they have been cast
into the Water, they have increased like Fishes, and when their heads have been
cut off, they have like Trees, put out more new branches then were taken off;
so that there was no talk of ruining Heresy, but only of the Party, which was
still free for the King to do, considering the frequent grounds they gave for
it; for that mutiny was naturalized in them; but that it was far otherwise in
the affairs of Italy and of the Valtoline, which might not be abandoned but
with extreme great shame, and without ever hoping for another opportunity to
root up the Spaniard, if he should be now let alone to grow up and gather new
strength. These were the important reasons represented by the Cardinal to the
King, and which induced his Majesty to grant a Peace to the Hugonots, that he
might carry on his designs in Italy and the Valtoline. After the paper of their
grievances had been examined, his Majesty confirmed to them, whatever had been
granted by the Edict of Nantes, granting them free Liberty for the exercise of
their Religion, in such Towns where they had Churches and Churchyards, and an
Act of Oblivion for any thing done in the War, but he would not consent to the
demolishing of Fort Lewis, as being too important for the keeping of Rochel in
aw and obedience.

These favors were accepted by the general Deputies of the Hugonots, in the
name of all the Hugonot Towns, excepting those of Rochel, Mountauban, Castres,
and Milhana, who having been gained by the Duke of Rohan and Sieur de Soubize,
and finding that their Leaders had only obtained a single pardon, without any
other advantage, and without being employed in Italy, according as they
desired, they entreated his Majesty upon other pretenses, that he would be
pleased to grant some time, till their two chief Officers, and those four
Cities, were joined with them. The King granted to them that delay, upon
condition it were not over long, who presently sent away the Heads of those
Resolutions which had been taken.

Politic Observation.
THough the weakening of a Party in a Kingdom, which has been long breeding, so
that they may make no more Insurrections, be a thing much to be desired, yet it
will not be peradventure always seasonable to attempt it; it is the duty of a
wise Minister to take all occasions for the doing of it, according to the state
of Affairs of the Kingdom. Suetonius Paulinus, one of the most experimented
Captains of his time, made it appear in an an excellent discourse, upon the
beginning of the Civil War between Ottho and Vittellius, as Tacitus reports
it, that it would be necessary for Vittellius to be diligent: but that Orthoes
Party would get advantage to execute their design by delaying of it, until
they had nothing else to do. The Dictator Cneus Sulpitius, after a great deal
of consideration, resolved not to hasten on the War against the Gauls, upon
this reason, that he would not hazard any thing upon an enemy, who was every
day declining, and out of his Countries too. Indeed he had endangered himself,
had he fought when they pressed him to it; whereas shortly after he might
overcome them with ease. He which gives good advice for the State, ought not to
be blamed for it; but the discreet Minister deserves more praise, who not
only knows that it is not enough to consider by the resolutions of State, that
which is just to be done in the Theory, but also that which the time permits,
and complies with opportunities and necessity.

The Kings Army in Italy is recruited with six or seven thousand men, under the
Marquis de Vignolles.
THough the peace with the Hugonots was not fully concluded, yet the Cardinal
being informed of the necessity of recruiting the Army in Italy, was not
defective to procure his Majesty to give orders for it. The Marquis de
Vignolles was dispatched with six or seven thousand men: Who coming into
Piedmont with his Forces, found the Siedge still before Veriie, a small Town
upon the Po, very slenderly inhabited, but defended by a Castle built on a
Rock, at the end of a little Hill, which was none of the worst. The Duke of
Feria, drawing his Troops out of Ast, had brought them up thither, hoping for a
good success in it: But the Duke of Savoy having intelligence of his
resolution, caused the Marquis de Saint Reyran, a Gentleman of Prussia, to
march up within view of the Spaniards, with a thousand Foot, and by the advice
of the Marshal de Cregny, he likewise caused his Army to advance and Incamp at
the foot of the Hill, in certain Intrenchments, which were much stronger then
the place it self.

Above three Months were spent in continnual Sallies and Assaults. The Duke of
Feria entrenched himself to his greatest advantage: The Cannon thundered on the
place with a great deal of fury; and having made at several times six or seven
great breaches: The Spaniards did as often assault them, and were repulsed with
a great deal of courage. They opened several Mines, one of which had seven
mouths, which they called the Hydra: but every day brought them some
misfortune, so that they lost more then the besieged. In short, they got not
one foot of land, which was not as soon retaken from them. In the mean time, the
ill weather began to come in, and the Po to swell up, which did not a little
perplex them, for they were forced to quit one part of their Trenches, by
reason it was filled with water, which brought their Battery into such
disorder, that most of their Cannon stuck in the Mud, and much ado they had to
get them clear off again. These disgraces happening to them, did much add to
the French courage: So that on the seventeenth of November, the Constable, the
Marshal de Cregny, and the Marquis de Vignolles who was but lately arrived,
having considered together what was to be done; cast their thoughts on those
Forts which the Spaniards had in the Plain, and resolved to assault them. The
Constable gave orders for the attaquing of them; and the Troops being put into
Battalia, they began a Combat, which lasted above three hours, with such heat
and success to the French, that they carried all the Forts in a trice.

In the interim, the Duke of Savoy arrived, and the enemy having drawn up three
great Squadrons of Foot, and two of Horse, came Matching up in good order
against the French, to try if they could recover what they had lost; but they
only retook one single Fort, which was resolved to be quitted and the night
coming on, ended the Fray; in which they lost above two thousand men, and the
French not above one hundred. After this Disaster, they being in great want of
victuals, and having small hopes of being Masters of the place; Don Gonsal^s de
C^rdova, raised the Seige privately in the night, without noise of Drum or
Trumpet, and without giving the Horse any other sign, but by beating certain
flint stones one against the other. They lost before this paltry Town an Army
of forty thousand men: Their Commanders lost their honor, their Arms got no
little discredit by it; and it should seem, God was pleased to abase the vanity
of their glory, which hurried them on with extreme ambition to the attempting
of unjust designs,

Politic Observation.
AMbitious Princes can never raise their designs so high, as that God who
humbles the Proud, and abates their power, should exempt them from divine
Justice; which is pleased to pull down the mighty. His Providence does always
confine the^r force, by keeping their Interests and those of their neighbors,
in an equal Balance, for the tranquillity of the people. He who is born with a
fixed and contented mind, and is satisfied with those limits which he may
justly pretend to, and in the protection of his Allies, is not subject to these
misfortunes. Honor and glory never depart from him: whereas he who rests not
within his own bounds, but attempteth all ways, tries all means to extend
them, is usually liable to ruin, for that every one runs upon him, to oppose
his designs, and God too is delighted to abase him. The divine wisdom cannot be
enough admired in this particular, which having placed two great Kingdoms near
one another, makes the one serve to moderate the ambition of the other, and to
break the neck of his designs, for the preservation of his neighbors: It
usually ends in nothing when one shall take from another to enrich himself.
The divine wisdom does bound in the ambition of such, and brings all their
designs that way tending to confusion. It is true, God is sometimes pleased to
chastise a Sovereign, and permits another to destroy him, but it is but seldom,
whereas he does commonly throw down him who raises himself upon the ruins of
others. Darius was so insolent, that he caused himself to be styled, the King
of Kings, but what befell him? Did not Alexander, whom he had scorned and
undervalued, take away his Life and Estates too? In the same manner it was with
Arphaxates, King of the M^des, who after he had brought diverse Nations under
his Empire, and built the famous City Ecbatan, became so proud, as to think
nothing was able to resist him; but how quickly God did let him see the
contrary, by suffering him to be chastised and conquered by the King of
Niniveh? How is he delighted to show by these examples unto Sovereigns, that
Humility in their conduct, is that which makes their designs subsist, and end
in glory; whereas Ambition exposes them to misfortunes, losses, and utter ruin?

Recruits sent to the Marquis de Coeuures in the Valtoline.
THe Cardinal was no less careful to send supplies to the Valtoline then to
Italy: For besides those several French Troops which had orders to march
thither, those others which were raised by the Grisons, and those which after
much ado were sent from Venice, he caused two Regiments to be advanced in the
Cantons of Vry and Vndernal, making it appear that nothing could over-match his
Prudence, for that these two Cantons are close Leagued with the Spaniards, and
that the Marquis d' Ogliang the Spanish Ambassador, as also Scagy the Popes
Nuntio, had used their utmost endeavors to prevent it. These Recruits arrived
very seasonably; for the Spaniards had but very lately before received a very
great supply, which gave them the means to execute an enterprise, which they
made under the Conduct of Papenheim, upon the Terze of Sotto of the Valtoline,
and to make themselves Masters of those Trenches which had been committed to
the custody of the Albanois and Capelets, amongst whom it struck such a
terror, that there was no possible means to make them stand to it; and besides
the Army too was at that time very much weakened. The Marquis de Coeuvres who
could not let them go away with this advantage unrevenged, resolved with the
Council of War to retake it; and on the seventeenth of October, having
appointed Pont de G^des for a Rendezvous, he gave order for the Assault. The
Fight was stoutly begun, and after two hours continuance, the Intrenchments
were re-taken, which had been formerly lost, but with greater advantage then
the Enemies had when they first took them, and with more honor, for that they
were at that time exceedingly strong. After this Expedition was over, the Duke
of Candale received intelligence, that eight hundred foot, and four hundred of
the Spanish party, had seized upon the Fortress of Chaumont amongst the
Grisons, which being once known by the Marquis de Coeuvres, he presently
dispatched two thousand to reprise it. The Duke mustered his Army, the better
to know his own forces, and so went to invest Chaumont, and the Spaniards
within it made show of defending themselves, but the Duke having finished a
Battery of six pieces of Cannon, soon made a Breach fit for an Assault, and
commanded whole showers of Musket shot to be poured in upon them, who should
appear to defend the Breach, and also clapped two Petards against one of the
Gates, which forced them in pieces, so that two companies of French entered the
Town, and compelled them within to yield upon composition; which was, that they
should march away with their Arms only, and leave behind them what Ammunition
they had brought into the Town: So accordingly they went out, and left the Town
to the Duke of Cand^le. There remained only Morbeign^ to take in the
Valtoline, and the Marquis de Cuvres had twice called a Council of War to
contrive a means for the taking of it, but the major part of them alleged, and
that very judiciously, that the place was strongly situated, and very hard to
be come to for any who would assault it guarded by good store of men, both
within, and in the Country thereabouts, that it was impossible to shut them up,
for want of Vessels upon the Lake of Come, which was the way which they had all
their provisions; and withal they concluded, it was not much material whether
they had it, or not; seeing it did not at all help to serve the Spaniards,
either to shut up, or open the Passes. Their advice was followed, and their
courages submitted to the Laws of Discretion; which made it appear, that it was
not wisdom at all time to attempt great Enterprises. Others did wish, that the
Conquest of the Valtoline had been begun in this place (as afterward it was
done) for that it is the most important of all the other places, not in
relation to the Passages, but the securing of the Valley, and to keep all the
rest in their duties; for the Allarm being once taken in the Vale, there are
immediately store of Forces clapped into it, for the keeping of it, as being the
most considerable of all, and that once done, impossible to be taken.

Politic observation.
THE greatest Courages are bound to submit to the Laws of Prudence, when there
is a question in hand for the attempting of any great Enterprise. Their Glory
is not considered by the successes of their Victories, or the taking of Towns,
which many times have no dependencie upon them, but by their Resoluteness, and
Constancy, which they make appear without the least dread, in doing all that
can be done to vanquish. Impossibilities defend them from all blame when as
they have done their utmost; for no one can be obliged to do that which is
above his power.

In the making of War in a Foreign Country, it is needful (if possible it may
so be done) to begin it by assaulting of the strongest place first, especially
if it may not otherwise be taken, then by a surprise. The reason is clear; for
what ever assault is made elsewhere, gives an Allarm to the whole Country, so
that that the Prince who stands upon his defense, presently claps in both Men
and Ammunition into the principal place, that afterward it will become
impossible to surprise it. Let us first seize on Rome (said the Enemies of the
Roman Empire, in Herodatus) which is the heart and Castle of the Empire, and we
shall quickly have the rest with ease. The like did Caesar say that the Romans
could never promise themselves any security in Gaul, until they had become
Masters of Authun, which was the chief City, and on which the Conquest of all
the rest depended. And as it is true, that the chief Head of an Enterprise
having once made himself Master of the City Gates, may at his own pleasure
enter upon the whole, so it is likewise most certain, that he who has once
taken the chief Fortress, has a curb on the rest, so that he may do what he
will himself, especially if he can but so order his business, that he may keep
it in his power.

The Duke of Rohan excuses himself from accepting of those Articles which were
granted to those of his party.
THese were the most remarkable passages, both in Italy and the Valtoline,
during that year; but let us now return to the Affairs at home. The Duke of
Rohan could not be drawn to conclude a Peace without making some advantage by
it, so that he desired to be excused from giving his final Answer unto those
Articles which the King had granted to those of his party, until he had
conferred with an Assembly which he pretended to make of the high and low
Languedoc, insomuch that his particular Interests and private Ambition were the
causes which retarded the Peace. In the interim he did his very utmost to
surprise some places in Languedoc, either that he might get some advantage,
whereby to make himself the more considerable, which might induce the King to
give him that employment in Italy which he desired, or some other favorable
conditions. He made an attempt upon Tillet in Albigeois, sending five hundred
men to surprise it by night, but they were stoutly repulsed, and forced to
retire. He had sometime before caused the Towns of Masdazil, Pamiers, and
several others of Foix to revolt; from which places he sent out his Scouts, who
committed great havocks in the plain Country. Now the evil treating of the
Country people, forced the Consuls of some Towns thereabouts, to desire the
Marshal de Themines, to come with his Majesty's Army to assist them, and make
himself Master of those Towns. Diverse were of opinion, that this Proposition
ought to be rejected, because admitting it should be followed, it would leave
the Duke of Rohan at liberty to go whither he list, whom at that time the Army
kept in such awe, that he durst not stir a foot, or attempt any new design. But
however, the Count de Carmain, considering this proffer of the Consuls, and in
regard they undertook in behalf of the Towns to contribute to the charge of the
War, and to refresh the Army which was much distressed before Castres, he let
himself be persuaded by their entreaties to go and assist them, and taking some
small Forces with him, he went and fell on Calmont, a little Town near Mazeres,
from whence several of the Rebels would make frequent excursions, and pillage
the neighbor Country. They endured the siedge only three days, and then
finding themselves ill handled by the Cannon, they ran away in the night, but
the Marquis d' Ambres, who was not far off with his Troop of Light Horse,
hearing the noise of their flight, charged them, and cut the most part of them
in pieces. Shortly after, they took six or seven other small places, some by
storm, and some by composition. They of Masdazil, hearing of these successes,
began to be afraid, and sent for a Pass to the Army, to make their
Accommodation: But the Duke of Rohan found a means to conveigh in some Forces to
them, which made them resolve to hold out, so that they changed their former
resolution, and defended themselves, which drew down the Marshal de Themines,
and the Count de Carmaine to besiege them. On the fifteenth of September the
Town was encompassed round about, and shortly after the Cannon made a Breach,
but whilst the Question was in debate, for the giving an Assault, the Breach
was repaired, so that a second was made, and they within grown very resolute,
repelled the Kings Army with great loss; and that which was worst of all, was
the Rains falling increased the River, and so filled up the Trenches with
water, that Siege was forced to be raised, which much troubled the Marquis; but
it was somewhat moderated, by that advantage which the Marquis d' Ambres got
over the Duke of Rohan's Troop of Light Horse, which he killed, took, and put
to flight. The Duke of Rohan was much afflicted at the loss of them, and seeing
that the holding out of Masdazil did not serve his turn, for that it would at
another time be taken with ease, and that the could not make any further good
progress, he went to the Assembly at Milhaud, where he made those of his party
send a Courrier to the King, to accept of the Articles of Peace, which his
Majesty had granted to them. His Majesty confirmed them, though they had
rendered themselves unworthy, by their new acts of Rebellion. But it was
necessary so to be, for the better opposing of the enterprises of Spain, though
Rochel was still excepted, by reason of the little inclination they had
testified of keeping themselves within their duty.

Politic Observation.
THE Ambition of Grandees in a State is oftentimes cause of many evils, and
every one knows that they are the principal motives, either to begin, or
continue a War. There is not any excess into which Ambition does not hurry
them, to attain those ends which they propose to themselves. It loves none but
it self, and it will easily violate all the rights of obedience, for the
procuring of a happy issue to all their designs. It never makes a question of
the equity of any cause, but looks on the advantages which will follow it, if
it succeed well. Whence it comes, that the first thing it does, is to shut
close the eyes against Justice, that it may the more confidently begin, or
continue it is design. They who are possessed with this same Ambition, never
look on any thing but through a false glass, which does still represent things
either more specious, or bigger than really they are: And by this device it so
charmeth their thoughts, that they begin to presume, that Fortune which has
bestowed some favors on them, will never forsake them. The rash and fond
confidence of their own abilities, makes them despise any fair overtures of
Peace; but they ought to remember, that Fortune is like a Glass, which falls
down when a man thinks he has it fast enough; and that God too, who delights
in peace, does often send down upon them, those troubles and calamities which
they proposed amongst themselves to measure out to others. The Huntsman that he
may take the Panther, knowing that he loves Henbane, hangs a good quantity
of it up in the air, somewhat out of her reach, whence it happens, that she
having once seen it, never leaves off leaping and frisking up and down, until
she become at last so weary, that she falls down unable any longer to stand,
and so dies on the place. May it not safely be said, that Fortune does the
self same thing with Grandees? And that she uses the very same artifices to
destroy ambitious persons? She proposes advantages to them, Victories and
Conquests, but which are beyond their reach, and above their power, and knowing
this to be the surest way to allure their minds, and that for the obtaining of
their extravagant ends, they will use any endeavors, or run into any rash
heady attempts, she still draws them further on, until in fine they are
forced to sink under the weight of them, and meet with their shame and
confusion in those designs, where they well hoped for Honor and Glory.

Prosecution of the History.
IT was matter of astonishment, to see the Hugonots so reduced, considering the
strong resistances which they had made against the King but a few years before,
and those great Armies which had been kept in Languedoc, all little enough to
quel them. But they who will but reflect on the strange alteration, which the
Cardinal brought with him, will not much wonder at it. I might safely say, that
the Army which he caused to be maintained about Rochel, was one cause of it,
seeing it did in effect keep under the Country of Aunis and Poicton, that
neither of them durst to stir. I could likewise attribute those effects to the
sending of those Companies into Languedoc, upon the first beginning of the
year, who might be in a readiness to fall on them, in case they should appear,
insomuch that they had not the least opportunity to do any thing; and this is
really the most certain preventive remedy for all Revolts. But however you may
behold another Reason of State, which is the more considerable, for that it did
by little and little, and without being perceived, undermine the greatest prop
and force of them: The little Authority which the Ministers, who preceded the
Cardinal, had caused his Majesty to take upon him, and the Licentiousness which
the Grandees were left at, either of running into the Hugonots party, or of
abetting them, whenever any thing went contrary to their humors was the true
cause of their greatest strength. The Princes would openly levy Troops to aid
and assist the revolted, and either themselves would go in to them, or at least
lend them monyes, to make more Levyes. But now the case was altered, and things
did not run in their former channels. This Grand Minister persuaded his Majesty
to make himself Master of Affairs. His Majesty wanted not daily oportunities to
effect it, and at last brought it to such a pass, that the Princes and Grandees
lived very quietly, and every one of them was so well satisfied with those
Fav^urs which were bestowed on them, that not a man of them would nourish a
thought tending to disunion or combinations. Formerly the major part of them
carried such a sway in matters of concern, that unless every thing which they
desired were granted to them, they would forthwith retire in discontent to
their own houses, as not thinking themselves obliged to serve the King any
longer.

But things began now to be carried in another way, and they began to live
after another sort, and to be sensible of the obligations which lay upon them
to keep themselves within the limits of Respect and Obedience. They now began
to perceive it was to no purpose, to think to have that by a high hand, which
could only be granted to them by way of Gratification. All the Parties and
Factions which formerly were so rife, began presently to fall back, there
having been certain people removed from the Court, who made it their only
business to embroyl things, and like Wasps, sucked up the best of the
Treasures, which they employed only in the sowing of discontents amongst the
Grandees, who lived at the Kings costs and charges, and yet did altogether rayl
and quarrel with the Government. The taking away of these abuses was the true
cause of the Hugonots weakening, who were never strong, but when assisted
elsewhere. Thus it was apparently seen, that the King having overtopped them by
the sage advice of the Cardinal, they were afterward compelled to live as true
Subjects in the obedience which is due from that qualification.

Politic Observation.
AUthority is the soul of a Kingdom: A State cannot but be happy, when he who
governs it knows how to rule as he ought, be it either in not ordaining those
things which are improper, or by bringing his Subjects to be obedient; so that
as a Physician endeavors most of all to comfort his Patients heart, a
Ministers ought to study no one thing more, then how to increase and strengthen
his Masters power and authority. But if he has once suffered himself to be
dispossed of it, he has lost the Rudder by which he steered his vessel, the
yoke wherewith he kept the people in obedience, the splendor which made him be
honored with respect, How will he be afterward able to retain his subjects in
their duties, seeing they will slight his Authority? And how shall he be able
to receive respects from them, when as he is no longer Master of that which
should preserve it in their souls? Authority is to a Sovereign the same thing
that Light is to the Sun: And as that fair Star would not be respected by man
without that splendid luster which dazeleth our eyes, so having once lost his
light, he is no longer admired or respected. The Princes of the Blood divide it
amongst them, and make it evident, that the dis-esteem and weakness, whereunto
he is fallen, serves for a footstool to them to advance their own power. The
Governors of Provinces too, they take some share, and thus every one acts as
best pleases himself; every thing is attempted without control, and they do
not fear to endeavor the getting of that by force, which they cannot by
justice. The Public Moneys are turned aside, the people oppressed, and at
last all things brought into confusion. Theopompus King of the Lacedaemonians
answered a certain man who told him, Spa^ta was governed with a good
Discipline, because the Kings knew how to command, That it was rather, because
the people knew how to obey: But for my part, I imagine that the happiness of a
Kingdom proceeds from one and the other; and that both of them are dependent on
the Authority which gives Sovereigns the Liberty of well commanding, and the
necessary disposition of Subjects to obey them. Which if it be true of
Kingdoms in general, it is most assuredly so of France in particular, seeing
the Government of it has been so absolutely established upon a King, seeing
there is not any thing more proper for the settling of any State whatsoever, in
its due order, then to restore him the self same qualities, with which he took
his Birth.

The Cardinal is extraordinary careful to make a good understanding between the
King, Queen Mother, Monsieur, and the Princes of the Blood, and others.
AS the Ties of Birth are but of small force, if not cherished with Affection,
so the Cardinal could not be satisfied with settling the King in his Authority
over the Princes, but took extraordinary pains, to continue them in a good
understanding with his Majesty. The Queen Mother was the chief of all those who
had the honor to be of the Royal House, so he used his utmost power to tie her
fast to the Kings will. He did the more readily undertake this trouble, because
he had for several years, received sundry testimonies of her favor, and he
would gladly have acknowledged them by his services; and it sorted so happily,
that it may safely be said he did in it repay all her obligations a hundred
times over; but it was no small matter to be brought to pass; for he was to
combat with the Queen Mothers inclinations, and the jealousies which the King
had with some reason entertained against her. From the time that the Queen
Mother had governed France in the quality of Regent, she had not as yet
renounced the Conduct of Affairs; though the care which one is bound to take
for the Government of a people, be accompanied with a thousand pricking
vexations, yet so it is, that the splendor wherewith it is attended, has such
powerful charms, that the discreetest souls, and least ambitious, have much ado
to defend themselves against them. The knowledge he had of her inclination
still to conserve that power to her self, was a great impediment to his work:
And the King, in whose hands the only supreme power resides, was so much the
more jealous of it, for that it is ordinary with Grandees to be suspicious of
their powers; and that with so much the more reason, for that Justice does not
permit that one should divide the command with them.

The Cardinal meeting with things in this conjuncture, used his utmost industry
to overcome the Queen Mothers inclinations, being assured that it would be
afterward easy to dissipate those suspicions of the King. He insinuated into
her soul with all sweetness and address, the truth, which ought to be the
foundation of their good correspondence, letting her see, that she ought not to
think it any strange thing, that the King should desire to be Master, or that
all Affairs were revolved by his order, for that by his birth the Laws of the
Kingdom did give him that Authority which no one had any right to deprive him
of. He used indeed his utmost address to impress this truth in her, letting her
see, that she ought not to pretend to any part of it; That the King quitting
all his suspicions, would give her more then she could wish, seeing he was so
naturally inclined to pay her all manner of respects. The Queen Mother, who did
then much esteem of his counsels, did believe him, and she received such
advantages by it, that by letting his Majesty see by her conduct, that she did
no longer think of the Government, he restored her into so absolute an
Authority, that she had all sort of power in the management of Affairs.

This was a very great advantage, procured to her by this grand Minister, and
which surpassed all those favors which he had at any time received from her
Majesty. The State too did not receive less profit by it; for that this good
correspondencie which united the Affections of the King, and Queen Mother, did
put an end to all those Cabals which had formerly divided the whole Nation, so
that the Forces of it would not now fly out any more into parties, but remain
entire, to oppose the Ambition of Strangers.

The Cardinal, that he might the more confirm this Union, and make it the
stronger, persuaded the King to take Father Suffren for his Confessor, who had
been so for a long while to the Queen Mother, assuring himself that this good
person, whose soul was so affectionately inclined to Peace, replenished with
Piety, and void of Ambition, being the Depository of the secrets of their
Consciences, would not be a little conducing to the dispelling of those little
suspicions which might arise between them, and that he would have somewhat the
more power, in regard women are naturally addicted to be persuaded by their
Confessors.

Next to the Queen Mother, Monsieur was the most considerable person in
affairs, as also the most capable to raise Divisions in the Kingdom, as many
Princes of his Place and Birth had done, who not being able to stay for command
until the time prescribed by the Laws both the Nature and the Kingdom, run out
at the persuasion of those who were near them, to seize on the Government. The
Cardinal therefore was no whit less industrious to tie him too unto the Kings
Interests. There was no great need of any extraordinary diligence to bring it
to pass, Justice having infused into him with his birth, all those inclinations
and dispositions which were proper for him to have toward his Majesty. All
which the Cardinal very well knew.

Neither was he ignorant, That Princes of his condition are usually carried
away from their duties by those who are attending near upon them; so that he
likewise made himself sure of the Colonel d' Ornano, who had the honor to be
nearest to his person, and upon whose advice Monsieur did more rely then any
others. Now knowing that this soul naturally ambitious, was not to be
captivated by other ties then those of Greatness, he persuaded the King to
bestow on him a Marshals Staff of France, conceiving that this Qualification
would force him to become his Majesty's very faithful servant. Monsieur the
Prince, had the honor to be the first of those of the Blood Royal, and the
Cardinal thought it no less expedient to gain him, and satisfy his humor, by
giving him a part in Affairs, and the content which he might pretend to in his
Interests. He had a great conflict with the Queen Mothers spirit, but at last
with a handsome address, he let her see, that there could be no certain quiet
and repose in the State, without a good understanding between the King her son
and him, and that it was to contribute to his own greatness, not to leave the
Prince in those discontents whereunto he had been reduced, and which might in
time carry him on to the making of Cabals, and raising of new emotions. But
whatever reasons he could then allege, she would not be induced to assent to
his coming to the Court; nevertheless the Cardinal so dealt with the King, that
his Majesty in some Letters to him, gave him extraordinary expressions and
testimonies of his Favor, sometimes by asking his advice, as occasions should
present, as also by taking a particular care for the expediting of his Affairs,
which was accordingly effected; and the King writing to him, assured him of his
kindness toward him, and desiring his opinion of the Affairs of the Valtoline,
of the Hugonots, and the War of Italy. By this he received an entire content
and satisfaction, so that from thence forward he began to order himself with
more affection to his Majesty's Inclinations, then formerly he had done. This
strait union which the Cardinal tied in the Royal Family, was an assured
foundation of the Nations Peace, and cut off all hopes that any troublesome
spirits might have to embroyl it.

Politic Observation.
THat Minister who would attempt any great designs abroad, is bound to settle
all at home, by a strong uniting of the Royal house. The harmony of the prime
Qualities is that which preserves our bodies in a convenient health: If one
should assault the other, the Natural Justice is violated, and the Union
dissolved; which once so, the whole frame falls to nothing. Who knows not,
that the Union of Grandees, especially those of the Royal Family, is the most
sure foundation of Peace and Welfare to a State? They may not be disjoined from
their King, neither may any one of them attempt upon his Crown, but Justice
will be offended, and their Union broken, which once so, the State is soon
exposed to manifold dangers and misfortunes. This was the opinion of Misipsa in
Salust, and Cyrus instructing Cambyses his own Son, advised him always to be
in friendship with his kindred, and to give them such advantages as may content
them, because it will make him be well beloved by his Subjects, who imagine
that a Prince, who does not affect his own Kindred, deserves not the
affections of any others; and will also give more assurance to his Government,
by defending him from any insurrections which might be made by them. And this
is the more considerable, as Tacitus says, for that it is ordinary with the
people, to have a particular affection; for the Kindred of a Prince, when they
shall see them hated without any just cause or reason, exemplyfying the Love
which the people of Rome did bear to Germanicus, which increased in them by the
hatred which was born to him by Tiberius; and it cannot be doubted, but that
the particular affection with which the people love them, may give them great
advantages to embroyl the State, and may serve for a strong prop to their
revolts. It cannot be avoided, but that Princes nearly related to a Sovereign,
must have some hand in the Government of Affairs, and must partake with him in
the Honors of the State; how can it then be done in a good order, unless they
live in a fair correspondence with one another? What way can a vessel go, when
as they who guide it, do some row toward the Poop, and others toward the
Prow; despising the Pilots orders, so that the vessel becomes exposed to be
wracked. And what may there be expected from a State, where the Princes of the
Blood Royal, who have the Government of the Provinces, fall off from his
Majesty's designs and interests, engaging themselves in Factions and Parties?
Does it not by this means absolutely expose the State to Civil Wars, which
being left at random by this disunion, becomes a prey to strangers, who will be
sure to take advantage of it?

The sending of the Sieur de Blainville into England in the quality of
Extraordinary Ambassador.
THough the Alliance which had so lately been contracted with England, seemed
to be indissolvable by the confirming of it with the Marriage of the Princess;
yet it was not long before some grounds did arise to obstruct their good
correspondency. The great confidence which the Queen of England had in certain
Ladies, who had been a long while near, and about her, as also in certain
Ecclesiastiques, a little too inconsiderate in their zeal, was in part the
occasion of it; for they giving her advices which were not always accompanied
with Prudence, did clash with the King her Husbands humor, and were upon the
point of breeding some differences between them. The King did not much wonder
at it, having of a long time known, how little considerable women's counsels
ordinarily are, and how they commonly end in some broyl, unless there be some
one near them, who may prevent it by the reputation and credit which he has
amongst them. But however it did not hinder his Majesty from dispatching the
Sieur de Blanville, his Extraordinary Ambassador to the King of England, that
he might take some course before the inconsiderateness of those persons who
were about the Queen, had caused any more mischiefs; which was the easilier to
be done, in regard the Queen wanted neither Respect nor Love for the King her
Husband, and was only to be blamed, for having relied a little too much upon
those who were given to her to be her Counsel. But this was not all, there was
another cause of difference between the two Crowns, which was this: The Sieur
de Soubize, having fled into England, and there saved himself, had taken in
times of Peace, and against the approval too of those of Rochel, a small
vessel, called the little Saint John, at the Port of Blavet, which he
afterward carried to Plymouth. And not long after the English had detained and
unladen another Ship at Dover, called the Merchant Royal, full laden with goods
to the value of twelve hundred thousand Liuvers. This kind of acting was as
strange as unjust, and a great noise it made. The French Merchants not being
able to get a satisfactory answer in it, because the Sieur de Blainville's
demands were sent to the Council of his Majesty of Great Britain, seized upon
some English Ships, which exasperated them afresh, and hindered the resolution
of any thing until the following year.

Politic Observation.
ALthough the common end of private Marriages tend to concluding of Peace
amongst Families, yet it is not always the same thing with Princes. They do
never make up any Matches but on the score of Interests, and if any cause of
difference arise amongst them, they do not at all value their Alliances; but it
is well known, that those Wars which have been between such Princes, have ever
been the most bloody. It was imagined, that those many Contracts which had been
made between the Princes of the House of Orleance, and those of Burgogne, would
have extinguished the fire of their Quarrels, but the sequel made it apparent,
they all served to no purpose.

Lewis the Moor, Duke of Milan, was near a kin to the Arragonois of Naples, yet
he undid them by his intreagues: And who knows not that France never had such
great Quarrels either with Spain or England, as when they were allied by some
Marriage? And indeed it ought not to seem strange, for a Sovereign has no
Kinsman so nearly related to him as his State. A private man may govern himself
according to the Rules of Friendship, but it is otherwise with a Sovereign, who
is obliged to preserve the Rights of his Crown against every one. His
reputation is of so great concern toward the good of his Affairs, that he may
not suffer any injury to be offered to it, which he is not bound to repel by
any ways whatsoever.

The Treasuries are better regulated by the Cardinals care.
THey who have had particular knowledge of things ever since ten years last
past, could not sufficiently wonder at those vast charges which the State had
been put to both by maintaining so many Armies together, in Languedoc, in
Poictu, in the Valtoline, and Italy, as also in the Match with England, and
defraying of Ambassadors expenses, together with Alliances with States,
considering that the Cardinal entering upon the Administration, had found the
Treasury not only exhausted, but likewise much indebted, so that they lived
upon the next years Revenues. This was an effect of that great Ministers
prudence, who knowing how necessary it was for a State to have a good mass of
Money in reserve, had quickly so settled the Treasuries, that there was great
plenty succeeded that former want. The Secretaries of State were commanded not
to seal any more Orders, but by express command from the King or his Chief
Ministers: The Superintendants were also ordered, not to authorize those which
should be presented from the Secretaries of State, but upon good and just
consideration. There were diverse persons removed from Court, who attended there
to no intent or purpose, but only had sometimes the honor to see the King.
Rewards were kept for those who deserved them by their services. There were
also new orders taken at the same time concerning the Treasuries, which were so
exactly observed, that it was impossible any more to abuse the Kings Moneys as
formerly they had done, so that the Treasury was not only acquitted of those
advances which had been made, but was afterward filled with such great sums,
that France had never seen the like.

Politic Observation.
THe King who designs great matters, and wants store of moneys to execute them*
does only attempt vain enterprises. The most part of Politicians have always
been of opinion, that the Riches of a Prince are the Nerves of War; because as
it is impossible for a man to go or stand without Sinews; so it cannot be
expected that an Army should subsist, or that Soldiers should do their duties,
if there be not good store of moneys to pay them, and to provide all
necessaries for them. There is not only Machiavel, who denies this Position
against the Authority of Dion, Quintus Curtius, Vegetius, Cicero and Plutarch,
who is of opinion that money is not a Nerve in War. But besides that the
Judgment of these great Sages of Antiquity, is at least as considerable as his
opinion. So I find not that those reasons of his are solid enough to overthrow
so commonly received a maxim. I must confess with him, that War may sometimes
have a good success, though the Soldiers be but ill paid, because the
Authority of a grand Commander, and their own Courages may very much animate
them; but as that does but seldom happen, so there cannot be any certain
conclusion deduced from it. There is hereof a notable example in the Battle of
Pavy, where the Imperialists despairing to persuade their Army to fight by
reason they were so ill paid, the Marquess of Pescaire took the resolution on
himself to exhort them, and infused such mettle into them, that they went on
with great Courage, and got a great honor over the French. But that Prince who
would deduce an absolute Rule from this example, or any of the like nature, and
shall follow them in his Conduct, shall only prepare himself for his own
Confusion and Ruin: Experience having made it evident on a thousand occasions,
that it is unreasonable to hope for a happy success in matters of War, though
never so inconsiderable, without great practice. I know that it is not money
only, which conduces to the carrying on of great exploits, but that good
Soldiers are also necessary; an experienced old Commander, courteous,
generous, able in Counsels, quick in executions, beloved by the Soldiers and
endued with several other qualifications necessary for command: But besides all
this, though a General and Soldiers should be thus accomplished, yet unless
there be good sums of moneys, nothing can be really attempted: For how can a
Prince without this, satisfy several Soldiers and Commanders? How can he
without this make his preparations of Victuals, Provisions, Ammunitions,
Artilleries, and other things which cannot be had without great expenses? And
in case his Forces shall be cut off or destroyed, how can he make Recruits or
new Levies? Charles the eighth having great occasions for Soldiers to raise
the Siege of Navar, sent the Bailiff of Dion to raise it, but having no money
he could procure no Soldiers. In the mean while, the King accorded with the
Florentines for the restitution of Pisa, and several other Towns in Hostage, by
which means he received great store of moneys, of which he sent a small part
into Swizzerland, and the Bailiff who only demanded ten thousand men, brought
twenty thousand with him.

The Assembly of the Clergy for the Condemnation of certain Libels, sent abroad
by the Spanish Ambition.
ALL the rest of the year at least after May, the Bishops and Clergy of France,
were assembled at Paris. The chief intent of this meeting was for the renewing
of that contract which they made every tenth year with the King, for the
payment of those Rents which are imposed upon them. But this was not the only
worthy employment which entertained them, the affection which they always had
for the King, would not let them give way to the permitting those infamous
Books, abortives of the Spanish Ambition which had been sent into France. There
need no more then only to read them, and it would soon be apparent that they
were full of seditious Doctrine; That they were published only with design to
diminish the Kings Authority, to detract from his Majesty's glory to raise Wars
amongst strangers, to stir up the people to sedition, and to kindle a flame of
War in France: The Contents of them were replenished with a thousand specious
pretenses of Religion. These generous Prelates soon discovered their designs,
and made it apparent that they were like Apothecaries, or Mountebanks Boxes,
which are marked on the outside with the title of some healing Medicine, but
have within nothing but what is very dangerous and hurtful: They condemed the
Authors of them as enemies to the public quiet, and seducers of the people to
sedition, putting them in mind that God had commanded them to honor Kings as
Lieutenants of his power, and required them to be in a straight obedience, by
showing honor and respect to his designs and Justice, whom God had placed over
them, for the good and happiness of France; and not contented with having thus
verbally expressed their affections to his Majesty, they testified their zeal
and fidelity to him by granting him six hundred thousand Crowns upon the
Churches of France, as a contribution toward the Wars in which the State was
engaged, as also to preserve Religion in its splendor, and to maintain the
glory of the Crown. It cannot be denied but that many poor low spirits grumbled
at it, who considering but one of those ends for which Lands were given to
Churches, began to oppose it, as if the Church, which is part of the State,
were not bound to contribute to the good of those Corporations of which they
were members, and as if the public necessities were not more considerable
than the private profits of some particular people who often employ their
Revenues to bad uses.

Politic Observation.
KIngs may lawfully compel Eccleasiastiques upon an important occasion to
contribute to them some part of their Revenues for the maintenance of the
State, seeing the goods of the Church are upon such necessities in the same
condition with those of others. They are not exempted from ordinary
contributions either by the Son of God, or his Apostles; for when as they lived
on the earth, the Church had not any immovable Goods, and it is from the
favors of Emperors and Kings, that she has since obtained that privilege;
it was never granted to her, but only that they might be employed on the
public extraordinary necessities of the State. They are only tied by Religion
not to exact it, though they may by absolute authority force it; for if they
might not make use of the Churches Goods in a case of urgency, their Sovereign
power would be of little worth: And Sovereigns not compelling them in this
harsh manner, do so much the more oblige them to do it; for the entreaty of
him who may enforce, is a greater tie then his command: And is it not very
reasonable, that as all the parts of the Body, even the most noble, do
contribute to its conservation, so all the members of a State should do their
utmost to preserve it, and to establish the glory of it. The Emperor Gratian
ordained, That every one should serve on public occasions, and first of all
addressed himself to execute it, not pretending any exemption to due to the
privilege of his dignity; and Plato says, No man but ought to obey
necessities, seeing the Gods themselves submit to them. And admit that
Ecclesiastiques should deny, or make any difficulty to assist the King on such
occasions, might they not with reason be reproached, as the Emperor Dioclesian
once did a Philospher, who petitioned him to hold him excused from some Levy
which was laid upon the rest of the people. Thy request, quoth the Emperor to
him, is contrary to thy Profession, for that thou pretending to overcome thy
Passions, and to tread under thy feet all that which the world delights in,
do however, suffer thy self to be possessed with covetousness. So
Ecclesiastiques professing to be Imitators and Disciples of Jesus Christ, who
recommendended no one thing more then Poverty, and who prohibited his Disciples
to heap up Gold and Silver, would do an act much contrary to their profession,
if they should pretend to be exempted from those charges which their Kings are
forced to lay on the rest of their Subjects in any urgent occasions.

Troubles in Lorrain hapening upon the Will of Henry Duke of Lorrain.
IT remains that I should now write of some Affairs which passed about the
end of this year in Lorrain, and which have such a dependence on the concerns
of France, that I may not let them slip. Henry Duke of Lorrain, a little before
he dyed, finding himself without Sons, did by his Will invest his eldest
Daughter Madam Nicole, whom he had married to Charles de Lorrain, eldest Son to
the Count of Vaudmont, his younger Brother, giving her to understand, that
Lorrain and all that which belonged unto it, did really appertain to her, and
that Charles her Husband had no right to it, but only in consideration of her.
However the Count de Vaudmont, desirous to preserve it to his Son, in case he
should outlive his Wife, pretended himself to be heir to the Dutchee, by virtue
of the Will of Reynard, King of Sicily; and Duke of Lorrain, his Great
Grandfather, dated the twenty fifth of May, in the year one thousand five
hundred and six, which until then he had never heard of; by which the said
King foreseeing the ruins which usually happens to great Houses, by
subdividing those possessions which once belonged to them, had incorporated the
Dutchees of Lorrain and Bar, the Marquisate of Ponta-Mouson, and the Earldom of
Vaudmont, and constituted his eldest Son Anthony, late Duke of Lorrain, sole
heir of the said Soveraignties and Lordships, willing, and ordaining, that his
descendents should succeed him from Male to Male, gradually, and one after
another, and that the Daughters should not at all pretend to it. He left in
division to Claudius his youngest Son, the possession of Guise, Elbauf,
Aumalle, Mayenne, Joinville, and several others which he had in France,
substituting and ordaining his Heirs Males for ever to enjoy them, and
excluding all Daughters. The original of the Will was very authentic, and
Copies of it in diverse places to be had. There was moreover an Instrument of
Approbation, made by the States of the said Duchy assembled for that purpose,
after the decease of the said King, upon the thirteenth of February, in the
year fifteen hundred and eight, before Madam Philip of Gueldres, Queen of
Sicilie, Duchess of Lorrain and Bar, who declared, they were contented to
conform themselves to the said Kings Will.

Now the Count de Vaudmont supposed, that upon consequence of this substitution
and order thus established by Will, and confirmed by the States, himself was
the only and true Heir of Lorrain, and that his late Brothers Daughters could
pretend to it, but that they ought to be married to persons correspondent to
their Qualities.

At last he declared, by a public Instrument, that in consideration of his
Sons marriage with Madam Nicole, his late Brothers Daughter, he was content to
dispossess himself into the hands of his said Son, and that he did invest him
with it, requiring that he should be honored and obeyed in that quality by all
his States, which he renounced to him in his behalf; and that after his decease
they should descend to his next Heirs Males, excluding all Females, and still
preferring the eldest, who were to give the youngest Pensions, and the
Daughters Portions according to the Honor of the House.

The King, though somewhat concerned in this agreement, did not oppose it, but
esteemed it as frivolous, it being free for him not to take any notice of it,
because it was not presented to him for a ratification, though the curious
spirits of the time, who are pleased to discuss the Interests of States, not
at all concerned in them, but only by the faithfulness of their Affection, did
talk diversely of it: Some maintaining that the Will of Reynard the second, upon
which the Count de Vaudmont grounded his pretensions, was absolutely void, as
also the Contract of disseisure. They alleged for their chief reason, that it
was contrary to the Laws and Customs of Lorrain and Bar, observed in the
Successions of those Dutchies and Lordships which ever preferred the daughters
before the Males who were far removed; and secondly, that it was contrary to
the Laws and Customs of France made at Orleance, in the year one thousand five
hundred and sixty, and at Moulin in one thousand five hundred sixty and six,
which prohibit such substitutions for ever, but restrain them to the second
degree^ Besides the institution which was passed, if it should so stand, it
would follow of consequence, that the substitution in behalf of the Males for
ever, could not be vallid, especially in relation to Bar, and that which
depends on the Crown of France, where his Majesty ought to be considered, not
only as common Sovereign, but as Lord Paramout to whom belonged the cognizance
of causes of Appeal, and to whom Faith and Homage ought to be paid, as also
service with and against all others, it being not allowed to a Vassal, to alter
(without the Kings authority who is chief Lord) the nature of the Fee, against
the Order established by Custom. Thirdly, they added for the confirmation of
their opinions, an example very considerable which was this. It had been
concluded and agreed upon in a Treaty made at Guerand, in the year one thousand
three hundred sixty and four, between John the valiant Count de Montfort,
afterward the Fifth of that name Duke of Britain, son of John Count of
Montfort, of the one party, and Jane Duchess of Britain, daughter to Guy
Count of Ponthieu, elder brother to the said Count of Montfort, of the other
party. That as long as there should be Males of the said House of Britain, no
Female should inherit the said Duchy: They did not apprehend this Agreement to
be firm and good, unless Charles the Fifth who was Sovereign of the said
Duchy should ratify and confirm it, for that it was contrary to the Custom;
by virtue of which said Custom, the said Jane had obtained the said Duchy by
a solemn Judgment, against her said Uncle the Count of Montfort in being
preferred before him, as being the nearest, and daughter to the eldest Brother;
and that therefore they entreated the Commissaries and Deputies, who were the
Archbishop of Rei^ns, and the Marshal of Boucica^d, to ratify and confirm
their Award, which they did: That upon the score of this Ratification, the
Males of the House of Montfort had always succeeded in the said Duchy of
Britain, by being preferred before the Females. That Rainard the second in not
having followed this order, for the Duchy of Bar, and those other Lands which
depended on France, had made his said Will and Substitution absolutely void in
it self. Fourthly, the best Historians did moreover allege, That this same
Will of R^ynard the second, was not deemed to be vallid in the House of
Lorrain, but had been abrogated from time to time: As for those Lands which
related to France, they answered, that the said Duke himself had about ten
months after, dis-owned his said Will by a solemn Act, whereby he beseeched
Lewis the twelfth to grant his consent, that his Heirs Males and Females, might
succeed to inherit those lands in France, though the said Claudius was born out
of the Kingdom, as may appear by the Letters of Naturalizing, granted by the
said King at Lions in the year one thousand five hundred and seven, in the
month of May, preferring by this Act, the Heirs females of Claudius, before
Anthony his eldest son whom he had created Duke of Lorrain, and the sons of the
said Anthony. That in Prosecution of his said Deed of Abrogation, the said
preferrency had been granted to the daughter of Claudius, in reference to the
Dutchies of Guise and Aumalle; as also in the Principallity of Joinville; in
which it is declared, that the said Daughters should be admitted to inherit the
said Lordships and Lands, excluding the sons of the late Duke, at least from
all which related to France. Sixthly they added, that as for what has
dependence from the Empire, the Will ought not to be valid, neither for that it
is directly contrary to the Custom received and used in all Principallities
thereunto belonging, which are upon that side of the Rhine, and particularly
against the Custom of Nancy it self: By virtue of which, the daughters have
ever succeeded, excluding the Males when ever they were nearer related, and
that it was not in the power of Raynard to abolish the said Custom without the
Emperors consent to that purpose, first had and obtained. On the other side
there were some others who were of opinion, that the Will of the said Raynard
ought to be good and vallid, there being no disposing Power which can exceed a
Privilege; that it was true the said substitution was contrary to the
Customs, but the Sovereign Liege having power at least with his States to make
and to constitute such Ordinances and Laws which might regard the good of his
people; provided always that the Supreme Authority from whence he depended,
were not injured in it, he might abrogate such usances, and that no one could
pretend to oppose it, no not the Lord Paramount himself, for that he was not at
all concerned in it, admitting his particular Rights were preserved to him,
seeing as the Lawyers say, That whatsoever is resolved by the States of a
Country, for the reformation of a Custom ought to be deemed and observed as a
Custom of it self. Their main reasons were, That it was necessary to
distinguish between a Sovereign Paramount, and a Liege Lord; that indeed it was
granted, a Liege Lord had not power to make any Orders or Laws in prejudice of
his Superior Lord, but that it is not the same thing as to what concerns the
Powers which appartains unto him, and that he may at least dispose of them with
his States, not to alienate; but certainly to substitute and appoint them. That
it were indifferent to a Lord Paramount, whether they were Males or Females who
succeeded in the Government, it being not any thing of concern to him, provided
his rights were preserved to him, and that his Homage, Service, and Obedience
were paid him. That if at any time they should oppose such Orders and Laws as
were made by a Sovereign Liege and his States, their opposition however were
not of any validity, for that no one has any right to oppose any thing which
does not clash with his own Interests. That withal this reason was so much the
more considerable, in respect of those States which have dependence on the
Empire; because they are held with much less Subjection then those of the
Crown of France, for that the Duke of Lorrain is not at all obliged to pay
Homage to the Emperor, but only to serve him, and contribute to the
necessities of his State.

They alleged one very considerable reason, as to what concerned his Majesty's
interests, in relation to those Signiors which depended on his Crown, making it
apparent, that he was so far from being prejudiced by those constitutions made
in favor of the heirs Males, that rather on the contrary, his Majesty would
receive a notable advantage by it, seeing by this means, the States of Lorrain,
would always remain in the Possession of some small Prince, whose weakness
alone, if he should at any time be minded to fall off from his Fidelity, would
force him to continue in his duty; whereas if the daughter were admitted to a
succession before any Males further removed, it would of consequence fall out,
that those Females might fall into the hands of some Potent Prince, from whom
his Majesty might probably receive more dis-service then service, as it
happened in the case of Inheritrix of Lorrain, who married Raynard, it is
apparently known to every one, of what great concern it is (without being
beholding to examples) for a King to have small Princes to be his neighbors.

As to that which concerns the Ordinances of Orleance and Moulines, which
restrained all substitutions made to the fourth degree; besides the first
institution, that is to say, from the Institutor, and the instituted, who
succeeds the intestate, they pretended it did not exclude Francis Count of
Vaudmont from the substitution, seeing he was the fourth from Anthony, who was
the first instituted. For this Anthony left his State of Lorrain to his son
Francis, which Francis left them to his son Charles, and Charles to the late Duke
Henry his son, who was father to Nicole, which Henry having no sons, Francis
Count of Vaudmont his brother ought to be admitted to the succession, he being
within the fourth degree of the Ordinances, and that reducing Liege Princes to
the condition of ordinary Vassals, that which is permitted to ordinary Vassals,
ought at least to be granted and allowed unto them. They likewise answered, in
reply to the Treaty at Guerrande, that that example could not prejudice the
right which Francis Count de Vaudmont had to the succession, for that a single
example creates no Law, as the Lawyers say; because particular persons not
well informed may be defective in using their own rights in their utmost
extension of Power.

And lastly they said it was easy to answer all those Allegations brought to
make void the Will, and that Reynards own Act could not nullify it, for that
no Testator whatever, contradicting any one Article of his Will during his
life, does at all hinder the standing good of all the rest.

Besides that, the Ratification made by the States two years after, did
sufficiently evince that he did not at all pretend to abrogate those Lands
which he had left to his son Anthony, and that it might safely be said, he had
only desired Letters of Naturalization from Lewis the twelfth, that he might
make the daughters of his Son Claudius, capable of succeeding in those Lands
which he had left him, not that he did pretend by it to prefer them before the
far remote Males; but because it might happen in time, that they alone might
remain to enter upon their Fathers Possessions, and in that case it would be
needful, that their Father were naturalized to bring them into Possession.
That the same thing might be said, in answer to the Dutchies of Guise and
Aumalle, and the Principallities of Joinville; as also of the Treaty made
between King Charles the ninth, and Charles the second Duke of Lorrain; for that
there was no color of reason to believe, that the Messieurs de Guise, who drew
on the said Treaty, would act against that Will which called them into the
Succession of Lorrain, by excluding of the daughters, seeing it had not as yet
been contradicted, there not having hitherto been any daughters, who could
pretend to the Succession of the Dutchies of Bar and Lorrain, in exclusion of
the Males, but only Madam Nicole, and Claudius of Lorrain, who were then in
competition. That as to the form of renunciation made by Anne, daughter to Duke
Anthony, and Christian daughter to Duke Charles, they could not null the Will,
for that both did protest to be maintained in those rights which did really
belong to them, which thing did not however give them any right at all. These
answers seemed plausible enough, whence it followed, that those exceptions made
against the Will not being considerable in their Judgments, they presently
concluded that the Will ought to be in its full force, and put in execution,
and these were the reasons alleged by both Parties; but the King could only
judge of them, as to what related to his Crown; for that he alone is Sovereign
judge of all that concerns his own interests, and he has no power but God
above, which can Arbitrate concerning it.

Politic Observation.
THe substitution of Soveraignties made in favor of men, seems to be so much
the more lawful, in regard it is conformable to the Order of Gods Providence,
who has created women only to obey; who knows not that Moses the Lawgiver
of Gods people, whose Councels were inspired by the holy Ghost, has not
permitted the daughters to accept of the Succession, but in default of sons.
And does not Plato in the second book of his Laws say, that it is reasonable
that they should fall to the nearest of kin, still observing this Order, The
Male should be preferred before the Female, and that at least the Testator
should choose one of the Males for his next heir? Sol^n one of the wisest
Lawgivers of Antiquity, made a Law to establish this rule in his Commonwealth,
as Demosthenes testifies in his Oration against Leocrates: And the Law of the
Athenians gave not any right of succession to the daughters, if the sons should
present themselves to accept of it, as it may be seen in the Book of
Theodosian. Euripides gives a good reason of it in his Iphigenia, when he
says, the Male children are the Pillars of houses; that to them it belongs
to take up Arms for the good of the People, that the Sacrifices are made in
their names, that it belongs to them, to transact Public affairs, and the
daughters instead of preserving those Families into which they are born, do
weaken them by dividing the inheritances of them, and carrying them into other
places. And if this privilege of Males has been judged heretofore reasonable
amongst private families, it is incomparably much more in Soveraignties, where
the daughters have been always esteemed incapable by the most discreet. It is
true that Liege Lords, being only to gather the profits of their possessions
are bound for the making of these substitutions valuable to procure the
consents of their Estates in whom the proptiety remains: But an absolute
Sovereign ought not to make any difficulty at all of it, because it is very
advantageous for them; especially if it be done in the favor of those whose
greatness is not to be suspected. This will be a means to preserve the Estate
that belongs to him in the hands of a small Prince, whose power he will never
have any reason to fear, which is no small advantage to him, whereas letting it
fall into the hands of daughters who may marry with Potent Princes, they may
become their Masters, and may not only not render that service which is due by
Liege men; but on the contrary, may bring such troubles to them, as may oblige
them still to attend them as enemies, who may make a War upon him: It seems
likewise to be without any ground, that he should pretend a power to hinder
them, seeing his right extend only to the investiture, to the Homage, to the
Tribute, to the Service of War, and fidelity, in which he cannot be damaged if
they are preserved to him. Of what importance is it then, whether it be a son
or a daughter, which pays him his Homage Tribute, and other duties as a token
of submission. In that case it ought to be indifferent, for it has only
relation to the Liege Prince, whence it comes that every one being in a
capacity to dispose his rights, as shall best please himself, especially when no
one is prejudiced by it, there can be no impediment for the substituting his
estate in the favor of the Males. Provided he always oblige them to pay that
that is due to their chief Lord without great reason no alterations ought to be
made, in fundamental Customs of Countries; and as it seems not to be allowable
in France to abrogate the Salique Law, which excludes the daughters from the
Crown; so it is very doubtful whether it be in the Power of the States
themselves of some Countries, to change such Customs as have been received
there time out of mind for the successions of Sovereigns.

Anno 1626.
The Duke of Savoy's Design to continue the War against the Spaniards.
WHo so has at any time beheld the Sun shining through a black Cloud,
dissipating those darknesses that cover the earth; dispelling fear out of their
Souls who had been affrighted with the Thunder, and rejoicing the World by the
presence of his rays, has seen the Image of that happy Peace which entered
upon the beginning of this year, in concluding the Wars wherewith Italy and the
V^lteline were so much afflicted: But to go on with the prosecution of that
which happened after the raising of the siege of Verrue, until the conclusion of
the Treaty; I must tell you, that after those advantages obtained, the Duke of
Savoy being suggested by those happy successes, and the Devastations which the
Spaniards had made in his Country, desired passionately to fall upon their Army
which was retired to Pand sture, as also to enter upon Mallan, that he might
engage the two Armies in a long War, and by that means be revenged of them.
This was according to the temper of his Soul, who could not endure any quiet,
but the Constable ae Lisdiguiers, and the Marshal de Crequy, who desired not to
attempt any thing which might not sort to their Masters glory, opposed his
design, representing to him that there was no sense of reason to assault the
Spanish Army, which consisted of fourteen thousand men effective, entrenched in
a place very advantageous with Cannon, and where they might be releeved with
all necessary provisions, and that neither the season nor condition of their
forces, would consist with the besieging any place in Milan, without hazarding
the Kings Army and Reputation. These reasons were very considerable, and the
Constable without losing any more time, and seeing his presence would be
needless during the rest of the Winter in Piedmont, withdrew himself toward
Granoble, after he had put the Troops in Garrison, under the Command of the
Marquis de Vignolles and Vxelles. In the mean while, it being necessary to give
his Majesty an account of the condition of affairs, and to receive his
commands, he forthwith dispatched the Marshal de Crequy toward the Court. This
journey of the Marshal did much perplex the Duke, because he doubted, that he
would induce the King to Peace; as also, least he might make complaint to his
Majesty of the little care which was had for the satisfaction of the Treaty of
the League, and least he might lay all the faults which had happened in his
dish. This moved him to resolve upon sending of the Prince of Piedmont toward
him, as well to defend his Interest, as to persuade the King to carry on the
War in Italy; and having dispatched him a few days after, they both arrived at
Court about the beginning of February, where after they had entertained his
Majesty according to their own desires, they were obliged for the better
consideration of their Propositions to put them down in writing; accordingly,
they presented them to his Majesty, who assisted by his Ministers, examined
them with great deliberation; and at last resolved in order to that Prince his
designs; and withal, the more to oblige him to have a greater care in
performing his promises, he was assured of having the chief command of his
Army, though the effect of it was diverted by that unexpected negotiation of
the Sieur de Fargis in Spain, which ended in the Treaty of Mouson in Arragon.

Politic Observation.
HAppy is that Prince whose Councels in War become unprofitable by a favorable
Treaty of Peace, who can doubt but that the one is the source of all miseries,
brings all things into necessities, deprives the people of their liberties,
makes the land barren, destroys the most glorious Palaces, tieth up the
hands of Justice and brings the Country men under the barbarous insolency of
soldiers; and that on the contrary, the other is acknowledged to be the Mother
of Plenty, the beginning of the happiness of Kingdoms, and the joy of
Nations, that it gives all Liberty of Commerce and Labor, leaving to every
one the power of enjoying his own Goods, making Arts to flourish, Justice to
Reign, and banishing all fear, which keeps the mind in hell and in a
continual unquietness, whilst there are any troubles. It is not much more
pleasant to behold the earth, decked with its verdure, painted with all sorts
of Flowers, enriched with the diversity of Trees, which either nature or the
Laborers hand had Planted, replenished with all fruits and spices, and flowing
with Milk and Honey, then when it languisheth by the insufferable hardnesses of
Winter, converted into Snow and Ice, become stiff and dis-coloured, and the
Land Barren, and over-flowed with Water. So much more satisfaction ought a wise
Prince to receive, when Peace comes to deliver his Subjects from those
miseries into which War had precipitated them, to restore them the free use of
their own Goods, to give them the means of exercising their own Professions
with quiet, to drive away necessity from them, to open the Ports of Trade from
one Coast to another about their affairs, then to see them remain idle, and
without exercise, in the want of the greatest part of necessaries, not daring
to go out of their Gates, besieged by War in their Towns, and slaughtered in
their own houses by sickness and famine.

The Conclusion of the Treaty of Mouson.
FOr the better understanding in what manner this Treaty was concluded, It will
be needful to look a good way back and to take the first rise of Affairs from
Count Olivares the chief Minister of Spain, who finding that the Legate could
not bring his business to that pass as was expected, resolved to use his
utmost to accommodate things in a peaceable manner, and accordingly made
several overtures that way tending, to the Sieur de Fargis, Ambassador with his
Catholic Majesty, who was not wanting to give speedy notice of it hither; and
at the same time the Marquis de Mirabel, Ambassador for the Spaniard certified
to the Marshal de Schomberg that his Master desired a Peace. Whereupon orders
were sent to the Sieur de Fargis, that he should answer to such overtures as
had been made, that his Master would not be unwilling to embrace it, if it
might be made upon Honorable and safe conditions; and he was also acquainted
with the Kings desiers in that particular which were reduced under three
principal heads. First, that the Spanjards should renounce all pretenses to
the Passages in the Valtoline, next that the Soverainty of the Valtoline should
be preserved to the Grisons, and last related to the safety of the Catholic
Religion, he acquitted himself of their directions very diligently, but with so
much heat, that after several meetings and conferences had with the Count
d'Olivarez, they at last set down their several proposals in writing, which
being agreed upon, they were signed by them, though the Sieur de Fargis, had no
power so to do. The Sieur de Fargis conceiving he had dispatched a great
affair, presently sent away the Treaty to the King, who was not a little
surprised, as also his Ministers, to find a Treaty of peace concluded by his
Ambassador, who had no Authority for it, nor had ever sent any word of advice
about it. His Majesty seemed by this precedure to be obliged to recall him, and
at his return to treat him according to his deserts: but his prudence guiding
him in it, he would not presently conclude so to do, but proposed the business
to be debated by his Ministers. Many were of opinion absolutely, to reject this
pretended Treaty, not only because the Form of it was ill, but because it was
likewise an offense to the Kings Allies, it being concluded without them; and
withal, the haste and eagerness which appeared in the Spaniards was a manifest
sign of their weakness, which might not be passed by without taking some
advantage of it.

But the Cardinal taking hold of the discourse, told his Majesty, that prudence
did not so much tie men up to consider the Forms as the substances of things,
and withal told him that he thought it more proper to stand to the conditions,
of the Treaty, then to dispute the manner of the Treaty; and how the Sieur de
Fargis had concluded it; He confessed that those Terms which his Majesty had
desired, were not expressed with all the circumstances and limitations, as was
to be wished, and yet he represented to him, that it was no small matter to
have obtained of the Spaniards, the chief points which were demanded; for they
renounced the passages in the Valtoline; they were contented the Soverainty
should remain in the Grisons, and in conclusion he freely declared, That to
his apprehension it were not proper rashly to reject that Treaty, for that the
Spanish Ambassador had lately told the Marshal de Schomberg, that in case there
were any thing to be altered in point of form, or if any of the Articles were
too harsh, it would be more proper to review and amend them, then to neglect
the reuniting of the two Crowns. Then he informed his Majesty, how that his
taking up Arms was for the establishing the Grisons in their Sovereignty and to
preserve the passages of the Valtoline for France, in excluding the Spaniards
quite from them, and that his Majesty obtaining both one and the other he might
both with advantage and reputation, hearken to the peace. That true it was his
Allies might complain of it, but without any season, if once those ends were
obtained, for which the league was made, and withal the small success of the
Army in Italy made it apparent, there was little to be got by it. In short, he
beseeched his Majesty to weigh one thing of great consideration, which was that
Rochel not being yet reduced under his obedience, it would be an easy matter
for the Spaniards to stir up the Hugonots to revolt, who finding themselves
countenanced and supported by several Princes of the Court, would divert one
part of his Forces, and would impede his sending of so many Forces as would be
needful on the other side the Hills, so that instead of expecting a good Issue of
the wars in Italy, there was great fear of many dangers in it. The Prudence of
this incomparable Minister, urged so many strong reasons, that they were
impossible to be answered, so that his Majesty resolved to lay hold on those
advantages in the Treaty and to amend what should be thought fit in it; To
which purpose Orders were dispatched to the Sieur de Fargis, with command to
induce the Count d'Olivarez to agree to them, and in case he should make and
difficulty of it, that he himself should presently take his leave and return
home, to give an account of his business.

The Sieur de Fargis having received them, on the fifteenth of February,
addressed himself with all diligence to repair the fault which he had
committed, and also in his letters to his Majesty testified a great deal of
sorrow for it, which however did not with hold him from running into a second,
for he concluded upon and signed another Treaty with the Count d'Olivarez,
somewhat better indeed then the former, but not strictly conformable to his
Orders and instructions, so that sending them to his Majesty, they would not be
accepted of unless once more amended: and also his Majesty that he might take
away all suspicion from the Marquis de Mirabel, that he did approve of this
manner of proceeding in his Ambassador he wished in a public audience, that
Fargis had been but as discreet as he was; that the first time, he did a thing
of his one brayn, without any authority, and that in the second he had not
followed his Orders and Instructions, for which he should exemplarily be
punished. But that in the mean time both himself and the King of Spain did
reap some benefit by his Folly, in that they might both discover one another
minds to be without gall, and to be well inclined to peace, of which that he
might give an evident testimony, he would send a Treaty to his Ambassador with
the least alteration that could be, and such a one as the King of Spain, would
not make any scruple to accept of.

The Treaty was drawn up, and before it was dispatched the King gave one part
of it to the Prince of Piedmont, and to the Venetian Ambassador who both having
several particular designs quite different from that of the league, neither of
them did approve of it, either in substance or form; and the Prince himself
took his leave of the King to return into Piedmont. The Marquis de Mirable, was
informed of their resentments, who seeming to suspect an absolute breach,
pressed very earnestly for a quick dispatching of the Treaty away toward
Spain, in such manner and form as his Majesty desired it should be amended, and
gave great hopes that all things would be concluded in a happy end. So the
Treaty was sent away to the Sieur de Fargis who received it at Barcelona, and
as his own Interests as well as those of France did excite him to it, so he
played his part so dexterously with the Count d'Olivarez, that it was soon
after signed and concluded between them, and antidated from the fifth of March
at Mouson, to evade any complaints of Cardinal Barbarini, who had bin at
Barcelona, before the Treaty was signed and had no hand in it, for fear only
of some great delays, which he might have raised, because he had no other
answer made him to those overtures of his for peace, but only complements and
thanks, and assurances that the peace was concluded. The chief Articles were,
That the Affairs of the Grisons and the Valtoline should be restored into the
same state, they were before the war, in the year one thousand six hundred and
seventeen, preserving by this means the Soverainty to the Grisons, and the
absolute disposing power of the Passages to France, in whose actual possession
they then were; that there never should any exercise of Religion be established
in the Valtoline, but only the Roman Catholic and Apostolic, that the
Valtolines might elect their own Governors and Magistrates, all Catholics
either of the Grisons or the Valtolines. That such elections should be
confirmed by the Grisons, who should not however have any power to refuse the
Ratification of them: That all the Forts in the Valtoline should be restored
into the Popes hands, to be forth with rased and demollished that the two Kings
should proceed with all sincerity, to settle peace between such of their Allies
as had engaged in the wars with them, and that neither of them should openly or
privately give any abbetting or assistance, to the continuing of the war
between them, without having first used all fair means and ways, for the
settling of a peaceable and friendly agreement. Thus were all the grounds of
difference between them ended and concluded, to the great Happiness of
Christendom, though by away in it self extravagant enough, and contrary to all
usual Forms.

Politic Observation.
IN all Treaties of great Importance. It is more material to adhere to the
substances then the formalities of conditions. Formalities are indeed,
necessary as means to abtain that end which is proposed, and there is great
reason to rest satisfied when that same end is once obtained. What sense is
there not to accept of that which is aimed at when occasion does present, but
to leave it off to the hazard of time and Fortune, and all to finish it, with
certain Ceremonies, which at last cast do not at all advantage the thing doing?
The end say the Philosophers, has this property, That it terminateth all
motion; and so a stone rests when once arrived at the center of the Earth,
the end which the Creator of Nature has ascribed unto it.

So the Artificer, when once he has perfected his workmanship, forbeareth any
further labor about it; and it is most certain that all causes whether natural
or artificial, do prefer rest before motion, if it were not necessary to admit
of Actions for the attaining that end whereunto it tends.

Who knows not that Public peace is the end of a wise Prince, and the very
thing too for which he does attempt any war, and that he would never design war
but only for the obtaining of a quiet sure rest? The sick person would never
have any recourse to the Physician, if he had no need of putting his
distempered body into a good order.

And what Reason could there be for continuation of the war, when there is an
overture offered for accepting of an honorable and advantageous peace? to do so
were point blanck against the prescribed rule of Justice, of which both art and
nature gives us examples. Admit there be some formalities wanting in the
Treaty, they ought to be considered in the order of negotiation, in the same
manner, as the motions of nature; and as no one makes any esteem of motion
when as the pretended end is once obtained: So the wisest Politicians do lay
by the considerations of all formalities, when once they are arrived at that
pitch which they propose to themselves.

The Pope is very glad of the Treaty of Peace, between France and Spain.
AS soon as the Treaty was concluded, his Majesty's next care was to induce his
Allies to ratify it; The Pope was first of all acquainted with it, who was
overjoyed at it, and openly declared to the Sieur de B^thune that he took no
notice at all, of the extraordinary manner had bin use by concluding it without
interesting him or letting him have a hand in it, only that he might rejoice
with the more liberty to behold the two Crowns of France and Spain in Peace: I
shall also add that his Holiness excused himself too, for the Resolution which
he had taken of sending six housand men to Pepeinheim, for the guarding of the
Fort of Rive, assuring him that he had not done it, but only to vindicate the
injury which had been done him by the Spaniards, who were come to that point
of Boldness as to say his Holiness favored the Grisons against the Valtolines;
as also in some sort to repel the injury which had been offered to the Holy
Chair, when as those Forts were taken which had been guarded under his
Ensigns, and that he did moreover pretend by this means to get a greater power
over the Spaniards, that he might afterward the more easily force them to
accept of a reasonable Treaty. But he was much more overjoyed at the news of
the last Treaty, for he heard at the same time from the Si^ur de Bethune that
his Master the King had also accepted of it, and that the Peace was by that
means absolutely concluded.

The sending of the Sieur de Bullion toward the Duke of Savoy, to persuade him
to assent to the Treaty before mentioned.
NOw as this Agreement was the principal thing which could be desired from his
Holiness, so the Sieur de Bethune, satisfied him with it, by representing to
him, with what respects the King his Master had treated him, by his admitting
the Forts should be restored into his Holinesses hands to be by him demolished.
All the Princes of Italy, who were not entered into the league, did testify a
great deal of joy at the news of the accommodation; but it was not so with the
Duke of Savoy, and Commonwealth of Veniee, who upon the first hearsay of it
seemed to be much discontented, for that the Treaty had been concluded without
them; though in reallity, they had no reason to be troubled at the foundation
of it, seeing his Majesty had obtained those ends for which their Armies and
Forces had been united and leagued together: But in regard the form of the
Treaty was contrary to that Order which was usually observed, his Majesty
resolved to send his Ambassadors to them, to recompense by some extraordinary
(...), the default which might be omitted in prejudice of their right. The
(...) de Bullion was sent toward the Duke of Savoy, by reason of that credit
and acquaintance which he had of a long time had with the said Duke. His
Instruction consisted of three particualrs, The first to induce his Highness to
assent unto the Treaty of Mouson, and to qualify his resentments for that it
had been done without him. The second was to dispose him toward a cessation of
Arms, with those of Genoa, and to refer the business of their differences to
arbitration, and lastly to treat with him, concerning the interests of his
house, and withal to proffer him his Majesty's assistance to raise him, to the
greatest point of glory, that he could aim at. Upon the first of these three
points, the Sieur de Bullion had orders to give his Highness to understand,
that the manner of Sieur de Fargis his proceeding in it, had deprived his
Majesty of all possible means to communicate it to his Highness, and that his
Majesty having had advise upon it, was counseled to lay hold on peace, in
regard of the disposition of Affairs both within and without his Kingdom,
considering the small progress the Arms of the League had made after two years
time in Italy, and lastly for that those very things were obtained in the
Peace, for which the League had been contrived, all which things were much more
considerable then any Formalities and Punctilio's of honor. Upon the second
point the Sieur de Bullion had express charge to tell his Highness, that his
Majesty had so much the more willingly consented to the Treaty of Peace, that
he might be capable of ending his differences with the Commonwealth of Genoa
by arbitration, in respect his Arms had so little contributed to advance his
interests as yet, and that if his Highness would be pleased to make known his
pretentions. The King would embrace them very affectionately, and as his own;
and would also concur with him for the procuring him all possible satisfaction
and content, either by disputing the business by reason, and if need were by
Arms. Upon the third point, which had no relation to any thing of the League,
and yet was no inconsiderable thing neither, for that it was designed only to
allay and take off from the Dukes anger and passion, that his Majesty well
knowing the courage and magnanimity of this Prince, and that it was his high
mind which made him esteem glory above all things, as also that eminent Titles
of honor have a great influence on the Souls of those who are touched with
greatness, and that it does bring them to that point which is pretended,
commanded the Sieur de Bullion to humor this inclinations, and to let him know
that his Majesty had by the Sieur de Bethune proposed to the Pope, to cause him
be Crowned King of Cyprus, as well in regard of the pretensions which the house
of Savoy has upon that Kingdom, as also in regard of his particular valor,
which was risen to so high an admiration and credit in the whole World, that
this Title could not with Justice be denied him, and that there was not any
King in Christendom, which would not be well satisfied with the admission of a
Prince of his Birth and recommendation, into that degree and quality.

The Dispatch of the Sieur du Chasteauneuf to the Commonwealth of Venice, for
the Affairs beforementioned,
THE Sieur de Bulloin made use of his Reason with so much Judgment and
Prudence, that he obtained all he could desire: The Cessation of Arms was
consented to; and accordingly, proclaimed in Milan, Genoa, and Piedmont. The
referring of the business to Arbitration was well approved of, and his
Highness delivered a breviate of his pretensions to the Crown of Cyprus, to
the Sieur at Bullion, who assured he would recommend that business
particularly to his Majesty; and told him, that most assuredly his Majesty
would be very careful of it. On the other side the Sieur de Chasteauneuf was at
the same time sent to the Commonwealth of Venice, to induce them to accord to
the Treaty and accommodation of Mouson, and from thence for the same purpose to
the Grisons, the Valtolines, and the Swisses. Those first Reasons which were
given in charge to the Sieur de Bullion, to represent to the Duke of (...) were
also included in his Instructions, and he had likewise particular order to ad^
to the Commonwealth of Venice, That they had great reason to be well satisfied
with the Peace, seeing it freed them from a chargeable War, subject to many
accidents, and in which well they might lose much, but gain little. And because
the Venetian Ambassador declared that he did imagine the assurance of the
Treaty to consist in the keeping up of those Forts in the Valtoline; the said
Sieur de Chasteauneuf had Order to let them know, that such a pretension as
that was, would most assuredly have broken off the Treaty of accommodation, and
that all that was to be wished, was sometimes impossible to be effected:
Besides that, the keeping up of the Fort; would be a great charge, either in
relation to the necessary expenses, for the giving of a full satisfaction, or
else for the maintaining of a strong Garrison, and who at last cast too, might
not peradventure be able to keep out the Spaniard, if at any time he should
have a mind to enter upon them with an Army. He was also charged to let them
perceive that the natural inclination of the Valtolines, was not to endure any
Rule or Government, and that they would never have endured any long time
together, that those Forts should remain in the power of a stranger, and that
the Spaniards knowing their natures to be such, would always be inciting and
assisting them underhand to retake them; so that the keeping up of the Forts,
would instead of securing the Treaty, only become an absolute ground of
troubles to the Commonwealth; as they who are nearest seated to the Valtoline,
who are in perpetual fears and jealousies, and forced still to be upon their
Guard against the Spaniards attempts, which would put them to vast charges, and
force them too at last to yield to reason. And he was commanded by his Majesty,
that he might humor the Commonwealth in its Interests, to tell them, that the
King would willingly grant them the Passages of the Valtoline and Grisons for
ten years, he knowing how passionately they desired it; and moreover, that his
Majesty would in case they should request it, enter into a defensive League
with them.

The Sieur de Chasteauneuf prosecuted these Instructions so luckily, that the
Commonwealth was sensible of the honor the King had done them, in sending to
them an extraordinary Ambassador upon their Affairs; and left it to his
Majesty to consider, whether all those advantages which were to be wished for,
were comprised in the Treaty, and that for their particulars, they thought
themselves much obliged for his proffer of a defensive League, assuring the
said Sieur de Chasteauneuf, that they should be ever ready to continue those
testimonies of affection and observance, which they had always had toward the
Crown of France, which was as much as could be desired from them. Then the
Sieur de Chasteauneuf went toward the Grisons and the Valtoline in prosecution
of his Embassiy: The Instructions which he received from his Majesty concerning
those parts, was to join himself with the Marquess de Coeuvres and to swear
those people to a solemn observaon of the Treaty. The Valtolines made not any
difficulty at all at it, but accepted of the Treaty, as also to pay every year
unto the Grisons, five and twenty thousand Crowns, which had been imposed on
them: But as for the Grisons, there were many meetings and Assemblies held
amongst them, without any resolution; but only in general terms they thanked
his Majesty, for his assistance, and acknowledged themselves infinitely obliged
to him. But as to the Treaty, they desired they might send their Deputies
toward his Majesty to represent to him the difficulties which did arise in
their acceptance of the said agreement, by reason of the alteration of
Justice, seeing the Magistracy and Authority, was given into the hands of the
Valtolines. They accordingly sent their Deputies to make their complaints, but
after they were once fully informed of the Justice of those reasons which
invited them to accept of the Treaty, seeing otherwise it would be impossible
to preserve the Sovereignty of the Valtoline to them, or to defend themselves
from a perpetual War with the Valtolines, who being under-p^^^pped by the
Spaniards, would never submit to their longer government of them; as also that
the Sovereignty of Justice was well paid for by a great sum, and that
themselves too might be chosen into the Magistracy as well as the Valtolines,
they did at last accept of it, and were content to receive the Treaty. So the
Sieur de Chasteauneuf continued on his journey toward Switzerland, for the
satisfying of his Majesty's pleasure, who had commanded him to induce the
Cantons both Catholic and Protestant to accept of the Treaty, seeing they had
not a little contributed to the recovery of the Valtoline, by those Troops
which they had sent thither, and that it were not amiss to engage them in the
execution of those Articles of Peace, for that they might be very much
assisting toward the preserving of the Valtoline in that condition as had now
been resolved on. To the Catholics he represented, that they had great reason
to be satisfied with it, seeing the Catholic Religion was established so
firmly in the Valtoline; and to the Protestants he alleged, that considering
the Sovereignty was maintained to the Grisons, they had reason to rest
contented; accordingly, the Catholics resolved to subscribe to it and to
persuade the Grisons to do the like. And the Protestants after some
difficulties at first, being shortly after assembled at Aran, resolved likewise
to embrace it, excepting as to what concerned Religion, and delivered their
Declaration at the same time to the Sieur de Chasteauneuf. And thus the Treaty
being accepted of all hands, that were any ways concerned in it, there
remained only the putting it in execution.

Politic Observation.
AN Ambassador who is employed to make a Treaty of Peace, is chiefly bound to
represent to them, with whom he treats, the great inconvenicences unto which
thich they expose themselves by continuation of the War. For as Interest is the
only rise from whence all the motions of Princes do flow, so he need not doubt
but that Interest too will lead them to any thing, if he finds a means to
persuade them that War will be prejudicial to them. He ought not to be
unmindfull of letting them know, that a Prince may not either with Justice or
Prudence make a War, but only that he may obtain a most certain and
advantageous Peace; as also that that Prince who would continue a War, after a
Peace is offered to him, with those two conditions annexed, is as unreasonable
as an Artificer, who after he has given his work the best most curious form,
that it is capable of, should however still continue his care and pains, to
perfect it, though unable to give it any other or better form then he has
already done.

This once done, it behooves him to tell them in words tempered both with
Prudence and Courage, that the success of War is uncertain, and that many
Princes have fallen down from their great hopes and victory into misfortunes
and losses: That the divine Providence has often permitted those Princes, who
are over obstinate for the continuing of Wars, to be rebuked with disgraces and
shame. That the Holy Scripture gives us a notable example of this truth in
that of the Tribe of Benjamin, who refusing these overtures of Peace, which
were made to them, by the rest of the Tribes, when they entreated them to
abandon the Gibeonit^s, who had offended them, were shamefully overcome, and
their Cities Pillaged; That many having given way to their Ambition to persuade
them to the Conquest of their Neighbors. Have seen their own States exposed as
a Prey to their particular enemies: That many things appear easy in discourse,
which are difficult to be put in execution. That they are not the most generous
Princes, who suffer themselves to be led on with Passion, to enlarge their
Borders, but they who employ their powers with prudence and equity; That a
Prince has glory enough, if he can but give his Subjects the means of enjoying
that felicity which is the end of the Politic Government; which happiness
being linked with Peace, he ought not at any time to refuse the accepting of it
when proffered with advantageous conditions: In fine, he will make a great
impression upon their Souls to incline them to conclude a Peace, when to as he
shall discourse to them, that Princes who are ambitious of their neighboring
States, are like unto hunger starved appetites, who never satisfied, but
desirous to devour all, do weaken and destroy their natural heat by the excess
of those meats wherewith they fill themselves; and that in the same manner it
is with those, who not contented with that state and condition whereto their
Birth or Fortunes had assigned them, suffer themselves to be hurried away with
an insatiable desire of usu^ping upon others; and in fine, only weaken and
impoverish themselves, and their Subjects by a continuation of Wars, which
lays them naked to the cruelty of their enemies, inforceth them to leave
their Lands untilled, squeezes from them all their means toward the
Contribution of the War, and sometimes too casts them into rebellion, when as
once they begin to be weary with the violences of the Soldiery: and adding to
these misfortunes the constant attendants upon War the want of all those good
things which are so plentifully enjoyed with Peace, it will be a most
efficacious means to cause them to lay down their Arms and to accept of that
peace, which is so offered to them.

Prosecution of the History.
IF it was a business of some difficulty to persuade the Allies to accept of
the agreement, it was no whit less troublesome, to execute those Articles
which had been concluded particularly for demolishing those Forts in the
Valtoline: The two Armies could by no means be drawn off until the Forts were
slighted, which was no small charge to the two Kings as well as to his
Holiness, who had carried six thousand men as far as Milan; whence is followed
that it was treated both in France, Spain, Rome, Milan and Valtoline, in what
manner it should be done, and so many difficulties did arise, that it was
November before any thing was resolved on; and the execution of it deferred
until February in the year one thousand six hundred twenty seven. The Treaty
was to this effect, that the Forts should be restored into his Holiness hands
to be forthwith demolished; but the Pope made some difficulty of charging
himself with the doing of it, and only desired that the Forts might be
delivered up into his hands, for reparation of the injury, which had been door
him as he persuaded himself, when as the Marqueis de Coeuvres took them from
him, and that afterward he would cause the Spaniards to raze them. France did
not at all stand upon re^^oring them into the Popes hands, but the King would
be well assured that the Pope should not deliver them over into the Spaniards
hands to be by them demolished, to which effect he desired that his Holiness,
would only send in so many Soldiers, that in appearance only they might seem
to be Masters, which his Holiness would not be drawn to, and the Spaniards too
dissuaded him from it, as hoping that when his Holiness should have them in his
absolute power, they might find some way or other, to get them into theirs and
so demolish them, which many amongst them thought to be very honorable, though
diverse others were of a contrary opinion, as imagining it to be a work ignoble
for their Master, who had first caused them to be built.

The Final agreement for the demolishing of the Forts in the Valtoline.
AFter many contestations off and on, the King to end all differences, gave
full power to the Sieur de Bethune to conclude at Rome with the Pope and
Spanish Ambassadors, any thing that was reasonable to be do, and between them
it was at last concluded, that the Forts should be delivered into the hands of
Torquatus Conty, who commanded the Popes Forces: that in the mean while the
Kings Forces were to quarter in such places, as were not included in the
deposite, That as soon as ever the Forts were delivered up, they should
presently demolish them; That the Arms, Artillery and Ammunitions of war,
which belonged to the Spaniards, should be restored to them and that the
discharges being granted, his Holiness Forces, as also those of the two Kings
should withdraw themselves at the same time from the Valley and the Earldoms of
Bormio and Chiav^nnies; These were the principal Articles resolved upon for
execution of the Treaty, which after it was ratified by the King, the Marquis
de Coeuvres presently trealed with Torquatus Conty and Don Goneales de Cordua,
whom the Spaniards had sent in Ferra's place as a man more inclined to peace,
concerning the form of the redemise and demolition of the Forts. There were
Commissaries likewise appointed for the giving in of true Inventories of the
Artillery, Ammunitions of war, victuals and the deposit, and to make a general
discharge which ought to be given to the Pope, upon his entrance into those
Forts, which had formerly been delivered to him in deposit. Upon the fifteenth,
the demolition was began, and so many labors came to finish it, that in six
days it was all ended. The Marquis de Coeuvres gave order to the Marquis ae
Tequiers to retire with his Majesty's Forces toward France, and his Majesty,
for a just and worthy recompense of his services, bestowed in him the Honor of
Marshal de Campo; and thus the respect and reference, which the two Crowns made
to the Pope, were an assured means for settling them in peace with one another.

The Reasons which oblige great Princes to show an extrardinary honor to the
Pope.
THere are diverse Reasons which invite great Princes to pay an extraordinary
respect so the Pope. They are bound to it by duty, seeing as St. Bernard says,
he is the high Priest, the Sovereign Bishop, the Prince of Bishops, Heir to the
Apostles, that he is like Abel in his Priority, Noah in his Government, Abraham
in his Patriarch-ship, Melchisedech in his Order, Aaron in his dignity, Samuel
in the excellency of his Judgment, St. Peter in the Power which he received
from the Son of God, seeing he is the cheef of Christians, the Shepherd of the
people, the Rod of the Mighty, the Hammer of Tyrants, the Father of Kings, the
Light of the World, and the Lieutenant of God upon Earth: And who sees not
that all these eminent qualities, do make him amongst other Potentates here
below, the same that the Sun is in comparison of the rest of the Stars? And
then looking on his Person, and beholding the Object whom he does represent,
which is no other than God himself, ought not every one be persuaded to treat
him, withal imaginable respects for the love of God the Almighty Lord, who
governing States by the hand of Providence, does most commonly bless them in
that proportion, as Princes respect those for his sake who belong unto him. To
speak truth, this honoring them is a Loadstone, which draws down all kind of
blessings from Heaven, which conduce to the Happiness of Kingdoms: And if
neither of the two considerations should be potent enough, over the minds of
Kings, to persuade them to bear a great reverence to the Pope; yet in my
opinion they are bound to it by a very Politic and considerable reason, which
is to preserve themselves in Peace. For that it has been always judged
necessary that amongst Princes there should be an Impartial chief, and a
general father of Jesus Christ's family, who might accommodate their
differences, and might by his Counsels moderate, the violence of those, who
make unjust attempts, and who might unite their Arms and Powers to defend the
from the violences of its enemies.

If it should so happen that the Pope should become contemptible by the little
respect which is rendered to him, what credit could he have, to conclude or
effect such things amongst them? what esteem could he have to end their
differences. They might force him to contain himself within the limits of his
spiritual jurisdiction, without meddling in temporal affairs, but in the
interim, the fire of war would often break out amongst them, with such fury
that both themselves and estates would be consumed in the Flames of it: Whereas
did they but receive his Counsels with respective honor, and admit of his
persuasions with esteem, his dignity would then become venerable amongst them
all, and he might with ease accommodate their divisions, by his allotting to
each one what belongs justly unto him, he might restore peace to the Nations,
and stop the course of all violent proceedings.

Articles of Peace granted to the Rochelois.
AS Peace is the most sure Foundation of the happiness of Kingdoms, so the
Cardinal was not satisfied to have settled it abroad, but endeavored the
procuring it for those of Rochel, and to establish it in France, both for the
greatest good of the people, and the highest glory of his Majesty that could be
aimed at. He quickly set on work diverse persons of the Town, whom he had
gained by opening their eyes, and who were potent enough, with several others,
to persuade them to follow the example of the rest of their Party. So that the
Deputies who had been sent by the Assemblies of the Hugonots, coming to Court
to present to his Majesty the Ratification of the Articles of Peace, which it
had pleased his Majesty to accord to them the year last past, were accompanied
with those of Rochel, who came in their behalf to offer their submissions, and
to beseech him that they might obtain the same grace and favor which had been
granted to the rest of that party. It is true, they did not so much repent for
their Rebellion, as they were sorry for those inconveniences, which the Kings
Army had put upon them, then commanded by the Marshal de Themines, who
succeeded the Marshal de Plessis, and who pressed so close upon them, that they
could not peep out, but in danger of being taken: For that they no longer had
the liberty of enjoying their Goods, and that all their Traffic was spoiled.
Affliction does at last open the eyes of those Rebels, whom insolency and
ambition had but lately closed up, of which they gave assured proof, by those
earnest entreaties which they made to his Majesty, to forget the Rebellion of
which they had been guilty. The same reasons which invited his Majesty to show
his Clemency to the rest of that party, did also persuade him to do the like to
them of Rochel; as also the Cardinal hinted one more to him, somewhat
powerfuller then the rest. There had then been newly discovered a Combinatiyn
between diverse Princes and Lord, of the Court as shall be anon declared, and
amongst others, one of their designs, was to engage Mensieur with the Hugonots
Party; so that if Peace had not been granted to Rochel as well as to the other
Towns and Cities, it were the ready way to let open a door for War, and to give
those Rebels the more means to execute their designs by a high hand; for it
were an easy matter by the means of this one City, to raise all the party. And
last of all, this great Minister laid down before his Majesty, That the English
(being as they were picking a quarrel with us, to which they were inclined)
would upon a word speaking find Rochel ready to let them into France. These
reasons of State were of great weight, and fit to be considered, of which his
Majesty being sensible, he did at last grant the City of Rochel the favor
which was desired, and the Cardinal was not a little diligent to watch that
this Peace were not concluded upon such shameful Articles, and full of
baseness, as formerly they had been. The King consented that the Town should
be delivered into the hands of the Corporation, on condition they kept no Ships
of War; that they observed those Orders for Traffic which were established in
the rest of the Kingdom: That they should restore to the Ecclesiastiques all
the Goods which had been taken from them: That they should suffer the
Catholics to live freely and quietly in the exercise of the Roman Catholic
and Apostolic Religion, and in the enjoyment of those Goods which appertained
unto them: That his Majesty should leave what Garrison he thought fit in Fort
Lewis, and the Islands of Ree and Oleron, only promising that out of his
bounty and goodness, he would settle such a course in it, as those of Rochel,
might receive no trouble by it, either in their Commerce, or the enjoyment of
their goods. These Articles were agreed on about the beginning of February, and
the next day the general and particular Deputies ratified and confirmed them,
thinking themselves happy, for having obtained this end from his Majesty's
Bounty. By this years enjoyment of Peace among the Hugonots, his Majesty did
with the more ease detect and break the designs of those who were factiously
bent, as also he assisted his Allies in Germany, he eased the people, and went
on laboring in the means, for restoring of that happiness and glory, which
had been so long wished for in the Kingdom. I shall only add, that his
Majesty for the surer execution of the Treaty, sent Commissaries to Rochel, who
were received there with great honor: Those of Rochel having sent their
Deputies to Surgeres, for the establishing the exercise of Religion, and
settling things into such order, that there were very great hopes of a true
Obedience and long Peace, had not that people been extremely much inured to
Rebellion.

Politic Observation.
ALthough the Rebellions of subjects force a Prince to punish some for an
example, yet prudence does oblige him sometimes to dissemble it, and to give
them peace, when as there is any fear of a greater mischief to follow, by any
new revolt, which joining their flames with the former, might endanger the
putting of the whole into combustion. It could not be any weakness of heart, or
necessity (to which as an Ancient says, the Gods themselves are obedient) will
force him to it. It is no fault to fear, when as there is a just ground for it,
but it is rather a great piece of prudence, and a virtue, without which there
is no enjoyment of happy success in war any long time together of this.
Marcellus heretofore gave us a good example, when as Badius, that he might
acknowledge the favor which Hanibal had done him, in saving his life, and
giving him back his Ransom, made the most part of the inhabitants of Nole
revolt against the Romans in the Battle of Cannes. This Captain seeing the
conjuncture of Affairs, did oblige him rather to allay then exasperate, used
his utmost power to regain Badius, by assuring him, that if he would but return
to Rome, those wounds which he had that day received, would bring him great
rewards: Badius was much taken with the generousnesse of the Message, and
Marcellus the more to accomplish his design, sent him a very goodly Horse, and
five hundred drams of Silver, which did so oblige him, that he was ever
after very loyal and faithful to him, so that from that time forward he would
never inflict any punishment upon those who were revolted. It was more by
Prudence then by Force that the Romans became Masters of the Universe. A
discreet Minister ought much rather to induce his Master to accommodation on
such occasions, then to hazard the State in any eminent danger, by too much
stiffenesse in resolution, for the punishing of those who are revolted, when
they are upon the point of having a strong assistance, by which means they may
hazard the success of the War.

An Edict against Duels.
IT was no small happiness for France to be thus at Peace abroad, and with the
Hugonots at home, but the Cardinal could not imagine it sufficient, if not
settled amongst the Nobility, who were every day cutting one another Throats in
Duels. It was impossible to persuade them by any reasons, that it was one of
the greatest parts of glory, for a wise man and a Christian, to overcome his
own emotions of anger, and to forgive his enemies. So this great Minister
insinuated into his Majesty, who was already zealously desirous of Justice:
That nothing was so contrary to the Law of God, and the welfare of his own
State, as Duels, in which there every day perished many of the Nobility, and
which has been always known for one of the greatest Incendiaries of France.
It was no hard matter, to persuade him to stop the further course of it, by the
terrors of those punishments included ^n an Edict against all such, as should
be found guilty of the breach of it. The Edict contained, that all such as
should for the future fall into that crime, either challenging or challenged,
should be ever after deprived of all their Charges, Pension or other gifts,
notwithstanding any letter of favor or grace, which they might procure or
obtain, either by surmise or otherways; and that in case they should
afterward attempt any thing against those who should be placed in their
Offices, they should presently be degraded out of the Nobility, declared not to
be Gentlemen, but Yeomen, and punished with death. And besides, that a third
part of their Goods should be confiscated: That the person who carries a
Challenge should under the Penalties abovesaid be banished three whole years:
That all such as should assault or fight with one another* upon any occasion,
should be proce^ded against and punished, as if the design to fight had been
premeditated. That all such as should fight out of the Kingdom should be
punished in their Goods during their absence, and in their persons after their
returns in the same manner, as if it had been committed in France. And lastly,
that such as should take with them either a Second or Third, should be punished
with out more a do, with death: As also all such, who should the second time
carry any one a challenge for Duel.

These were the chief punishments included in the Edict, and upon the
publication of it, his Majesty took a solemn oath, not to she any favor to
those who should break it, and commanded his officers, that if it should happen
that his Majesty, might by importunity be drawn to grant any pardons for it,
they should take no notice of it, and enjoined the Marschals of France to have
a great care in ending any difference which might arise between the nobility,
giving them authority, that in case any should refuse to give that
satisfaction, which should by them be enjoined, they should presently besides
those punishments of imprisonment, and such others as might be inflicted on
them, be forth with degraded of their nobility* It was however much to be
doubted, lest those, who should be challenged and did not fight would be
esteemed as cowards, but to prevent that disorder, his Majesty did also by the
same Edict declare, that such refusal to accept of any Challenge should be
esteemed as a mark of courage, generous and prudent conduct, and deserving to
be employed in Military commands; and he did likewise promise by oath before
God, that he would reward such as should forbear to accept of any such
challenges.

Politic Observation.
PRinces may not permit Duels without partaking in the Crimes of them; for who
so has the Authority in his hands, and makes not use of it, to punish those
offenses which are committed against the Laws, is no less guilty, then they
who are the absolute Authors of such misdemeanors. The people do not only
violate the Law in the persons of their Kings; but the Kings themselves in not
punishing the offenders, are guilty of the same crime.

How unjust is it to leave Duels unpunished, seeing they are condemned by the
Judgment of God, when he said, his Blood shall be spilt, that spilleth the
Blood of his Neighbor. And under the new Law who so shall take the Sword in
hand shall perish by the Sword. I may safely say, there is not any Crime so
enormous as this, for the man who commiteth it, takes that Authority which God
has reserved to himself, according to that saying of Saint Paul to the Romans,
Vengeance is mine, and I will repay it. And it is not only an attempt upon Gods
prerogative, but also one of the greatest miseries that a Commonwealth can be
afflicted with: For as a great loss of Blood, extinguisheth the vigor of our
bodies, makes our faces become pale, and renders nature weak and languishing:
So likewise is it with Duels, which draw out the most courageous Blood of the
nobility, in which consists the Chief strength of the State, which mightily
impair the force of it, exstinguishing the lively colors of its beauty, and
bringing it into a languishing condition: And if the State be injured in it,
those particular persons who perish in such combats are much more exposed to
many unhappinesses; for with, the life of their bodies, they likewise lose that
of their Souls, by the loss of which the utmost they can hope for is to become
objects of Gods Just vengeance, who is seldom wanting to punish even those who
escape with the victory, with some notable chastisement, unless they pacify
him by a true repentance: For can it be otherwise then very displeasing to him
to behold his workmanship so destroyed, which cost him so much, and to see such
Souls ruined by the enemy, which have heretofore invited him to show such
effects of his power, and such miracles of his love, and all for their sakes?

The cause of this misfortune is no other then a false and damnable tenent,
which finds ways to persuade men, that it is glorious to be revenged, and that
to suffer an injury unpunished by their Swords, is a great loss to their
Honor. But can there be any reason to think an Action honorable, which is so
contrary to God's Laws? It cannot be denied but that the nobility do draw there
Chief glory from their courages, but there is a great difference between this
virtue of generosity and the Passion of Revenge. This same virtue is no fury,
and transportation of the mind, to things against both humane and divine Laws:
But it is a vigorous resolution; commendable in a generous Soul which makes
him despise dangers, especially when his Prince commands him to fight against
the enemies of the State. Valor has it is limitation as all other virtues, and
who so goes beyond those bounds, falls into the extremity of vice, whence it
hapened that Agesilaus said, according as Plutarch reports it, That valor
ought not to be regarded, if not accompanied with Justice. Now that which is
showed upon private authority, is it not quite contrary to it? Reason obliges
a man to overcome himself at private and particular quarrels, just as he would
his enemies. In Commonwealths well governed Revenge is an Act savouring of a
Brute. Socrates once answered a certain man who beat him, If I were an Ass I
should run upon thee too, but being a man I must endure it with patience. Is
there any reason or sense to fix honor upon an Action prohibited by God, and
forbidden by nature? Honor would be but ill grounded, if it had any
dependence, upon an unruly passion; it cannot be linked to any thing but
virtue, and none but they who are overswayed by passion do pretend to attain
it, but by virtuous ways.

The Condemnation of a Book composed by Sanctarellus the Jesuit.
WHilst his Majesty was using these just and prudent means, for the
establishing of Peace in the State, There did arise very great disputes in the
University of Paris, especially between the Doctors of Divinity; and all about
a certain book composed by a Jesuit, one Sanctarellus by name, which treated of
the power Popes had over Kings, which book had been approved by their Chief
President, by his Holinefs Vicegerent, and by the Master of the Holy Palace.
His Doctrine was very strange, teaching that Popes had a Power of direction, or
rather correction over Princes, that they might not only excommunicate them,
but deprive them of their Kingdoms too, and absolve their Subjects from their
Oaths of Allegiance, whether it were for Heresy, Apostasy, or any other great
public Crime, whether it were for the insufficiency of their persons, or for
their not defending the Church; and that his Holiness might at last give their
States to such as he should think fit. They who were clear sighted, attributed
this work to the Spaniards Ambition, which uses all devices to stir up
commotion amongst their neighbors, and fish their own ends out of the troubled
Waters, and who did at that time chiefly aim to draw the hatred of all
Christendom upon the King, by reason of the succors which he had given to the
Grisons and Hollanders, and of some assistance which the Princes of Germany,
who were oppressed by them, did hope for from his Majesty. These tricks of
theirs are so ordinary, that it might easily be concluded this in particular
was shot out of their Bow, and that it was only a piece forged in the Fire of
their Ambition. But that we may not be longer stayed upon the consideration of
the promoters of so strange an opinion. I shall only add, that for the present
it made a great noise amongst the Doctors, and was opposed by several books,
which were then set out; and that the whole Body of divinity did condemn it;
some indeed of the old league seemed to favor it; But the Parliament, which is
the depositarie of the Kings power, that they might not let his Majesty's
Authority rest Idle, called the chief of the Society of Jesus before them, and
obliged them to sign a Declaration, by which they should condemn the said Book,
and to cause another of the like to be subscribed by all the Provincials and
Rectors, and by six of the most ancient of every one of their Colleges in
France, and so ordered the said Book to be burned by the Hangman, with
prohibition to the Stationers to sell any of them.

That the Kings of France may not be deposed by the Pope.
IT is very often no less important to prevent the offending of the Regal
Authority, by the publishing of any pernicious Doctrine, then to oppose any
violences which are offered to it by Arms. In my opinion he spoke very
learnedly, who likened this authority to the apple of the eye, which may not be
touched though never so little, but the whole man is suddenly troubled and hurt
by it; for to say truth, it can hardly be expressed unto how many
inconveniences a State is exposed, when once the authority is entrenched upon,
or shaken, though it be but a very little. But would not that Magistrate be
very much to blame, who should suffer, that the authority of our Kings should
be brought under any other power, which might despoil them of it? Were it not
the only ready way to open a gate to the revolts of Grandees, who would find
means enough to embroyle the State as often as they pleased, if the people
might but once be persuaded that the King were guilty of any great sin,
incapable of ruling, suspected of heresy, or a favourer of heretics? were it
not the ready way to furnish the ambition of strangers with a pretext for
entering upon and invading the Nation, when and as often as they would, or had
power so to do? Besides, what appearance of any reason were there to tolerate
so dangerous at enent, and which all the Fathers of antiquity have condemned as
erroneous, and which too was but now late risen up again, in these last ages,
and in the time of Gregory the seventh, who first attempted to make it vallid?
The King never cease to be King, until he be deposed by him, who first
constituted him to be King, or unless he falls under those conditions which
his first Constitutor has declared should be the means he would use to throw
him down from his authority; Our Kings are only appointed by the hand of God:
He has made use of their courages to set the Crown upon their heads, and God
has not appointed, that either Apostasy, Heresy, or any other Crime should
be the condition, which should shake them out of their Authority, for that both
good and bad do equally reign, as we have heretofore said, and by consequence
they cannot be deposed but by God himself; nor can they be deprived of their
Authority, for any crime whatever. Besides, if they could be deposed by Popes;
it would necessarily follow that the Pope must be superior to them in Temporal
Power, for that such deposing must needs be the Act of a superior Jurisdiction,
now the Popes are so far from being above them in this particular, that rather
on the contrary the most ingenious and able writers of antiquity have
confessed that they are inferior to them. Pope Gelasius writ to the Emperor
Anastasius, Polagius the first to Childebert, one of our Kings, and St. Gregory
to the Emperor Mauritius, and that in such express terms that their meaning
cannot be questioned; The most moderate of them who uphold this error, cannot
maintain against these reasons, the power of dispossing Kings, which they
ascribe to the Pope; they say indeed it is not an absolute and direct power
that they have, and that they do not so much exercise it in despoyling them
from commanding, as in dispensing their subjects from their oaths of
allegiance which they had made to them; But how frivolous is this evasion? For
the Popes cannot dispense with divine right, and the obedience from subjects to
their Princes is commanded by divine right in an hundred express places of Holy
writ; But I shall pass farther on, and say that it is not in the power of a
King to bring himself under such a condition, as that their subjects can be
discharged from their duties and oaths, by any means or way whatsoever, for
they may not do any Act which is prejudicial to the Regal Authority, entrusted
in their hands, but they are bound to leave it entire, not maimed to their
successors. Whence it happened that Philip the Long, intending to make a Treaty
with his subjects of Flanders, granted to them for their security of his
observing the league, that they might rise against him, and withdraw themselves
from his obedience, if he should fail in that which did belong to him or his
part, but he was hindered by those of his counsel, who represented to him, that
it was unlawful for him to make any such condition.

The subtle means which the Cardinal used to join the Princes of the lower
Saxony, into a league with the Auseatique towns against the house of Austria.
THough Peace was very necessary for France, yet it was no less needful to
prevent the rising of the house of Austria, in Germany, which had usurped the
Lands of diverse Princes there and oppressed their liberties, especially since
the Treaty of Vlm. For the same reason it was that the King of great Britain
sending Count Mansfeld with an Army, to endeavor the restablishment of his
Brother in Law the Palatine, his Majesty aided him with two thousand Horse and
a good sum of money, but these Forces were not enough, to oppose those of the
Emperor, but it was requisite to send more and greater; England would have
engaged the King to have joined in an Offensive league, and declared the war
against him, but it was improbable his Majesty would hearken to such proposals,
for that affairs were not in a condition fit for such an attempt, so they were
rejected: But the Prudence of Monsieur the Cardinal, which is never deficient
in the finding out expedients fit for the greatness his Master, and did give
life and heat to that design which the Princes of Germany, had heretofore
resolved on, of putting themselves into the field, in defense of their liberty,
and for the restablishing of those, who had been forced out of their States.

The King, who has a most admirable apprehension to Judge of those counsels
which are given, quickly conceived the goodness of this, and in order thereunto
he sent about the end of the year, last part, the Sieur de la Picardiere, to
the King of Denmark, the Princes of the Lower Saxany and the Auseatique
Cities; His instructions were to represent to the King of Denmark, and those
other Princes, that the King his Master did hear with much joy their resolution
to take up Arms, for the establishing of the Prince Elector and his Brothers,
and to repel those menaces wherewith they were threatened, and the ancient
friendship, which had always kept their States in good Union, obliging his
Majesty to be sollicitous, of their Interests, had induced him to send a
proffer unto them, of what ever was within his power. They had beseeched his
Majesty, not to engage himself in any league with Germany, without giving them
notice of it, which he had not only order to assure them of, but also to
promise them, the sum of a Million of livures in two years time, and French
Troops besides. He had moreover express order to excite them to a quick
dispatch, because experience has made it evident on a thousand occasions, that
the success of most enterprises does usually depend upon the ready and
dexterous excecuting of them, and that when as much time is taken in
deliberation, the most favorable oportunities are lost by it. But these
reasons were needless, for by that time that he came to them, he found them
with their Arms in their hands, and the King of Denmark had already sent some
Forces by Sea, to join with those of the other Princes, who began to threaten
the Empeour, and forced him to send Count Tilly to advance toward them for the
opposing of their designs: Yet he did not a little heighten their resolution,
setting them on, by proposing to them what a glory it would be to them, to
restablish their Allies, and also by telling them with oportunities of
advantage, they had against the Emperors Forces who were but weak, and much
dispersed, by reason of the wars in Italy and the Valtoline, whereas their
Army was fresh, and numerous, and all their Forces met in a Body together. He
had particular order not to demand any thing in prejudice of the Catholics,
His Majesty having no other end in his intentions, but the settling the
Liberties of Germany and the restating of those Princes. Who had been clapped out
of their States; And whereas of lower Saxony is composed of several Auseatique
Cities, as well as Princes, which Towns and Cities were no less against the
war, then the Princes were for it, by reason their Traffic was into Spain, and
they much suspected, least if they should declare against the house of A^stria,
the Spaniard would then stop their Ships and break their Trade; He was
commanded to visit them in his progress, and to persuade them, to associate
themselves with the Princes in the league, as also to contribute toward the
maintenance of the Army, and to represent to them that in case they should
refuse to join in the design, they would then run a very great hazard, least
the King of Denmark fall upon them, who had an old grudg to them, and only
wanted such a pretense to be upon them, especially now that he had his Arms in
his hand: and that if he should be to weak to force them, he might however
easily enough ruin their Trade particularly that of Danzik and Lub^c, and of
other places too by stopping up the straight of the Zound by which their Ships
must necessarily pass, and also that of Hambourg and Breme, by building some
Forts on the Rivers Elve and Vezel, which do belong unto him; That in case such
a misfortune should befall them, all their Allies, would undoubtedly abandon
them; That the King of Spain could not assist them, he being to far off, that
he had not one Ship upon that Sea, and that as for himself and the King of
great B^itt^ige, they could not in consideration of the King of ^en^ark, take
care or notice, to hinder the Hollanders from seizing on their vessels between
Calis and Dover, which should make any voyadge into Spain, which being so their
Commerce would be for ever ruined and decayed; so that it would be much better
for them to league themselves with the Princes, which if he should do his
Majesty would undertake their protection against all their enemies, and that
the King of England, and Hollanders too would give them the same assistance:
These were the chief Instructions which the Sieur de la Picardier received, and
all which he effected with so great judgment and good success, that he he
went not from them until he had seen their Army march into the field, and
persuaded the Auseatique Towns, to join in League with the Princes. This was
not a work of small importance; for the resolution of this Enterprise, was one
of the chief motives which induced the Spaniards to conclude the Treaty of
Mouson, forced them to abandon the Valtolin^, and to relinquish the designs,
which they had in Italy, and leave all the rest of the Allies of France remain
in peace and quiet. His Majesty testified to him that he was well pleased with
his conduct and management of the business, for carrying on to that
perfection, the design of uniting the Auseatique Towns and the Princes of
Germany, and accordingly his Majesty sent them Troops and Forces and such
moneys as he had engaged to them, as also to keep an Army of twelve or fifteen
thousand men upon the Frontiers of Campaign, to engage some part of the
Emperors forces to stay in Alsatia, by which means he might give the more
advantage to those of the League, who did in the revolution of the year, make a
great progress by this means against the Emperors Armies.

It is the highest piece of Prudence to assault ones enemy by a third Person.
IF it is advantageous for the King to settle a Peace at home in his own
Kingdom, it will be no less needful for him to drive on some War among his
neighboring Princes, to the intent that they being forced to defend themselves
might be so prevented from attempting any thing against France. It is one of
the best pieces of Policy for which Lewis the eleventh is commended in History;
for he knowing the designs which the English and the Duke of Bourgogne had
contrived against him, did raise them so many new broyls, that he hrought them
to an impossibility of executing their wicked intensions against him. Above all
this one means ought to be made use of, when as a Sovereign does once begin to
grow so Potent by his Arms, that he becomes terrible by reason of his
Victories. The safety of States does consist in the equality of the
neighboring Princes, and there is great reason of fear, if any one of them
shall grow to be too Potent; for that Ambition which is natural to all Princes,
cannot well contain it self within bounds when it is once accompanied with
Power.

It is the highest point of Wisdom, to assault ones enemy by a third hand, to
raise a League against him, in which one is not any thing concerned; but only
to contribute some moneys, or send some Troops thither, which may be as
occasion serves disowned; for is not this the way to obtain the end which a man
does propose, without any great expense, and without putting any thing in
hazard or danger? An Enemy is sometimes overcome by this way with more
advantage, then if the whole force of a State had been employed against him; at
least he will by this means be so busied, that he will not have any time to
think of attempting any thing on his neighbors, but rather how he may best
defend himself, and yet one is not all this while forced to break with him, but
preserves Peace in his own Country, one is at little or no charge, and the
Soldiers will be spent who under go many great inconveniences in strange
Countries: The Ambassador who is to negotiate such a Treaty, after he has
resolved upon, and set down this truth for the foundation of his good success.
That Princes have no other motives in their designs then their own particular
Interest is obliged, to induce them to whom he is sent to have a good opinion
in his Audiences, and to represent all those things and reasons which may
further and countenance the design which he would insinnuate and persuade them
to. He ought to let them know, that the Peace in which a great Prince is left,
does raise great suspicions, and serves to no other end, but only to augment
his Force, and establish his Power, that not long after he may attempt new
designs. That many Princes have in fine been ruined by being two great Lovers
of the Sweets of Peace: That it is much better to prevent an Enemy, then to
stay in expectation of him; by which means he may be taken unprovided, and
consequently be the easilier ruined, whereas staying for him, will give the
less abilities to our selves for our defenses, by letting him take what
advantages he pleases against us: That those who love quiet in an over great
measure, do never subsist long; for it is to their enemies a most evident sign
of little courage, and less resolution, to repulse any attempts which may be
made upon them: That nothing is more shameful then a Peace which gives way to
our enemies, to fortify themselves for the commencing a War, and that he who
neglects first to fall on them, when he has reason on his side, both but
add to their Insolences and Courages: That a false gloss of Peace, will at
last deprave into a base and true servitude: That after all, it will be easy
for them to vanquish and overcome their enemies, if they will join and unite
their Forces; for by every ones contributing the to War, they will have a
greater power, and with less charge then their enemies: That it will be very
honorable and glorious for them to have curbed his Ambition, whose Arms begin
to strike a terror into all the World; and by thus insinuating to them the
glory, utility and facility of the design, they cannot but let themselves be
persuaded to engage in it with a great deal of readiness and affection.

Combinations of diverse Grandees of the Court against the King and State.
IT is as impossible long to keep France in quiet, as to prevent the agitation
of the Sea by Winds. The humor of the French is full of Action, and they are
no sooner clear of one broyl or War, but they are desirous of beginning
another. The Cardinal had used his utmost endeavor to settle the Kingdom in
quiet, but diverse young Princes and Lords of the Court, not able to relish the
sweetness of such a Calm, did still engage it in some new Commotions. Peace
indeed did not so much grate upon their humors, as the cause which gave it,
which was nothing else, but the Authority with which his Majesty dispatched the
Affairs of the Realm, and the necessities which he laid upon them to live
within the limits of their duties: Now as they had much ado to submit after
they had many years lived in an entire licentiousness, they resolved to employ
all their endeavors to shake off the yoke. The most expert amongst them,
acquainted the rest how the Cardinal was the man, who had persuaded his Majesty
to take this power into his own hands; whence if followed that they laid their
heads together and contrived, how they might bring him into some disgrace, or
remove him by what means soever it were from the Stern. As their design was
extravagant, so the ways which they proposed to accomplish it were extremely
difficult. They despaired of doing any good upon the Kings mind toward it, for
that he was too clear sighted, not to be mindful of those signal advantages
which he had received from the sage advices of this great Minister, and too too
indulgent of his States good, to deprive it of so prudent a supporter; so that
they concluded there remained only 2 ways, proper to attain their end. The
first was to put all things into confusion, and then to force the Scepter out
of the Kings hand, by which means they might bring things to that pass, that
they might have none above them, but God to Pray too. The other was to form so
powerful a Party amongst the Princes, that they might be able to give the Law
to his Majesty, to constrain him to banish the Cardinal, and to compel him to
be ruled by their directions. This Cabal consisted of a great many persons,
which as it could not be done but with a multitude, so there wanted not some
who spoke very rashly of it: There were diverse reports spreadabroad of what
they intended, which were published, though whisperingly, with a great deal of
insolency, and at the same time it was known that a Favorite of Buckingham's,
said openly in England, That there was so great a Faction contriving against
the King, and carried on by Monsieurs Councillors, that all the Catholics of
the Queens house might be driven out without any danger, and Heretics placed
in their room, though contrary to the Articles of marriage. There were some two
of the Bourbonnois engaged in this Combination, who talked so openly and
confidently, that notice being given of it to the King and his Ministers; it
was adjudged that they intended to carry things to extremity, and that it would
not be much amiss to give Commission of Enquiry to the Vice-Seneschal of the
Bourbonnois, to make enquiry of the truth, who gave a great light of the whole
matter, by his informations. It was likewise discovered that Madam de
Che^^reuse, being discontented that her private intelligences with the English
Ambassador were so publicly taken notice of, did not a little promote the
undertakings, by her animating of Monsieur the Grand Prior, and Chalais to
execute it; both which were engaged by love to her; as also that the Colonel de
Ornano, abusing Monsieurs goodness, and the credit which his place gave him,
did absolutely divert him from the marriage which his Majesty had so earnestly
desired should be celebrated.

The Cardinal on the other side having been acquainted that Louvgry who was one
of the cabal, being deeply in love with a Lady of quality; had discovered to
her the sum of their design, and amongst other things had assured her, that
Chalais was one of the chief instruments in the enterprise, he resolved to go
pass away some time at Chailliot, in Chalais father in Laws house, that he
might the better make use of his prudence to discover more particulars of the
business. His design took effect, and as there are few things in his wish which
the greatness of his prudence cannot accomplish, it is said that he found a
device to learn several things from Chalais own mouth, and that he assured him
both of his own assistance and his Majesty's favor in case he should do that
which was desired of him in this business of discovery. He likewise found out
how the Colonel d' Ornano, was the Ringleader of the Plot, hurried into it by
like for fear lest if Mounsieur should marry, his Princess would assume to her
self, those advantages which he then had over his Spirit; That their chief end
was to unite all the Princes so close together that they might enforce his
Majesty, not to remove any of them from the Court, and with all to permit them
to live in the same licentiousness that they had a long while formerly enjoyed;
That to this effect, they endeavored the breaking of the match between
Monsieur and Mademoiselle de M^ntpensier, and to bring on that of Mademoiselle
de Bourbon, which would more nearly engage Monsieur to their Interests; or else
to persuade him to marry some other stranger Princess, which might be a means
to shelter, and defend their designs by the Forces and assistances which they
might reasonably expect from such a family. That this once effected, they
intended the Count de Soissons should marry Mademoiselle de Montpensier, that
the Houses of Guise and Bourbon might be united together, and in this manner,
they would in a moment huddle up together almost all the leading potent persons
of Court. It was no small advantage for the Affairs of the State to know that
end this Cabal did drive at. The Cardinal was not defective, in acknowledging
the services which Chalais had done in that particular, and he might certainly
have made very great advantages by it, had he not relapsed into former
contrivances and designs.

Politic Observation.
IT is a very great Imprudence, to engage in any Faction against the Prince of
State, under hope of not being discovered. It cannot be denied, but most
ill-doers do believe their disorders will lie concealed; For who would commit
them, if he thought he should be detected? But who knows not, that there is a
certain blindness which attends on sin, like a thick curtain spread over the
eyes of the Soul, which obstructeth the seeing such things as are most in
themselves perspicuous and hurrieth the mind into excess of Rashness?
Whosoever will suffer himself to be reduced by the Error, must of necessity be
ignorant of what the Son of God has said in the Gospel, That there is nothing
hid which shall not be found out, nor nothing how secret soever, but time shall
discover, God who over-ruleth Kingdoms, and watches for their conservation,
will not permit, that those Plots and conspiraces which are contrived against
them by some particular persons, should remain concealed; and it oftentimes so
falls out, That Justice being guided by his Providence, causes the very Author
himself to become the discoverer before he be aware of it. All great secret is
a great Burden to the Bearer, and experience has often showed, that it is
almost impossible, for a man to keep it any long time without disburthening his
Breast of it: If perchance a man has the power to bridle his tongue from
discovering it, yet can he never forbear the discovery of it, by some Actions,
which will speak it to those of understanding. And truly it seem God permits
it so to be for the glory of innocence, under whose Laws, few would enforce
themselves to live, if Treachery had discretion enough to conceal it self.

Aristole, did judiciously answer him, who demanded what was the most difficult
thing in the World? when he said, that it was to conceal that which was not fit
to be made known; since no man could be thought capable of keeping a secret,
but he who could endure a burning Coal upon his Tongue. Indeed whatever is once
known to three persons, is quickly after made common to all; for that each of
them having an itching desire to speak of, relates it to his friend, and so
from one to another it comes to be published. According to which, History too
has recoreded many wicked designs closely contrived, yet at length brought
unto light.

Plutarch says, that in the Cyprian War one Aristocrates chief of the
Messenians, was the cause of their being cut in pieces by a notable piece of
Treasons, into which the desire of rule had engaged him, and that twenty years
after it pleased God to permit his wickedness to be found out, and himself
severely punished; and it were needless to produce any the like examples, for
that History is full of them,

The Marshal of Ornano Arrested at Fountainbleau, and carried Prisoner to the
Castle of Bois de Vincennes.
^T were a dangerous folly to give them who contrive against the State, time to
execute their designs. Accordingly the King resolved with advice of his Council
to secure the Ringleaders of the conspiracy, yet still pretending ignorance
both of the persons and their intentions. He had been ever since the beginning
of the Spring at Fountainbleau, not so much for his recreation, as because it
was easier to dive into the bottom of those Intreagues in such little Towns
then at Paris, the vastness and confusion of which is sufficient to hide and
shelter the greatest wickednesses. The whole Court attended him, and the cheef
of that Faction failed not to be there. But his Majesty needed no other
witness then his own eyes to discover their frequent meetings, nor other
proofs but his own ears to convince the Marshal de Ornano to be the chief of
that Cabal, and of the extreme Passion that they had to hinder Monsieurs match
by his frequent discoursing with his Majesty whole hours together upon that
Subject. He was not ignorant, that Princes were jealous of no one thing more,
then of their own authority, and upon that ground it was, that he principally
endeavored to incite the King, by making him believe, that those who persuaded
him to marry Monsieur were not very affectionate to his service, that this
marriage of Monsieur would quickly raise him up Children, and as soon as he
should have a Male, every one would consider him as a rising Sun, that the
Grandees would forsake his Majesty to follow him, and that he would soon find a
power set up in the State, able to confront his own Authority. This Artifice
was subtle, and fitted to cast a Mist before his Majesty's eyes, had he not
been before hand well informed of his design; and if after mature consideration
of the reason, he had not concluded it of less consequence then the breaking
of his wicked devices. His importunities the true witnesses of his excessive
Passion, made his Majesty conclude that it was not safe any longer to defer the
securing of his Person, and he thought it so much the more necessary, from the
rule which he had learned in Tacitus, that for the hindering the progress of a
Conspiracy against the State, it would be needful to make sure of the cheef;
because most commonly all the others are then left with as little motion, as
the Members of the body, after the head is once cut off; besides imprisoning of
him, Monsieur too was in a manner secured; accordingly his Majesty returning
from hunting upon the fourth of May, gave command to some Companies of his
Lifeguard, to beset the ways between Fountain-bleau and Paris, to seize upon
those of the Cabal, if they should endeavor to save themselves by flight; in
fine, his Majesty caused him to be Arrested by the Sieur de Hallire Captain of
his Guard, he was imprisoned in the Castle, and from thence guarded to the Bois
de Vincennes, where a few months after he died of a stoppage in the Bladder.

In the mean while his Majesty, who never speaks openly any one syllable, which
may be of consequence in affairs, kept close the reasons which obliged him to
restrain him, neither did he show any coldness in his carriage to his
Accomplices, as well that he might prevent their running into extremities, and
oblige them to quit themselves of wicked designs; as also that he might have
an opportunity to seize on Monsieur de Vendosm, who was suspected to be of that
party, his Majesty was pleased to signify to the Queen his Mother, that he had
imprisoned him by reason of-some broyls he had intended to raise between him
and his Brother: Monsieur having notice of it, went presently to wait upon the
King, who assured him of the truth of it, and told him the same reason which he
had sent the Queen his Mother; to which Monsieur answered, that if he should be
convinced of the truth of it, he would be the first that should prosecute
Justice against him; but withal, that it were proper to consider whether his
enemies had not made this contrivance against him; but he could not contain
himself upon this occasion, as in diverse others from testifying his displeasure
at it.

Politic Observation.
^T is expedient after the discovery of a Conspiracy, to wink at those who are
guilty, for the better preventing of them, and seizing on their chief
instruments: The reason is, because they soon draw their necks out of the
Collar, if they have the least suspicion of being detected; and sometimes so
fortify themselves, that it becomes almost impossible to hinder the execution
of their intentions, or to secure their persons. Lewis the eleventh was very
dexterious in this particular, as Philip de Consinus relates in several places
of his History, particularly in the reception he gave the Constable of St.
Paul, when he came to him near Noyon in the year one thousand four hundred
seventy three, he received him with so many endearments, and gave him so many
fair words, that the Constable thought himself bound to believe him. The King
dissembled for two years together, the hatred which he bore unto him, because
his other affairs did not concur with his resolution of chas^ising him; but at
last he cut off his head, it is likewise reported, that he would let his son
Charles the eighth, learn any other Latin then the Proverb, Qui nescit
dissimulare, nescit regnare, so much did he esteem dissimulation to be a
quality necessary in a Prince, which amongst private men passes most commonly
for a Vice. The wise Fowler spreads not his Nets for one or two Birds, but
expects until the whole flight, or the greatest part of them light together,
that he may take a great many at once; and so a wise Prince who would secure
himself of the chief heads of a Conspiracy, knows well how to dissemble with
them, till such time as occasion presents it self, that he may snap them all
together, or at least those without whom the rest are not able to attempt any
thing considerable, that he may bring in practice the saying of Seneca the
Tragedian, that he who takes notice of a Conspiracy before the Accomplices be
imprisoned, loses the occasion of punishing them.

The Cardinal beseeches the King to permit his retirement from the Court.
THE Soul of Monsieur the Cardinal did like the Palm undergo with Courage all
those burdens which were imposed upon him, neither was he much moved at those
pernicious contrivances, though he knew his own ruin was the principal which
they aimed at. However to remove all pretenses which his enemies might raise to
asperse him. That his fortune was built upon the loss of diverse men of
quality, if they should be punished according to their deserts, and to take off
any pretext for their making of Factions in the State, should they but arrive
to the end which they proposed to themselves, he resolved to beseech the King
to give him leave to retire himself from the Court. He could not be reproached
for this Act without injustice, seeing the discontent of all those Factious
persons was only grounded upon the Power, Authority, and Glory, which he had
acquired for his Master, and the good Order and Government which he had
established in the State. Great and Noble Souls, cannot endure that Envy her
self should have the least occasion to detract from their Glory; and
accordingly, he testified to the whole Nation, that he did not at all consider
his own Interests. Now that he might the easilier obtain his request of
withdrawing himself, and that he might the better dispose his Majesty to grant
it, he entreated the King being then at Fountainbleau, that he would give him
leave to pass away some few days at Limours, by reason of some indisposition,
which he found growing upon him, which the King gave way to, and being there,
he was visited by Monsieur, what resentments soever he had for the Marshal de
Ornano's imprisonment, as also by Monsieur the Prince of Condy, whom he had
persuaded the Queen Mother to Caresse; notwithstanding all her aversions from
it, that he might engage him in his Majesty's interests, and divert him from
taking part with those of the Cabal. From thence it was, that Monsieur the
Cardinal writ to his Majesty, beseeching him, that he would be pleased to let
him withdraw himself. He presented to him, that for his own part he never had
any other designs in his service, then his glory and the good of his State; but
was now extremely much discontented to find the Court divided upon his
occasion, and the fire of dissension ready to flame out, and all with design
for his ruin. That he would little esteem his life, if employed in his
Majesty's service, and for the good of his Crown; but that it could not but
trouble him, to see himself basely Butchered in the midst of the Court, as it
was almost impossible for him to avoid it, he being every day attended by a
multitude of men, whom he knew not, and not having any one near him, who could
defend him from any violence which might be offered to him, that in case his
Majesty's pleasure were such, that he would command him to continue near him,
and in this danger he would most gladly obey him without the least repugnancy,
because there was not any thing which he would prefer before his Majesty's
Will. But the confidence he had that his Majesty could not take any delight to
behold him, ending his days by such a death, to which he could not be exposed,
but his Majesty must remain injured and offended; did oblige him to think good
to retire himself from the Court. He added, that his want of health too which
was much impaired, by that great concourse of people, with which he was daily
over-pressed; did make him believe, he could not long hold out in the
management of Affairs, and that his Majesty had so much the more reason to
grant him his request, in regard his weakness would in a little while make him
useless in his service.

He writ to the same effect unto the Queen Mother, and begged her to employ her
Power with his Majesty to obtain his requests. But their Majesty's were so far
from having the least inclination to admit of his retirement; that on the
contrary, the King openly declared, he would never give his consent to it, he
being sensible enough of those great happinesses which he had procured to the
Kingdom already, of that credit and esteem, which he had raised his Arms unto
amongst strangers, of the submission to which he had reduced the Heretics, of
the good Order which he had established in the Treasuries, and of the great
height whereunto he had advanced the Authority of his Scepter. The Queen Mother
too, considering over and above these reasons which were not unknown to her
what a loss it is to a State, to be deprived of a grand Minister, how useful
the Cardinal was to her Counsels and Interests, at the same instant resolved to
oppose his removal, so that it was by their common advices concluded to command
him, no longer to think of absenting himself, and to let him know that his
services were too well known, to procure an assent for his departure; and
lastly, that he need not be afflicted at the sense of those wicked designs
which were contrived against him, nor at the inconveniences which he suffered
in point of health, for that it were easy to remedy both one and the other.
Monsieur the Cardinal who prefers nothing in respect of their Majesty's will
and pleasure, submitted all his resolutions accordingly. The King too, that he
might provide for the safety both of his life and health, assigned Guards to
him, who were to wait on him every where, and defend him from any attempts of
his enemies, he commanded the Sieur de Folain, to have an especial care, that
his health were not prejudiced by the multitude of people who made addresses to
him, but that entrance were only permitted unto such as had occasion to speak
with him, about some urgent Affairs. These Provisions of the King were so many
certain testimonies of the good Will, which his Majesty did bear toward him,
and I think that the honor he got in this Action, was more considerable then
all the rest; for by it he evinced to the whole Nation, that he was not tied
to the Court; but only for his Majesty's service, and that his own particular
intrests and concerns were not valued at all by him.

Politic Observation.
IT is impossible to prevent that the splendor of an extraordinary virtue,
honored by a Prince with a great power, should not raise up the Envy of those
who have never so little Ambition in them. The Sun does not more naturally
attract diverse vapors from the earth, which afterward become Clouds and
darken his light, then a grand Minister does ordinarily see his own merit, and
the greatness of his Genius draw upon him the hatred of the Grandees, that
they make use of factions and divisions against him. We have elsewhere said,
that Fortune was never yet seen to defend them from this infelicity, and I shall
now add that the cheef and ready way for great men to exempt themselves from
the blame and the troubles which envy may stir up against them, is to manifest,
that their meddling in affairs of Public concern, is free from all manner of
self-interest, which may easily be done, by their desiring to withdraw
themselves from the trouble of Government, to lead a private life. This
moderation will stop the mouths of the most imbittered men, who after this,
cannot find any thing to object against the power wherewith they are honored,
and are forced to convert their hatred into admiration. Lucullus finding that
the glory of his Triumph, had laid him open to the hatred of some leading men
in the Commonwealth, withdrew himself from the management of Public affairs,
to spend the time in studying of Arts; but he was instantly entreated by the
wiser sort, not to follow his own inclinations in that particular, and at such
a time, for it was not unknown, that he was only able to curb the ambition of
Pompey. And Augustus (as Suetonius reports) did often desire to quit the
Empire, when he found how difficult it was to deal with the people of Rome. The
Pope St. Gregory the Great, in the like manner, knowing that the course of his
life, did offend many persons, who could not endure that his example should
oblige them to live retiredly and reservedly, and had designed to choose another
Pope in his place, he declared to them; that he for his part should be very
much afflicted to find any storms arise in the Church upon his score, and that
he would much more willingly surrender the Government, then see any Schism
arise amongst them. But this his modesty and humility, represented him so
venerable a person, that those very men, who did not resent his Government,
were obliged to acknowledge the greatness of his worth. Lastly, although it be
commendable in a great States man to make show of such moderation, to the end
he may silence that Envy to which he is exposed; yet a King is bound to make
some difficulty in ascenting to his retirement, on such an occasion. No Counsel
can better be followed, then that of the wise man (who said) he who has found
a faithful servant, ought to cherish him like his Soul, and to esteem him as a
brother; and it cannot be denied, but that to deprive a Kingdom of the
assistance and guidance of a Soul highly generous and understanding, were to
take away the Sun from it, and to fill it with horror and confusion.

The Imprisonment of the Duke de Vendosm, and the Grand Prior of France his
Brother, at Blois.
IT had been little to the purpose, barely to have imprisoned the Marshal de
Ornano, if some others too of the chief Accomplices had not been secured, and
especially, the Grand Prior, who was much to be feared, he being a person of
greater abilities to carry on a design then all the rest. His Brother too, the
Duke of Vondosm was not to be neglected, considering the intelligence which his
Majesty had but newly received of his endeavors, to withdraw the people from
the obedience which they owe to his Crown: That he had caused himself to be
called Monsieur the Duke without any other Title: That he had commanded this
form of Prayer to be used in the Church, Pro famulo tuo duce, domino nostro:
That he had sundry times attempted by money to corrupt the Sieur de Cange, then
Lieutenant of the Castle of Nants: That he felt the Pulse of the Nobility, the
Parliament, and Chamber of Account, that he might the better fortify himself
in the Province; an intelligence which ought so much the more to be looked
into, in regard two brothers do not usually enter upon any great design, but by
a joint consent; that some pretensions they might have (though weak ones) upon
Britain, and that nothing does sooner engage great men in the Factions of a
Court then Ambition. Now although it was very needful to arrest him, yet it
was difficult to be done in Britain, by reason of the great Power he held
there, so it was thought fit to withdraw him, and engage him to wait upon his
Majesty upon some pretense or other. No way was imagined to be more expedient
for it, then to work upon the Grand Prior, by feeding him with hopes of the
Admiralty, concerning which he was to treat with the Sieur de Montmorancy, or
at least by persuading him that in case that charge were taken away, as it was
then intended, he was the only man who should have the Commission to discharge
that Office.

These Proposals were made to him, with so much address, that they made sure
of him, and absolutely convinced him that there was not any suspicion in the
least of him, and the King going to Blois, where it was not known that he
intended to pass on any further, his Majesty told him how glad he should be,
that the Duke of Vendosm would come to him, so he presently took upon
himself to go to him, and to persuade him to come and pay all signs of
obedience ^o his Majesty. Some have said, that he being doubtful, lest his
Majesty had already conceived some apprehensions against the Duke of Vendosm,
did demand assurance for his bringing him to his Majesty at Blois, and that his
Prudence returned such an answer, which though it obliged him to nothing, yet
it gave the Grand Prior satisfaction enough to engage the Duke to undertake the
journey. I pass my word to you (quoth the King, as is reported) that he may
come to me, and that he shall have no more hurt done him then your self, though
for my part I cannot but much doubt of this particular passage; but true it is
he went from the Court and shortly after brought the Duke his Brother with him
to Blois, where his Majesty received them with so many, embraces and
endearments, that they could not in the least suspect the resolution which was
taken for securing of their persons.

Before I proceed to the manner of their being taken. I cannot but observe, how
very recessary it is, that the Chief Offices of the administration, be supplied
with persons of courage as well as of Integrity, The King sent for the seal to
the Lord Chancellor Haligie, the very same day that the Grant Prior went to
fetch the Duke of Vendosme. The Honesty of his Minister was not unknown to all
the world, but it could not be denied, that his mind was low and full of fear
which he did sufficiently make appear* wen as upon the taking of the Marshal
d'Ornano, he had not the courage to justify his Majesty's counsels in that
particular before Monsieur, although the thing it self were one of the most
important accidents, that had a long time happened for the good of the State.
This passion of timerousness, is a very improper quality in a supreme Minister
of Justice, who is bound to make head against all wickedness, and not only
that, but also to use courage and force to resist and overcome it; this was it
which obliged his Majesty to take the seal from him, and to entrust it with the
Sieur de Marillac, superintendent of the treasury, whose loyalty was then in
great credit amongst all well affected men, and who had testified a great deal
of resoluteness in the dispatch of those affairs which presented themselves
unto him. The super-intendency was bestowed on the Monsieur d'Effiat, whose
judgment and discret conduct was well known in sundry occasions, particularly
in the late affair of the Match with England. But that I may now return, to the
two Brothers, who were come to wait on this Majesty at Bloys, his Majesty being
retired to his bed, sent about two hours after mid night to find out the
Sieurs d'Hallier and the Marquis de Moicy, Captains of his Guards, and
commanded them to go into their Chambers, and make sure of their persons;
accordingly they seized on them and it is reported that, the Duke of Vendosm,
beginning first to speak should say, looking on his Brother, well Brother, did
not I tell you in Britain, that we should be arrested? and that the Grand Prior
should answer, would I were dead, upon condition you were safe there again, and
then that the Duke should reply. I told you the truth when I said the Castle of
Blois was a place fatal to Princes. They then made a thousand excuses, each
telling the other that he was the cause of their imprisonment, and that they
themselves confessed, that they were advised that evening by a letter how they
should be imprisoned, but that they could not believe it. That whole morning,
they had liberty to disburthen their miracles by their complaints, of the
misfortune in which they found themselves imbroyled. Afterward they were
carried to the Castle of Amboyse, and thence to the Bois de Vincennes. This
blow gave the allarum to the whose Cabal, though his Majesty who would content
himself with punishing of some few, pretended to be ignorant of the rest: He
also sent a commission to the Count de Soissons, to command during his absence
in and about Paris, for the securing of it. It Is true he would not trust
himself there, but chose rather to pass away, some little time either in Savoy
or Italy. A certain Princess took the boldness to say unto some who went to
visit her that notwithstanding the assurance, which the King had given to the
Grand Prior, in behalf of his Brother the Duke of Vendosm, yet that both of
them were arrested; which did clearly evince, that those were near his Majesty
did persuade him to break his promises; which being reported to the King, it is
said he was pleased to answer, that the was not well informed of the whole
passage, and that he was not concerned to entertain such discourse, for that if
they knew themselves innocent, they would never have thought of demanding a
security to come and wait upon him: and that who so does require an assurance
for his attending on his Sovereign, does in effect condemn himself to be
guilty, and that the promises which are made on such an occasion ought not to
be his warrant, unless they be very clear and express to that purpose.

Politic Reflection.
ALthough all absolute promises which are made by Kings, ought to be kept, and
that even with seditious persons; yet it is not the same thing, where a diverse
sense may be imposed on them, or where there is an apparent good will showed on
purpose to draw them on into a snare prepared to arrest them. To punish them
and hinder their troubling the repose of the Kingdom, cannot be denied for an
Act of Justice, which if it cannot be done but by giving them fair hopes and
good words to a muse them, then such means are to be made use of accordingly,
provided always, that there be no express promise granted unto them. King
Antigonus having understood how that Pitho Governor of Media, did raise
Soldiers, and money, to revolt against him; pretended not to believe those
informations, but gave out, that he would send him an Army to command upon some
exploit or other, designing that Pitho when he once heard how affectionately he
was esteemed, would peradventure come to wait upon him; which indeed happened
accordingly, for he presently repaired to the Court, showing himself highly
pleased with the Honor which the King did him, and that he came on purpose to
receive his Majesty's Commands, whereas Antigonus finding him within his power
chasticed him according to his deserts.

Pope Leo, made use of the self same device, to imprison John Paul Baylloni and
to punish him for those Crimes which he had committed, and he answered those
who complained of being deceived by his promises, that evil doers could not
think themselves deceived; when they were chasticed for their falls, but that
they were deceived, when as there were permitted to continue Scot free in their
Crimes, and when their liberties and lives, of which they were unworthy were
continued and granted to them. The proceeding of Artaxerxes King of the
Persians toward Artaban is not improper to be remembered on this occasion. This
Prince having un^e^s^ood how the other had contrived to kill him, and seize
upon his Kingdom, resolved to prevent him; but he being cunning and always
well guarded, he had recourse to his wit dissembled the suspicion which he had
against him, and that so handsomely that Artabanus, imagined himself to stand
very right in his opinion; To complete his design, he gave out that he
intended a certain foreign invasion, and gave him order to levy his Troops,
and draw them together, which being all assembled, Artaxerxes desired to see
them mustered in his own presence, and coming up to him in the head of his
Forces, seemed to be much taken with the handsomness of his Arms, and desired
to make an Exchange with him, Artaban finding himself obliged to put them off,
forth with disarnied himself, and presented them to the King, who seeing him
naked would not loose that opportunity, but fell on him, and killed him with
his own hand. I know there are some Politicians, who are of opinion that there
need not any great care be taken concerning performance of promises, nay not
those which are absolute and express, though made by Princes in the way of
assurance and security; and that it is sufficient for them to answer those who
shall complain of the breach of them, as Agesilaus did a friend, who taxed him
upon a promise, which he afterward had found to be unreasonable. If what you
demand be Just, I have promised it, but if it be unjust, I am not obliged to be
as good as my word, and when he was answered that a Prince, ought to perform
whatever he promises, yes Quoth he, and a subject ought not to request any
thing of his Sovereign which is unreasonable. But for my particular I am of
opinion, that a Prince is obliged inviolably to observe all express promises,
and that it is only permited to his Ministers for Justice sake to be less then
their words. I should rather imagine that a Prince should on such occasions
make use of all violent means, rather then delusions, because Force is reputed
for a virtue, when backed by authority, and nothing can be alleged against
it; whereas deceit cannot be taken for any other thing, then a kind of malice
unbecoming the Majesty of a Sovereign.

The Assembly of the States at Nantes the King being present.
UPon the Duke of Vendosm's imprisonment, it was mistrusted least diverse
persons, whom he had won to his Interests in Britain might stir up some
Commotion with hopes to enforce the King to grant him his liberty; but as his
Majesty's presence only was sufficient, to deprive them both of the means and
liberty to do so, he went to Nantes, and shortly after summoned all the States
to meet there, where such as were any ways suspected were not suffered to
appear. The King was pleased to be personally present at their first Assembly,
and the Lord keeper gave them to understand, that his Majesty's design, was
only to consider of what means and ways were most proper for settling the peace
of that Province, which was the principal thing there debated, and at last it
was so happily concluded by the Kings Authority, and the Prudent conduct of the
Marshal de Themines, (to whom his Majesty had committed the Government of it
upon the Duke of Vendosm's imprisonment) that there did not any difficulties
arise in it. The chief means to settle all was to disarm such as were
suspected, and to deliver them to others who were known to be right and honest.
To destroy some strong places, many of which belonged to the Duke of Vendosme,
and served only to countenance a revolt. Which being thus ended, The King began
to debate with the Queen Mother and his Counselors, whether it were proper to
marry Monsieur or not; for that was one of the main pretexts of the Cabal, who
had endeavored to possess Monsieur with the opinion, That having no other
liberty or freedom, he might choose his own wife, and in that particular follow
his own inclinations; but it was easy to undeceive him, by laying before him,
how the liberty incident to Marriages was civil, that it is ordered by the Laws
of the Kingdom, which do prohibit any Princes to marry themselves, without the
Kings consent, and that he for his part could not do better then to be governed
by the King, who loved him very dearly, and would undoubtedly match him, which
such a person as would be most proper for him. Diverse reasons were urged both
of the one and the other part, all sorts of Interests were considered with great
deliberation, and all the consequences incident upon his marrying or not
marrying, were examined to the full, and in conclusion the King of his own
motion said, he indeed apprehended several reasons which were sufficient to
take him off from any thoughts of marrying him, but with all that the Quiet of
his State, seeming to oblige him to marry him, he resolved to do accordingly:
That his intentions in it being good, he could not but hope Heaven would bless
it with good success; and in case the enemies of the public Peace should
attempt to raise contrary effects out of it, that he had power enough in his
hand to remedy and defend it.

It is reported, That Monsieur the Cardinal, did only represent to his Majesty
those reasons, which might seem either to invite or dissuade the marrying of
him, without inclining more to the one then to the other, as well because he
knew his Majesty to be prudent enough, and not to want any advices in what did
so nearly concern the power of his Authority, as also because it was a business
in which his Majesty ought to follow his own will and pleasure, and was not
obliged to conclude off or on but with his own satisfaction and content, it is
very dangerous to second too strongly such counsels, whose effects are liable
to the changes of Fortune, and it were a great folly for a man to think himself
safe and sure, of that, which is often perverted by the wickedness of some men,
who by it raise advantages to themselves.

At last it being generally resolved, the Queen mother passionately desirous,
that Monsieur should marry Mademoiselle de Montpensier, sent to Madam de G^ise,
to come forthwith to Nantes, and to bring her with her, as also she presently
proposed to execute those Articles which had been so long since concluded on.
This Princess, who indeed was the richest match of France, had been betrothed
to the late Duke of Orleans, in the year one thousand six hundred and eight,
whilst the King was then living, and the young Prince dying about the year one
thousand six hundred and eleven, both the King and Queen Mother, had passed
their words to marry her to Monsieur who was to succeed in the quality of Duke
of Orleans. Both being now of an age fit to be married; Madam de Guise did
oftentimes urge that the promises which had been made to her, might be
performed, and Monsieur who had always preserved himself, in a total
resignation of his own to the Kings will, was the more easily induced to effect
it, in regard of those most excellent qualities wherewith Heaven had blessed
both the Person and mind of that Princess; but however, the liberty which is
usually permitted to Princes of his age, did allay the over hasty execution of
it neither did his Majesty press it, until he had discovered by the
dangerousness of the Cabal, that one of the only means to shop the farther
progress of them, was to hasten on his marriage. The King did not approve of
his marrying any Foreign Princess, least it might prove an inlet for
Factions in the State, and least it might open a door for strangers to invade
the Kingdom, as often as they would raise any discontents to themselves; but
he liked well of this Match with Mademoiselle de Montpensier, her Birth and
virtue rendering her worthy to be admitted into the Royal family. The Queen
Mother, who could not be heartily persuaded to love Monsieur the Prince did not
like of the Match between his Daughter Mademoiselle de Bourbonne, and Monsieur,
though the Cabal did much drive it on: Withal Mademoiselle de Montpensier being
left sole inheritrix of her whole house, was extremely rich, and would very
well serve to make up Monsieurs affairs, as also ease the Exchequer of great
Pensions which otherwise must of necessity be bestowed on him. They of the
Cabal were vexed at heart, to find things so carried on, but they were
necessitated to be quiet and to hold their peaces too* Shortly after, the King
declared some part of his thoughts to Monsieur, who answered him that if it
were his Majesty's pleasure to marry him there, he should totally resign
himself to his Majesty's will; By which and in several other occasion, he has
always showed, That Heaven did with his birth infuse into him extraordinary
respects for the King, which had doubtless inseperably linked him to his
Majesty, had not the mallicious devices of those, in whom he placed some
confidence diverted him. Monsieur sent M. le Coigneux his Chancellor to Madam
de Guise, to assure her of his kindnesses, and particularly of the affection
which he had to conclude the Match, between himself and Mademoiselle her
daughter, and charging him afterward to wait upon Mademoiselle de Montpensier,
he commanded him to assure her on his behalf, that he would be a better
Husband, then he had been a Servant, He was received with a great deal of
Honor, both by one and the other, and with as many testimonies of joy, as the
modesty of that sex could allow of, and the next day Mademoiselle de
Montpensier going to wait on the Queen Mother, the called her Daughter, and
made her sit down near to her. To conclude, the marriage was celebrated soon
after to the quiet and content of the whole Kingdom: And thus the King
assisted by the sage counsels of Monsieur the Cardinal, did dispel all those
small contrivances which were designed to oppose it, and brought to nothing all
the Cabals which diverse Princes and Lords of Court had projected upon that
occasion, both with England, Spain, Holland and some places of Italy, with the
Hugonots, nay with the very household Servants of his Majesty, and some of them
were such as had nearest access to his person.

Politic Observation.
THe Marriages of Princes of the Blood ought to be contracted with a great deal
of freedom, seeing that liberty is an essential part of marriage; but they
ought to be mindful, that this same liberty does not consist in a power of
marrying whom they pleace, and when and upon what terms they think fit. Liberty
in general (as Vlpian says) consists barely of a power to do what the Laws
do permit, and speaking more particularly concerning Marriages, he says; That
the Liberty which Lawyers do allow of, can be grounded upon no other thing then
the mere power, of contracting ones self in that manner as the Laws do approve
of. And the old Law allowed of none to be legitimate, but such as were
conformable to the Laws of the State. Civil Liberty keeps a medium between
those two extremities of servitude and licentiousness, and is neither one or
the other of them; for as it has no absolute dependence upon Slavery; so is it
also limited by Laws not to do whatever it shall think fit; it consists in a
Liberty of doing that which is justifiable by the Law, whence it follows, that
the Princes of the Blood in France, being by a fundamental Law prohibited to
marry without the Kings permission, they are deprived of the Liberty to
conclude any match upon their own heads or power. The great St. Basil says in
the first letter which he writ to Amphilochius, that those contracts which are
made by them who are not masters of themselves, ought to be esteemed for void,
if not confirmed by the power upon which they depend. But what may be the
reason hereof? It cannot be said that they are not voluntary, for then they
could not be termed contracts, which is so evidently clear, that it cannot be
denied; but however it is true, they are not concluded with the Civil Freedom,
that is, not guided by the Law, and for that reason cannot be accounted valid.
The reason of this Custom is grounded upon a Maxim of Law, which says, what
belongs to us cannot be taken away without our consents, whence it follows
that those who depend upon another, and who have not any thing which does not
belong to those upon whom they depend have not any lawful power to dispose of
themselves, and in case they should do it, it were only an Act of
licentiousness, and is declared void by Law. Moreover, what St. Basil says,
speaking of Contracts in general; in his first, he does more particularly set
forth, concerning his marriage in his second letter, when he declares in
express terms: That such marriages as are made without the Authority of those
upon whom they depend are absolute Fornications, of which no other reason can
be given then this, that they who contracted themselves did not consent to it
with a lawful power, and that they could not dispose of themselves, in regard
of their dependency upon a superior Authority. He who is not master of himself,
cannot give himself to a wife, and it will necessarily follow from thence, that
the marriages of the Princes of the Blood of France, cannot be esteemed valid,
when they are not accompanied with their Kings consents, for that they do
absolutely depend upon their Majesty's.

The Sieur de Chalais is Imprisoned.
I Shall not put an end to this discourse in only acquainting you with the
Marshal de Ornano's imprisonment, or the arresting of the two Brothers, with
their confidents Modene and Deagan; for that suddenly after Tronson and
Sauveterre were removed from the Court, for having contrived many devices for
hindering Monsieurs marriage; as also Marsillac Governor of Sommieres, was sent
Prisoner to the Castle of Ancennis, for having talked too boldly concerning the
same subject: But as the greatest part of all these designs were discovered in
the process against Chalais, presently after the finishing of the marriage; so
I think it proper to treat more particularly of it. Chalais had the honor to
be the Master of the Kings Wardrobe, and to be brought up from his Infancy near
his Majesty; but his Soul being over-mastred by ambition, he every where
discovered a great discontent against fortune, openly saying, that it would be
needful for him to seek out a more liberal Master then the King, if he did
intend to better his own condition; it was thought that this Passion was that
which engaged him in the Faction then at Court, but it is true, that the love
which he bore to Madam Cheureuse, did no less engage him in it. The King was
informed of his Intreagues from Paris, and though his Majesty had pardoned him
upon the assurances which he had given him, and Monsieur the Cardinal; of his
future living in loyalty, yet he did not cease to re-embroyl himself, so potent
are those two troublesome and giddy Passions, and so great a power have they
over the Souls of those, whom experience has not well instructed in the
affairs of the world.

It was known, that upon the first imprisonment of Monsieur de Vendosm, he had
dispatched a Messenger from Blois to Monsieur and the Count de Soissons, by
which he gave them intelligence quite contrary to his Majesty's interest and
service. The King had good reason to be offended at it, yet his Clemency
carried him on to command the Cardinal only to tell him, that he did run
counter to those protestations of Fidelity which he had formerly made, that his
Contrivances were better known then he was aware off, and that he should be
careful of his Actions. Chalais was informed at the same time by others, that
the King was angry with him, and finding himself guilty, he desired to
discourse with Monsieur the Cardinal to disguise his faults. The Commander de
Valenhay, was the person who accompanied him to Beau-regard, where the Cardinal
then lay, and being come thither he attempted to surprise the Prudence of that
incomparable Minister, by diverse devices; but Monsieur the Cardinal well
informed of his ill deportment, advised him to beware of himself and become
more faithful to the King his Master, giving him to understand, that he was
the more obliged to do so, in regard the King being well informed of his
actions, gave him so much time to look back into himself, that he might not
destroy him. He seemed to be very ready to withdraw himself from those
imbroyls, and also took occasions to speak unto the King, whiles he was making
of him ready, to assure him that he would never be defective in his duty; yet
notwithstanding all this, his turbulent Soul was not able to contain it self in
this resolution; for it was known, that a certain messenger sent by some one
from the Cabal, was kept private in his lodging at Tours, while the King stayed
there, and that Louviece who belonged to him, being one in whom he much
confided, was gone upon a private message for him, these things gave reason to
believe. That he still persisted in his first designs, and being a person of a
bold nature, and ready to run into all sorts of extremities, the King was
councelled to secure him at Nants.

Politic Observation.
IN concernments of State it is dangerous to rely upon the promises of those
who are over-mastred either by love or ambition. These two Passions do so hurry
away the Soul, so animate it with violent ebulitions and so blind it, that they
prepare it for any wickedness. We have hereofore showed what attempts ambition
makes upon the valiant, and we have evidenced that there is no sort of
wickedness which it will not persuade for the attaining of its designs. And it
is not more easy to verify the same concerning lusts, which corrupts both
the mind and understanding, which beleaguereth and burns up the heart with a
brutish heat, and which does so alter the nature and complexion of the most
temperate, when they are once engaged by it, that there is not any
unlawfulness into which it does not transport them; it is a fatal sore from
whence arise horrors, sacriledges, wars, perfidiousnesse, murders, Paricides,
and cruelties, until it leads them to the acting of such things, as both
Heaven and Earth do blush at the sight of. The History of Italy, furnishes us
with a memorable example, to evidence that there is not any abomination
whatever, into which these two Passions are not able to precipitate a man; it
is in the person of Caesar Borgia Cardinal de Valence, whose Ambition not
brooking the Popes giving the charge of General of the Church Armies to the
Duke of Candy his elder brother, an office which he himself aimed at, and who
likewise was passionately enamoured of his wife; his Sister in Law, caused him
one night to be assassinated, as he rid alone through Rome, and his body to be
cast into Tyber. And that we may particularly look into the wicked effects of a
dishonest love, Antiquity has afforded us a notable testimony of the disorders
which he is liable to, who permits himself to be blinded with this Passion,
when it says; that Jupiter himself the first of their reputed Gods, could not
be both wise and in love at the same time. And one of the best advices which
can be given to those that attempt to raise their fortunes at Court, is, that
they forbear to engage themselves in the love of women who are factiously bent;
for admitting them to be engaged in any Cabal, they have so powerful an Art to
persuade what they endeavor, that it is impossible to defend ones self from
them; and as they have no small Passions, they blindly engage themselves in
prosecution of their malice and revenge, that a man insensibly finds himself
upon precipices, from whence it is impossible for him to get off.

The Cabal of Chalais, punished by Arrest from the Chamber of Justices at Nants.
CHalais being once arrested, condemned himself as guilty, and desired in order
to making of his peace, that he might speak with Monsieur the Cardinal, the
Duke de Belligard, and the Marquess de Effiat, who were placed near the
Cardinal. The King was advised of it, who commanded them to go to him: Twice
they went, and the Cardinal never spoke to him, but in hearing of the Sieur de
Belligard. At first Chalais desired and endeavored to justify his innocence,
but finding by the Cardinals discourses that his faults were but too well
known, so that that was not the way to do his work; he afterward freely
confessed to him those Delinquencies which could not be excused, he
acknowledged the advice which he had given Monsieur upon the imprisonment of
the Duke of Vendosm, and the grand Prior his brother, and confessed that he was
then of opinion, that Monsieur should withdraw himself from the Court, and
discovered several other things of concernment. But having twice abused the
Kings Grace, his Confession now avai^'d him little. The King gave Commission to
the Lord Keeper Marillac, and the Sieur de Beauclere, Secretary of his
commands, privately to inform themselves of the whole Plot, and his Majesty
desired that Monsieur would declare in their presence, that which he had
discovered to him in particular, after he had been sensible of the little
justice and reason there was to engage him in their embroils. At first, he made
some scruple at it, but at length having considered of the duty which he owed
his Majesty, and how much reason Princes themselves have to chastise them who
engage them by their evil councels in designs against the State, without any
other motion then their particular discontent and private interest, he resolved
upon it, and discoursed the whole to them in the Kings presence. That M^nsieur
de Soissons was the correspondent which he had at Court to inform him of all
the news that passed there, that Chalais was the Internuncius, that his advice
had been to gain Madam Villars, by means of Monsieur the grand Prior, to the
end he might make sure of Haure if occasion should be, and that he should
endeavor to obtain the government of Pont de l' Arche, for the Marquess de
Coeuvres, with hopes that the grand Prior would at Monsieurs request deliver up
that place which was upon the way to Haure, and might serve for a retreat in
case he went thither: That Chalais did likewise persuade him to deal with the
Hugonots, and to make use of them for a revolt in the State, and that he had
lent him Louviere to be sent toward the Duke de Lavalete, to engage him in the
business, and to make sure of M^ts; in fine, that it was he who had advised
him, that the King had ten thousand men about Nants to stop his going from
Court. This Declaration was signed by the King. the Queen Mother, the Lord
Keeper Marillac, the Sieur de Beauclere, Monsieur the Cardinal, and the
Marquess de Effiat; insomuch that for the chastising these insolent and rash
actions the King set up a Chamber of Justice in Nants.

Politic Observation.
THough Clemency be one of the worthiest Ornaments in a Sovereign, yet it is
not permitted him to make use of it, when it is prejudicial to the public.
That gentleness which is showed to the Ringleaders of a Conspiracy, is a
dangerous cruelty to the State. Cato was of opinion, that they who did not
hinder evildoers when they might do it, by chastizing them, ought themselves
to be punished. For that were to encourage their abettors to follow their evil
examples, it is true Arostole says, The subjects love is the chief foundation
of Royal Authority, and that they are not easily induced to love Kings, unless
upon their own advantage. And it is very necessary for them to punish the
factions, without which they would be hourly exposed to the dangers of civil
war, which are the cause of the greatest misfortunes, that can afflict a State.
And the same Philosopher in his Morals, esteems him incapable to command, who
is never angry, but affects to show himself merciful, on all occasions
whatsoever. To speak truth, a King is bound to show as much severity to them,
whom the public Interest obliges to be chastised, as bounty to them that
keep themself within their duties. It is the only means, says Tacitus in his
Annals, to render him as well feared by the wicked, as esteemed and honored by
the good; who receive no less satisfaction in the punishment of crimes, than
in the receiving of those rewards, which art due to their virtue.

The Sentence of death passed against the Sieur de Chalais.
THe King committed the trial of Chalais rather to a Chamber of Justice than any
private Court not only because he would have it expedited, it being improper
to be delayed, but also to keep private the names of his Confiderates and their
designs, which were dangerous to be published. His Majesty made the Lord keeper
Marillac President, and appointed for Judges the Sieurs de Cusse and Brie
Presidents of the Parliament of Britain, The Sieurs Fonquet Merchant,
Chriqueville Master of Request, and six Counselors of the Parliament of
Britain. They met several times for instruction of the Process. Chalais was
often times examined, and having found by discourse with several people with
whom he conversed, that there was full information made of all his wicked
designs, he confessed not only what was contained in Monsieurs Declaration,
but withal diverse other things of which Lorrain accused him, and which were
testified by Monsieur de Bellegarde, Le Sieur d'Effiat, by the Maust exempt,
who had the charge of his person, and by one of the Lifeguard, to all which he
made no denial being brought face to face. He discovered the Major part of his
Associates, he confessed that he would have carried Monsieur from the Court,
that he would have persuaded him to take up arms, to hold Intelligence with the
Governors and Hugonots, to make himself Master of Havre, Mets, and diverse
other places of the Kingdom, and withal that being once at a Council, where
the grand Prior and those of his faction were present, he proposed to them to
take the Marshal d'Ornano out of prison, to poniard the Cardinal, and then to
fly into Flanders; thinking that this once done, they might easily obtain all
their desires. There were several other charges produced against him, and
amongst others, certain letters from the Sieur de Moison the Kings Resident
with the Countess of Hanault in Germany, and of the Sieur de Vatembourg his
Majesty's Resident with the Emperor, by which they gave advice of the Marshal
d'Ornano's conspiracy, of certain letters which Chalais had writ to the
Duchess de Chevreuse in Biscay, in which there were discourses to the Kings
dishonor, and also certain letters in characters to the same Lady, the
Declaration of Monsieur the Kings Brother, and the informations of the
Vice-Seneschal de Moulins.

These enermous crimes rendered him guilty and worthy of death, in regard he was
the Kings Domestique Servant, and that he had the honor to be in a charge,
which obliged him to be always near his Majesty's person. Justice could not
save him, and the several relapses, which proceeded from the fierceness and
ambition of his Spirit, tied up the Kings Arms from mercy. So this Chamber of
Justice condemned him to be attainted and convicted decrimine lesae Majestatis,
and to be beheaded in the Befroy of Nantes; That his head should be put upon a
spear over the gate of Sanvetour, that his body should be quartered into four
parts, and hung upon the four principal places of the City, that his posterity
should be ignoble and of the Yeomantry; His houses raized, and that for the
farther discovery of all his Abettors, he should be put on the Rack. But the
Kings clemency, seconded by the affection, which he always had for him,
moderated the judgment, and only commanded his head to be cut off, and that
they should show him the Rack, but not torture him.

They, who understood not, that the whole Intreague was discovered, or that
there were sufficient poofs to convict him, were astonished, that he should so
freely confess those crimes, whereof he was accused, and withal some were so
bold, to report, that he had confessed his crimes thus frankly, upon the
Cardinals suggestian, and persuading him to believe, that it was the only
means to obtain the Kings favor, the attainment of which, he gave him great
cause to hope for. But there need no other proof for conviction of this lie,
than the answer which Chalais made to the Sieurs des Carts and de Lourie,
Counselors of the Parliament, both persons of a clear reputation, and
entrusted to exame him: after judgment had passed upon him; who having told
him, that a report was spread abroad, that he had confessed his crimes
wherewith he was charged, partly through fear and partly through hope of life,
conjured him, he being now shortly to render an account of his actions before
God, to discover, if it were so or not, or if he had impeached any one in
prejudice to the truth and his conscience; and had no other answer from him,
but that, what he had said, was truth, excepting only, where he had in anger
spoke too hardly against Madam de Chevreuse, who had given him no reason for
it* and that he should be very wicked and senseless to discover so many
horrible crimes, to clear himself and charge innocent persons, and all for the
satisfaction of another man's passion. This proof was so much the more certain,
in regard it proceeded from the last passages of his life, in which he
testified, that he would dispose himself by a true repentance, to obtain pardon
from God of his faults. There was hereupon great reason to admire the Kings
clemency, seeing that he might in justice imprison and punish diverse Grandees
of the Court, whom he had accused, who were no small number; but his Majesty in
stead of Publishing their design was pleased to punish all their great faults
in one man only, keeping some in prison and sending Madam de Chevreuse into
Lorraine, not having ground to hope that she could live in the Court and not
raise new broils.

Politic Observation.
ALthough it be expedient to detect the chief contrivers of a compiracy either
against the Public quiet or their Kings person, yet wise Politicians have not
thought it proper, to prey too exactly into all the accomplices, or the plot it
self, if any great number of potent leading men have engaged in it. It being to
be feared, least either their quality or number, might draw others in, or that
the pretenses of their design might be so specious, that many persons might be
concerned in it, who never knew at all the true depth of the business. It was
upon this account, that the Senate of Rome, condemned Lucius Vectius, and
Tarquinius for discovering, that Caesar and Cressus, were parties in Catalines
conspiracy, it being by them feared, and that with reason, least a greater
number who were admirers of those two eminent persons, might betake themselves
to the same party: A little dissembling upon such an occasion, will be more,
then the strictest inquisition as Pompey made appear, upon Sertorius his death;
for Perpenna having sent him a great chest full of Letters, which the Romans
had sent to Sertorius, engaging themselves in his quarrel, he would not read
one of them but cast them all into the fire, fearing least instead of one
Sertorius, twenty might spring up in Rome, when they should find themselves
discovered; and for his part it was not his desire to force, or oblige them by
violence to unite themselves together, for their own defense. Thus Alexander,
having intercepted some of Darius his letters, by which he had encouraged
certain Grecians of his own Army to kill him, was in a great doubt, whether he
should suppress or discover them, at least to those to whom they were
directed; but having asked Parmenios advise in the business, he was counseled
not to speak of it to any one whatever, because in a multitude there are never
wanting some seditious persons, who only lack a head and prop, to make the
wickedness of their hearts apparent, and are naturally so base-minded, that the
bare report of a Faction, is ground enough to engage them in it.

Certain Broils sprung up in the Court of England, by the ill Counsel of some
of the Queens household.
THe Court of France was not the only Scean, of Factions: England was no less
pestered with imbroyles by those divisions which happened between the King and
Queen, but ended by the returning into France, all the Queens officers, though
by the Articles of marriage it had been concluded, That her Majesty should be
attended by officers who were French and Catholics. But it was most certain,
the English never intended long to keep them, which they sufficiently showed,
by the entertainment, given them at Dover, where they could hardly get meat for
their money, and soon after their arrival, they laid hold on several occasions
to put what that had concluded on in execution. It is reported that some
Ecclesiastiques and women, did sow jealousies and discontents between the King
and Queen, which exasperated the King very much against them, whereupon the
Duke of Buckingham designed that his Wife, Sister, and Niece, might be her
Bedchamber Women, which being contrary to the Articles of Marriage, which did
prohibit any to bear office in the Queen's Family, who were not Catholics, it
was denied him; which angered him the more, in regard he had used to dispose of
all affairs in England with a great deal of Authority: It was indeed proposed
not long after to do that Honor to his Mother, who was a Catholic, and to
his Wife, who was that way inclined, but he being unsatisfied with it, did from
that time forward use his utmost endeavors, to foment and revenge it. But it
is on the other side reported, that Madam de Cheuureuse, discontented in the
French Court, and having got a good acquaintance in England, blew the Coals of
this division, only to be revenged; and withal that Buckingham, was much blamed
by the Parliament of England, for having admitted of diverse Articles the Treaty
of Marriage, which were prejudicial, to the Religion of the Country, and
threatened to be called to an account, for a vast sum of money, which was
pretended he had diverted to his own use.

Now to satisfy the Parliament, who are of great power in England, he made it
his business to fall upon the Catholics, especially the Queens officers, and
all that he might testify to the Parliament, how he would conform himself to
their pleasure in every thing: But he was vexed most of all when he went into
Holland, upon some affairs, with design to pass to the Court of France, and
the King gave the King of England to understand, that he did not like of the
Journey; The Earl of Holland too, did not a little set on those divisions, for
that the French, who were near the Queen, had hindered him from being over-seer
of her Majesty's Revenue, and had persuaded her to bestow that place upon the
Bishop of Mande, which exasperated him very much, so that he made use of his
power both with the King, and Bukingham, to drive on the business to such a
height, that it was at last concluded, that all her Majesty's officers should
be returned into France, which was accordingly performed, and about the
beginning of August, they were forced to cross the Sea.

Politic Observation.
IT is Common upon the marrying of great Princesses with a Foreign King, to
give them officers of their own Country, but it is seldom seen, that they
continue any long time near them. It cannot be avoided, but that there will
jealousies and heart burnings arise between them and the Natives of the
Country, concerning their enjoying those offices, which they believe are due to
themselves? which jealousy does usually raise such storms; that their ruin is
included in it: but admit, no jealousy did arise, yet the mere diversity of
their language and Customs, were enough to create differences and divisions
between them; Foreign officers cannot forbear discoursing together in their
own language, which creates suspicions in those who understand it not. By
reason of the diversity of their fashions, they laugh at one another, which
commonly breeds quarrels between them; and withal, let a man be never so
complaisant in his humor, yet there is always a jealous eye upon them, that
they contrive some thing against the State. Of this, there are diverse examples
in all times, as particularly in the reign of Francis the first, in which
Bellay reports that Affairs were very much imbroyled by strangers,
instancing, the Bishop of Liege, the Prince of Orange, the Marquis of Mantua,
and Andreas Doria; hence Bodin in his Commonwealth, does much blame the
Venetians, for admitting of all kind of strangers amongst them, Lypsius
observes, That as when many crickets come into a house, it is one assured
sign, of their sudden destruction, so when a great multitude of strangers
shall live in a Nation, it is a certain, Index of some revolution near at hand.
Indeed, they have not usually any great deal of affection, for the Country
where they live, so that they do not heartily embrace the Interests of it, and
in case a war should break out, none would be so ready as they to entertain
intelligence and give advices to the enemies. They are also easily provoked
against the natural inhabitants of the Country, upon any suspicion, that they
are less esteemed by them, then others, which induces them to stick close
together and to raise Factions against the State: withal their bodies may not
be punished, though there be some kind of reason for it, least they should
generally resent it, and raise up a thousand Broils. These are the chief
reasons why it is impossible to preserve a Family of Officers, Strangers in a
Queens Court. This was it which did oblige those of Sparta, as Xenophon
reports it, not to suffer any strangers to live in their Commonwealth, which
made the Athenians take the same resolution, as Plutarch observes in the life
of Pericles, and which made Suetonius commend Augustus, that he would rarely
grant to any the being free or naturals of his Kingdom, and which induced
Polydore Virgil to say in his History of England, That it was not the custom
of English to admit of many strangers amongst them, least the difference of
their customs and fashions, might cause them, not to live in a good
intelligence with the natives of the Country.

The King sends the Marshal de Bassompierre into England.
THe Queen Mother, having been acquainted with the disorder which had hapened
in the Queen of Englands Family, first sent the Sieur de Bar to her, to
testify to her that she was sorry for her and took part in her discontents;
and shortly after, there being no reason to put up such an injury, the
Cardinal advised his Majesty to dispatch the Marshal de Bassompierre as
extraordinary Ambassador to the King of England, for a redress in the business.

Amongst diverse others he was more particularly made choice of for that
employment, because there had been many of his near kindred retained near the
Queen, who were now all sent back again; So that it was thought considering the
near Interest of his family, that he would be the more zealously affectionate,
in dispatching such instructions, as should from time to time be sent to him.
He was but coldly entertained in England, because audience had been denied to
the Lord Montague, who was sent into France upon the return of those Officers;
however he was no whit discouraged, at it, knowing that any Ambassador, ought
to shut his eyes, at all little difficulties and obstructions, so he may carry
on his Masters work to a good issue. The King of England appointed
Commissioners to treat with him upon that affair, who being met together, he
represented to them, in order to his instructions, that amongst other things
comprehended in the Articles of Marriage, it had been concluded and agreed on,
That the Queen of England should have free exercise of her Religion, that she
should have a Bishop and a certain number of Priests, to exercise the Offices
of her Religion, That all her household should be Catholics and French, and
that all the English Catholics should in general receive greater privileges,
then had been granted them, if the Treaty with Spain had been effected: That
the late King James, and the present King Charles his son then Prince of Wales,
had confirmed it by oath, and that King James had commanded his Officers, not
to trouble or molest the Catholics any more, whereupon that the King his
Master, had conceived great hopes of prosperity and happiness, for the Queen
his Sister, neither could he believe that the King of England his Brother in
Law, would break his word given upon the consideration of Royal Marriage, who
until then had amongst other virtues the reputation of being Just to his
promises. That this new Alliance instead of reuniting their persons and
Interests would now rather, breed great divisions between them, and at such a
time, when they had most need of being in amity with one another, both for
assisting of their Allies, and their own particular preservation. And that
notwithstanding all these premises, the King of England had sent back all those
Officers, of the Queen, contrary to the Treaty, which had been confirmed by
oath; that he placed about her, Officers who were English, and of a Religion
contrary to hers; and besides all this that the Catholics in General, were
every where troubled and ill treated for their Religion sake. So that the King
his Master, unable to abandon the Queen his Sisters Interest, had sent him to
his Majesty of Great Britain, to put him in mind of his promises, and to
persuade him. That her Majesty's Catholic Officers might be readmitted to
her, as also that his Catholic subjects might be more favorably dealt
withal, The English Commissioners could not deny what had been concluded in the
Treaty; but they would lay the fault of the Officers return, upon their own
shoulders, pretending that they had raised troubles in the Kingdom, in his
Majesty's own Family, and that of his dear consort the Queen, but they did not
produce any sufficient proofs upon the business: And as to that which concerned
the English Catholics, they pleaded, that it had only been granted for
formalities sake, and to satisfy the Pope. But the Marshal producing before
them the late Kings Oaths, confirmed too by another of the present King, then
Prince of Wales, they could no longer tell what to say to the business, but
fled to other complaints, not material or any ways relating to the matter in
question. The Marshal replied and that very tartly, that he could not
sufficiently admire that the Articles of Marriage, and confirmed by Oath, were
not observed: That the Queens Officers were sent back, under pretense that they
troubled the State, without giving the King his Master any notice of it, and
without acquainting him in the least with those crimes which were presented to
be committed, That presently thereupon, English Officers and those Protestants,
should be placed in their rooms, That indeed those accusations were to be
esteemed as frivolous, and admitting them for just, yet ought they to be
chastised only, and others French and Catholic put into their places, by the
rules of the Treaty. But that indeed those pretended quarrels or Jarrs raised
by the Queens French Officers, were so far from being the true cause of their
return, that on the contrary, the Lord Mo^ntague had been at Nantes, not many
days before their being sent over to congratulate the King and Queen Mother,
concerning the good understanding, which was between their Majesty's of Great
Britain, and concerning the great satisfaction which the King received at the
Queen his wifes behavior. That of the sudden and unlookt for discharge of her
Officers happening so immediately upon the neck of this joy, could not but
appear strange, and that as it did much wound the King of Englands Reputation,
so it likewise injured the King his Masters Generosity, who was not resolved to
put up such a wrong; who after he had tried all fair means to get satisfaction
done to him, would, if not granted, use all lawful means (of what kind soever)
to procure it. These replies were so just and resolute, that in reason they
should have produced those effects which were expected. But the before recited
Passages had so exasperated Buckingham, that he obstructed the procuring of
that satisfaction, which France did so earnestly expect.

Politic Observation.
IT is very unseemly that a Kings Officers should persuade him to be worse then
his word, only to satisfy their own Passions. It were the ready way to
subjugate the glory of the Master, to the Will of the servant, and to suffer
the least Stars to eclipse the splendour of the Sun, who have no light; but what
they borrow from his rays. Private affections have ever been hurtful to
public consultations, as Titus Livy records, neither was his judgment to be
questioned, when he said, there are cereain Clouds which do darken the Soul,
and make it like a dis-tempered eye, which sees all things far different from
what they really are. The word of a Prince is a sacred pledge, and his glory is
linked with it. The Minister who is to see it performed, is obliged to effect
it with inviolable respect, much less, not to abuse it for his own particular
anger and Passion. How can it seem lawful for a Minister to obstruct it by so
profane an abuse, when it is not permitted to a King himself to recede from
it, though the good of his State were never so deeply concerned in it. Good
Princes, as Traian says, are more bound to perform what they promise, then to
effect what themselves desire, so that it is not permitted them in a Treaty to
be worse then their words, under pretense of the public good; or to say their
Counsel does imagine the contrary to be more proper, or that the necessity of
their affairs does require it. If once a Prince should do so he would ever
pass for a Prince without Faith, which is the greatest misfortune can betide
them, and thus Mimus Publicanus says, he who has once forfeited his Faith,
has nothing else to lose, because all the Goods and Honor of a man depend
thereupon. It is indeed fit to consider of Treaties with deliberation before
they are entered into, but when once a Prince shall have passed his word to
observe them, there cannot then be any starting hole to creep out at. It is a
shameful excuse for them to allege they did not think of it. Bias says, they
cannot make no lawful excuse, for he that loses the credit and glory of being
esteemed faithful, has a more considerable damage, then if he lost the thing
which he promised. After Cinna had sent for Marius, he made a question whether
or no he should receive him; but Sertorius understanding he had sent for him,
told him it would be unfit to propose it to him; for (quoth he) the obligation
of Faith, does not allow of the consideration of what is once promised. But
certainly it is a very great abuse to the Majesty of a King to break his Oath,
for by it he does seem to mock God, whom he invoketh as a witness of his
promise. Cicero says in his Offices, that an Oath never ought to be broken,
and the Egyptians punished Perjury with death, because they who were guilty of
it, did not only violate the worship of God, but broke faith which is the
greatest and strongest tie of humane society.

The Traffic at Sea established.
DUring all these civil and foreign broyls, the Cardinal was intent upon
repairing those losses which France had sustained in the late Wars, and upon
settling such an Order in the three States, that happiness might succeed their
miseries and abundance those wants which they had undergone; in this, he
imitated the wise Physician, who having recovered his Patient, makes it his
work to restore his former strength. There only wanted this one thing to the
completing of it. That they upon whom the executing of his designs did depend,
would lend their assisting hands to it. Now Commerce at Sea, being one of the
chief Fountains of a Nations riches, he made it his first care to settle that
in a safe course, which his Majesty having assented to, he gave notice of it to
the Undertakers, and that he should be glad to see them enter into Companies
and Partnerships; assuring them, that they should have all possible assistance
from him, and that he doubted not but they might in time, receive as great
advantages by it, as the Hollanders did by that which is settled amongst them,
or as the Spaniards did from the Mines of Peru. There wanted not diverse who
were ready to adventure on such a design, Montmor in the name of one hundred
others, presented to the Council, Articles of establishment for a Company, to
Traffic both into the East and West, by Sea and Land. He proffered in their
behalf to raise a stock of six hundred thousand Livres, and that the moiety of
the profits thereof, should still go toward the increasing of the said stock:
That he would expend the sum of six hundred thousand Livres in building of
ships and settling the ground-works of their Trade. These Proposals were very
advantageous; his Majesty approved of them, and commanded the Cardinal to
conclude upon the Articles with the Company. So they had diverse Privileges and
Liberties granted to them, in regard of Foreign Wars, and the Wealth which
follows Traffic, as also in consideration of the accruement of power and
shipping by Sea, which was no slight matter, for that the Spaniards, English,
and Hollanders had become very potent at Sea, by this means, and have often
thereupon fallen in upon our Coasts at their own pleasures. The Cardinal
withal, persuaded his Majesty, at the same time, to lay out a great sum of
money, to buy Ships both at Amsterdam, Denmark, and other places of France, to
defend themselves from the like incursions.

Politic Observation.
TWo things chiefly are necessary to render a Kingdom flourishing, Government
and Commerce, and as without the former it is impossible that it should long
subsist, so without the latter, we find it want many things important to the
life of man, and that the Nation cannot attain unto any great riches. Those
Politicians have deceived themselves, who measure happiness by virtue alone,
and think that all their cares and dangers whereunto they expose themselves,
are to no purpose. We are not now in those times, when men lived on Acorns
dropping from Oaks, or when the Fruits of the Earth were the greatest
delicacies without art or labor. Many more things are now require to entertain
(...) ^en heretofore, and the neglect of Commerce were to deprive ones self of
them by laziness. And admitting it were not so, have not sundry Philosophers
used Traffic as a means to attain the experience of many excellent things.
Sol^n amongst the Athenians rendered himself capable of giving Laws to his
Country. Thales one of the Sages of Greece, made no difficulty to employ part
of his time therein, and Plato himself did the same thing to get the charges of
his voyage into Egypt, by carrying Oils thither to sell, that he might purchase
knowledge. Withal, we live not now so much by the Commerce of Elements, as by
that of Gold and Silver, those are the great Springs which more all the rest,
and without them, Kingdoms can neither be Potent in War, or flourish in Peace.
Politicians acknowledge them for the Sinews of War, and as for Peace, never any
poor State was yet considerable, or ever came to any great height, and what
brings greater riches then Commerce? France abounds in many sorts of Grain,
but wants Gold and Silver. Now the only means which it has to come by it,
is to send abroad to its neighbors who want many of those commodities, what it
can well spare by way of Commerce, a means so powerful, that sending only
what is superfluous, it may bring in the greatest part of their wealth.

Monsieur the Cardinal is made by the King, grand Master and Super-intendent of
the Traffic and Commerce of France.
IT was necessary upon settling the Company of Trade, to appoint them a head,
who might have a full power amongst them, and whose reputation and knowledge
might countenance their undertakings, it being most certain, that such designs
as are out of the common road fall to nothing, if not upheld by some particular
favor or an extraordinary understanding. To the Admirals care it could not be
committed, unless their speedy ruin had been intended, for that he assumed of
late so great a power over all Traders, that instead of assisting, he undid
them. The only difficulty was, that it being fit the head of this Company
should be absolute, there would every day arise some disputes between the
Admiral and him; but the King to avoid this inconvenience, was of opinion,
rather to cease the Admiralty, then to break off the settling of Trade; for that
the Admirals were no less chargeable to the State then to the Merchants, they
drawing at least one hundred thousand Livres out of the Treasury every year,
without any advantage by it. Hereupon the King resolved about the beginning of
the year, to take the Admiralty out of Montmorency's hands, who seemed willing
enough to part with it, by his readiness to treat thereupon, and in
conclusion, he had a good round sum paid him for it. This resolution was of
such concernment, that without it, not only the Trading of France had been
quite broke, but the Kings Subjects had been liable to daily Inroads and
Pillagings, for that of late years, above four thousand Christians, had been
been made Slaves by the Turks, above one hundred Vessels taken, sunk, and
burned, by which means a great many families were brought to Beggary.

The King too good, just, and generous to suffer such injuries, which by
diminishing his Peoples goods, did no less take off from his reputation and
glory, resolved to contrive some remedy for it. It was ordered that the
Admiralty should be suppressed, and that a chief, grand Master, and
super-intendent of Commerce of France should be set up instead of it, endowing
him with full power to execute the Office of Admiral, in such cases as might
advantage the benefit of Trade, or the Kingdom, and cutting off all other power
which might prejudice either of them. There was now only wanting a person of
quality to execute this charge who ought to be resolute and clear from all
private Interest, in regard of honor, or the public good. The Cardinal had
made it apparent that these qualifications are eminent in himself, so his
Majesty made choice of him, who accepted of it, but in receiving the Office, he
would not take those Allowances and Pays which had formerly been due to the
Admiralty, for that his Majesty had suppressed that Office, partly to save the
expense of it, so that instead of contracting any charge in this new Office,
his Majesty saved above one hundred thousand Livres per annum, heretofore
assigned to the Admiralty, besides he had now the power of commanding his
Fleets wheresoever he pleased, but before the command of them was annexed to
the Admirals, though they were not endued with qualifications necessary. for
such a charge, and which is most to be observed, that though the Cardinal might
as easily have obtained the Office of Admiral, and executed it with the same
advantage for the King, the benefit of France, and Trade, as that of
super-intendent of the Sea, yet he waved that honor and contended himself with
the means to serve him in a condition less honorable, and less subject to
emulation.

Politic Observation.
IT is great discretion in a Minister to wave those Titles, which only serve
by reason of their noise, to expose him unto Envy. They are but low Souls which
affect ayry Titles, neither do they consider how that by ambition they do
provoke Fortune, and instead of making their authority respected, they do most
commonly render themselves ridiculous in the eyes of all wise men. Modesty is
the thing which makes greatness honored, whereas ostentation offending every
one, atracts the hatred of all the World, and becomes insupportable. Who so is
advanced to any eminent pitch of Honor ought to imitate great Rivers, which
glide a long, with little murmuring, though great profit to the people; whereas
torrents being less profitable do perpetually vex the head with their noise.
Great men ought more especially to shun such titles of Honor, as may render
them odious. Scipio Affricanus, a man who wanted neither courage nor
discretion, gave us a notable example of this particular, as Titus Livy has
observed, when as the Spaniards called him King, and he refused that little,
which he knew would be dis-rellished by the Commonwealth, and told them that
that of General of the Army was the greatest Honor, he did aspire to, That
having indeed a royal soul he should not much take it amiss if they thought
him worthy of that Honor; but he beseeched them to forbear the other, least
that might breed a jealousy upon his Person.

Did not Augustus in the same manner testify a great deal of Prudence, when in
taking upon him the Emperial Crown, he refused to be called Emperors, and
contented himself with the name of Prince, which could not exasperate the Roman
people, it being a name in use amongst them, and a fashion to create a Prince
of the Senate? his discretion told him, That the Romans would easilier undergo
slavery it self, then the name of it: and therefore he would prudently sweeten
the displeasure which they might apprehend at their being brought under his
command by a Title full of modesty, He also aimed at the names of Consul,
Father of his Country, Tribune, and High Priests, only because the people did
not mislike them, designing rather to add a new power to an old Title, then to
assume upon himself such odious qualifications as would only render his power
feared and redoubted.

An Assembly at Paris, to redress disorders of State.
THe setlement of Trade was sufficient to bring great profit to the Kingdom,
but it was likewise necessary, to use diverse other means, for the raising of it
to it is height and greatness. The King had long before concluded on it, but
finding himself unfurnished of a Minister, to put it in execution, the affairs
had still continued in some lameness, until at last seeing himself assisted by
the Cardinal he resolved to assemble the Chief Officers of his Kingdom,
especially those who had acquired most experience and showed best conduct in
affairs. And for the better resolving upon the means, he appointed them to
attend him a Paris, where being met together, his Majesty himself opened the
reasons of their Assembling, upon the second of Dece^ber in the Thuill^ries; He
was pleased to tell them, That he had called them together to provide some
remedies against the disorders of the State, and that the Lord Chancellor
should farther acquaint them with the rest of his desires; and the Lord
Chancellor beginning his speech, represented to them, the great disorders that
had crept into the Kingdom, whilst the King was employed abroad to repel his
enemies and the great expenses he was at for the keeping up of his Armies: and
then told them that his Majesty was resolved for the establishing of the
Kingdom in its ancient splendor, to employ powerful redresses, and so to
regulate his Treasuries, that there might always be a sufficient foundation to
supply the occasions of the State, without being forced to overcharge the
people as of late: He gave them to understand, that the King was contriving to
lessen the expenses of his house, and even those which he was at for the paying
of several Garrisons in places of no importance which he was resolved to
dismantle: To settle Trade with ^ll possible advantages, for the enriching of
his subjects: So to govern his Soldiers both in garrison and the field, that
his subjects might be no more oppressed; upon which it chiefly was, that his
Majesty had desired their advices. When he had concluded, the Cadinal made a
most excellent speech, in which his eloquence was no less to be admired at
then his prudence. He laid before that Illustrious Assembly, how visibly God
had made use of his Majesty to atchieve that in a little time for the public
good, which many thought impossible to have been effected in an age. He gave
them to understand, that as there had been great charges and expenses, so the
King and Queen had received very great advantages by it, in relation to that
Honor and Glory which is due to them; and that if any good success had at any
time happened, it was only the dawning of those resolutions which his Majesty
had taken, for the easing of his people, and restating the Kingdom in its
former Splendour. That as only God can make something out of nothing, so it was
necessary to lay a good foundation in the Treasury, and to that end, to cut off
from the extravagant expenses, and add to the receipts, or indeed to do both at
once. He showed them, how that every one, regarding the advancement of his own
private Interest, it might possibly provoke some to anger, if their expenses
were moderated; but he added withal, that no one could justly complain at it,
since nothing was to be preferred before the Public good, and that the King
and Queen Mother, were both resolved to give a good example, by contracting the
expenses of their families.

He told them, that if in great tempests there was sometimes a necessary to
part with the goods, to ease the vessel and defend her from shipwreck, prudence
did direct the like thing in a State; Which ought not to be cast away for the
preservation of any ones particular good, and that they themselves were bound
in reason to conform themselves to the resolution thereof, for that it is
impossible private and particular men's plenty and Riches, should long last,
when the State is poor and needy, in fine, he told them, that settling a good
government in the Affairs and Treasuries, they would in a very few years find,
both the King and Kingdom raised to a greater pitch of glory, then ever it had
formerly been, but he added, it would not be so necessary to order such things
unless they were really put in execution; That the glory of settling the Nation
being reserved for his Majesty, they who were deputies ought to esteem it a
great Honor done them, in that he gave them part of it, and that for his own
particular, he should esteem himself most happy to dye in the prosecution of so
glorious a design.

After this first overture, the King sent diverse proposals to the Assembly by
his Solicitor General, upon all which such courses were resolved, as were
thought most necessary for the setlement of the State. But it was first of all
concluded, what order should be observed in the levying of men, as also for the
maintaining of them, in such order, that the Country man might not be injured
by them. It was thought fit to keep two Armies in readiness of between eighteen
and twenty thousand foot, and two thousand Horse, as well to secure the
Public Peace, as to support the Kings Authority, and also to keep Foreigners
in a due respect. It is true, there were sufficient means found out to prevent
the peoples damage, but it was to be doubted, that the Soldiers would not so
readily observe those commands which his Majesty had been so careful to order.
Next of all it was considered, what unnecessary expenses of the State should be
cut off, as well to pay off two and fifty Millions of Livers, which the
Exchequer was indebt, as also to acquit the charges of the Nation without
increasing the taxes. In order to which it was thought fit to contract the
expenses of the King and Queens Families, according to the resolution taken
before the late Kings death: Not to exceed the sum of two Millions in Pensions,
which was the sum appointed by the late King Henry the Great for that business,
and lastly the Assembly proposed to his Majesty, the dismantelling of a great
number of strong places, which being in the heart of the Kingdom, or at least
remote from the Frontiers, did only serve to countenance Rebellions, and
consume a vast sum of money for payment of the Garrison Soldiers, and building
unnecessary Fortifications. There was also care taken, (with reference to his
Majesty's good pleasure) for the relief of diverse poor Gentlemen, Captains and
Soldiers, wounded in his Majesty's service; And at last the Assembly made
earnest request to his Majesty, that he would for the future prevent, those
revolts of the Grandees, which were commonly made every year to the great
trouble of the State, and that he would punish some for example sake, who had
the Boldness, to take up Arms against his Authority, or to divide the State
into Factions. They also proposed to his Majesty to admit into his Council, a
certain number of Gentlemen, to bring them up to do him the more service, by
the knowledge which they might get in State affairs, and in conclusion, they
gave his Majesty most Prudent Counsel concerning the ordering and decreasing of
the taxes, for the suppressing of diverse useless Officers, for the redemption
of his Lands which were in Mortgage, by paying them in whose hands they were;
the moneys lent upon them, or full Interest, out of the account of the Revenue,
to settle an order in the Treasury to prevent all future relapses for the
settlement of Commerce both by Sea and Land, for the distribution of charges as
well millitary as others, which have dependence on the Chief Officers of the
Crown, it being improper that they should be bestowed by any but the King
himself. And these were the Chief things then brought into debate before them,
and resolved on. So their was a Paper drawn up of those things which they
proposed to his Majesty, the most part of which, appeared so reasonable and
judicious, that they have ever since served for Maxims and a Rule for the
Government of the State; The Cardinal having put them in practice one after
another, as fast as ever the Civil wars, the Factions at Court, and the
attempts of the house of Austria upon France and it is Allies would give way for
it.

Politic Observation.
HE who would settle a discomposed Kingdom must resolve upon the course whereby
to do it, with the advice of the States, or at least of them, who have gotten a
great reputation of by experience in Affairs, by their qualities and conditions
or the great understanding they are Masters of. On such an occasion, diverse
have had recourse to an Assembly of States: which because they are ordinarily
accompanied with confusion by reason of the multitude, besides the great
expense which they draw on, I should think it much more proper to make use of a
selected Assembly, who are the only persons, whose opinions serve for guides to
the rest, now no one can doubt but that their advices will be very necessary
for a State on such an occasion, for that those great persons are like so many
twinkling stars, whose counsels are replenished with so much light, that they
soon make their Judgments of with is fit to be done, to shine forth. Not to
need Counsel, is to be more then man, and not to make use of Counsel in affairs
of concern, is to be less then man. God is not contented only with overuling
the Elementary World and to make it fruitful in all kind of Science, by the
influences and light of the Sun, but he has imparted some share of his Luster
to the other stars, and has asigned so considerable a proportion of work to
them that every one reputeth them in part to be the universal causes of all
sublunary things; so it may safely be said too, that God creating a Minister in
a Kingdom, whose Souls he replenisheth with any extraordinary part of
understanding, does not however forbear to bestow some light upon others too,
though peradventure inferior both for sufficiency and quality, that they may
contribute with him to the General good, by the particular knowledge which he
may infuse into them, and by the Counsels wherewith he may inspire them. And if
their advices may be of use in a Kingdom, they cannot be less advantageous,
unto a Minister, on such an occasion, in which the angring of diverse persons,
cannot possibly be avoided. There never yet was any reformation for the
public good, but many particular private persons were angered at it. They who
Judge of all things by their own private Interest, are ever discontented, and
conceive no little ill will, against that Minister who is guided only by his
own will, and direction: Whereas if it were done by those, whose wisdom is
esteemed, and whose Prudence is respected, it would silence all men, and make
that sweet and easy, which else would be bitter and insupportable. It is very
dangerous it, for a Minister to undertake great enterprises upon, his own head
only? For good success is not inherent in any man, seeing all are subject to
Deficiencies in Actions and inconstancy; withal it is not to be doubted, but
that the greatest part judging of things by the event, would charge him home
with blame if any misfortune should happen. How many great men who promised
themselves high matters, have seen the success fall contrary to their
expectations, and have been exposed to the disgraces of their King and People
for their ill success, which might have been secured too, had they but
proposed their designs, and taken good advice upon them in a Counsel of the
most considerable Grandees in the State? He who attempts nothing without good
advice, secures himself from any ill accident whatever. Tiberius thought in no
derogation from his honor, to acquaint the Senate with every affair, though
never so little considerable. Anthony the Debonair never took any thing in hand
either in Peace or War, which he did not first communicate to several wise men,
protesting that it was more reasonable to accommodate his opinion to their
advices then to oblige them to follow his Will.

The Sieur de Baradas removed from Court.
ABout this time was Baradas removed from the Court, a person who had been much
in favor with the King: He had been the first Gentleman of his Chamber, and
chief Querry of his Majesty's little Stable: And as great favors puff up the
mind, and destroy the judgment of many, if not qualified with a great
under^^anding, he did so much forget himself, that he would oftentimes make
himself Master of the Kings Will, and interpose in matters of concernment, in
which he had neither ability or authority. His Majesty was much grieved at it,
being a Prince who did not delight to see that they whom he favored should
abuse themselves, and be defective in that respect which is due unto him; but
it one day fell out, that he being too importunate to persuade his Majesty to
bestow a very great place upon a certain Kinsman of his, who must of necessity
be daily attending upon his Majesty, being a person too whom his Majesty did
mislike, his Majesty resolved to deprive him, not only of his Offices or
Charge which he held near his person but of that extraordinary familiarity
wherewith he had formerly honored him, and accordingly commanded him to retire
to his employment in little Bourbon of chief Querry, an Office of no small
advantage. But as nothing is so displeasing to Favorites as to find themselves
cast off, he was so transported by it, that he suffered himself to be deprived
by despair, of that little judgment which he had: There need no other
indiscretion be alleged, but that one thing which he did in his Majesty's
Chamber, when the Governor of Souvre came in thither, whom he supposed one of
the causers of his discredit; he began to quarrel with him, and told him that
he should be very glad to meet him with his Sword in his hand: Which so
insolent discourse being before his Majesty, he told him, that he did not
remember the p^ace where he was, and that he deserved to be sent to the
Bastile, there to be punished according to the Act for Duels, but he only
commanded him to get him gone, from which time forward he was no more seen at
Court.

Politic Observation.
THere are but few Favorites who know how to moderate themselves, and so to
manage their Affairs, that they may preserve their Masters good affection. A
man ought to be of an excellent temper, well to digest any very great favor.
It is most certainly true, that as excess of meat stuffeth up the stomach, and
choaketh the natural heat, so an extraordinary favor depriveth most men of
their judgment, intoxicateth them, and makes them loose the exercise of their
reason And for this cause it is, that they enjoy those favors of fortune to
their Graves, as it has in all ages been seen, that the most part having been
led in Triumph as it ^ere unto the highest point of Glory, have precipitated
themselves into the greatest gulfs of misery, and have so bruised themselves
against the favor which they possessed, as if it had been purposely turned
into a Rock for their ruin. The wise man considers that an indifferent
favor is much more certain then those great ones, and contenteth himself with
what his Master bestows; Fortune does no sooner raise him up but his
discretion presently tells him, that her smiles are inconstant, and that
nothing can so much contribute to his preservation, as to use them with
moderation. He oftentimes reflecteth on that memorable passage of Sosistratus,
who being drawn in his Triumphant Chariot by four Kings, entertained himself
with observing the motion of the Wheels, how that which was now uppermost
presently became lowest, and being asked the reason of his contemplation,
answered, that he delighted to remark the turning of his Wheels, and was by it
put in mind of the inconstancy of humane Affairs, and that the same Fortune
which had raised him to that height of prosperity above those four Kings, then
sub-jugaged to him, might shortly bring him to the same condition. The wise
Favorite fixing his mind upon the inconstancy of Fortune, as upon a sure
maxim, never permits her to blind his mind with vanity, but keeps himself
upon his Guard, not putting himself on in matters of State, but as his Master
calls him, and pays him the greater respects, as his obligations increase. He
is industriously careful not to abuse his Masters favor* by assuming too
great a power on himself, remembering how Calisthenes lost Alexanders good will,
by reason of his too great presumption, and the vanities which he did commit in
the Emperors presence: nothing does so much destroy Favorites, as their
affecting too great an Authority, and taking upon them too much power over
their Masters: He likewise knows, that it is with them as with the Moon, who
hides her self when ever she approaches near the Sun, it being from him that
she receives her light, and that so Favorites ought not to exercise any kind
of authority when they are near Kings, but are rather bound to show them in
their requests all imaginable respects whatsoever: it is his care not to
intermeddle in the administration, nor does he ever attempt to add the power
of governing the State, to that of his Masters good affection: But on the
contrary, he takes so much the less upon him, when the Testimonies which he
receives of his Masters Favor seem to give him most power, and it is his
daily fear to be raised to too eminent a degree, least he should by it be
exposed to too great a fall which might totally destroy him.

Differences between the Bishop of Verdun, and the Officers of the City.
ABout the end of this year, great differences did arise, between the Bishop
and the Officers of Verdun. This being a Frontier Town was then looked upon as
somewhat considerable, in regard Monsieur de Lorrain, seemed to be active and
able to attempt something upon France, which obliged the King to go on with the
design which he had long before resolved of, building a Citadel there. The
Abbey of St. Vannes was ever reputed the most proper place of all the City for
that purpose, whence it happened, that in the Charter of the said Abbey, as was
to be seen, there had been diverse Articles concluded between the Bishop of
Verdun, to whom that place has ever belonged, in which they bound themselves
to build their Church in some other place, if it should be found necessary to
make use of some part of it for the raising of a Citadel. However the Lines
were so contrived, that the Church was saved, but that of the Capucines was
forced to be taken down, which was afterward done, and rebuilt in another
place.

Now the Bishop of Verdun, being a Kinsman of Monsieur de Lorrain, had no other
motion but what came from him, so that not considering what dependence he had
upon the King, suffered himself to be engaged by the Duke to prevent with his
utmost power, the building of the Citadel. His Temporal power was but weak to
manage his design, so he had recourse to his spiritual; and accordingly on the
l^st of December, he published a Monitorium, fixed upon all public places,
against all such as should labor about it. But as the spiritual power has no
authority over the Temporal to deprive it of its rights, so this procedure was
looked on as a strange thing by the Kings Officers, who wanted neither courage
nor loyalty in this affair. The Sieur Guillet Lieutenant at the Royal Siege in
the Town, presently called a Council of his Majesty's Officers of the Town, to
consider of what was to be done, where it was concluded to tear down such
Papers as had been any where Posted up, and to set others in their places of a
contrary tenor in the Kings behalf, which was presently put in execution: The
Bishop was much offended at it, and to be revenged for it he thundered out an
Excommunication the next day against Gillet, which he fastened in diverse places,
and having given Orders to his great Vicars not to act any thing in prejudice
of his pretended Authority, he departed from Verdun, and rid Post to Cologne.
In the mean while the Sieur Charp^nti^r, his Majesty's President in Mets, Thoul
and V^rdun being acquainted with the whose proceeding, and considering how
Derogatory it was from the Power who was Sovereign of the Town, and
consequentially, had absolute authority to fortify it, as himself should think
fit, as also to give such assurances to his Officers who should execute his
royal commands, as might secure them from any Bishop, Excommunication, only
for doing their duties, he declared the said Monitorium to be abusive and
scandalous, and commanded it to be torn and burned by the Hangman: That for
reparation of such a proceeding, the said Bishop should be sent Prisoner under
a safe conduct to Paris: That his Benefices should in the mean time remain in
his Majesty's hands; and that he should pay ten thousand Livres fine for his
said fault. The Judgment was put in execution with the usual form, excepting
only, as to the Bishops being sent to Paris, so that he resolving not to
suffer himself to be thus despoiled of his Goods, thought his best course to
send to the King to pacify him for his rashness, as also he gave order to one
of his Vicars to absolve the Sieur Guillet, and to license the going on of the
Fortifications.

Politic Observation.
AMongst the sundry Privileges, which our Kings bestow on those whom they call
to their service, one of the most just and ancient is, that they may not be
Excommunicated by the Prelates for such actions as they do in discharge of
their duties. There need no other evidence of it but reason it self, and the
order established by God between the Spiritual and Temporal Power, which is
such, that either reserving himself within his prescribed bounds, ought not to
attempt upon the others Power. And does not History furnish us with diverse
examples, which are as so many proofs in this particular. I have seen an Act
resolved by an Assembly, selected in Normandy, dated the year twelve hundred
and five, which contains, that no Archbishop or Bishop, may Excommunicate
any Barons, Bailiffs or Sergeants without his Majesty's permission; and the
Archbishop of Roijen, thereupon promised his Majesty in the year twelve
hundred and seventeen, not to excommunicate any of his Officers without his
consent. The Bishop of Chartres in the year thirteen hundred sixty nine, having
attempted to Excommunicate the Kings Officers at Manto, was condemned by a
Judgment to recall the Excommunication, or lose his Temporal Goods which were
taken into Custody. The Official of Roijen in the same manner too, having
thundered out an Excommunication against one of the Kings Bailiffs, in the year
thirteen hundred and seventy, who refused to deliver a Clerk to him whom he had
taken Prisoner in colored clothes, was condemned by a judgment of the same
nature to take off his Excommunication. And was not a Cardinal Bishop of Man's
condemned by an Arrest in the year one thousand four hundred sixty and five, to
absolve those Officers of his Majesty, whom he had attempted to excommunicate
with an inhibition, not to attempt the like any more hereafter. The Parliament
of Grenoble, approving of the Cardinal de Clermonts power, who was the Popes
Legate in Avignon, in the year fifteen hundred and sixteen, declared, That the
Kings Officers who were in his jurisdiction, should not be any ways liable to
Ecclesiastical censures or interdictions. And when the Bishop of Castres
excommunicated two Councillors of Toulouse, in the year one thousand five
hundred sixty six, was he not adjudged to pay ten thousand Livres fine, and to
repeal his Excommunication besides. And of latter time. when the Cardinal de
Sourdis, attempted to excommunicate certain Counselors of the Parliament,
Anno one thousand six hundred and six, his Temporalties were seized on, and
himself condemned by Arrest of the said Parliament to call in his
Excommunication. It were easy to allege many more like examples. But besides
(though there are proofs enough to convince that this privilege does really
belong unto the Kings Officers.) It is expressly said in the Arrest against the
Bishop of Chartres, made on the year thirteen hundred sixty nine, and in those
Articles proposed to the Assembly, Anno, fiteen hundred eighty three, at St.
German en Lay, that they have enjoyed it time out of mind.

Neither is this privilege particular to them alone, for Matthew Paris says,
in the life of H^nry the second King of England, that the King of Englands
Officers could not be excommunicated, unless the Prelates had first obtained
his Majesty's leave for it.

Anno 1627.
The Insolent Revolt of the Rochelois.
EVERY one verily believed, considering the Peace concluded with the Spaniards
and Hugonots: That France which had a long while like a floating Vessel been
Weather beaten, would now cast Anchor in a quiet settled Harbor: It was every
man's hope, now to enjoy the fruits of so many labors, and that the Clouds
passing away would make room for Serene Calms: But just as it was going to this
Port, the Hugonots and most of the neighbor Princes, appeared on the shore to
prevent its settlement on Land: They raised new stirs, they cast up Shelves of
sand upon one another, and beat the Waves with such violence and fury, that the
end of one storm was but the beginning of another, and that a greater then the
former. Those of Rochel having been of late accustomed to live in an insolent
licentiousness, could not endure to see the Articles of Peace which the King
had accorded to them, put in execution; and Rebellion had taken so deep rooting
in their minds, that the yoke of Obedience was become insupportable to them;
they could not permit, that the Rules of Commerce, observed over all France,
should be taken notice of amongst them. The cutting off of that absolute
authority which they had made use of, in the Isles of Ree and Oleron, and other
places bordering upon their City was looked on, as an outrage; the exercise of
the Catholic Religion being settled amongst them, was esteemed as a great
slavery, and as a rigorous constraint imposed upon that whereof they made
profession. They complained of those Soldiers in Fort Lewis, and the Isles of
Ree and Oleron, left there only to prevent their relapsing into their former
insolences, as a most insufferable tyranny. They resented his Majesty's
Commissaries Acts in order to the execution of the Treaty, as so many unjust
attempts upon their Liberties, and would needs have it be believed, that the
continuation of Fort Lewis, was a breach of those promises, which had been made
to them. These were the Chief complaints which they every where spread abroad;
These were the Griefs which filled their Manifests; These were the Motives
which they made use of to persuade the rest of the Hugonot Towns, to revolt, to
form themselves into a Commonwealth, and to obtain that by force from his
Majesty, which with Justice they could not expect: But these complaints were
made with little reason for that subjects, cannot pretend any thing for their
attempting on their Kings authority: and accordingly the answer which they
could have, when they had the boldness to present them either to his Majesty or
his Minister was, That being born subjects to his Majesty, they neither ought
or could pretend to any exemption from the Laws of obedience; That their
complaints of violencies offered to their Religion, was groundless; for that
they had a full liberty of conscience under his Majesty's protection and that
all such, as troubled them in it, were chastised as disturbers, of the public
Peace: That true it was, by the Treaty of Monpellier, Fort Lewis ought to have
been demollished but with all, That they had made themselves unworthy of it, by
their refusal, to execute several Articles of the Treaty, and amongst others,
to establish, the exercise of the Catholic Religion, in their City as they
had engaged to his Majesty: and moreover, that the Honest's men of the City,
the most sufficient, and such as had most to loose, having represented to his
Majesty, that in case the Fort were slighted, They should be exposed to the
mercy of the Rascality, who would put a thousand outrages and affronts upon
them, he could not deny their so just a request: Besides the sixth Article of
Peace granted them in February last year did expressly say, that his Majesty
would not assent to the destroying of that Fort: They were also told, That
being subjects of his Majesty, they had no cause to complain, of the
Commissaries being there, especially seeing one of them too, was of their own
Religion, and that they had not been then there, but for those delays which
were by them made, in the execution of the Treaty: As to the quartering of
Troops about their City and the adjacent Isles, it was answered; That they had
no reason at all to complain of it, for that they gave the occasion, by their
daily mutenies, by their slow proceedings in the demolishing of Fort Tadon, and
which they did so slightly too, that it was an easy matter to repair it; and
that last of all, those Troops living very civilly, they enjoyed the self same
liberty which his Majesty's subjects did many other Town, where there was a
garrison and that they could not think it strange, his Majesty should so watch
them, who had so often revolted after several protestations of obedience to
procure his pardon for their faults. But nothing would satisfy them, so that
finding they could not procure their desiers, they concluded to prosecute it,
with Arms, and to form themselves into a Commonwealth.

Politic Observation.
IT is neither safe nor Just for a City, born under a Regal power, to shake off
that obedience and become a Commonwealth. The injustice of them who should
attempt so to do cannot be defended, seeing Kings are the Lively Images of the
God head, Livenants of his power, and that he has subjected people in such
dependancies, that no one but himself alone, can revoke their Commission. I
advise thee, says the Wiseman, to have a care of the Kings mouth, and to keep
the oath, that thou have sworn unto him: beware that thou withdraw not thy self
from his power or slight his commands, for otherwise he will deal with thee as
he lists and no one can say unto him, What do thou? And as this Procedure
is very unjust, so it is not safe for them who would engage in it, for that no
Government is so bad as a Popular. There is indeed a certain kind of apparent
liberty, which charmeth, and works upon the Souls of them, who do not under
stand it, but it is most sure, that it is a liberty which exposes a City, to
the greatest misfortunes, that can befall to it. All Kings propose Honor and
the Public good for the end of their Government knowing all their glory
depends thereupon; whereas in a Popular State, every one proposes his own
particular advantage, and by that he measures the Weal Public, and then
comes Honor in the very rear of all other thoughts. Wise discreet Counsels are
so little esteemed in Popular States, that they cannot remedy any
inconvenience though accompanied with a very little difficulty. For though in
State affairs most voices ought to be considered; yet it is not to be thought
in point of number, but the Prudence of them who Judge: whereas admitting the
people to be Master, most voices carries it clear from the rest though better
grounded, by far. The Senate of Rome chose rather to allot Tribunes to the
people, by whose mouths they might deliver their opinion, then to leave them in
a Licentions power, concluding that though the Authority of those Tribunes
would be in some sort superlative, yet that it would be much more supportable,
then that of the people, that many headed beast which having no Judgment,
loves change, and mooveth more by impetuosity then reason. This Beast,
nourishes it self with a thousand vain hopes, its designs are accompanied with
fury, when the danger is farthest off; but soon loses his courage when
brought upon peril; and as it has but a small portion of abilities, so it
knows not who are men of understanding, or who do them good service. Whence
it does ordinarily well reward, such as do them ill service, and ill reward
such as do them good service. Was it not heretofore seen that the Athenian
banished Miltiades, ordered him to pay a great fine, and kept him in durance
until he had paid it, as a reward for having with ten thousand men saved their
City from a dangerous siedge, and beaten one hundred and ten thousand Persians,
by his good Conduct? The like they did to Themistocles, Arist^der, Alcibiades
and diverse other Captains, who had served them, very eminently without any
regard had to their services. He that would esteem a Popular Authority, ought
not to know what it is: And Agesilaus did wisely answer one who would have
changed the Government of Parthia into a democracy, when he advised him only to
set up a Demoraty in his own Dominion, which would discover to him, the
rashness and disorder of a Popular Government.

The Designs of the Duke of Rohan in Languedoc.
THe Duke of Rohan, discontented for that he had made no advantage by the
Peace* at least to render himself the more considerable, did not a little
foment those Mutinies of the Rochelois, to which end, he under hand sowed
divisions among the Consuls of the Chief Hugonot Towns in Languedoc, and some
he made for his own party; that they might lead the people to rebel, when ever
he should hold up his finger; but finding that his design did not absolutely
take in those parts, he resolved to accept of those proffers, which the King of
Great Britain had made to the Duke of Sonbize his Brother, and the deputies of
those of his party, presently after the Treaty of Peace which had been then
newly concluded, about the end of the last year. They could not away with the
putting off the Treaty in execution, as to many particular Articles, which the
discreerest men among them, had persuaded them to agree unto; They dispatched
certain Deputies, toward the King of England, to beseech him that he would use
his power and Authority with the King his Brother in Law, to persuade him, to
demolish Fort St. Lewis which kept them in a wonderful subjection; who being
presented to him by the Duke de Sonbize, who retired himself into England in
the year one thousand six hundred twenty and five, they were well received and
had promises given them of a strong assistance. Now the Duke of Rohan not to
lose these hopes, sent amongst the Deputies the Sieur de Blancard a person of
quality, to procure a quick dispatch, they had many fair promises made them,
and a confirmation of whatever had formerly been resolved on, so that the
Revolt was now concluded on; It was so much the easier to obtain those
succors, for that of late, England had conceived some ill designs against
France. It much troubled them, to see the Hugonot Party, and those of Rochel,
reduced to greater weaknesses then ever, and they took so great a share in
their Interest that one of the Chief Ministers of State there, said in full
Counsel, that it was less considerable to his Majesty to lose Ireland, then to
suffer Rochel to be taken by the King of France. Withal Buckinghams particular
Spleen, which carried himself and swayed most of the great ones there, did not
a little increase it, who were all mad to be dealing with France; so much do
Courtiers follow the inclinations of Favorites. We have in the former year laid
down the causes of his particular hatred, I shall now only add the resentment
which he took, at his Majesty's denial to let him come into France, was that,
and only that which incensed him to that height: But the Cardinal foreseeing
what effects, that refusal would in reason produce advised his Majesty to
permit him to come to the Court, assuring him, that it would be easy to raise
some advantages, out of that earnest passion which he had to come thither, and
that at last he could only end as Icarus did, who perished for aspiring too
high. Yet however the Queen Mother seconding the Kings resolution for his
non-admittance, she became Mistres of the Counsel, which so exasperated
Buckingham, that he vowed shortly to come into France so well attended, that
they should not be able to deny him entrance Madam de Cheureuse, who was
discontented too, and then in Lorrain, did not a little blow the Coals of his
passion, and serve to nourish his anger; but as it would have been more to his
discredit then Honor, to have openly declared it, so he wanted some pretenses
to cloak it. He pretended that the King of England his Master had been surety
for the performance of those promises which the King and his Ministers had made
to the Hugonots upon the conclusion of the Peace. Now the Chancellor having
told their Deputies, in presence of the English Ambassadors, that though the
King could not be induced, to assent unto the demolition of Fort Lewis, yet
that they might hope for it from his Bounty in Time, in case they lived within
the bounds of a due obedience. These hopes would he needs have pass for
absolute promises, and for Articles agreed on with Ambassadors, and in
prosecution of them, he would fain have it be believed that the King his
Master, was bound, by way of caution to see the demollishing of it put in
execution. He had likewise the boldness to let the King know from his Master of
Great Britain, by his Ambassador, that he was likewise engaged to see the
performance, of a certain Declaration made to the Hugonots by the Earl of
Holland and the Lord Charlton; Extraordinary Ambassadors then at that Treaty,
in which they had construed the Chancellor Haligres words in that sense, as
was most agreeable to the Hugonots, and all, that they might engage them the
more unto their Interests, and not want a pretense to imbroyle things when ever
they had a mind to it. But it was absolutely denied, that the King of England
did ever become engaged to see those promises made to them of Rochel,
performed, or that he had been treated with, or his Ambassadors, in any sort
whatever; But on the contrary, it was represented to them, how it was not
forgotten, what message his Majesty then sent to the Earl of Holland and the
Lord Charleton, by the Duke of Cheureuse and the Bishop of Mande which was,
that in case, they should pretend to intermeddle in the Treaty, the King would
not give his consent to any thing, but if upon condition that the King of
England would engage to assist him with a strong Fleet to compel the Rochelois,
if they should fall back from their duties. This had been told them once and
again, and that plainly enough, as also confirmed by Monsieur the Cardinal, so
that their pretenses of the King of Great Britains, being Pledge for
Performance of those Articles granted to the Rochelois, were groundless: as
also that frivolous pretext; of making use of the Earl of Hollands and the
Lord Charle^ous Declaration, which being a thing of their own drawing, and done
as best pleased themselves was of no value. However it was one of the chiefest
Arguments they made use of, in their Declaration to justify their Arms, when
they entered upon Ree; And the Duke of Buckingham manifested to all people, that
his only design was to protect the Rochelois and reformed Churches of France,
though it was not unknown, that his private Spleen, was the true cause of his
design; yet he was cunning enough to dissemble it to the King of England, and
pretend assisting of the Rochelois, and withal to assure him that the whole
party of the Hugonots, would revolt and upon the arrival of his Fleet put such
and such Towns into his hands, that he might set on foot his old pretenses upon
France, and enter upon it with security and advantage. Upon these scores the
King of England, labored very industriously for the rigging out of his Fleet,
all April, May and June; not at all discovering his design though both his
Majesty and the Cardinal, were not so ill informed but that they perfectly knew
it was prepared for France.

Politic Observation.
KIngs when they have a mind to make a war, never want pretenses to disguise
the injustice of it; however it is an absurd rashness to engage in any, without
urgent necessity. I like well of T. Livius Judgment who says war is then Just,
when it is necessary; and that Arms are never attended with Justice, but when
there are no other hopes but from them. And who can think otherwise of it,
seeing war is followed by all sorts of miseries? War it is which ushers in
disorders, and evil customs, which takes away the lives of the Innocent,
which brings the Rich into want, and which generally banisheth all the
pleasures of life to set up troubles and afflictions; So that a man can hardly
fancy any thing more to be deplored then war, from whence it follows, that
who so begins it, without absolute necessity, may be well compared to those
Chemists, who administer such potions to their patients, that they thence
suffer more griefs and pains then from their sicknesses and diseases. A wise
man will abstain from war, says Xenophon, though he have some reason for it.
Craesus did ever prefer peace before war, if only for this reason, because in
war Fathers did bury their Children against the Laws of Nature. The He Wolf is
so ravenous according to Pliny, that having seized upon one Prey, and
discovering another, he presently leaves his first and pursues his second
game, though he be uncertain of taking it: He who would undertake a war without
being absolutely necessitated to it, does not he do the same thing? does he not
hazard the pleasures and certainties of Peace, to obtain victories by his Arms,
which by the opinions of all Wise men, depend rather upon Fortune then Valor?
He who designs another ruin, is himself often included in it, and that Prince
who would blemish his Neighbors reputation, does often find his own exposed
to those disgraces which he had provided for others: He does not only exhaust
his own Treasures, but makes himself hated by his subjects, in drawing from
them contributions, for the carrying on of his war, in leading them to
slaughter, and exposing his Country to ruin; for that the divine Providence is
well pleased to chastise arrogances and Public in Justice, and raises such a
flame as may destroy perchance his own Country, instead of his Neighbors. The
flames of war are not so easily extinguished as lighted, and many Grand
Monarchs designing to employ them, for the subversion of others, have only
raised them, for the last piles of their own glory and Honors. It is no less
unjust to raise a war, not necessitated to it, then infamous to remain within
doors, when the Public Interests oblige the undertaking of it.

The King animated by the save Counsels of the Cardinal, resolves on the siege
of Rochel.
THe Cardinal must of necessity have had less courage and zeal for his
Majesty's service, then hitherto he had expressed, longer to have ^ted the
Rochelois to go away unpunished, for their insolent mutinies; S^ Grand Minister
who was eminently endued with those two admirable qualities, openly told the
King, (who chanced to discourse with him upon that affair) that there was not
any reason longer to put up their indignities, and that he thought it expedient
for him to make use of his Arms, for the curbing in of the Insolence of those
Rebels, who hourly disturbed the Repose of his Country. He briefly represented
to him, the several insurrections which the Hugonots had of late years, raised
up in the Kingdom. That of all the Towns, Rochel was the support, of their
Revolts, as also the fierbrand, which Foreign Princes made use of to inflame
the Kingdom with war, That that one City was an obstacle to the undertaking of
any great designs, That it was a shame to see those Edicts how just or
necessary soever, not regarded or observed in their City. That it served for a
Road to discontents, and a retreat for Rebels: That Peace could never be
certainly established, in the Kingdom nor abroad, whilst that place was in a
condition to second a Faction: That France could not be in security from
strangers, whilst that place was in its own power to set open their Gates: and
on the contrary, that there was reason to hope; for a happy and prosperous
Peace, that place being once disarmed and their Forts reduced to nothing, by
which they would be forced to live in their obedience. This discourse once
ended, it was no hard matter to resolve his Majesty's inclinations, for the
reducing them to the rules of obedience by a potent siege, especially seeing he
was not of so little courage as to suffer such obstacles and indignities
unpunished any longer: But though it were regretful longer to suffer it, yet it
was no less, difficult to prevent it. The reason he had to puni^h them, was
apparently visible, but the means how to do it, not easily found out; But as
difficulties serve only to augment great courages, who are carried on by any
extraordinary sense of glory, so the King animated by the generous Counsels of
the Cardinal, fixed upon the Resolution of making strong preparations for the
siege of it.

I shall moreover say, That the Cardinal knowing that no one ought to shut his
eyes in dangers, but rather to look upon them, exactly to consider them, and if
possibly apply preventive remedies to overcome them, so he did not disguise any
thing to the King which might happen in the siedg. He represented to them, the
strength of the Hugonot party, grounded upon many strong places, fortified with
intelligence from abroad, cemented by the Interests of diverse Grandees of the
Kingdom; and supported by their own Forces; that whatever the Precedent Kings
had gained in many Battles, and a long tract of various war, served only to
make Treaties of Peace, which are as so many marks, of their uncomptrouled
insurrections. He desired him to remember the Ambition of Grandees, the Passion
of Ministers, the insolences of them of this Faction; their Plots, Cabal; and
animosities, and he clearly told him, That it was the more necessary to remove
all these obstacles, with his very utmost power, in regard if he did not,
instead of healing it would fester the wound, and diminish instead of making
his Arms more considerable. But withal he assured him that in case his Majesty,
thought fit to do his utmost upon this rebellious place, there was reason to
hope for a good success, seeing he had Peace with Germany and no enemy to
divert him, the English only excepted, who at that time were not strong enough
to be much feared; That in case any one should attempt upon France, there might
however be means found out to put off or hinder their designs; which being so,
he did not find any difficulties, but what were under his own power. That the
Sea Port of this City might be blocked up, if he would go to the Charge of it,
and that making a line about it with Forts and Redouts, all hopes either of men
or victuals would be cut off from them. That bringing good store of vessels
which might be drawn out from several ports of France, the English attempts in
case their Fleet should arrive, would be to no purpose seeing his Majesty's
Ships would be all under the shelter of his Forts and Batteries, which might be
raised at the mouth of the Channel; by which means Rochel would in a little
while be reduced to necessity, forced to deliver upon mercy and then so
ordered, that they should never be in a condition, but of obeying for the
Future. The^e considerations were laid down with so much discretion and
proposed with such clearness, that his Majesty could not be ignorant of the
just grounds he had to hope for a good success in his design upon this City.
So he resolved about the beginning of the year to go on with it, and his whole
thoughts were bent upon the preparations for the siedg, though it were very
secretly carried that they might have no suspicion of it, before all things
were ready for to assault the place,

The Cardinal caused almost exact Platform of Rochel to be drawn out, and of
all the adjacent places. He saw all their Forts, their Form height and bigness,
the breadth and depth of their ditches, and whatever was strong or weak in the
whole Fortification. The ways and passages of the whole Country were not
omitted, nor the length and largness of the Channel, the places where Batteries
might be raised, with Forts for defense of the Port, and oftentimes considering
this Map with the Marshal de Schomberg and other able Ingeniers for such
exploits, he framed so perfect an Idea of all that could happen in the siege
foreseeing effects in their causes, That he did no longer doubt of the
victory; And having discoursed more at large with his Majesty concerning it, he
told him, that he could now almost assure his Majesty of a good success in
this design, if it pleased God to Prosper it with his blessing, as there was
great reason to hope, seeing he acted for the good of the Church, and the glory
of his own name. The King was overjoyed at it, and from that time forwards
preparations were made in all the adjacent Provinces, of warlik amunitions,
great store of Cannon were sent before hand toward the place that they might
be in a readiness when time should serve; diverse means were thought on, to
block up the Channel, and to begin with those of less charge, to prevent
greater expenses, in case they might do the work; a private computation was
made of what horse and foot, would be requisite to invest the place, and secure
the neighboring Isles, and to be short, every thing was disposed to the best
advantage for the carrying on of the siedg.

Politic Observation.
HE who shuts his eyes at those difficulties which he shall meet with in
war, deceives himself: Commonly they that do so, are quickly reduced to an
impossibility of executing their designs, If there be any one Action which
ought maturely to be deliberated, in its beginning, progress and end, without
doubt war is chiefly the thing, it being as Scipio says, absolutely important,
not to begin it, unless Fortune presents a favorable occasion, with advantage:
but when the means necessary for it is continuation are certain, and when there
is a sure way to come off with Honor. Though Fortune should be cross, yet
after so many considerations, it can hardly end in a bad success, whereas with
blinded eyes and no considerations had of the means to overcome such obstacles
may arise as nothing, but confusion and disorder and ruin can fo^low: Tiberius
is very much commended in Tacitus, for having so great knowledge of his enemies
Plots, designs, and resolutions, in so much, that those very subtilities which
they proposed for to get a victory, he made use of for their destruction: And
T. Livy says of Hannibal, that one of the principal causes which gave him many
advantages in war, was, the knowing his enemies Counsels as well as he did his
own resolutions. A discreet Pilot foresees a storm and secureth himself,
neither does a Grand Minister of State attempt any thing of concern, but he
foresees the difficulties which may happen in it. It is for Fencers, not
Princes to resolve on a sudden. A wise man, never brings himself within danger
of repentance, and as he knows his designs may be countermined, so he is
accordingly careful not only to provide all such means as may carry his
business to a happy issue, but also such remedies as may overcome any obstacles
which may chance to be made in opposition of it. He never lets his courage be
quelled with difficulties, but makes them only serve to fix his resolution the
more strongly against all resistances; by this means he will see all things
fall out according to his own forecast, and he will force Fortune her self to
become favorable to him.

The Duke of Lorrain comes to the King at Paris, to complain of his Majesty's
Actions toward the Bishop of Verdun, and to do him Homage for the Dutchee of
Bar.
GReat enterprises are not to be ended in a moment, so that some months had
passed before the English were in a condition to make good their promise to the
Rochelois; during which time, diverse remarkable things intervened. The Duke of
Lorrain about the beginning of the year came to his Majesty at Paris, and made
great complaints of his Majesty's Officers Actions against the Bishop of Verdun
his Kinsman, how that they had seized on all his Goods, translated the charge
of his Offices to other persons, that they had Posted up Papers against him,
and had resolved to have seized on his Person, if it had been in their power:
But as he had not to do with such Ministers, who had either fear or weakness,
or knew not how or when to maintain their Masters Interests, so he was quickly
answered. That Bishops of what condition soever, being his Majesty's subjects,
owe as much respect and obedience to him, as others of his degree, that when
they fall off from their duties, it is then the more just to punish their
faults, their Delinquency being an ill example, to which most people are apt to
follow: That enjoying their Temporal States only in order to the Oath of
Allegiance, which they all swear to his Majesty, they do most especially
deserve to be deprived of them, when they break their said oath; That his
Majesty was more especially obsigned to maintain his Right in Verdun, which was
a Fontier Town, and in regard too, that the Bishop had attempted against his
Royal Authority in hindering the building of the Citadel, though it were a
thing only relating to the Soverainty, and in which he was not all concerned:
These answers were so Just and grounded upon such sollid reasons, that nothing
could be replied against them, so the Duke had recourse, to his entreaties and
beseeched his Majesty for his sake, to wink at with was past, to order
restitution of his seizures, and to command the Bishop Officers to be
re-established in their former charges. He was very urgent in his behalf, and
because at the same time the Emperor having writ to his Majesty in his favor,
the King had returned him answer, That at his desire, he should willingly grant
him any reasonable favor, the Duke obtained his request but upon condition
however, That the Bishop should first send a Commission to one of his Vicars,
to revoke the Censures which had been given out against his Majesty's Officers,
and them who worked on the Citadel, and that in fature he should comport
himself with more respect and moderation. The Duke did willingly become bound
for his performance, and having sent the Commission the King discharged the
seizures and settled all things in their former state. But notwithstanding all
the Duks seeming affection and forwardness in this affair, yet that was not the
chief end of his Journey. He had been newly put into possession of the States
of Lorrain and Bar, by virtue of Reynard the second King of Sicilies will, and
by the resignment of his Father, the Count of Vaudmont pretending to hold them
of his Liege in his own proper name, though the late Duke of Lorrain his
Predecessor had, and that with reason declared, by giving him his eldest
Daughter to wife, that she should be the true Inheretrix of his States, and
that he should only enjoy them in her right.

He also made his entry into Nancy, with Balls and public rejoycings in his
Court, and all that he might celebrate with the more Honor his arrival to the
Crown of Lorrain, hereupon he pretended to do Homage to the King in his own
name, for the Dutche of Bar, as appertaining to him in Fee, and not in right of
his wife, but he therein met with greater obstacles then in that of the Bishop
of Verdun.

It was presently given him to understand, that he had not a little offended
his Majesty, in that he had upon his own head assumed upon himself the
Investiture of Bar, and not expected his Majesty's introduction, to whom the
Soverainty did belong. That he had expedited all letters Patents in his own
name, without mentioning that of the Duchess his wife, for that no vassal has
any thing by descent in his Fee, until he be invested by his Soverain to whom
he does Homage; That he gave a just ground to be disseised of it, if he should
possess himself thereof, before he were lawfully introduced; That he had also
committed no small fault when as he attempted to alter the quality of Tenure of
Bar, and so create it Masculine, whereas the Chief Sovereign could only alter
the nature of Fees, and dispense with Customs. The inconsiderate and lofty
humor of this Prince, was such, that he could have wished he had not been
dependant on any other, and gave him not leave to consider the Justice of these
reasons; he answered those Ministers with whom he treated, that it being
indifferent to his Majesty, whether the Homage of Bar were Masculine or
Feminine, he imagined that R^ynard King of Sicily his great Grandfather, had
lawfully constituted it upon the Males, in exclusion of the Females; and that
in consequence it was become his own right, that he was ready to pay unto his
Majesty that homage which is due unto him; and lastly he added, that in his
judgment he had no power to annul the right which he had acquired. He made use
of the Duke de Ch^ureuse, who made many journies too and fro, to make his
argument pass amongst the Ministers for good, and some others too, which being
inconsiderable I shall pass by. But he was ever told that his Majesty had
reason enough and interest withal, to oppose that an Homage dependant upon his
Crown might be altered in quality; that the Customs of Countries and
succession of States, were not at all altered, seeing such changes are reserved
in his only power and in no other whatever: That he ought to know the Customs
of Bar were never changeable but by his Majesty's permission; and moreover, on
condition that they were confirmed by the Parliament of Paris: That he could
not be ignorant how the custom of both Bar, and all those lands bordering upon
the Rhine did grant the succession to daughters; in exclusion of any Males
descended from a second Brother, they being daughters of the eldest, and that
he had so much the less reason to change this custom without the Kings
Authority, in regard this one Article was of greater concern then all the rest;
that such a change was contrary to the fundamental Laws of Lorrain, and that he
debarred the Duchess his wife, of the right which indubit^bly belonged to
her. Now as he could not possibly make any satisfactory answer to these
objections, so he was forced to return without doing any thing at all in it,
only he procured some time to make out his pretensions, and to furnish himself
with Titles and Reasons to second and uphold them.

Politic Observation.
THE wisest Politicians have thought it dangerous to the good of the State, to
alter any Laws without urgent occasion, or unless the change carry some great
advantage with it. Aristotle says, it makes subjects slight rules and powers,
and does much diminish their Authority; Thucydid^s has gone a little further,
thinking it safer and more proper inviolably to continue the Laws of a Country
though ill ordered, rather then set up new ones and better in their place. St.
Austin says, that as in sickness it is good to continue the use of those
medicines, which till then the sick person had used; so likewise, it is the
effect of a great discretion, to preserve the observation of those Laws which
had formerly enough in them to remedy any inconveniences in the State: Which if
true, of Laws in general, is then, much more necessary in Fundamentals, which
have been the establishers of a State, seeing they are no less conducing to
its preservation, then the Foundation of a house for the subsistence of it. To
speak ingeniously, such Laws are the Pillars which uphold Authority, and as a
building, if the Foundation be undermined and shaken, soon falls to the earth;
so a State too quickly comes to ruin, if those Laws upon which it is
established once come to destruction or alteration. For this reason, Adrian
ordained that no one should intraduce any new Customs into Rome. Plato in his
Commonwealth, prohibiteth the changing of any thing in it, even
Childrens-play; for novelties alter manners, and bring antiquity into
dis-esteem, a thing of great consequence. I should like well of the alteration
of some rules of Justice, because the manners of men are variable, and the
punishing of Crimes too may admit of change, according to the disposition of
men and times. But it is not the same thing in fundamentals, which rule the
government, and which settle the election which God has made of a Sovereign,
which do authorize the order established by former Princes, for the ordering of
the people, and which are the known rules for the preservation of the common
good; indeed such ought no more to be changed then the Laws of nature, for both
are equally founded upon Gods Law: He it is who divides the earth amongst
Nations, who establishes Kings families and inheritances, so that without his
will no alteration may be intraduced to change those Customs which have been
anciently in use.

The Duchess of Orleans death, upon her lying in of a Daughter.
THE King was much troubled soon after the Duke of Lorrain's departure for the
Duchess of Orleans his Sister in Law. We have in the former yeart related, how
many broils the marrying of this Princess did raise at Court, and how most of
the Princes of Christendom endeavored to hinder it, now we are come to wonder
at the blindness of Grandees, who turmoil themselves in extremity, who move
heaven and earth by their broils, and all for those things, which death, and
the inconstancy of humane affairs cause to vanish in a moment. The marriage was
concluded but more for discretion than love in his part, yet God so blessed it,
that Love had quickly united both their affections very strongly;
notwithstanding all the endeavors or devices of Monsieurs Favorites and
Creatures, to make him dis-esteem her, and her not to love him; the particular
merit of this Princess gave great reason to believe, that Monsieur could come
to be sensible of it, and would by his esteem and affection give her a great
power over his Soul: Now his Favorites finding if things went in that way, it
would be a great prejudice to their affairs, and lessen the power which they
pretended to have in his house, left no stone unturned, that they might engage
his affections elsewhere, at least lessen his kindness to the Princess; but
Monsieurs good nature animated by the virtue of this Princess, was above the
malice of those Factious Interests: So that love having joined their wills in a
true affection, death could not separate them, but to their great griefs. The
Princess growing big in a few months after her marriage, was about the end of
May brought to bed of a daughter, but so mis-fortunately that there was little
hopes of saving her life. Monsieur was every hour with her, so that it could
not be concealed from him, and he unable to dissemble the greatness of his
affection, she was forced to comfort him, by testifying her readiness to
submit to whatever God should c^dain. In the interim, the Physicians employed
their utmost Art but to little purpose, so that after she had disposed her self
to leave this world, by all religious actions which might make her fit for
heaven, she died and by her death taught all great men, that in greatness
nothing is more certain then inconstancy, and that greatness ought to be
considered only as a game of Fortune, which after a fair flourish, bring all
to nothing in a moment. The King who did no less honor her virtue then
Monsieur, was much affected at it; but above all the house of Guise. They saw
all their hopes and the great designs which they had projected upon her
Marriage, to be brought to nothing, which made them continue along while in
their discomforts.

Politic Observation.
HE spoke very wisely concerning worldly greatnesses, who said they are
obtained with much peril, kept with no less vexation and inconstancy; and lost
with as great prise; What ever luster and dazeling the Sun makes in our eyes
yet we see him set everyday, and though men attain to never so great glory, yet
must they be laid in the dust. The same cause which gives us life, leads us on
to death, yet as the same Sun which ushers in the morning light leaves us in
darkness at his departure. The same Sun going out of the first degree Aries,
rests not until his return; and we too, once borne, are hurried on to death.
Nothing is here beneath more certain then incertainty, more constant then
inconstancy. Though Fortune be so favorable as to let us enjoy greatness some
little time, yet then comes death and snatcheth all away, forcing us to pay
that duty which we own, what ever resistance we make against its assaults, it
will at last force us to stoop under its Laws; its dart is unavoydable, so that
there can be no greater wisdom then to resolve of being overcome, and to enjoy
that without regret which Fortune prepares for us. In our expectation of
deaths coming to deprive us of all we ought to attend it, with the greater
care in regard the Limits of man's life are so uncertain, and when it comes,
we ought not to think it has made too much have, since no death is
precipitated upon us: and considering the uncertainty of the time, when it will
come, we ought however to be assured, that one day it will come, and carry us
out of this World. Let the World flatter it self with all it is glories, yet
death will cut all down: After the earth has been enameld with Flowers,
replenished with a thousand sweets, arrayed with infinite plants, and laden
with rich Harvests, yet a few months, and her beauty withers, she becomes
covered with snows, hayles and storms, she is glued up with frosts and drowned
in raines. So shall the greatest Princes find their luster and glory terminated
by death in the grave. Their Splender shall fade like Flowers, their
prosperities melt like snow, and though like Torrents they have astonished the
world by their noise, at last they shall pass away like a flash of lightning.

A Duel between the Marquis de Praslin, and the Sieur de Bouteville severely
punished.
THough the King had made so strict an Edict against Duels, yet such was the
blind fury which had seized on the souls of the Nobility, that some of them
could not refrain fighting. This Error which had built glory upon Revenge, and
caused Duels to pass for a test of courage, had taken such deep roots in most
of their thoughts, that it was impossible totally to extirpate it: and as
heretofore among the Macedonians, he was accounted an unworthy fellow, who had
not slain some of his Countries enemies, so in France, he who had not killed
one or more in Duelling, could not be thought valiant. The King had made
rigorous Edicts against this lamentable evil, which had untimely ravished a
number of Brave men out of France, since Henry the second's time. But as it is
to small purpose to make laws unless they who violate them, be punished
accordingly, so his Majesty was very strict in chastising those Gentlemen which
should offend in that particular: The Marquis de Praslin, son to the late
Marshal, had the boldness to fight with the Baron du Bar; for his punishment he
was deprived of his Livetenant Generals place in Champagne, and forced to live
some years away from the Court. About the same time there was some suspicion
upon the Sieur de Liancourt, for having challenged the Sieur de Cressia from
the Duc d' Alvin, and though there were only conjectures of it, yet the King
forbid them the Court: and also resolved to dispose of the place of first
Gentleman of his Bedchamber, which belonged to the Sieur de Lian Court, and had
accordingly done it, but that some persons of quality, who served them in that
affair testified that there had not any challenge past in it. This was so
exemplary a punishment that every one began to hope, the Nobility would at
length, be undeceived, of that belief which they had, that the Laws of Honor
were contrary to those of virtue and Christianity. But rashness has no bounds,
The Sieurs de Bouteville and des Chapelles carried themselves to such excess,
that his Majesty was forced to make use of his Justice to punish them, with
more then ordinary severity, being unable to pardon them, without giving way
and countenancing the neglects of his Crown, and a madness which cried for
Justice from Heaven and Earth.

The Sieur de Bouteville was indeed to be commended for his good courage, as
his very enemies would confess, but it not being guided with discretion, it
depraved into such a fury, that there was hardly any one at Court reputed for a
stout man, but he must needs meet him with his Sword in his hand; Not a day how
holy soever, but he would profane by his Duels, no place how public soever
which he would not bath with the blood of some one or other, so little
reckoning did he make of the Kings Prohibition; after the coming out of the
Edict, he had fought with the Count de Thorigny and slain him: about the end of
the foregoing year, and the beginning of this he had another Duel with la Frete,
where his second was killed, which quarrels of his were so much the less to be
connived at, in regard those of the best quality were still parties in it. So
the King resolved to punish him, which he having notice of withdrew himself
into Flanders, where he found means to persuade the Archduchess to Interest her
self in his affairs upon the score of the Damoizelle de Montmorency her
favorite, who writ to his Majesty to beg his pardon, The King took advice of
his Confessor, and as there was no reason to forgive such offenses, so he
counseled him not to grant it, and made it evident to him, that he could not
do it, with a safe conscience; but that his Majesty might not seem totally to
deny the Infant, he sent her word that at her request he should not be
questioned for what was past, provided he came not either to Paris or the
Court. This was as much as a Just Mercy could well do; But the same fury which
had formerly engaged Bouteville in those quarrels, did so provoke him upon his
Majesty's denial of a total pardon, that he openly vowed he would ere long
fight in Paris, nay, and in the Place Royal it self; accordingly not long after
thither he came, and having given notice of it to the Marquis de Beuuron, with
whom he had a quarrel, that he was ready to give him satisfaction for those
differences between them, which he had not the liberty to do in Flanders,
whither Beuuron had come to find him out, by reason of the promise which he had
engaged to the Infant, not to fight on any of her Territories: So they made
choice of the Place Royal for their combats, where being met three against
three, Bouteville, des Chapelles and La Berte, against Beuvron Bussi, d'
Amboyse and Bouquet, they fought and Beuvron was killed out right, by
Chapelles, La Barte desperately wounded by Bouquet, and Bouteville with
Beruuron close grapling together, with a good will to be at it with their
daggers, but having cast away their Swords, it is reported how in this equality
of advantage they mutually asked one another life, to go part their friends.
This was all that could be got from their neglecting the Kings will, and the
fury which led them to entertain such detestiable offenses. The King heard of
it, and soon after that, Bussy's Mother had arrested Bouteville, by a Gentleman
of hers, and des Chapelles at Vitry, from whence they were conducted to safe
Custody to Paris and there delivered over to the Parliament, to be proceeded
against, his Majesty having absolutely refused to show them any favor, though
their kindred made great requests for it, and at last their heads were struck
off at the Greve, by order of the Parliament.

Politic Observation.
HE who defends the wicked, and he who offends the good, are both in equal
abomination before the Lord, as Solomon says in his Proverb's, I should
therefore submit to that of St. Chrysostom who says, That as Justice without
Mercy is not Justice, but cruelty: So Mercy without Justice, is not Mercy but
extreme rashness. It were not less improper, to pardon all Crimes, then to use
on all occasions the extremity of Justice. Both ought to be moderated by
discretion, without which there are as many inconveniences which will follow
gentleness as severity. Philip advised his son Alexander to be very courteous
to his subjects, whilst he was not King, for it would not be fit for him to use
so great indulgence toward them, when as he should arrive to the Throne;
Judging, with great wisdom, that it is impossible for him who rules, to treat
all with clemency; not only because the Interest of his subjects does sometimes
compel him to be severe, but also because unless he punish the wicked, it will
be a dimination of his own authority: The Heathens say, Jupiter himself cannot
reign without Justice. And Plutarch in the Life of Demetrius says, nothing is
more becoming a Prince, then the exercise of this virtue; and does not Solomon
who is much more authentic, say, The Throne of a King is established by
Justice. St. Cyprian in his Tract of the twelve abuses, says the Justice of
the King, is the Peace of the people, the Nurse of Children, the defense of the
Country, the comfort of the poor, and himself the hope of Heaven to come. And
if a Sovereign ever may make use of it, he ought not to let it lie idle, when
it sends to the purging of his Court from such seditious companions, as engage
his nobles daily to cut one another throats.

It is a Crime more then Brutal; for the instinct of nature, forbideth beasts
to fall upon one another. It is reported that Neurians are Wolves one six
mouths of the year, and men the other six mouths, but I should with more Justice
imagine their swash bucklers, not to be men at all, but that by their
greediness of spilling man's blood, that are beasts Wolves and Tigres, all their
lives. Their courage is not courage but a fury, which hurrieth them on to dip
their hands in their brothers blood, not a courage but a Rage which makes them
madly expose their bodies to death, and their souls to damnation. It is not any
just Law of Arms which obliges that to be thus barbarous, but a Devilish Charm
which deprives them, of their reason. The foolish passion of an imaginary
honor which animateth them, is a monster begot by vanity, brought up by fury
and nourished by blood; as it is said of that in Habacuc, the greatest, the
noblest and most courageous serve it for a prey. What apparency of reason can
there be alleged, for renewing the old Butchery of Haman flesh, before the
images, not of a Moloc; a Saturn, but a vain fantasy of honor? What Justice
to tolerate that, which God has so expressly forbid and condemned to be
punished with death, which heaven abhors, which the Laws detest and which is
only worthy of Hell fire? But above all things, it ought not to be permitted,
when committed in dirsion of the Regal authority, for once admitting a Kings
power to be trampled on, the next thing which follows, will be the peoples
revolt, and a general confusion in the whole Kingdom.

The King of England's and diverse other Princes endeavors to divert the King
from his resolution against Rochel.
THough the design of besieging Rochel were kept very secret, yet some little
suspicions there were of it which allarumd all the neighboring Princes. The
English who had already concluded upon their entering into France, resolved to
redouble the Forces which had been alloted to take shipping, and others too
were no less jealous of it. They knew how much it behooved them, to uphold the
Hugonot party in France, which would disunite the Force of the Kingdom, and so
employ the King whenever they had a mind to it, that he should not be able to
march out of his own Frontiers, to oppose any designs of theirs, or attempt any
thing upon them: They well knew France was not a little to be feared, when as
it was at it is full liberty, and no remora at home to hinder, the going out of
their powers. That it has pretensions upon all her neighbors, and that if the
Hugonots were but once quashed, and Rochel their strongest support destroyed,
his Majesty would then be at full liberty, to prosecute his pretenses. So every
one preferring his own Interests before Justice and Religion, sought for
opportunities to divert his Majesty's Arms and force him, instead of assaulting
others, to defend himself, they consulted together by means of their
Ambassadors, and made a league to assault France in diverse places at one and
the same time. The King of Great Britain being Chief of the league took care
to send from one place to another, to resolve particularly what should be done.

Politic Observation.
Policy obliges Kings to foment the beginnings of division amongst their
neighbors, but it ought to be accompanied with Justice, else it cannot pass
for a virtue, and is to be used only toward enemies. The Laws both of nature
and Christianity forbids the doing of that to others, which we would not
have done to our selves, they who deal otherwise do invert the rules of humane
society. Bajazet the Turkish Emperor was to be pardoned for that answer of his
to Sigismonds Ambassadors, (who remonstrated to him that having no right or
Title to Bulgaria, he was bound in Justice to withdraw his Arms from it) that
he had such Guns in his Arcenal, as gave him a right not only to Bulgaria, but
as much as he could finger too, in any other place. An answer I say excusable
in a Tyrant, who openly professes to trample all Equity under foot, but not so
in Christian Princes, whose victories ought always to be bounded in with
Justice. That which Antigonus the Great, replied to one, who would needs
persuade him, that whatever Kings had a mind to, was lawful, was much more
praise worthy, he told him true, it was so, but amongst Barbarian Kings, not
them who profess Justice, and to whom all injustice is an abomination. God
has in the Scriptures appointed distinct Laws both for Princes and private men;
and as particular persons may not do any thing against the Common good, so
Princes cannot attempt any thing of injustice without offense. Plutarch blames
Marius very much, for not executing Justice, but when it was advantageous, and
because he always took profit to be honest, not regarding truth so he might be
stronger, but measured the worth of the one by the value of the other, and
attempted the executing of that by craft which he could not obtain by Force.
God, says Isaiah, reproves the counsels of them which are not conformable to
his Laws, and Princes do but in vain hope to bring their designs to a good
pass, when as there is no resistance of Gods decrees.

Prosecution of the History.
THe Abbot of Scaglia was one of the Prime men in this confederacy, by the
Duke of Savoys means, who desirous to reveng himself, because the Treaty of
Mouson had been concluded without his knowledge; made choice of him, as a
person capable to embroyle things, who went about it the more passionately,
because he was offended with the Cardinal, for having driven him out of France,
for making of cabals, against the State. His first voyage was into Holland, to
see how they stood inclined, and to draw them into the league. But meeting with
some there who negotiated his Majesty's affairs, he could make but little
progress in it, his reasons not being seconded with that money which theirs was.
Thence he went for England where finding their minds according to his own
desire, he still used his best endeavors to drive on the quarrel; which being
once concluded, The King of England sent about the month of April, the Lord
Mountagu, to take particular orders for execution of it, both in Savoy and
Lorrain, and with the Duke of Rohan. It was needful to have some pretense to
disquite Montagues Journey, and no one was thought more fit, then for him to
pretend he was desperately in love with Madam de Cheurcuse then in Lorrain,
with whom he was to discourse, that he might be fully informed of all the
Factions at the French Court, the Chief of which kept a strict correspondence
with her. So he began his Treaty with the nearest State first and that was
Lorrain; besides Buckingham had a particular intercourse with Monsieur de
Lorrain by Madam de Cheureuses means, and all that he might fully know the
State of the Intreagues of France, He having found the Duke much exasperated,
and that he only wanted an opportunity to let the King feel effects of his
anger, he engaged to him to enter upon France, at the same time that the
English Fleet should land there: The Duke also gave him hopes, that his
attempts should be the more considerable, in regard the Emperor, who he was
assured did blow the coals of the French Faction, would send him Forces for his
assistance being at last fully instructed, and having disposed the Duke of
Lorrain to the doing whatever he could demand, he went into Languedoc, where
meeting the Duke of Rohan, he gave him an account of their whole design, who
being thus filled with hopes of potent succors from England, Savoy and
Lorrain, he resolved to rise at the same time with the rest. Thence he went to
Savoy where the Duke animated against France, and particularly against the
Cardinal, his only work there was to receive the Dukes assurances, of entering
upon Dauphine as soon as the English put to Sea, to which purpose part of his
Forces, were already upon their march: He presently dispatched one to the Duke
of Rohan, to assure him of the assistance of six thousand foot, and five
hundred Horse, exhorting him to be careful and courageous, for that their
business was in a good condition. They fancied to themselves, that they did all
ready cast that thunder bolt with which they ruined the whole Kingdom of
France. Mountagu shortly after returns through France to Lorrain, but the King
was not ignorant of his Intreagues, having had a continual watch upon him four
months together, that he might snap him upon his return, and learn more
particularly, by the contents of his Papers, the quality of his negotiations;
and accordingly he was very fortunatly taken upon the Borders of the Kingdom by
the Marquis de Bourbonne, whom his Majesty had commanded to apprehend him.
About him was found a little cabinet of papers which contained the depth of his
employment, and it was the happier for France, that he was so improvident to
carry such papers about him, which could only serve to cause him be taken and
put to great trouble, It was about the end of September that he was arrested
and at first carried into Coffie. The Duke of Orleans hearing of it, took his
part, made a great noise, about it, and fancying to himself that the English
were landed in the I Will of Ree, that they and the Marshal de Thoyras were close
engaged together, he dispatched the Sieurs de Ville and de Leven-Court, one in
the neck of the other to the Queen Mother, then at Paris in his Majesty absence,
to demand Mountagu of her; and in case she did refuse it, to let him know it
within four and twenty hours time, protesting withal, that he well knew how
to carve his own satisfaction, for this injury which he pretended had been
done him, because he said Mountagu had been taken in his territories. He had at
that time his Arms in his hand to second the English and Duke of Savoy, and at
the same time that he send to the Queen Mother he resolved to besiedg Coffie,
where Mountagu was then Prisoner, as also to assault diverse other Frontier
Towns, whilst his Majesty was busied in resisting the English: But the
diligence used in removing of Mountagu from Coiffie to Paris, together with
the defeat given the English at Ree, as shall anon be declared, made him and
the Duke of Savoy too, change their resolutions for that they found the King in
a condition able to deal with both of them at once.

They were likewise told that in case they would oblige his Majesty to come out
of Poictou, they might both of them pay the charges of his Journey: So the Duke
of Savoy turned his design upon Genoua, which he thought to surprise, by a
Stratugem which had been contrived, and the Duke of Lorrain was contented to be
quiet upon assurance given him, that Mountagu should be set at liberty, soon
after his Majesty's return to Paris.

His anger was like storms which after much noise, are quelled in a moment she
resolved without any great entreaty, to expect the Kings return to Paris,
whither he soon after arrived: Mountaigu's Person not being so considerable as
his Papers, from which there had been discovered as much as was desired, his
Majesty brought him out of the Bastile and delivered him up unto him reserving
that punishment for another time which he had resolved for the Duke of Lorrain,
and which he had deserved by his engaging in such intreagues. In the mean time
the King was very glad to see in these Papers, that the Duke of Savoy knew of
the English design to land in Ree, that he had promised to assist them; That he
had persuade the Duke of Rohan to revolt; that he had assisted him with
succors; That he had engaged to fall upon the Dauphine with six thousand foot,
and twelve hundred Horse. There was by them likewise discovered the design
which the English had projected against Toulon, for the sending certain Ships
pretending to trade in the Levant, and how the Duke of Savoy engaged to assist
them with men and Galleys; That the same Duke had a hand too in that attempt
which was afterward made against Montpelier; That he had intended to have
surprised Brecon and Valence, and besides all this there were amongst them
diverse bloody Manifests against the King, his Ministers of State, and the
Government of his affairs.

Politic Observation.
TO be employed without good cause for the troubling of a Foreign Princes
State, is a Commission, as little happy as honorable. If it tend to the Arming
of his subjects against him, It has ever had such ill success, that one may
say of him who arms them, that in shaking the Pillars of the State, Justice,
and obedience, he only burries them in their own ruins. If it be for the
making of confederacies with neighboring Princes to make a war upon another,
they last so little, that there is not any hopes of more expectation from them:
Either of the Chiefs would have more power in the Army then his companion. Then
comes distruct between them, no one obtains any glory, which the other does not
envy, nay and hinder too if he can; Great designs raised upon such weak grounds
fall to ruin, like structures built upon a foundation of sand. War is of it
self so uncertain, that he who begins it, is not sure to gain any thing by it.
A Command mis-apprehended, an Order ill executed, an enterprise not well timed,
an inconsiderate rashness, and in short one poor single word may sometimes put
a whole Army to the rout; Besides negotiations being often considered, by their
Events, all the blame will be assuredly laid in his dish, who first persuaded
to the design. On the other side, God favors Just Arms, and valor
signifies nothing says B^llisarius, without Justice, so that he who ingageth
any, without a lawful cause, may expect nothing but misfortune and confusion.

But to waht dangers does he expose himself whilst he passes thorough his
States, against whom he attempteth to make a war? Not to stop him, were a
madness in any Prince, and a greater, not to punish him for his rashness. But
admit he escape that misfortune, his very Commission is contemptible seeing it
usually brings trouble and charge to his Country. I have ever much esteemed of
Phocions words in Plutarch, to Leosthenes, who in an Oration endeavored to
engage the Ethenians in the Lamian war after Alexanders death; Thy speech quoth
he is like a Cypres large and full, but bears no fruit, for just thus thou
make the people conceive victories and thy words puff them up with signal
advantages, but indeed there is not any just ground to hope for any certain
fruit, from such a war tending to the States good, so inconstant misfortunate
and expensive are all wars whatever. What did all those turbulent Souls carry
away but blame and misfortune, who employed their whole time, provoked to it,
only by their particular passions any unjust reasons, to raise wars amongst
Princes. The Count de St. Paul may serve for a notable example in this kind.
After he had spent all his days in Broils and turmoyles, his glory vanished
like smoke, and at last he paid for those Treacheries by death which he had put
upon Lewis the Eleventh. In the same manner Savanorolla had passed for a Saint
amongst the Florentines, but for that seditious Spirit, which animated him
against the house of Medicis, and excited him to make a war even against his
own Citizens; but the blame he reaped by it, sullyed all his glory, and in my
opinion whoever engages himself in such a Commission may not expect any
greater honor by it.

Turbulent Spirits clapped up in the Bastille.
THese Foreign designs were not a lone to be feared, there were diverse other
Grandees of the Kingdom sediously disposed who had some notice of the intended
siege of Rochel, The Major part of them foresaw that in case Rochelle, were
taken, they must then of necessity live in an exact obedience, That it would
carry with it an absolute ruin to all the Hugonot party; and that there would
be no more means left them to rise up against the Kings authority in future,
when they had a mind to procure any thing by force: neither were they a little
startled at the assurance of the design his Majesty had resolutely taken, of
carrying the place. The Grandees have always thought the increase of the Royal
Power, a diminution to their own private authorities, and they of France were
not ignorant, that in case the Hugonot party were destroyed, they had then no
game left to play but that of submission. This induced some of the most
factious to cast out such discourses, as could only be deemed the Symptoms of a
Revolt, though as yet there had not been any appearance of a formal contrived
design. The King had learned from some of the old Court, that that which
hindered the taking od Rochel, when as Charles the ninth besieged it, was only,
the little inclination which many of the Grandees then at the siege had, that
it should be taken as the Marshal de Montlue testified on the place by diverse
letters: So that he resolved to prevent this inconveniency; neither was it
less needful to prevent the growing of this cabal, least they should by
joining themselves with the Hugonots and strangers force his Majesty to draw
off his Armies and to attend their motions. The wise and discreet resolution
which his Majesty took, to give an assured remedy hereunto, was, to clap up
in the Bastille several sedicious turbulent persons, who began to speak aloud
such things, as neither the Laws of obedience or respect could allow of, but
with order that they should be well treated and want nothing, it being his
Majesty's desire only to prevent them from doing any hurt. The Marquis de
Rouillat de Bounivet, de Montpinson and d' Oy, were first of all secured, and
shortly after Fancan and La Milletiere, with other inferiors to keep them
Company, which made them perceive, who had the good Fortune not to be
interressed in any of these Broils; that the King was no more to be dallyed
with and that it would become them to live within their limits, and that they
could not avoid lodging in the same place, if they gave any cause of suspicion
by their behavior: Thus every one for love or fear was quiet, and the King had
the freedom to continue his preparations for the siege of Rochelle.

Politic Observation.
A King is no less obliged to search after those who are able to trouble the
repose of his State, then those who are able to serve him; It is needful for
him to have certain marks both for one and the other that he may judge of either.
Now amongst them who are able to engage in a Faction, he ought to make little
account of such who have great stirring Spirits, but little Prudence, for they
of his Temper are usually wicked, ambitious, Lovers of Novelties, insurrections
and all sorts of intreagues. Grobus would needs have us esteem Alcibiades for a
person of this condition, when he represented him to be as exquisite in his
vices as his virtues, and T. Livy puts Hannibal amongst the same number, when
after a recital of his virtues he adds that his vices were full as eminent.
On the other side, he ought to be vigilant over those, who are ready to undergo
any meannesses, upon hopes of getting any advantage or greatness; as Caesar
did according to Dions report, who condescended to bestow embraces beneath the
quality of his person, on mean and base men, if he found them any ways
conducing to the advancing of his Power. In this last age M^ns^eur ae Guise
has done the same thing, in the eyes of all men, but was slain at Blois in his
attempt of making himself Master of the French Crown. Withal, he ought no
less distrust those persons of quality who are grown poor, or who have been
laid by from employments and affairs. For Tacitus on the life of Ottho says,
there is not any one thing which persons of Courage and Quality do suffer with
more regret then that of poverty, do we not read that poverty was it which gave
so much boldness to Sylla in his attempts. That Cneus Piso was engaged in all
his undertakings, by his being reduced to extreme necessity, and of doing those
things which were unworthy of his Birth: Then he ought to be no less
watchful of those who comporting themselves to the present times, change their
Fashions when they please, who of Lions turn to be Lambs, and from Lambs become
Lions again, and this with much facility, all to make advantage of whatsoever
comes uppermost, to swim with the stream, and to join their Interests with
those only from whom they have expectations of gain and advantage: He had need
be jealous of those who under pretense of their own private Affairs pass from
one Country to another, without any apparent reasons for it, of such as only
converse with turbulent minds; of such as seem to be discontented at affairs,
of such as are in debt, or have received some distasts in their private
interests. I could produce examples to fortify the reasonableness of all
these several propositions, and how that all these sorts of persons ought to be
suspected, if the brevity of these Maxims would give way to it. But making
profession of being short, I shall only for conclusion say, that both Prudence
and Justice oblige to make sure of such persons, especially on the least
occasion given to suspect, that they are disposed to engage themselves in any
Intreague. The least delay which shall be given them, will only fix them so
much the more, whereas the dispatch in securing of them rather sooner then
later, is a kind of Pity, for that it warranteth them from a more severe
chastisement, by preventing them from falling into greater Crimes. Ambition,
Covetousness, Revenge, and Poverty, meeting in a turbulent Factious Soul,
never let him be at rest, or free from some embroyl or other, if he be not
curbed in either by force or necessity. And when it shall so happen that he may
be of himself persuaded to keep within his duties, yet it will be less
inconvenient to make sure of him by a just rigor, then to leave him in a
licentiousness of ill-doing by too imprudent a compassion.

Differences between the Duke of Espernon and the Parliament of Bourdeaux,
reconciled by the discreet foresight of the Cardinal.
THere was about the same time, ground enough to suspect lest the bitterness
which had about a year since disunited the Duke of Espernon, Governor of
Guyenne, and the Parliament of Bourdeaux, might prejudice his Majesty's service
in this juncture, where it was needful that all his Arms and Justice might
concenter to stifle rebellion in its birth, and to keep the people in their
duty. Monsieur the Cardinal spoke to his Majesty, and persuaded him to send the
Sieur de Leon Counselor of State to Bourdeaux, to endeavor their
reconcilement, and such a correspondency as might befit his Majesty's affairs.
The ground of their difference was this, the Duke of Espernon had caused the
Edict of Peace, granted by the King to the Hugonots, to be proclaimed by the
Jurats of the City before it had been registered in the Parliament. Whereupon
the Parliament had turned one Minuelle out of his Office of chief Jurat, fining
him 1500 Livers, and ordered the rest to appear in Court, and suffer such
punishments as should be imposed upon them. The Duke of Espernon would not put
up the business, but pulished an Ordinance to prohibit the execution of the
Parliaments Arrest, and confirmed Minuelle in his Office, grounding himself
upon certain pretensions in publication of Treaties of Peace. The Parliament
hereupon condemned the said Ordinance as an attempt contrary to the Kings
Authority entrusted with him; but the Duke of Espernon being not of an humor
easily to submit to any others will, then that of the Kings, persisted to
prohibit by another Ordinance the execution of the second Arrest. The
Parliament made a third; so did he too to hinder Minuelle's displacing, and
that the Jurats should not assist at the publication of the Peace, which was
then made by the Parliaments Authority. In sine, an extreme feud rise between
them, and the Parliament came to that point, that they ceased to perform their
Offices in the adjudging private causes, yet not without taking care for all
that concerned the Kings service. This quarrel made a great noise in Guienne,
and had it continued until the Hugonots next revolt, they had doubtless taken
advantage of it, it being certain that every one lives as himself pleases,
when Magistrates are together by the ears in their particular quarrel. The King
finding of what consequence it might prove, dispatched the Sieur de Leon to
Bourdeaux, to dispose the Duke to give the Parliament satisfaction, and to
continue the correspondence which they ought to hold together for the public
good. The Sieur de Leon came thither, and finding the Parliament resolute, that
the Duke should give them satisfaction for his fault, could gain nothing more
of the Duke then only this, that he would go to the Parliament and pay them
some complements of honor and respect. The Parliament was not contented with
it, so their accommodation was deferred, till at last the news being come, that
the English Fleet was at Sea, every one addressed himself to serve the King,
and to hinder their landing in Guienne: And then the Cardinal de Sourdis, Arch
Bishop of Bourdeaux interposing between them, persuaded the Parliament to be
satisfied with those respects of honor and complements which the Duke of
Espernon would pay unto them. At last unto the Parliament he came, and having
complemented them with great civility; they answered him in the like, without
the least mention of any thing past, and thus this great storm was allayed.

Politic Observation.
IT is not dangerous sometimes for his Majesty's service, to permit Parliaments
and Governors to fall out amongst themselves; for they discovering one
another defects by their division, give occasion to redress them, and withal,
each one fears to offend, that he may not give advantage to the other to
impeach him. It keeps affairs in an equal balance, and produces the same
effects, as a weight equally divided in two Scales, which hinders the
over-ballancing of either part. If they always should continue in a strict
intelligence, each of them would do that without contradiction which best
pleased himself, and their Sovereign never the wiser. Thus said Cato to them,
who thought the quarrel between Pompey and Caesar had ruined the Commonwealth.
It is true, it did not a little contribute to that disorder which was then on
foot, but the friendship which had formerly been between them, was the first
and chief cause. Their good intelligence gave Caesar means to grow the greater,
who afterward finding it begin to break by the deceases of Pompey and Crassus,
their wives which served to preserve it, there fell out great broyls between
them concerning the Government; Caesar being unwilling that Pompey should have
more authority then himself, and Pompey that Caeser should be his equal. The
Senate finding that diverse Magistrates of Rome neglected their duties, and that
every thing went to decay, chose Pompey sole Consul, giving him an
extraordinary Authority to balance the power of the Magistrates, and to
redress those Delinquencies which they might or had committed. Seneca with
great reason compared this division among chief Magistrates to the Stones in a
Vault, which do so much conduce to the strengthening of it, that the more
weight is laid on it, the stronger it bears it up; whereas it would easily be
broken, if made of one stone alone. In fine, this little emulation is much
conducing to the discovery of abuses, to the looking more strictly into things,
and the keeping every one in his duty. It is to be wished that Parliaments and
Governors were firmly united toward his Majesty's service, and that there were
no way but this for the well governing of a Province; but it is not possible
long to preserve that temperative in their authority no more then in the four
humors of man's body; and it is more expedient to search for means of advantage
from their disorder then to study ways to settle them in an immutable
intelligence. One of the chief is, when a Parliament pretends to assume too
great an Authority, to oppose the power of a Governor, and if a Governor abuse
his power, to prevent him by the Authority of a Parliament: And thus was it
according to Tacitus, that the Roman common people, ballancing the Nobilities
power, did along while prefer their liberty. Yet above all, it would be
necessary to hinder such dissentions from too much clashing, and that the
Parliament and Governors be not left alone to fly out into extremities, from
whence strange accidents might follow. If heat or any other quality of man's
body super-abound, either death follows, or at least great sickness; and
doubtless such contests happening among Governors, either in Kingdoms or
Common wealths are sufficient to destroy them, or at least breed great
disorders amongst them. The divisions which so often grew hot between the Roman
people, and the Senate, caused great evils; and when the quarrels of Marius and
Sylla, Pompey and Caesar did break out, every one siding with some party, took
up Arms, from whence followed strange murders, and Tragedies, and the Peoples
Liberty became inslaved to the Emperors Will.

The King going from Paris toward Rochel, falls sick at Villeroy, after the
first day of his setting out.
VVHilest these different affairs happened within the Kingdom, the King was
not ignorant of those great preparations made by the English to invade France.
The happy address wherewith Heaven had blessed Monsieur the Cardinal, enabling
him to discover the most secret of Foreign Affairs, gave him to understand all
the particulars of their designs; his Majesty thus informed of their
resolution, suddenly hoised Sail and resolved to go from Paris to Rochel, that
he might encourage his Soldiers, to whom nothing is invincible when he is in
presence. But God who over-ruleth the designs of all men, did not permit the
effecting of it, so soon as his Majesty desired. It pleased his Providence to
visit him with sickness from the first day of his departure from Paris, which
increasing, forced him to stay at Villeroy: His fits were so violent that his
recovery was questioned. The Physicians imagining that the sense of Affairs did
increase his Fever, beseeched his Majesty to dis-burthen his thoughts of it;
and experience having told him, that it was but reasonable, he committed all to
the Queen Mothers and the Cardinals management. But the Queen Mother was so
troubled at this accident, that her sadness would not give her leave to think
on any thing. The whole burden then lay upon the Cardinal. Not but that grief
too had made a great impression upon his Soul, as well as upon the Queen
Mothers; but as great spirits quit not the helm at the violence of the storm;
so he behaved himself in the giving such Orders as were necessary and conducing
to prevent the English Fleets attempt, together with the Rebellion of the
Rochelois, that it seemed Heaven had preserved all his senses to him to
increase his glory. It cannot be denied, but that this was one of the most
considerable affairs that had a long time happened to the Kingdom. It was a
parting blow, upon which depended the settlement of the public quiet, and
which particularly concerned the glory of his Master. So he gave himself up to
employ his utmost industry in it, and his prudence effected such things, which
cannot pass but for miracles.

Indeed it was so much the easier for him so to do, since the King had
commanded him to ease himself, as much as possible he could for his health
sake, which did not well agree with the continual cares of this Grand Minister:
He had induced his Majesty to think good, that he should take for his share,
the care of what related to his Majesty's glory, or the conduct of his State.
This moderation of his was to be admired at, and such as few are endued with.
In that he represented to his Majesty that having entrusted the Seals with
Marillac, who was a person Active, Lively, and full of Understanding, he might
absolutely depend upon him for the Justice, and on the Marquess de Effiat in
matters of the Treasuries of which he had made him super-intendent, which being
thus, he could apply all his care to the government of the State, and give a
happy dispatch to all his Majesty's commands. And lastly, that he did not think
it either proper or profitable for France, or any other State, that one man
alone should have the over-seeing of all manner of affairs, for that employing
one part of his mind on those of Justice and the Treasury, he must have so
much the less ability to look after the rest of the Kingdom, which in France
too would take up one man's whole care and time. His Majesty did not a little
esteem both his judgment and modesty; far different from the Ambition of
diverse other Ministers, who are never satisfied until they rule all, so he was
pleased to admit of his request, which he did the more readily grant, in regard
he thought it might much conduce to his health, which could not long subsist
under the care of all things, though he knew he had a Soul able to govern the
whole world. From that time forward, he meddled only in matters of State, and
left all the rest to the other Ministers.

Politic Observation.
A Prudent Minister who knows the work of well-governing a Kingdom, never
burdens himself with the care of all manner of Affairs. He who pretends to a
super-intendency of all businesses, is a rash inconsiderate man, and he will
find nothing but confusion in his Government, and hatred upon his person. The
Soul of man of what quality soever he be, is like a River whose course runs but
weakly and slowly when exhausted into several little Brooks; and true it is,
who so divides the strength of his Genius, in the management of all affairs,
can act but feebly in those of great weight, and by consequence to the
detriment of the public good. It is with Souls as with Appetites, they who
suffer themselves to be drawn along by sawces and delicate meats, over-charge
themselves, and convert the greatest part of their nourishment into ill
humors, thus those minds which would govern all, leave all in disorder.
Plutarch speaking of the Government of a Kingdom says, that the Prince ought
to be like a hand, which should employ several Ministers under his Authority;
the hand has diverse fingers to work. There need no other proof of this truth,
then that knowledge and prudence which is required in the Conduct of a State;
besides the administration of Justice, and the superintendency of the
Treasuries. A chief Minister ought to have his eye not only upon all things,
affairs, and persons of concernment in the Kingdom; but likewise upon all the
bordering Princes and Allies; yes, and upon their Ministers too, to discover if
possible their designs, and either by policy or force to break such, as may be
any way prejudicial to his Master.

He ought to have his Engines on work, to dive into the Counsels of the Pope,
the Emperor, the Spaniard, and all other neighbor Princes. He ought from time
to time to acquaint himself with their humors, their inclinations, passion,
exercises, and all that may conduce to the Government. In case any of them
attempt a design which may make them too potent, he is bound to oppose it. If
his Allies be set upon, he must be as careful to defend and protect them, as
the out-guards of his Kingdom. As for that which is considerable at home, the
King his Master will take up a great deal of his time, either in his
applications to preserve his favor, or to dissipate such jealousies as his
enemies may have infused into him, or to propose to his Majesty such expedients
and counsels, as may be proper and profitable together. The Princes of the
blood too, will find him some work to keep them in such a condition as they may
not trouble the public Peace; but that they may however live in some kind of
satisfaction, it being true, that either the good or bad Fortune of a Kingdom,
does most commonly depend upon them: He ought also to have an eye upon the
Clergy and Prelates, to keep them in such decorum, that they clash not by any
mis-understandings to the bringing of Religion into contempt: That they do not
so greedily swallow down the respects which are paid unto them as to abuse that
power of Souls which is entrusted with them, in prejudice of the Kings royal
authority. What care ought he to have to maintain the chief Officers of the
Crown, the Governors of Provinces and Towns, and generally all the Grandees of
the Kingdom in their duties, does it not concern him to know what ever
considerable thing is done amongst them, their designs, Cabals, Interests,
Abilities, and their very inclinations, that he may take order with them
according to their dispositions, and the common good, and to divert such
Mutinies as they may in time raise? ought not his duty lead him to look into
the Commerce and Trade, that it be preserved in it is greatness as the Fountain
of the Kingdoms wealth? The Common Rabble will call upon his thoughts
sometimes to be resetled in the duties they owe their King and Country: But
what proportion of his time then will the affairs of war take up, when there is
a necessity of raising Forces? Will it not behoove him to give all necessary
dispatches, either for quarterings or marching of Regiments, or to lead them on
to fight with courage either for ammunition, or the exact observation of
military discipline? It would need a long discourse particularly so set down
the great duties of a principal Minister, but the Briefness which I have
proposed to follow, gives me not leave to describe them, These are enough to
guess that he will have somewhat to do to go through with them, and that upon
these considerations a Chief Minister ought to be satisfied and totally to
acquiet himself, of the Burdens which accompany both the Justice and
Treasuries.

The English Fleets arrival before Ree.
DUring his Majesty's sickness about six in the morning upon the 28 of July the
English Fleet appeared about Olonne between 18 and 20 Ships. At first it was
supposed they were Dunkerkers, who might have perchance some design upon the
Dutch Fleet then in the Road. But when they were perceived to draw near the I Will
of Ree, that their number increased, and the Hollanders not afraid of them, it
was easily concluded that they were the English Fleet, of which there was
quickly a greater assurance, when they saw all their Ships at anchor at the
mouth of Breton near the Cape d' Ars. The rest drew near one of the Forts in
the I Will of Ree called La Pree, against which they shot very much all day long,
and the next day too until night in so much that the Ships encompassed the
Point of Sablanceau, within half musket shot of the Land, and some of them
adventured within Pistol shot: Which made the Sieur de Thoyras, then Governor
of the Citadel St. Martin in the I Will of Ree, Judge that they intended to there
abouts, so he drew out as many of his men as he could well spare to prevent
their designs, and carried them as near as possibly he could to that place,
that he might fall on them in their disbarking. But their Landing being
favored by above two thousand pieces which shot continually. They had the
opportunity to set on shore about ten thousand men. The Sieur de Thoyras had not
with him above two hundred Horse and eight hundred foot, yet it being for his
Majesty's Honor to welcome them at their first footing, he resolved to assault
them, notwithstanding the incredible violence of the Cannon, which beat down
every thing that did but appear upon the shore. He hoped for a good success
from the Justness of his cause, and that his Soldiers would force Fortune to
be favorable unto them. He divided his Horse into seven parties, five of which
were commanded to give the Charge, and break the English ranks, and the foot
had order to follow on; the two other parties were to keep off for a reserve,
upon the first signal of the Fight, The first went on in good order, but were
forced to Gallop off again, for that the English Cannon put them in such
confusion, that the most part of them were routed before ever they came to
engage, some killed, some wounded and others unhorsed; but their courage who
were in a condition to march on, stood firm, so they advanced up to the English
Battalions, and there did what ever could be expected from high resolutions.
The English astonished to see the French come thundering in that manner upon
them thorough the midst of the Flames and Cannon shot, were put into such
disorder, that many of them swam to their Ships. The French now finding they
were not pursued, and seeing that they were not in condition to fight, they
rallied together and charged them once more, before ever the foot came up; but
at last they came and fell in, doing more then could be expected; but the
violence of the Cannon was such, that it was fit to sound the retreat, and to
expect a more favorable occasion to fight with them. Rostaincler the Sieur de
Thoyras his Brother, the Baron of Chautail, Navailles and diverse other
Gentlemen and light Horse, and about one hundred and fifty Soldiers were slain
in the excounter, most part of the Officers being wounded: neither had the
English a less loss. Fifteen Officers of their Army were killed besides diverse
Livetenants and Ensigns. They likewise lost one of their Colors, and upon a
view taken they found between five and six hundred killed and wounded. So they
had but little stomach for that present to advance any farther into the Ilaud:
but in 3 dages time they fortefied themselves on the shore side, keeping under
shelter of their Ships, neither would they stir one foot, till they were
informed that the French intended to defend the Citadel of St. Martin, and not
meet them any more in the field.

Politic Observation.
I Think it impossible to prevent a strong Fleet from landing in an Island,
where they may come on shore in sundry places unfortefied. The night alone is
enough to favor their landing, and admitting there were Forces enough to meet
them in all places, yet the Canon would make such havoc, that at last there
would be a necessity of giving them leave to come on shore. Thus has
Machiavel, and the wisest Politions observed, That it seldom happened, that
ever any Fleet especially if accompanied with a good Army, was hindered from
opening any passage if undefended by a good Castle. When Francis the first
undertook the war in Italy, The Spaniards being on the other side the River
Beuchamby, with very great Forces to hinder his passage, were forced to make
way for him, when they saw Monsieur de Guise, with his Sword in his hand
followed by all the Troops to take water that they might come fight with them.
In the like manner Philip de Valois having commanded Godemar du Fay to keep the
Passage of the River Sum at Blanchetacque with a thousand men at Arms
besides the Bowman of Genoa, and six thousand foot did quickly notwithstanding
all this see the English Army force the pass, and in less then six hours, to
be all over, whilst the Sea flowed back again. It were easy to produce many
the like examples. But I rather think the wisest course which can be taken on
such occasions is to make them pay dearly for their Landing by cutting good
store of them in pieces, and to adventure on them at their first footing with
courage and resolution. The first attempts are they which make way for all the
rest. An Enemy finds himself astonished at the death of some of his party, and
at the great resistance which he meets. The difficulties which are forseen in
obtaining of victories disheartens all those who have but a little courage: and
it has been often found that an enemy will more willingly retier himself, then
run the hazard of a second rout. Cruelty is allowable in such occasions, to
strick terror into an enemy, to shake their resolutions, and to affright them,
for many from fearfall to despair of victory, whilst they judge, considering
the strong resistance made in defense of a pass, it must needs be a mark of the
assured resolution they have taken to defend themselves in a place when once
they are besieged.

Prosecution of the History.
THE news of the English Fleets arrival was soon brought to the Court, but the
Cardinals Prudence was such that he would not let the King be acquainted with
it, least it might increase his Fever, neverthlesse his Great Genius, who
finds remedies for all things, did take wonderful care by his orders to repel
them. The King had already, upon Intelligence that the English were setting
out, commanded many Regiments of Foot and Troops of light Horse and dispatched
several Commissions to raise more Forces with order to all Officers, to come to
the randevous at Poictou, and there to be in a readiness, for such employments
as occasion should require: He had also given the charge of this Army to the
Duke of Angoulesme, who at his first coming, gave all necessary orders, for
the safety of Brouage, and the Isles of Oleron, relying entierly as to the I Will
of Ree, on the courage and Loyalty of the Sieur de Thoyras, Monsieur d'
Angoulesme had also put into Fort Lewis, all kinds of Ammunition with great
diligence, whereby to repel the English, if they should come to assault it and
he made use of a Stratagem, which was the probable cause of staying the English
at the I Will of Ree, as also of preventing them from coming on the Mainland. His
devise was this; He gave order, upon his first coming to the Quarter Master
General of the Army to go to all the Boroughs and Villages there abouts, to
provide Quarters for an Army between fifteen and twenty thousand men, though he
had not in all; above the half of that number.

The Rochelois hereupon swallowing this fiction for a truth, presently advised
the English of it, who apprehending the encounter of so great Forces, went to
the I Will of Ree. He also observed the order given him by the Cardinal, not to
provoke the Rochelois, nor give them the least jealousy of any thought to
besiege them. This Great Minister well knew, That the people are easily
transported to all extremities, when they fear any severe punishment to fall
upon them, and particularly that the Rochelois having called in the English to
vindicate their Liberty, would never be induced totally to give themselves up
to them, whilst they did not fear a siege, and that therefore it would be
proper, not to give them any suspicion. And for the same reason it was, that
the Duke of Angoulosme, did so favorably receive their Deputies, assuring
them, that the King intended nothing else, but to let them enjoy their
privileges, on condition they deserved it by their submission; he also
suffered them to gather in their harvests thinking it less inconvenient to let
them make that provision, which at best could not much prolong the siege, then
to give them occasien, by declaring their design to deliver up themselves to
the English.

This disposal of his was accompanied with great Prudence, yet not sufficient
to drive the English out of the I Will of Ree, or hinder them being Masters
thereof to go on the Mainland. Monsieur the Cardinal, who had the Charge under
the Authority of the King and Queen Mother, to provide against this necessity,
employed more effectual means, for the procuring those happy successes, which
forced the World to believe, that the King could bring such things to pass, as
his predecessors could not aspire to; He used extraordinary deligence to
hasten the Levies, and to draw together good store of shipping, to succor Ree
as also to hinder the English from entering into the Channel of Rochel, in case
they should attempt it, one of his Chief cares was to prohibit by an Edict all
sorts of Maritine commerce; and at the same time he sent into parts, to man
those vessels formerly employed, and with all speed to bring them near Roch^l;
he sent to Havre de Grace and Diepe Commissions and money, for the dispatching
of the Ships which he had there prepared, and unto Oleron, Brouage and ^uyenne,
to have victuals and ammunition in a readiness. He gave Charge to the Abbot of
Marsillac, to pass by the Coast of Olonne to raise Mariners, and to the Sieur
de Beaumout Chief Comptroler of the Kings house, intimate friend of Monsieur de
Thoyras, to emyloy his utmost care and industry to put provisions into the
Citadel of Ree. Withal, Touredes was dispatched to St. Mallos to rig out three
great Ships, and Beaulieur Courcelles, with Cant^lona, Sea Captains unto
Ol^nne, to contrive away how to clap victuals into Ree. Beauli^^ Persac was
sent to execuse a design he had proposed to set fire on some of the English
Ships, and to throw himself into the Citadel of St. Martin, but he could not
effect it. La Rinterre, after Greffier was sent along the Coast to press all
the Shallops, that went with oar, he sent Magnac to the Duke d'Espernon, and
several Couriers, to the Towns upon the Garronne, to draw together all the
Barks, Galliots, and small vessels which might be serviceable. He sent post
into Holland to the Commander de Gouttes, who commanded the Kings Ships to come
away with all speed, and at the same time understanding that the Hollanders
were solicited by the English to assist them with their shipping, he set a
Treaty of renewing alliance on foot by his Majesty's Ambassador there, whereby
to divert them. Which was soon agreed upon by giving them certain monyes, and
so the Articles were signed; amongst which this was one, that they should
assist the King with their shipping, if need were. This Grand Minister
excercised with admirable Prudence the advice of an Ancient, who counseled him
that had two enemies, that he should compound with one of them, the better to
make war with the other: He likewise employed the Bishop of Nismez, Monsieur de
Thoyras his Brother, and Monsieur Desplan one of his best friends, to advance
those succors with all diligence. He made diverse promises of ten thousand
Crowns to them who should convey victuals into Ree, in short from July to the
end of August there was nothing to be seen but Couriers of all qualities
poasting up and down the Country, and others to advance the succors which at
last arrived as we shall hereafter declare, and relieved Ree, to the shame of
the English and the Kings immortal Glory.

Politic Observation.
PRudence is a Helmet which secureth a Kingdom from all sinister accidents
which may betide it. It is the Eye of a Minister, of State which helps him to
see all that is needful to be done, as his valor is the hand which serves him
to put it in execution. Without it, he were more feeble then a Blind man; and
might expect nothing but confusion from the resistances which he shall make
against the enemies of the State; whereas with Prudence every thing is
possible. Antiquity has said that a Wise man is Fortunes Master, and that
there is not any thing in the power of that blind Goddess, but is subjected to
the Laws of virtue; and which may not be diverted by the prudent Counsel of a
Wise man. Plutarch on the life of Fabius says, God only gives good success to
men's actions, according to their being messured by virtue and Prudence; and the
Example of the Emperor Antonius the Debonnaire, may serve to Illustrate this
truth; He had so many good successes in all his undertakings, it is said he
never repented of any his resolutions, and that he saw all his designs come to
pass according as he contrived them; Now a certain Roman Senator taking the
boldness, to ask him the reason of it, after he had testified how much he
esteemed his conduct, and with what wonder he was possessed to see so happy an
end crown all his endeavors; he was answered that he did as much as was
possible, foresee all those accidents which might fall out and thereupon he
prepared proper remedies for them: That he spared neither his care nor
discretion, to bring his designs to pass, and that he committed the executing
of them to person fit for it: This is the Rule of Prudence, and true it is that
as the light of the Sun shows the way to any place where a man would go; so
this virtue when possessed in any eminent degree, inlightens the Soul of a
Minister with so much Splendour, that it gives him a means to obtain whatever he
can propose to himself. It discovers to him infallible ways to arrive unto
the ends of his undertakings, guides his motions, orders his Counsels,
regulateth his affections, composeth his Actions, Governs his wisdom,
appoints his orders, and discovers to him, whatever is able to stop the
course of his designs: And as it teaches never to attempt impossibilities so
it is a most certain way to arrive unto whatever is within compass of being
brought to pass. And thus it may safely be said, that by Prudence it is, that
God does prepare the ways of happiness and good success for mankind.

Buckingham stormeth the Citadel of St. Martin.
NO one but God alone moves in an instant. The succors could not be put into
Ree on a sudden, and the English finding no body come to trouble them, in the
fortifications upon the shore, resolved to besiege the Citadel of St. Martin.
The Duke of Buckingham, conceived such great hopes of making himself Master of
the place, that he writ to his Master of Great Britain, that in eight days he
would set up his Colors in it, and his Majesty published a Declaration
inviting his subjects to go and inhabit the Island of Ree, promising them great
privileges and freedoms, and that he would take care to hunt out all the
French. That which made Buckingham thus confident was, he found himself on the
Island very strong, and knew there were but few French in the Citadel, and his
Engineers assured him of making such devices, that it should be impossible for
his Majesty to relieve it. To which purpose, he made his approaches upon the
Citadel on the sixth day after his arrival, and on the seventh commanded six
piece of Cannon to be planted upon the Port of St. Martin, who began to batter
the place from day break with such effect, that beating all down where the
Mills stood, they want but little of bearing them clear away; but the
besieged labored with that dexteriousnesse and diligence that they covered,
and so saved them; and withal their Battery shot at that of the English, so
luckily, that they soon dismounted all their Cannon. This discredit madded the
English, who the next day raised another Battery to be revenged of it, and drew
their Trenches about the Citadel, that they might make their nearer approach.

Now the Sieur de Thoyras not acquainted with letting his enemies make their
avenues, without going out to meet them, fell upon them in their works; and the
English were no sooner at their labor, but he sallied out upon them with great
violence and courage. But above all, on the very first day he made use of one
for to secure a Haven where such Barques as came to releeve him, might land in
safety, and raised a work round about it upon the shore-side, which he kept as
carefully as the Citadel it self, and from thence it was that he received
those succors which afterward delivered him out of trouble. The enemies
Trenches were not such, but that he had intelligence with those of the Island,
especially the Catholics, who were a good number, and such as might furnish
him with many necessaries for the Citadel; which the Duke of Buckingham
perceiving, sent them all away in Boats, so that there was now no other hopes
of relief but from the main land. The English in the mean time trifled out a
month more, without doing any thing, but at last growing impatient; they
resolved to assault a Half Moon, not quite fini^hed, and by favor of the night
fell upon it; but being got on the top of the Wall, they were knocked off again
by the Halberds, and so ill-handled, that after the loss of about one hundred
and fifty men, they drew off again, whereas we had only four soldiers hurt.
This vexed them indeed, and made them resolve to try once more what good they
could do upon the same Half Moon, but they were then also beaten off with good
success. The Sieurs Montant, Praron, Montandre, Caisac, and Saint Previl
received the assault with a great deal of courage; of the French party Beauli^u
only miscarried, and the greatest hurt which the English did, was this, they
poisoned a certain Well near the Half Moon, that they might the more
incommodate the besieged, who to say truth, did very much want water, and
thereupon they resolved not to stir any more, but to force the place by Famine,
and to put them to all imaginable inconveniences, which might compel them to
surrender.

Politic Observation.
A Pass being once forced, it is discretion in him who is repelled to retreat
unto some strong hold, especially if he be too weak to keep the Field. Pericles
when he saw his Country assaulted by the Lacedaemonians, did thus for though
they burnt and pillaged the whole State, yet would be not stir out to fight
them; choosing rather with safety to preserve, then hazard those few Forces
which he had. In the defense of a Place four things ought to be observed, The
Governor, the Soldiers, The Fortifications, and the Ammunitions. As for that
which concerns the Commander in Chief, he ought to be a person of an
unquestionable fidelity, not to be corrupted by money, one whose courage is
invincible, and who knows not what fear is; His vigilance ought to be extreme
great, and incapable of surprise, he ought to have a body enured to labor, and
used to undergo the Inconveniences of a town and ill diet; to have a
confidence in his Soldiers that he may lead them on whether ever he pleases.
The choice of Soldiers is no less observable, and it were a madness to make
use of new raised Troops, unacquainted with trouble or the business of war;
None but old experienced Soldiers ought to be put in a place of concernment;
For this reason was it that the Romans always disposed such old Soldiers as
could no longer keep the field, into Garrison: For all Fortifications how
strong so ever, are to little purpose, if they be not animated by the courage
and valor of the Soldiers within them. Courage is a thing so potent, that by
it we have seen many places defended against most great Armies; Fortifications
however ought not to be neglected, but on the contrary, in case they be not
regular and in good order, when a place is first besieged, then he who is
overseer of them ought to work day and night with extraordinary care and
diligence until they be brought to a condition, of not fearing any assault. It
is impossible whole to defend them from the violence of the Cannon, but the
Governor ought always to have in readiness good store of Baskets Faggots,
sacks of wool, and Hogsheads filled with earth to make up any Breaches, which
shall be made. Now as to that which relates to Munitions of war and victuals.
The care of them is not less considerable, for that the Soldiers who are to
defend a place must both eat and fight, and he who is Governor of them must
make sure of such provisions, as may suffice to endure the siedg to the very
utmost. No exact measure can be set down, but they ought to be proportioned to
the places themselves, so that if the place be Tenable for a long siedg there
ought then to be a greater quantity of provision made, and if it be liable to a
surprise by assault then the less will serve turn. If in case there should be
any defect in making of necessary provision, he is then obliged to use his
utmost care and endeavor for the bringing of it to the place, his ruin being
unavoidable, if he want means to prevent it; and that he may secure away to
receive such provisions he must as much as possibly he may make sure of the
Avenues of the Port, if it be a Sea Town, and if it be an Inland place then
those passes which lie next to it. Thus did Corbul^^, when he was besieged as
Tacitus relates it by King Tyridates, he contrived away to make sure of those
passages by which he received his Provisions and Recruits from the Pontique Sea
and the City of Trabesond, by building a certain Fort upon an adjoining
Mountain, by which means he had all necessaries brought to him, so that his
enemies attempts prooved all to no purpose.

Prosecution of the History.
THis procedure of the English brought the besieged in the Citadel of St.
Martin to great necessity. When the siedge first began, they were furnished
with store of victuals butter, and wine, but there were for many Gentlemen
volunteers to be fed, so many footmen and Officers besides the R^giment and a
great many Catholic inhabitants of the Hand that in a short time they were
reduced to bread and water. Their greatest trouble was to be six weeks without
hearing any thing from the Main Land; all the boats which had attempted to come
to them, to assure them of a strong succor, had been stopped by the enemy,
excepting one only which brought them some victuals upon the thirteenth day of
^ugust, so that they knew not what to hope for. That which most of all
perplexed them was, that the English made several inventions, to stop up the
mouth of the haven, and to prevent the means of their succors; they first of
all built a certain Fort upon three or four great Ships fast tied together,
upon which they planted eight or ten piece of Cannon, to hit between wind and
water any boats that should attempt to pass: they made a certain raing of
Ships before the place, which shut up the passage: Withal they tied great
Cabals from one vessel to another, upon which they hung certain barrels to keep
them up above water, and hinder any relief. The Sea indeed and the winds
laughed at their devises, overwhelming them in the water, so that the English
were forced to unty their Cables, seeing in what danger their Ships were, when
the wind began to rise and the Sea to be troubled; But however, they having
blocked up the passage, so that it was impossible for the besieged to send or
receive any boats to or from the many Land, it the much troubled them, and
diverse Soldiers of the Citadel annoyed with hunger and other necessities
found means to get out and surrender themselves to the enemy, discovering the
straits to which the besieged were reduced: Whereupon the Duke of Buckingham,
that he might make use of this advantage, writ to the Sieur de Thoyras, where
after he had highly commended his courage, he invited him to surrender himself
and deliver up and place upon honorable conditions, that he might withdraw
himself from that imminent peril to which he was like to be exposed, by the
evil treatment, which if vanquished, he would force upon himself. The Sieur de
Thoyras endured this necessity with delight, because it was accompanied with
glory, nor was he at all moved at the receipt of the Letter; but he returned
answer to the Duke, that neither the despair of relief, nor the fear of being
ill treated, though to the greatest extremity, should ever be able to make him
quit his design of defending the place; That he confessed himself obliged to
him for his civil proposal, but that he should think himself unworthy of any of
his favors, should he omit any one point of his duty in this occasion, the
success of which could not but be very honorable unto him, However, that he
might take off from the impatience of the English, he thought it proper, and
that by the Council of his friends to pretend a Treaty with them, which he
continued with such address, that his enemies verily believed that his
thoughts were inclined rather to surrender than to gain time in hopes of
relief: The Duke of Buckingham supposing it impossible that they should be
relieved, considering his engines, and the great number of his Ships, which lay
in the Road before the place, sought rather to face the besieged by famine
than to run new hazards by assaulting them after his first ill success. In the
mean while as necessity does quicken industry, so the Sieur de Thoyras found
means to send three Soldiers to the Main Land by swimming, to give his Majesty
notice of the condition in which he was, and to hasten away relief. One of them
called Le Pierre passed the Sea, forcing its waves to yield to his resolution.
He came to the Army before Rochel and delivered the Letters which he had for
the King, and others the Sieur de Thoyras his friends. The Duke of Angoulesme
dispatched that to his Majesty, then at Villeroy, and his cares for sending the
relief were doubled; so that the Sieur de Thoyras his friends, knowing in what
condition he was, and how important it was to the Kings honor to assist him,
did use their utmost endeavors to heasten away his relief.

Politic Observation.
ONe of the greatest difficulties, to which a man can be brought in ordinary
seiges is the inability of sending intelligence to them, from whom he does
expect relief; and one of them greatest cares of the who besiege a place, is to
stop all ways that nothing way pass in or out. Some have made use of the
night for this purpose as the Goths did, when they would send news to Vitigez,
being besieged in Ormuz, by Belligarius; they made a great noise at one of the
Gates, pretending as if they would sally out upon their enemies, to the intent
that Bellisarius might draw all his Forces theither and leave but a few at that
quarter, by which they designed to send away their Messenger. A Stratagem
indeed very advantageous, when managed with prudence. The same Goths, as
Procopus reports, used another devise upon the same occasion to send news to
Vitigez, which was, They corrupted some sentinels for money, an invention easy
to be practiced in civil wars, where both parties are acquainted with one
another. But that which is the most certain way, which they who are besieged
may make use of, to send a broad intelligence, ought to be guided by
discretion, according as occasions present themselves, and executed them with
all possible address; for it is an art, not to be laid down by certain Rules,
neither can it be learned by precepts; but natural industry infuseth it by
diverse instincts, and experience teaches it in war. I shall only add that
there are sundry and diverse means to be met with in History, which great
Captains have used on this occasion. The Campany being besiged by the Romans,
sent a man, who counterfeyted himself mad, with letters for the Carthaginians
in his girdle, Hircius Consul, writ to Decius Brutus then besieged in Modena by
Antonius, and sent his Letters made up in lead, fastened to the Arms of those
who swam over the River. The same man did some times keep up Pigeons in the
dark without giving them to eat, and then finding them almost famished, carried
them as near the place as possibly he could, then let them go; which flying to
the houses with their letters about their necks, were either taken down or
killed by Brutus. Justine reports that Harpagus, that he might conveigh Letters
to Cyrus, put them up in the belly of an hare and sent them by a faithful
Servant, who passed through King Arbactus guardes for an Huntsman.

Others have used as many different devised, as their wits and opportunities
could attain to. That which ought to be observed, is this, that such Letters
ought not to be writ in Characters or such ciphers which are legible. We are
not now in Caesar's days; who designing to send Cicero word that he was at hand
to relieve him, writ to him only in Greek: At this time there are no ciphers,
which are not easily found out. It were fit that they were like the Characters
of Chinenses, which signify things not Letters, who writing as many different
Characters as there are things, it must needs be an hard matter to decypher
them. These Characters, too for the greater security should be writ with the
juice of Limmons or Onyons between the Lines of Letters, in which there is
nothing of concern, because that which is writ with this juice cannot be read,
but by water or fire. It were not amiss too, if he who is Governor, before
the siedg, agree with him to whom he would send intelligences of the manner he
would write to him, and there might be only certain words in each line, which
composed together should discover his thoughts, and yet taken with the rest,
would be thought to treat of other business than that which is really intended.

The I Will of Ree relieved.
THE Relief of the Island was due to the Cardinal after his great or rather
extreme care. One of the chiefest means he used to effect it was this, He sent
to Bayonne for 15 flat vessels, called Primaces, built both to sail and row and
withal very fleet, and able to endure a storm, He judged by his prudence, that
the English having none of this fashion, they might easily get to Ree in the
night, without being discovered. The order was dispatched to the Count de
Grand-Mont with command to put them under the conduct of the Sieur de Chalar
Captain of one of the Kings Ships, then in Spain, and in case he should not be
come back, then to whom he thought fit. The Count provided the 15 Primaces with
all haste, he armed then with Muskets and piks the best he could, in each of
them he put 20 seamen, and took care if nothing was wanting. The Sieur de
Chalar not being returned, he committed the conduct of them to Captain Baslin,
one of the most experienced and stoutest Sea Captain in those Parts. About the
end of August, he came with his Primaces to the Sands of Olonne, where the
Abbot of Marsillac received him with great joy, and his vessels being well
stored with victuals add ammunition, he lent him six score men of the Regiment
de Champany with some Volunteers, to put off upon the first occasion. Upon the
fifth of September, he set sail in the head of his little Fleet about 6 of the
clock at night. Soon after he knew that he was near the Enemies Fleet, he spead
abroad his great sails, and was presently discovered. But the Primaces going
very swift could not be stopped by the English Vessels; they went without
loss, only some sails and one or two Masts were shattered, and one shot
through with a bullet. Baslin having thus passed the Enemies, fell upon the
Baracado which they had made, to hunder relief, which consisted of great Masts
linked together with iron chains and tied with Cabels fastened to great Anchors;
however many of the Primances by reason, of their lightness and swiftness
passed over, the rest as it pleased God did light upon a certain place, where
the foregoing night a tempest had broken part of their Baracado, through which
they passed without difficulty; so that about two in the night they ran ashore
near one of the Bastilions of the Citadel, a place where the English could not
hurt them. The relief was great both for their reputation and assistance; It
came so opportunely, that it gave them new courage, who were till then hardly
able to breath, and it may safely be said that this one action was the deciding
of the controversy. The passage was afterward clear, The besieged persuaded
themselves that they should now want nothing, and the English were so
astonished at it, that they sent to his Majesty's Hab^rin the Duke of
Buckinghams Kinsman, to see if he would make any propositions of Peace; but he
was sent back as he went, without speaking with the King, who could no more
resolve to see him, than to suffer the English to go away without treating them
as they deserved, that they might have no great will to come another time.

Diverse other vessels attempted to pass unto the Island, but being heavier
than the Pinnaces, they were forced to go off, some one way and some another
through the English Fleet. It was then resolved, that 10 other Pinnaces should
be got from Bayonne, which the Count de Grant-Mont rigged out and sent under
the Command of Captain Audoum, upon the 4 of October they came upon the Sands
of Olonne, They were soon laded and accompanied with 25 other little Vessels,
300 Soldiers went abroad them and 60 choice Gentlemen. Upon the 6 of October
they put off. The Sieur de Cusar, and Captain Audouin were Commanders of the
Squadron. But the wind changing, as soon as ever they were at Sea, two days
past before they came to Ree, and that by day too. The English Fleet soon
discovered them, and engaged them in a rough fight. Musket and Canon shot were
not spared, but their courage surmounting their danger, 29 of the Vessels got
clear to the Citadel, where they run ashore on Friday morning the 8 of
October; five of their Vessels were forced to give back: One only in which
were the Sieurs de Beaulieu and R^zilly, was taken by the Enemy. The English
were so incensed at it, that they made in 24 hours above 2000 great shot upon
the Port St. Martin so that there were only 5 Pinnaces and one Traversin in
condition to sail; but the vessels were unladed, and the Gentlemen and
Soldiers happily landed in the Citadel.

Politic Observation.
THE Relieving of a place is of such importance, that without it no place is
able to hold out, when the besiegers appear to be resolute before it. He who
relieves them, is acknowledges for their deliver, and does considerable service
to his Prince. Although Seaports are more easily assisted than Inland Towns,
especially with a strong Fleet, because it is hard, if the winds, which with
their inconstancy have an absolute Empire over the Sea, should not at some one
time or other present a favorable occasion to break through all the obstacles,
which their enemies Ships can make; yet it is not the same thing when there is
a want of great Ships to fight with those of the Enemy. When it happens thus,
Prudence joined with Fortune must surpass all those difficulties, which oppose
the relief of the place. There must of necessity be an expectation till Fortune
presents a favorable wind, without which, what were it but rashly to run into
danger? But when the wind sits right, the opportunity ought not to be lost, and
then a wise Pilot guided by his industry, may hope for a good success from his
enterprise.

The Chief points, which he ought to observe, are, to provide store of light
vessels, which may pass the quicker. For besides that deligence, the Mother of
good success, it is particularly needful, when a strong Fleet is to be broke
through; and it gives great advantages, in regard the Enemies great Ships
cannot sail so nimbly. It is true the light ones may be stopped by the Enemies
which are of the same bulk, but it is an hard matter, if carrying a great
number for the succor, some should not escape, especially, because the smaller
vessels of the enemy are usually dispersed abroad upon the guard and cannot so
quickly come into the fight; for that wind which is good to some, is contrary
to others, and the succors having no great number of Ships for fight, one part
advances through, whiles the others bears the brunt.

Besides, it were necessary to be very secret in providing the Convoy, and
lading the Barques; and if it be possible to prevent the Enemies knowledge of
it, they will not be so strict in their watch, a dispersing their small vessels
abroad. Withal an Enemy taken unprepared is not so terrible as when advised,
and in readiness. The night gives a great help, and ought chiefly be made
choice of, as well for its darkness, which hinders their being discovered, as
because then great Ships dare not be too bold lest they run on ground, so that
the little ones are they which must pursue the fight. But above all the Command
ought to be given to a courageous prudent Captain, followed by choice Soldiers,
Victory being obtained more by valor then multitude. Such men ought to be
chosen, who neither fear Musket nor Canon, but are resolved to run the hazard.
Canons indeed are not much to be feared in the night, because they can hardly
be levelled a right by reason of the darkness, and the swiftness of the vessels
motion.

Prosecution of the subject.
THe King unable to come to Rochel so suddenly, as his courage persuaded him,
resolved to send thither Monsieur the Duke of Orleans his brother; those
succors conducted by Andonin, were an effect of his care and vigilance to
serve the King on this occasion; for having seen that the first Pinnaces guided
by Baslin had happly arrived at the Island, he thought it would not be amiss
to procure others to send a fresh supply, and therefore he dispatched away a
Servant of his, one Saint Florent to the Count de Grant-mont to entreat him to
make ready ten others, and to send them by some Captain, of whom he had a
particular knowledge: The Gentleman departing the 14 of September, arrived the
4 of October with them to the Sands of Olonne. To speak some thing of the power
which Monsieur had before Rochel, it was an effect of the Kings Prudence and
the Cardinals council, who was not ignorant how that certain persons, whom he
confided in, had craft enough to raise some discontent in him, if he had not
been employed in the war; And the King thinking it necessary to send a
Chieftain in his absence of such quality, whose presence might animate the
Soldiers, and whose condition might oblige the Grandees to obey him without
jealousy, chose Monsieur and sent him full power as Livetenant General of the
Camp at Rochel, of his Forces in ^oicion, X^in onge, Angoumois and Aulnis.
Monsieur showed in several encounters that he had no less Valor or conduct,
than those who had spent all their time in Arms: Insomuch that he once engaged
his Person in a skirmish with the Rochelois, where they had much a do to bring
him off. He was extreme careful for the bringing up of the Forces to the Camp,
and oftentimes attempted the relief of the Isle of Ree, and to keep the Army in
discipline. The King arrived at Rochel. and testified a great satisfaction at
his extraordinary conduct by Caresses, sufficient to have obliged him, to have
expected the issue of such glorious designs in his Majesty's company, had not
his confidence diverted him from it and persuaded him after the defeat of the
English to return to Paris. They made him believe that the Cardinal had all the
authority and that himself had only the name, although this Grand Minister was
never deficient in paying him all respects. These seditious Spirits were so
pricked with envy to see him act such glorious things. It is true they likewise
found that the Cardinals design was, by thus employing Monsieur in an affair
whereby he was obliged to be every hour with the King, to make a good
understanding between them; a thing no whit desired by them, who rather
endeavored continually to sow distrusts between them, which would render
themselves the more considerable by their seeming to be loyal and useful.
This procedure is ordinary with them, who serve great Princes for their private
Interests; they still fear, lest their Master should confide more in others
then themselves, and there is no device which they make not use of to prevent
it. This was the true reason, which carried Monsieur back to Paris, his
Highness having given more credit to their councels, which he thought were
accompanied with faithfulness than to his own passion, which carried him on to
the wars, when he might testify his courage to be no way inferior to his birth.

Politic Observation.
IT is necessary for the good of a State so to employ the Princes of the blood,
especially him who is Heir apparent to the crown, that they live contented, but
withal that they affirm not too great authority in affairs Alexanders procedure
was very barbarous, when passing into Asia, he killed all his kindred,
excepting one of his Bastard brothers, of whom he had no suspicion: A
Barbarousness only received among Turks, where it passes for a piece of
Policy. I cannot less blame the Kings of Orinus, who before they were beaten
by the Portugals, took away the lives of most of their kindred. The Kings of
China too are no less to be blamed, who shut them up in a place, from whence
they never are permitted to come out, excepting only him, who is to succeed in
the Empire: Christianity has Laws more moderate, and approves not of this
rigorous tyranny, but it well likes those prudent counsels, which Kings take,
so to treat them that they may not have any grounds of discontent which might
carry them to broils, and that they become not too powerful in the State. It
is wisdom to be kind unto them, to deal favorably with them as occasion
shall serve, to employ them in the Court with honor and in such Offices, which
have more credit than power, not to give them the Authority of a great
province, of any strong places, or the command of an Army, at least for no long
time, without a faithful Livetenant, who by his credit with the Soldiers may
hinder them from abusing their power. If but a little be added to the greatness
of their birth, they become too potent and assume too great authority. The
desire of Command, which their birth has given them, does blind their minds,
when they find themselves with their Swords in their hands. Command says Titus
Livy, takes off from the Loyalty of the nearest relations, and makes their
Counsels prejudicial to the public good.

Artaxerxes had no sooner caused his son to be chosen King but he was in
danger, of being killed by him. So Selimus being made partner of the Government
by his father Bajazet slew him, that he alone might have the sole command. And
Don Charles would have had done as much to his Father Philip King of Spain, not
being able to stay until his natural death should make way for his comm^^g to
the Crown? Hardly an Age passes, but some examples of this kind have appeared,
which have made it evident, that great power in the Princes Royal, is
incompatible with the Public Quiet, or the safety of a Sovereign.

The King after his Recovery comes to Rochel to beat the English out of Ree.
THE first succors, which had been sent to Ree, had been to little purpose, if
the ^ing had not come in person, and sent over an Army to drive out the
English; It was an enterprise full of hazard to expose all the Forces which his
Majesty had on foot at Poictou, to the mercy of the Sea, to dis-garrison all
the Ports of the Main Land, to relieve a Fort half lost, and to land in an
Island in sight of a potent Army; seeing especially that in so doing, Rochel
would be in some sort left as a prey to strangers. However necessity persuaded
to wink at all hazards; it was impossible to overcome them but in the Kings
presence, at whose sight there is not any difficulty, which the courage of the
French would not surmount. His Majesty having recovered his health, forthwith
resolved to depart from Paris. He forgot not before his departure to provide
for the safety of those Provinces, from whence he departed to which end, he
sent the Duke d' Elboeuf to the coasts of Picardy and the Duke de Longueville
to those of Normandy, with Forces and power to oppose the English, if they
should make any incursion there about. He sent other Commissions to diverse
Lords to raise new Troops and to hasten them away with the first, toward
Poictou. He dispatched the Duke de Guise to command the Fleet, part of which
was already drawn together. He accepted of the offer made by Don Diego de M^xie
from the King of Spain, of a Fleet to serve him against the English, but the
truth was with design rather to hinder the Spaniards from assisting his Enemies
under hand, than for any great help he expected from it. In fine, he gave power
to the Queen Mother, to govern, during his absence, the Provinces in and about
Paris; and then he set forwards toward Rochel, that he might be there with the
first. The news of his departure did much encourage the besieged, as also the
Army, which lay in expectation of him, before Rochel. They were all on fire to
be at it with their Enemies. His Majesty knew with what earnest desire they
expected him, so he would not make any stay in his journey, only at Saumer
where is the Church De Nostre Dame des Ardelliers. The King knew that victory
was the gift of Heaven, that it is rather Gods than the Soldiers hands which
procure it, and that men do in vain attempt if not favored by his providence.
He commanded public prayers to be made over all France, for the imploring of
Gods assistance. He rested one day at Saumer, where he fasted with such
devotion and confidence, that every one hoped for an happy success from his
fervent prayers. Neither was it in vain, for shortly after Audouin got into the
besiedged Citadel, the news whereof came to his Majesty then at Niort upon
the 9 of October, from whence he forthwith departed toward Rochel.

Politic Observation.
AS God is the Author, so his Providence is the Governor of Kingdoms. His
wisdom is an all seeing eye, to look into whatever is necessary for them: and
his hand is omnipotent to provide all waves for their glory. That Creature
which is born in the Sea, finds his livelihood there. The Tree which grows on
the earth, is nourished there. The Fruit which owes it is birth to the Tree,
owes also it is maturity. The Sun compleateth the Gold which he forms, and
thus States established by God ought to expect all their happiness and good
successes from his providence. That is it which infuseth into Kings the
knowledge of what is proper to be done, both in Peace and War: It is he who
holds the hearts of all subjects in his hands, who inspireth them with
respects due to their Authority, and keeps them in obedience. How easily can
God humble at his own pleasure, the minds of Rebels, abate their Fury, pull
down their courage and force them to live, within their limits! And is he not
the God of Battles too, who bestows victory where he pleases, defends
Justice by the Arms of the Soldier, strikes terror amongst his Enemies; and
many times gives greater success, then reason and the means would admit to be
hoped for? To him it is Kings ought to have recourse in matters of concernment.
David never went to war, but he consulted with God. Constantine the Great, in
that war which he made with the Persians, caused a little Oratory in form of a
Church to be carried with him, that in it he might do his devotions, and every
Legion had its Templum Mobile wherein the Priests and Deacons said Mass, to
implore Gods assistance. By Prayers, is Peace continued, and Enemies by it are
overthrown. Every Prince who is engaged in any great enterprise, is bound to
believe it, and to have recourse to God, by Prayers, by works of Piety and
Religion, assuring themselves upon his promise, of giving them what ever they
shall heartily request, because he is just, and will be near them, who shall
call upon him; that he will fulfill their desires who fear him; Exalt the
faithful, who hope in him; and keep those who love him.

Ree is relieved.
UPon the Kings arrival, all thoughts were bent to execute the resolution taken
at Paris, to send a strong relief, into Ree, not only that the English might be
forced from the siedge, but quite driven out of the Island; The Kings courage
would have carried him to go fight his enemies in person at Sea, but the
Cardinal and his Generals by their entreaties, foreseeing into how great danger
he run, persuaded him to the contrary. His Majesty would not by any means give
leave, that the Cardinal should go, but desired, he might stay behind, to take
the Chief care of sending the relief upon him, it being easy to judge, that if
his counsels were so succesful in his absence, he might obtain by his presence
what ever could be desired. Hereupon the Cardinal commanded, that some of the
vessels designed for the business, should be made ready with whatever was
necessary for the sick and the sound, with store of Munition, and the day
following the Sieur de Beaumont commanded them to Fort Delapree, which place
the English did not much secure; for they had victuals sufficient for six
months for one hundred men that kept it; the same day he likewise sent order to
Oleron, for the conveighing part of the Regiment of Plessis-Prasilin, to begin
certain Trenches, and to draw certain lines and redoubts about the port which
might favor the coming of the great relief; They all got safe in and lost not
a man; this good success put the rest of the Soldiers in heart who were to
pass thither. Without loosing more time the Duke of Orleans was sent by the
King to Plumb, that he might put aboard the Ships Le Sieur de Canaples, seven
hundred men of the guard, the Regiment of Beaumout, some Volunteers and good
store of Munition, who though he were then only eighteen year old, yet disposed
all things so prudently, as if experience had made him grow old in arms; After
the five and twentieth of October, the King who knew the names and persons of
most of his old Soldiers, had filled up all the Troops, the Masters of the
Camp, Captains, and all the rest, who were to go. His Majesty knew, that it is
not the number which gets the victory but courage, and therefore he would not
have one man amongst them of whom he had not some experience: These Forces
commanded by the Sieur de Canoples, came all safe within two hours to the Fort
De La Pree; The air was of a light fire with the shot which were made at them,
but not a Ship persued them, so they received no loss. St. Previll seeing them
approach, went out to discover who they were, and told the Sieur de Canoples,
that the enemy informed of their imbarking, were in ambush behind certain old
houses with intention to fall upon them at their Landing; hereupon he commanded
the Sieurs de Fourille, de Malicy, de Tilladat and de Porcheus presently to
Land their Soldiers, he showed Serjant Major Brierees the several Posts where
every one should be, and gave orders for the fight. The Duke of Buckingham, who
commanded in his own person hearing the noise of their landing, drew out his
Forces into three divisions, and leading them toward the Port, they were not
discovered until they came just upon the Kings Forces, and that only by the
light of their Matches, so dark was the night. Tillades's Chief Serjant, who
led on the forlorn hope first espying them gave them a salute which laid some
of them on the ground, however the rest came on; The Sieur de Canoples seeing
them not above fifty paces from Fourilles Squadron, resolved, after he had
proposed it to the other Captains, to fall on them, which put an end to the
business. Fourille went up and that so near them, that not a Musket was shot
off but at push a Pikes. The two Battalions of the French and English
discharged at the same time, the fight grew hot, Both Commanders and Soldiers,
were at emulation with one another to show that, it was not without reason, the
King had made choice of them, in this occasion. Their Courages saved them, for
the Enemy was much more numerous then they were. Indeed the Sieur de Canoples
good conduct did not a little further the business, for knowing the strength of
the English, he had commanded the Captains to draw all their Soldiers, into
the Counter Scarps of the Fort, but he had not so ordered his business, had it
not been in the night; for Buckingham seeing his first Battalia in disorder,
and thinking he had only met with the Forlorn Hope, commanded a retreat. He
left six and thirty on the place, and of his Majesty's party, there were only
six and twenty killed and wounded, amongst the rest, Mausan, Tourilles
Lieutenant, was found dead of a Musket shot, and two cuts with a Halberd.

Politic Observation.
WHen there is a necessity at first dash to fight an enemy, it is more
discretion to fall on him, then to expect him; and especially being inferior
to him in force, for then pure valor must carry it. Soldiers are ever more
courageous in assaulting then receiving an enemy. An assault distracteth an
enemy, makes in suspect some further stratagem, and puts him often into
disorder. Julius Caesar made an experiment hereof, when passing the Hellespont
in one only Galliot, he met Crassius, Captain of the contrary Faction, with
ten Galleys. A courage less resolute then his would have endeavored to save
himself by the lightness of his vessel, but in stead of flying be put himself
into a posture of defense, went directly up against Crassius, and so terrified
him, that Crassius delivered up himself. When such encounters are foreseen, it
is needful to be accompanied with choice resolute Soldiers, such as know not
what fear is, for fear is repelled by any the least resistance. A timorous
Soldier never yet did any thing worth notice, but to a resolute man, every
thing makes way. It is said of Cajus Marius that in his youth, he was so hardy
in all his enterprises, that nothing could resist him, but that in his age, his
Valor decreased, with the heat of his Blood which lost him some part, of his
reputation. Bertrand du Gueslin was both one of the most valiant and Fortunate,
of his times; But every one does ascribe those great advantages, which he
obtained in Battails to that resolution of his, which would sometimes so
transport him, that he would with a dozen Soldiers, fall into the midst of his
Enemies, who unable to withstand the effects of so admirable a valor, would
presently be put to disorder. Robert de La March, has afforded us one more
notable example of the success which attends on valor: it was in the
Battle of Navarre, where being touched with a fatherly affection, he rushed
into the Battle of the Swisses then victorious, that he might save his Sons
Florange and Jamets, who lay upon the ground much wounded: Which resolution of
his was so succesful, that though seconded but by a few Horse yet it so
terrified the Swizzers, that they could not prevent his bringing of them off in
safety.

Prosecution of the Subject.
THe Duke of Buckingham finding it would be a difficult thing for him, in
future to prevent the access of relief to the Island, as well because diverse
Vessels of his Fleet were lost, as also by reason of the small success he had
hitherto had, resolved to make his last attempt upon the Citadel of St.
Martin. He was not ignorant of those other and greater preparations which were
in agitation upon the main land, to send a stronger supply then any yet; so
that there was a necessity of taking the place, or hazarding a sharp conflict.
The Sieur de Thoyras had diverse conjectures of his design, and that he might
put himself into a condition of defending himself he sent advice to the Fort de
la Pree, desiring them to have their Forces in a readiness, to assist him,
when he should discharge three Canon shot, for a sign that the enemy began
their assault. Presently hereupon, the Sieur de Canaples called the Officers
together, to consult of what was proper to be done, and it was unanimously
concluded, that all their Forces should be put into Battalia by break of day:
That they should march toward Abbay, and that upon hearing of the Signal, they
should go directly to the enemy to divert them from the Assault. This Order was
exercised accordingly, and they were no sooner drawn up together, but the
Cannons gave them notice of the assault: the Sieur de Canaples went directly
toward the Citadel. It is reported, that there were between four and five
thousand English at the assault: However, they made but two considerable
attempts, one upon the Bastion de Thoyras, which was not quite finished; they
got up upon the Rampars, but were so ill treated by the Besieged, that they
were forced to give back, and to make such have down their Ladders, that some
of them never touched but the last round. The the other Attempt was at the
Bastion Antioch, where the English had no better success, for many of them
were killed with Musket shot, Stones, and long Staffs which were in the Half
Moon, so they fled and were pursued home to their Trenches. That which forced
them most to fall back, was to see the Forces which were come out from Pree so
near them. The Duke of Buckingham gues^ing their design was to fall upon his
Trenches, and to charge them in the Rear, drew off his forces, and set them in
order to receive them: But the Kings forces finding the assault given over, and
the enemy embattailed made an halt, the Sieur de Canaples being unwilling to
undertake any thing but the defense of the Citadel, until the great relief
were arrived, that he might not hazard his men to no purpose. The two Armies
lay in view of each other, the rest of the day, without doing any thing, and
night coming on, they of the Kings party, withdrew to Pree. In the mean while,
the Sieur de Canaples unwilling as has been said to attempt any thing, was
informed how the besieged had taken all the Ladders of the English, fifty
Prisoners, most of which were Captains and Officers, that they had killed
between five and six hundred, without losing above eighteen or twenty men, and
some few wounded, amongst which were the Sieurs de Sardaignes and Gran Val, who
being shot through the Bodies died in a few days after. This Victory did much
rejoice the Kings Army, and his Majesty himself too, who was diligently
informed of it. The English doubting their Trenches would not secure them,
forsook the one half of them, and shortly after resolved to go back for England.

Politic Observation.
TWo things are chiefly necessary for the repelling of an assault, men and
fortifications. It cannot be denied but that fortifications are needful; for
it were a vanity to believe, that a few men blocked up in a place, should be
able to resist a whole Army, if they be not defended with Bastions, half Moons,
and other Forts raised up to a sufficient height to protect them, whence it
follows, that his chief care who does command a place when he fore-sees an
assault, ought to be, to provide his fortifications, that they be in a
condition proper for it, and that he have preparations in a readiness to
repair the breaches. He will find it too no small advantage against his
enemies, since it is much easier to repulse an enemy, who attempts to enter a
place by Scaling-Ladders, then if there were a Breach where many might come in
a Breast, or his Fortifications should be in want of repair. But whatever
advantage it is to have good and strong Fortifications, yet the valor of the
Soldiers, is that which is most of all considerable. What said Pompey? It is
not Walls or Houses which makes Towns, but men, neither can they be defeated,
be they what they will, without the help of men; we often see the very
strongest places soon delivered up, when not defended by men of heart and
courage. Azarius being besieged in Quiers, by Vastius, had indeed notable good
Fortifications, and had also placed in the Breach, store of combustible matter,
with Fireworks, but all would not hinder the Town from being taken, for that
no one man appeared to withstand the Assault. Archimedes his Engines could not
defend the loss of Syracusa: Engines and Fortifications are all in animate,
and their Powers are limited to certain effects, in despite of all which, a
Besieging Army, will soon take in any place, if there be not men of resolution
and courage to resist their attempts. But that we may mention some order which
History teaches in enduring a Siege, or sustaining an Assault, it ought to be
known, That he who commands a place, must not then draw up his Soldiers,
when the enemy appears at the Breach, or mount their Ladders; but he ought so
to dispose them into every Quarter how strong soever it be, that no part be
left without a sufficient number of men to guard it. Caesar when he committed
this fault, by staying until Pharnaces was at his Elbow, found himself much
perplexed and troubled. Jugurtius as Salust reports it, having been defective
in this one point, gave Marius opportunity to become Master of one of his
strongest places. Thrasybulus took Sicyonian's Port, finding it dis-furnished
of Soldiers, who were all gone to a certain Breach which he had made, and
where he only pretended he would assault them. Vegetius? advises, that the
first assault be sustained by the most experienced and stoutest soldiers;
because an enemy when he meets with resolute opposition, and finds himself ill
handled, loses his Courage, and few have any mind to march over their
Companions dead bodies unto a second assault. But I shall refer the prosecution
of this discourse to them who have written whole Tracts upon it.

Prosecution of the Subject.
THE King having been informed of the good success in the late encounter,
dispatched in great have the remaining four thousand five hundred foot and
Horse, allotted out for the Relief with good store of Munitions. It cannot be
expressed how careful his Majesty was for the shipping off of them, how
dilligent in choosing the Officers and Soldiers one by one; animating by his
presence those who carried the provisions into the Ships, and encouraging those
who went aboard on this expedition; telling them, they might be confident of
victory, seeing they fought for God's cause. The Marshal de Schomberg was
appointed Marshal de Camp. The wind changing about just as they were put off to
Sea, they were forced to give back again, some one way, some another; But the
Marillac came at last to the point of Sablanceau without being hindered by the
Enemy, and passed without difficulty to the Fort De La Pree: and the next day
the Marshal de Schomberg came with fifty Barques about three in the morn being
the eight day of November. He Landed very fortunately being not discovered by
the Enemy, and his Soldiers being all upon the shore, he forthwith ranged them
into four Battalions, and his Horse likewise into four Squadrons, which he
extended into two wings, and in this order they marched up to the Fort. About
day break they came up, where he found all the Forces which had formerly been
sent thither draw into order, according as he had instructed Marillac. When he
had been informed of what had passed, he sent out to discover the enemy, and
put all things in order to fight. But first he would hear Mass, that he might
implore Gods assistance, without which, there is no hopes of good success, as
also he caused the general Prayers to be made, which are used in all Battles.

Then he caused his Soldiers to eat, that they might be strong, at which time,
he was informed that the enemy had drawn part of their Forces, out of their
Trenches and made as if they would retreit, whereupon he concluded there was no
more time to be lost. So he reviewed the Army, to see if every one were in
readiness, and then marched upon the head of them, toward St. Martin. The Sieur
de Thoyras came out to meet him, with as much joy as a person delivered from
such eminent peril could express, for the Enemy had forsaken their Trenches
and left him the liberty of coming forth. The Marshal having likewise
intelligence, that the enemy had quited the Town of St. Martin, presently
called a Counsel of war, to consider of what was fit to be done. The Sieur de
Thoyras proposed to march up directly to them, being confident, that in the
fear they were, it would be easy to cut them in pieces; The Sieur de Marillac,
was of a contrary opinion, thinking that nothing ought to be hazarded, seeing
the success of Arms is uncertain, That his Majesty's Army was not sure of a
victory against the Enemy, though they retreited, and concluded it improper to
fight with them. But the business having been debated, it was resolved that a
Medium should be taken, that without quitting the Station they had taken, the
Motion of the Enemy should be observed; and that in case they should pass unto
the I Will d'Oye, (where it was not unknown that they had prepared a Passage for
their re-imbarquing) then to follow them in order of Array, and charge them
when they were half over, but without putting any thing in hazard.

This resolution accompanied with prudence, was excecuted with Courage, for the
English advancing toward the place of their retreit; the Kings Army marched up
to them in Battalia, and being arrived to the Marsh, The Sieur de Thoyras could
no longer suffer them to go away, without paying for the trouble, which they
had put him to; but concluding that the Honor of France obliged him to have a
parting bout with them, and that it would be a wrong to the Kings Arms to let
them go clear off when such an advantage was offered against them, went on, and
the Command being given, the Horse had order to begin. Piedmont and Champain
followed, and each of them observing their respective Commands, put the English
to the Rout: Their Horse were all lost in the ma^n, their Cornet and 24.
Colors, and four Cannon were taken The French did nothing but kill and slay,
in so much that there lay above six hundred dead upon the place, besides what
were drowned in the Sea. Diverse of their Colonels, Gentlement of quality and
above one hundred and fifty Officers of all sorts were killed, above three
thousand Arms taken in the field, and above fifteen hundred Soldiers laden
with their Spoils. Thus the Marshal de Schomberg in the same day, landed, saw
the siedge raised, and beat his Enemies. It is reported that the English had at
their first setting foot on the Island at least seven thousand men, and that a
recruit of three thousand came afterward to them, but they carried off only
eighteen hundred, the rest being either dead with sickness or killed, and of
them too the greatest part dyed soon after their return to England, by reason
of the discommodities they there suffered.

Politic Observation.
JOhn James Triuulae, Marshal of France says it is a great imprudence to give
Battle in a man's own Country, if not invited to it, by some great advantage
or forced by necessity. He who adventureth to do it, runs no less hazard then
the loss of his Kingdom: Darius saw himself despoyled of his Kingdom, by
being guided by his Courage; and fighting a Pitch Battle with Alexander. He
might well have harraised him with his Horse on many occasions, as the
Partheans did the Romans: whereas being eager to meet him in the field, and
fearing least he would return into his own Country, and not be fought with, he
made after him to give him Battle. Alexander seeing him near at hand,
assaulted him, and reduced him to that deplorable condition, as is not unknown
by History to every one; Fabius was wiser then so, he was contented, only to
follow Hanibals Army, and to pull him down in diverse conflicts, and by the
great Inconveniences which an Army endures, when it passes through an enemies
Country, destitute of Towns to refresh them, and where they meet with
resistances on every hand; By these delays he discomfited Hanibal, without
endangering his Soldiers lives, a thing very considerable among the Romans,
who thought it a greater Honor to wear the Civique-Crown, bestowed on those
who had saved any Citizens life, then that which is called Muralis, given to
them who had first scaled the Walls of their Enemies: or the naval Crown
granted to such as had done some notable exploit at Sea, hence Guiccardi^ tells
us, there is no victory more beneficial or glorious, then that which is
obtained without hazarding the blood and lives of the Soldiers: when an Enemy
has entered upon a State, he is sufficiently beaten and overcome, with Glory
and Honor, if he be only wearied out and tired so that he have but little mind
to return a second time. In fine, the Title of victory and the Honor of a
Battle, does not appertain to him who kills most enemies or takes most
Prisoners; but to him who obtains the end of his design. Which made Don
Alphonso King of Naples say; When he was provoked by Monsieur d' Anjou to give
him Battle; That it was the part of a Captain to overcome and not to fight.
Philip de Valois fought a pitched Battle with the English at Cressy, but he was
overcome. King John confiding in his Forces, chose rather to give the same
English Battle near Poictiers, then to vanquish them by famine, and those
other Incommodities which an Army undergoeth in a strange Country, but he was
taken and died a prisoner. Charles the fifth following the advice of Fabius,
would never be drawn to hazard a Battle with them, but deprived them of all
provisions, and by that means took all Guyenne over their heads, and made
himself Master of most of the Duke of Bretaigns Chief Cities.

Prosecution of the Subject.
THE English were hard put to it in the Marisb, so that diverse of them were
taken prisoners, and amongst others, my Lord Mountjoy the Earl of Hollands,
Brother, Gray Livetenant of the Artillery, The General of the Horse, thirty
five Captains and Officers, twelve Gentlemen, and one hundred or sixscore
Soldiers; but they served for an object of the Kings Bounty and Clemency, For
hearing many of them were stripped, he caused them to be clothed and shortly
after causing the chief of them to be brought to him, he paid down their
ransomes to those who had taken them, sent them on their words to the Queen of
England, Commanding de Meau to present them to her with this assurance, that it
was only for her sake he had given them their Freedoms, nothing could be more
noble, and the Cardinal had no small share in it. But it was an usage much
different from that of the English, toward the French, whom they had taken in
diverse encounters. For the English would not stick to deny them meat for money,
some of whom assured his Majesty, that in case My Lord Mountjoy and some others
had not been taken, themselves had been starved to death: He was by others
informed that they had seen the English throw some Prisoners into the water,
whom they so tied that they could not save themselves by swimming. Indeed his
Majesty's Civil treatment of the English, engaged the King of England, to deal
better with the French, for presently after they were more courteously
entertained and so returned into France.

Politic Observation.
IT is no little Glory to treat Prisoners of War with civility either by
testifying a sense of compassion for the condition whereunto they are reduced,
or by doing them all the good Offices they might expect. It as a mark of true
generousness in a Prince, and that which sets off his Glory and Clemency with
Luster and Splendour, the two best flowers in his Crown. He ought to remember
himself to be Gods Image here on Earth, and that as nothing is more essential
to God then Bounty, so likewise his Glory can never appear more Illustrious
them by conferring favors on them, who are taken in fight by the Chance of
War. It is reported that Cleomens being asked what a good King ought to do,
answered, that he must do no good for his friends and all the mischief he
could, to his Enemies: But Aristo answered him with much reason, that it was
much more commendable to do good, not only to friends but even to Enemies; For
by that means a King makes himself beloved by all the World. It is no small
advantage to be esteemed merciful to the conquered. Plato gives a good reason
for it, for says he, it does increase the Soldiers Courage, for admitting
their Enemies should take them, yet they were obliged not to deal harshly with
them. Besides Prisoners do become so sencible of those kindneses which are
heaped on them, that they often are the Instruments of Peace Lewis the Eleventh
found it so, when as he kindly entertained the S^ig^eor de Conty his Prisoner
of War, who concluded the Treaty of Peace with Charles de Bourgogne. A Prince
is obliged to it, if it were only by the Compassion which a noble Courage ever
has of them who are overcome. Haloyoneus Son to Antigonus, having after a
victory lighted upon Heleneus, Phyrrus his Son, in a sad deplorable condition,
clothed with a Mantle unbefiting his greatness, embraced him with all possible
kindness, and having so brought him to Antigonus his Father, he did the like:
But withal he told his Son he had not done all which he was bound to do, in
leaving that cloak upon his shoulders; And at last having restored him to an
honorable attendance, and treated him with great kindness and humanity, he
returned him safe to his Kingdom of Epire.

The Siege of Rochel.
AFter the King had obtained this signal victory against the English, he bent
all his thoughts toward the besiedging of Rochel, that with their Walls he
might destroy their pride. This town as others, was at first but little, yet
the Port being commodious, it grew great by Commerce, and so insolent after
heresy had set its standard there, that they would make those privileges,
which our Kings had from time to time granted them, pass for contracts, and to
destablish a kind of Commonwealth in the State. They durst not openly declare
this pretention to the King by their Deputies, but their manner of proceeding
was an assured proof of it, a procedure the more insupportable in that it was
the support of all factions, both of the Hugonot party and the Grandees of the
Kingdom upon any discontents. Their Rebellion was become natural, and shortly
after this, they auguented their Crimes, by calling in the English to protect
their offenses. Some rich Merchants indeed there were who having somewhat to
loose, would have been contented to be quiet, but on the otherside it was
filled with store of Sea men surely and proud, as also very poor, who having
nothing wherein to employ themselves, proposed, that they might be at more ease
to make an insurrection in the Town, concerning their privileges. In order to
this design, they made a Manifest, to spread abroad their complaints, as a
poison in the minds of the Ignorant People of the Hugonots party, which might
induce them to take up Arms, and to shake of the yoke of obedience. This
resolution of theirs took them off, from paying any respect to the King; They
drove out the Sieur Doux Maistre des Requests, sent by his Majesty to them, in
quality of super intendent of Justice, with so much violence and outrage, that
they threatened to throw him into the Sea.

They openly assisted the English in whatever was within their power, They
solemnly buried the English Lords and Gentlemen, and such French Rebels as were
killed at the Landing on Ree. They sent Londriere with three hundred men to
second the English, when they found themselves too weak in Ree.

They received Madam de Rohan the Mother, and the Sieur de Soubize; who
assisted at their assemblies and enflamed them more and more. There was no
reason longer to suffer these things unpunished. The King about the beginning
of August, when they declared themselves so openly for the English, made his
approaches upon the Town, several companies of the Regiment of the guard, with
two other Regiments and two hundred Horse, were sent before it. The Duke
d'Angoulesme began to work upon the Fort De La Moulinette to lodge Forces
there, as well as in that of Fort Lewis. They requested the Sieur de Commings
Captain of the Regiment of the guard, that he would come to their assembly to
advise upon some means of accommodation; and as they saw no Declaration of an
absolute siege, until the English were forced from Ree, they thought to be
excused as heretofore by renewing their Protestations of fidelily: But their
words were not to be believed. All their proposals tended only to comfirm
their resolutions against the King. His Majesty thereupon, after the defeat of
the English, took his last resolution of forcing them to acknowledge their
faults, and to live within their bounds by a strong siege. The Order of the
whole circumvallation was prescribed by his Majesty; he raised 13 Forts and
several redoubts upon the Trenches the circuit of which were three Leagues or
there about, all out of musket or falcon shot, but not of Cannon. The Kings
design was by making these works, to compel them by famine and necessity to
surrender, neither did they much trouble themselves to hinder their work by
their Sallies, upon hope of being easily releeved by Sea; for so much as they
were soon, finished by the care of the Cardinal, and the Marshals de Scomberg,
and Bassompierre. His Majesty being well assured of their faithfulness, would
not employ any other persons indifferently, as formerly had been done in
Charles the ninth's time, and that so inconsiderately, that the very Commanders
of the Siege had no desire to take the Town. This circumrallation thus
finished, cut off all releef by Land, and it happened that having supplied the
English with a good part of their provsions, they had been quickly brought by
necessity to surrender, had they not been assisted by Sea. But shortly after,
they were so close blocked up there too, that they durst not show their heads.

Politic Observation.
IT is equally base and inconsiderate to suffer the insolency of a City, which
not contented to revolt against its Sovereign alone, does also call in
strangers to uphold their Rebellion. After the reducing of them by fair means
has been tried to no purpose, then ought all forcible means be used, to bring
then within their bounds. That King, who is deficient in this particular will
soon find himself exposed to scorn, both in his designs at home by his
neighbors, and in prosecution he will inevitably find both one and the other
take up arms against him. His neighbors, if they know his aversion to war, and
how unwilling he is to appear in the field, will soon rush in upon him; and a
party once accustomed to revolts, and permitted to attempt against the
Sovereign authority, will soon shake off the yoke of obedience. He ought
therefore equality to be disposed both for peace and war; He ought to intend
nothing more than the chastising of Rebels upon such an occasion. The expenses,
dangers, and cares ought not to be considered by him. It is equally dangerours
for a Prince, to be more inclined either to war or peace. Hence Marius was
blamed because he exercised not his authority in times of peace, by which means
he could never keep the Commonwealth in quiet.

Perseus lost his Kingdom by slothfulness, and to much loving of money,
desiring rather to keept in coffers than to expend it, in paying Soldiers
necessary for his defense; Thus he lost his Kingdom, and his treasures were
ransacked before his face. Pipin had never been so bold, as to have put his
Masters Crown upon his own heads, had Childerick loved arms, as well as
himself, and opposed those first attempts which were made against his Kingdom.
Francis Sforzza from a private Soldier, became Duke of Milan, and his Children
who were Princes and Dukes, became private Gentlemen, for want of experience in
the war, and because they would deceive others by their cheats, rather than
render themselves famours by battles. Less than this cannot befall a King, who
suffers the Rebellion of a strong Town to go away unpunished, especially when
it serves for a prop to uphold the revolt of any great party, or to countenance
the attempts of stangers. He ought to be in the field as soon as they begin to
declare themselves, and to take up arms with so much the more courage, for that
Trasan says, God does usually overwhelm the enemies of peace, and those who
are the disturbers of others by war; as heretofore in the example of Pyrchus
and of later ages, in that of Charles Duke of Bourgoign, I shall add, that for
the quicker and more secure reducing of his subjects to obedience, he ought not
to expect till their revolts make Levies. He ought always to have Regiments
ready in Garrisons, as the Macedonians had their Argyraspi^es. the Romans their
Legions, the Sultans of Egypt their Mammalukes, and the Turks their Janisari^s
By this means, a Town shall no sooner seem to mutiny, but it will be assaulted,
and if any of their Forces shall appear in the field, they will be soon cut in
pieces.

Prosecution of the History.
IT were of small consequence to have shut up the Rochelois by Land, had they
not also been blocked up by Sea. The Cardinal acquainted the King with the
necessity of it, and those contrivances formerly resolved on for that purpose
were put in execution. The Cardinal had the Chief conduct of it, because he had
examined with an extraordinary care all the means of finishing the siege with
good success, and was more capable than any other to effect it. He was so
modest that he suffered himself to be directed by Pomp^jus. Targon an Italian
Ingineer, who had wrought with the Spaniards in blocking up the Channel of
Ostende, he thought good to make a chain of Masts and other great pieces
linked together, with Harping Irons and Cables, but the first shot forced them
in sunder, and spoiled the work. He built certain Castles upon Ships some
floating, and some fixed in the Sea. He contrived other engines which were
Square, and of great pieces of timber, such as he called Bridges, for the
planting of Cannon upon them, levelled just between wind and water. But all
these inventions were more for show than use, though very chargeable, so the
Cardinal was forced to follow his own thoughts and the design which himself had
contrived for stopping the passage: and as there is no soul like his, so no
invention could equal that, which himself had projected. It was to raise a
certain banck, thwart the Channel, leaving only an entrance in the middle for
the ebbing of the Sea. This design seemed difficult for that the Sea is
incapable of any obstacles, which humane industry can raise against it. But as
the stars obey great Souls, so it was unjust that the Elements should resist
his will. Two things induced him to judge, that this banck would easlier be
raised than diverse imagined. First, the advantage of stones which might be had
on both sides of the Channel, and the great multitude of laborers, which might
be drawn out of the bordering Countries and from the Army it self for a quick
dispatch of the work. It was began in a place where the River is seven hundred
and forty fathom broad, where the Cannon of Rochel could not reach but at
random, so that the work could not be hindered. The Cardinal allowed 12 fathom
of depth, which quickly passing over, they left a stoping in the bottom, and
made a plat form of four fathom upon the surface, which should be raised to
such an height, that the highest tide could not reach it. It was built of dry
stones laid upon one another, without other mortar than what the Sea brought,
and to strengthen it the better at every 12 foot, there was an addition of
great timber.

This grand Min^ster knowing the taking of Rochel depended on this Bank, did
oftentimes go to see it, not regarding the Cannon shot which the Rochelois
continually made: He spared no money for the encouragement of the workmen, and
he obliged them by the charms of his words, which carry men on to whatever he
pleases. It was so advanced in two months time, that the Rochelois who had
hoped that it would only serve for a laughing stock to the Ocean, could now
only at several times pass four or five small Vessels over it. However, it
was a vast work such as passed belief, neither was it finished, till 7 or 8
months were ended. Besides this, the passages in the middle, for the ebbing of
the Sea, was to be stopped up, to hinder the going in or out of any Vessels.
Three great Fences were found out, such as could not be bettered. The first was
a Range of about 40 Vessels filled with Stones and sunk to the bottom. The
second was a kind of Pallisado made about as many floating Vessels linked
together with Chains and Cables, which were guarded by a whole Regiment. The
third was of great stakes, fastened in the bottom of the Sea, made Taper ways
which for that reason were called Chandelie^s. Thus was the Passage quite
blocked up, and there was no other way for the Rochelo, to be relieved by Sea,
unless the English whose assistance they implored should send them a puissant
Fleet, which might break through all these obstacles.

Politic Observation.
IT of so great importance to hinder the coming in of Provision to besieged
Towns that that being once secured the taking of them cannot be avoided, and
they who have forced them by famine, have by the Ancients been more honored
then those who have taken them by the sword, because they are lest subject to
hazards, and their Soldiers lives not in danger. A thing very considerable. In
long sieges the only thing intended, is by necessity to force the besieged to
open their Gates; the truth is, most commonly this is a work of time, and
consequently of great expense; but on the other side, it saves a great many
Soldiers lives, which is a recompense great enough. It was one of Caesar's
advices, in forcing of Towns rather to do it by Famine then the Sword, as the
Physician saves his Patients more by abstinence then forcible Medicines. The
truth is, I imagine this to be the better and safer way, in regard necessity is
such a thing, as nothing whatever can resist. Now as it is a way very
advantageous, so is not less difficult, especially in Sea Towns, heretofore
esteemed impregnable because of the incertainty of the Sea, and weather, which
seldom lets a Fleet lie long in safety, to prevent relief, as also by reason
of its violence, which commonly laughs at all those inventions contrived to
stop up a Port or Haven: Though this latter opinion, is at present but weak and
frivolous, seeing men have by industry found out several means to overcome all
manner of obstacles of this nature. Alexander the Great besieged the City of
Tire, stopped up the Channel by a Bank, took away all hopes of relief, and at
last forced them to surrender to his mercy, after they had refused to deliver
up upon fair and honorable terms. Caesar did the like before Duras; as also
St. Lewis upon the R^^s being a Branch of the River Nile, the Prince of Parma
at Antwerp, and Spinola at Ostend, all which by some invention or other found
means to hinder any shipping to come near the places which they besieged. But
amongst all, none is like a Bank, because in Tempests the Sea does usually
spoil and break all their Engines, of Masts, Cables, Timber, or the like.
Neither are Chains to be trusted in such occasions, for that small Vessels may
pass over them, as C^eus Duellius the Roman Consul did, who being blocked up
in the Court of Syracusa, caused all his men and luggage to be removed into the
Stern of his Galley, and his Oarmen rowing with all their strength passed them
half over, and then removing all his goods and men into the Prow, they rowed
over the other half and so got clear away, the like did the Spanish Forces at
Marcellia, when they found their enterprise was discovered.

The Sieur de Macheville, is sent to the Electors of Baviers and Treves, to
dispose them toward the settlement of a Peace in the Empire.
THose great cares which the Cardinal was necessitated to undergo, both in
opposition of the English Forces, and in the reducing of Rochel, did not
prevent him from providing for the Interests of those German Princes, who were
Allies to the Crown of France. His great Soul (like universal causes) produced
a tho^sand several effects, at the same time, nor could the m^nagement of any
one important affair, divert him from being circumspect in several others. He
advised his Majesty to dispatch the Sieur de Macheville, toward the Electors
of Baviers and Treves for the negotiating diverse affairs, particularly to
induce them to settle Peace in the Empire. His Majesty had learned that the
Emperor had designed to have his Son King of Hungary elected King of the
Romans: That the Electors did much desire his Majest^ would invite the Prince
Palatine to retire himself into France; That the Elector of Treves was well
inclined to league himself with the French Interests, and that diverse P^inces
of the Catholic League, did wish his Majesty would employ himself to negotiate
either a Peace, or a Cessation of Arms in Germany. Upon these four points it
was, that he gave the Sieur de Macheville instructions to treat with them. As
to the first, he was forbidden to thwart the Emperors design. His Majesty not
thinking it fit to declare himself against the Emperor, to the end he might
have more power and freedom toward the settling of his own affairs. But he was
commanded to flatter the Duke of Bavian upon that account and dexterously to
humor him, in his imaginary hopes of the Empire, by representing to him, as
likewise unto the rest of the Electors, That it would very much concern them to
promote some subject of less greatness then those of the House of Austria unto
that dignity, by which means the head of the Empire having a nearer equality
and correspondency with the rest of the Members, their union would be the
stronger, and their conditions the more secure. And in case he should find the
Electors averse from that Proposal, he was then commanded quaintly to hint unto
them, but not too openly; that the Emperor not being troubled by Age, or
Sickness, it would not be amiss to defer their Election of the Roman King
unto some other time, seeing by this delay they would render themselves the
more considerable toward the Princes of Germany, and the Emperor himself who
would be the more careful to preserve their friendship, it being so conducing
to his design; whereas having attained his ends, and finding himself in a
condition of being no more beholding to them, neither for himself or his, it
was to be feared least he should endeavor to extend the limits of his
Ambition to their prejudice. This was he expressly charged not openly to
declare, because the King thought it more proper, to insinnuate into the minds
of those Princes, the resolution of excluding the King of Hungary from the
Empire, or at least to defer his Election, rather then to discover himself.
However he was commanded to advise them, in case they were peremptorily
resolved to choose him, that it would concern them to take advantage of this
affair, in which the Emperor was necessited to make use of them, that they
might draw him to condescend unto such conditions as might settle a firm Peace
in the Empire, which it would concern them to do before the Election, least he
might be the more averse to peace, when he should find the Empire once assured
upon his Son.

As to the second particular, which relates unto the Palatins retreat unto
this Kingdom, he was commanded to tell those Princes, that his Majesty, could
not assent unto it, whatever proposals they made, of entertaining him at their
Costs and Charges; His reasons were these, That it was not beseeming the
Dignity of a King to capiticlate concerning the Pension of any Prince, unto
whom his Majesty pretended to be a refuge; and likewise that there was no
reason, why he should draw upon himself so great a Charge, not being
necessitated thereunto; and in case they should offer to pay all his Pension
without any treaty, he was then commanded freely to reply unto them, that their
Promises did not at all make sure the Pension, and if it should chance not to
be paid his Majesty could not then avoid the entertaining both of him, and his
whole family. Besides if the young Prince should come into France, his Majesty
was in Honor bound, never to consent unto the Peace of Germany until he were
restored unto his States, and that he could not give him a Retreat, without
promising to protect him, which he knew would not sort with their Interests.
That which concerned the Elector of Treves was not so difficult, seeing there
wanted nothing but the assuring him of his Majesty's affection and good Will.
He went accompanied with that which gave him a very particular satisfaction;
but the secret management of it, being of great consequence that he might serve
his Majesty without suspicion, the knowledge of this has not been discovered
unto any one but themselves. As to the fourth and last which concerns the
Peace, at least a Cessation of Arms, it was in relation to the enterprises of
the King of Denmark, and the Princes of the Lower Saxony, which had but ill
success; so that he had Order to negotiate it the more effectually, not only
because his Majesty was desirous to give a period unto those calamities, which
had brought Germany into so miserable a condition, but also for the Interests
of this Crown, which being concerned with those Christian Princes who are not
tied to the House of Austria, oblige him to hinder the Emperors becoming
absolute unto which the war seemed to contribute, by weakening the Princes
Electors, and ruining the Protestants. This was the more considerable, in
regard his Majesty, was not then in a Capacity to redress their aggrievances
by force of Arms; he was likewise commanded to procure an Electoral Diet where
the Electours coming to treat together, would doubtless resolve and conclude
a Peace; whereas if they should manage their affairs by their Doctors, who for
the most part were Pensioners to the House of Austria, there could be but
slender hopes of a good success. His Instructions Charged him, to acquaint
them, that he was commanded to negotiate the cessation of Arms, both with the
Emperor, the King of Denmark, and themselves, and that he should effectually
endeavor to accomplish it, provided that they would, engage unto his Majesty,
by Instruments drawn up in form, that they would, after the King of Denmark
should assent unto it, procure the Emperor to do the like, and that themselves
would do the same on their parts, and lastly that they would call an Electoral
Diet, where the Peace should be ratified as also a confirmation of their
Alliance with France.

These were the Chief Points of the Sieur de Macheville Instructions; in which
he bestirred himself with such diligence, that he prevailed upon the Princes
Electors (without discovering his Majesty's Intentions) to defer the Election
of the Roman King, That he persuaded them to think it improper for the Prince
Elector to retier into France; That he tied the Prince Elector of Treves unto
his Majesty's Interests, by Chains of Gold, and that he at last procured them
to meet at Mulhausen. He himself came thither, and represented to them, those
great miseries which the war had brought upon Germany, in such effectual
language, that they became more inclined to Peace, then formerly they had been.
And the year following the Peace was accordingly concluded, which the House of
Austria would have found means to prevent, had not France interposed in the
business.

Politic Observation.
IT is a piece of great Prudence in a Prince to procure a Peace for his Allies,
when the war is not favorable to them. It cannot be doubted but that his
endeavors will redound to his Honor and Glory, seeing it is no small
reputation to become an Arbitrator between Sovereigns, for God himself, who
overuleth the whole World has styled himself, The God of Peace. But besides
this consideration, those Princes who have gone by the worst in a war, are
mutually bound to assist him, in his occasions, he having preserved them from
destruction, withal the quality of Allie does oblige him to become a Mediator
for them, it being a means proper to preserve their Union, and an Act necessary
for their conservation. The Laws of Charity which command all Christians to
lend a helping hand unto one another in dangers and necessities, do more
especially enjoin it unto Princes seeing their downfals cannot but carry
greater consequences with them, and that after many frowns of war, their ruin
cannot be avoided. When once they are reduced to extremity, it is no longer
seasonable then to treat of a Peace; for victory pufs up their Enemy whose
insolency will hardly give way, to loose the advantages he has gotten; and if
he should be drawn to lay down his Arms, it must be upon hard and shameful
terms. It is easy to conceive, how dangerous it is, long to expose them unto
the uncertainties of war, seeing that Prince: who once looses either part of
his reputation or forces, does for the most part undergo duly crosses, and
seems to have been made the laughing stock of Fortune. It was not without great
reason, that Scipio said unto Antiochus, The Majesty of a King is not so easily
reduced from the height of their power, to a more indifferent degree, as it is
precipitated from an indifferent degree, unto the lowest ebb of Fortune.
Hereupon it was that Hannibal desired Peace of Scipio, the African before the
last battle which he fought, in which he was overcome; and that he Etolians
were blamed for not accepting of it, when offered unto them, by the Romans,
after they had been often worsted by them. I might hereunto add, that a King
who in such occasions procures a Peace, for this Allies, does not a little
serve his own Interests, for that a Kings Power consists as much in the force
of his Allies, as in that of his own subjects. There is so strict an Union
between the States of Allies, that no one of them can receive any considerable
loss, but the effects of it will soon appear in all the rest. The Power of
Allies is like the strength of the Frontiers to a Kingdom, and as an Enemy,
having once gotten the suburbs and out Quarters, has a notable advantage
against the Town, it self, so the Allies of a King can neither be weakened nor
ruined, but himself is in danger of being assaulted in his own Dominions, and
is rendered the less able to make resistance in regard his Allies are not in a
condition to relieve him. It was for this cause that Thucydides said, he who
dis-respecteth his dangers of his Allies, is careless of his own safety, and I
conceive, that a Prince who sees his Allies groaning under the hand of War, is
equally bound to assist them, by mediating a Peace for them, least his ruin
follow theirs as every man seeing his Neighbors house on fire, is obliged to
use his utmost endeavor to extinguish it, least his own house come into the
like danger.

The Marquis de Saint Chaumont sent to Vincent, the Duke of Mantoua in quality
of an Ambassodour Extraordinary.
AT the same time that the Sieur de Marcheville went into Germany, His Majesty
who thought himself equally concerned in the Interests of his Allies, as the
Affairs of his own State, sent the Marquis de Saint Chaumont Extraordinary
Ambassador to the Duke of Mantoua. The Duke had by letters express given his
Majesty notice of his Brother Ferdinand's death, and also begged his assistance
to second by his name and officers as Rome, the suit which he made there, for
dissolution of the marriage, which he had lately contracted with the Princess
de Bossolo, who though she had charms enough to persuade him to marry her, yet
was too old to bear Children. The King could have answered him by letters, but
it being necessary to look after Monsieur de Neuers his Interests, who only
hoped for his Majesty's assistance, he thought it more proper to send an
Extraordinary Ambassador thither. The Marquis de Saint Chaumont was chosen for
this employment, and commanded to signify to the Duke how sensibly displeased
his Majesty was at the late Dukes death, but of the Joy he had in this
accident, to find the succession devolved upon him, whom he esteemed a Prince
endued with all excellent Qualities, and from whom he might receive the same
respects, both as to his person and the Public good as he had heretofore from
his Predecessor. He had order to proffer unto him, his Friendships and Royal
assistance, of his Credit, Name, and Authority, assuring him that he should
find the effects of it, not only at Rome and in his Affairs depending there,
but also, in all other things, whenever occassion should be: next of all he
was to inform him, of the design which the Spaniards had, to marry him, after
dissolution of his late contract, to one of the Emperors Daughters, and then
dexterously to observe to him, that the States of Mantoua and Montferrat, being
very considerable in Italy, for their scituations and fertility, as also the
strong hold wherewith they are defended, were continually watched after by the
Duke of Savoy and Governor of Milan, that they might take some advantage over
them, and that he not being able to defend himself against them, but by the
Union and Correspondencie which he held with France, and the Princes of Italy,
was obliged so to carry himself, as neither of them might be jealous of him:
Moreover that his Enemies who well knew all these things, would pick out all
occasions whatever to make a Breach between him and his friends, by carrying
him to such Actions as might provoke them against him; but in case he should so
change, that instead of the Free and absolute Sovereignty in which God had now
settled him, he would find himself reduced, to a perfect dependence on the
Spaniards, who would expose him to the scorn of others, and cause him to loose
his reputation of friendship and fidelity: that all things considered he could
not do better, then to remain Neuter, to hold an equal correspondency with the
house of France, Austria, and the Princes of Italy, without doing any thing
which might incense either one or the other; but perceiving an entire affection
for France, as for him who desired his good, prosperity, and settlement, and
from whence he might be sure of receiving all assistance and protection without
any prejudice in the least. But above all, the Marquess was commanded to lay
the foundation of the Princess Maria's marriage Niece to Duke Vincent, with the
Duke de Rethelois, and to dispose the Duke to declare him successor to his
States after the death of Monsieur de Nevers his Father. However he himself was
inclined to marry her, could he but have procured the dispensation of his first
contract at Rome. He had instructions likewise to tell him, how much his so
doing would settle his affairs, and authority, against his neighbors designs,
who peradventure if his succession were not declared, would be the bolder to
attempt upon him, and not unlikely on his person too. These were the chief
points of the Marquess his Commission, upon his coming to Mantua; he was
resolved with all kind of honor, usually showed to an extraordinary
Ambassador of France. After he had entertained the Duke upon those particulars
contained in his Instructions, the Duke testified to him a great
acknowledgement of the honor which the King did him; telling him withal, that
he received it with the greater respect; in regard he was French both by
inclination and Obligation. He discovered to him the great desire he had for
the dissolution of his marriage, that he might afterward wed, not one of the
Emperors daughters as was supposed, but the Princess Maria his Niece, whom he
passionately loved, and from whom he had great hopes of having a Son who might
succeed after him. As to that which concerned the Prince de Rethelois, he ever
spoke of him with great respect, as a Prince whom he loved and esteemed, and
whom he looked on as his successor, in case he died without issue. The Marquess
de Saint Chaumont, thought it improper to propose to him, when he found him so
inclined, the marrying of the Princess Maria to the Duke de Rethelois, it
being an unseasonable motion to one who earnestly desired her for himself: But
talking in private with the Marquess de Strigio, chief Minister of Mantoua, he
discovered it to him, and engaged him to contribute his assistance to it, in
case a dissolution of his present contract could not be obtained, as the only
and principal means to preserve his Masters Life, giving him withal to observe
that this once done, the house of Austria, and Duke of Saxony must of necessity
cease their pretensions, which whilst the Duke was without a Successor were
too many, any longer to be permitted. He pressed him too the more earnestly, in
regard, the Marquess de Strigio told him, how that the Physicians had assured
that Duke Vincent could not long subsist, his body being sickly. The Marquess
de Strigio was sensible of the importance of that particular, and faithfully
promised to use his utmost diligence and power to effect (...). As to the
neutrality which the Duke was obliged by interest to observe between the two
Crowns, the Duke would oftentimes tell the Marquess that his heart was French,
that he was totally disposed to pay all respects and services to his Majesty
which could be expected from him; and that by the natural inclination he had
for France to be grateful in acknowledging the protection which his Majesty
had given his late Brother Ferdinand; and he added that his Majesty should
never have any cause to be offended with him. The Marquess having thus
dispatched the greatest part of his affair, took his leave of the Duke, to
return to his Majesty, and to give him an account of what he had done.

Politic Observation.
A King is no less obliged to he careful of his Subjects Rights among
strangers then of the particular affairs of his own Kingdom. He is to his
Subjects as the head is to the rest of the members, which ought to provide for
their conservation, Kings are bound to maintain their rights who are under
their protection either by fair means or foul. This made Theopompus, answer one
who demanded of him, how a King might reign in safety. That he ought to fear
nothing, but permit all reasonable things to his friends, and be careful of
his own Subjects, that they received no injury from any one. Diverse Princes
have been ruined by their toleration of injuries against those who have
depended on them. We have a remarkable example hereof, in that of Philip of
Macedon who was killed by Pausarias, for having been deaf in his behalf, in not
defending a wrong which had been done unto him. Nothing is indeed more glorious
to Kings, then the observation of this thing. It is an action resembling the
divinity, to protect the weak against the mighty, and to defend them from
oppression. Great Monarchs are not in any thing more considerable them little
Princes, but only in the Power of Arms which they have to defend and protect
the execution of Justice: Besides they have by so doing a great and notable
advantage to themselves, in abating the insolent and ambitious pretensions of
those who would usurp their Subjects rights, and become terrible to their
neighbors by their too great power. If this rule be worth consideration in
general, it is much more to be observed in respect of the rights which may
befall his Majesty's Subjects in Italy, where it is absolutely necessary to
prevent the increasing greatness of the house of Austria. They have already
become Masters of the greatest part of Germany, and there is not any more
certain way to balance their growing power. then by Alliances with the Princes
of Italy, by finding out some means to set foot in their Country, be it either
by gaining some of their States, as diverse of our late Kings have attempted, or
by establishing such French in them, as want not pretenses to them, and which
might be able to let in the Arms of France, when the Princes of Italy should
have occasion to make use of them, and there is no doubt, but the Princes of
Italy would be very glad to see the Arms of our Kings in their Country,
opposing those of the Spaniard whom they hate because they fear. To speak the
truth, it is an action which does beget, both glory and affection in those who
shall succeed; the honor which is to be achieved in so doing will shine
thorough all parts, and render them venerable amongst all strangers.

The Marriage of the Prince de Rethelois, with the Princess Maria, the
Inheritrix of Mantua.
UPon the news which his Majesty recived by the Marquess de St. Chaumont; that
there was little hopes of Duke Vincents long life, he concluded it to be very
necessary that he should use his utmost endeavors to make up the Match,
between the Prince de Rethelois, and the Princess Maria, as also to procure
that he might be declared the Successor to the States of Mantua and Montferrat,
after the decease of his Father the Duke de Nevers. The Cardinal by his
Councels, seconded his Majesty's judgment, and that with the more eagerness,
in regard the Duke of Savoy, and Governor of Milan, did both begin to declare
their pretenses. This made his Majesty resolve upon sending away the Marquess
de Saint Chaumont into Italy. The Instruction which he received was only of
two particulars, in which he was to bestir himself: The first was in his
Majesty's name to make an end of those differences between the Duke of Savoy
and Mantua; to which end, he was to pass by Turin, to dispose Duke Ferdinand
to the making of some other overtures for their accommodation, and then to
propose them to the Duke of Mantua, to see if any conclusion could be had;
withal, to let them both know, that a good correspondence were not amiss for
the good of their States; in regard their enemies by their divisions, would be
furnished with opportunities to make attempts upon them: The second was to
labor very earnestly with the Duke of Mantua, for the concluding of the Match
between his Niece, and the Prince de Rethelois, and that he might be declared
successor to his States, after the decease of his Father the Duke of Nevers. At
that present it was the easier to be effected, in regard the Pope had solemnly
protested he would never grant a dispensation of his first marriage. He was
also commanded to show unto him, that as this marriage was of great advantage
and benefit to the Duke of Nevers, and Rethelois whom he loved, by assuring
them of the succession, so it was not less necessary to defend and secure
himself from the attempts which the Spaniard, and Duke of Savoy might make upon
his life and State, for that they did already begin to discover their
intentions against him. He was farther Commanded, That if Duke Vincent should
chance to die, whilst he was near him, then to animate in his Majesty name the
Chief leading men of the States of Montua and Montferrat by all arguments of
reason and persuasion, to preserve the liberties of their Country, to keep the
faith obedience which they did owe unto Monsieur de Nevers, as their Lawful
Prince, and to declare him for successor to Duke Vincent, according to the
usual Forms of those Countries; and lastly to assure them, that his Majesty
would protect them against any Forces that should molest or trouble them, that
himself would invite the Pope and all other Princes of Italy to join with them
in defense of their liberties. These were the Chief Instructions in the Marquis
his Commission.

In order to them, he went to the Duke of Savoy to persuade him to some
agreement with Mounsieur de Mantua. He told him how the report went of his
being in league with the Spaniards, for the deviding of Montferrat, But the
Duke seemed to be angry at it, and wondered that after the having done such good
Offices to his Majesty be should imagine such a thing of them. Yet he did not
disown his apprehensions of the advantage which he might now take during Duke
Vincents sickness, to regain that which did belong to him in Montferrat, adding
withal, that it would be much more for his Majesty's Interest, if it were is
his hands rather then the Spaniards, and that at last in case he were joined
with the Spaniards, yet it was no more then his Majesty himself had done,
seeing they sent him a Fleet to Rochel; But the Marquis that he might lay the
foundation of an agreement, proposed to him, to renew the Treaty which had been
between the late Duke Ferdinand and himself, as to that which was in dispute
between them, in Montferrat: all the answer he could get was this, he demanded
fifteen thousand Crowns rent, for his pretentions there, and twenty thousand
for the Damages he had sustained for want of execution of his promises made of
marrying his little Daughter with the Cardinal his Son: By these his
unreasonable demands he evidenced that he only sought an occasion to justify
his breach with him; and the Marquis finding after diverse other conferences had
with him, that there was no good to be done, made no longer stay there, but
went to Mantua, he came thither so opportunely, as if Fortune had lead him by
the hand, for within five days after his arrival there, the Duke dyed. He
found that the Marquis de Strigio had disposed the Duke, with a great deal of
address to all that could be desired, That he had stirred him up, on the
designs which his Enemies might set on foot both against his life and State, to
declare by his Letters Patents, the Duke de Nevers his only and Lawful
successor, in all his States, and the Duke de Rethelois his Livetenant
General, ordering him to marry his Niece the Princess Marie before his
decease, and to cause the Governors of all strong places faithfully to keep
them for the Duke de Nevers. There wanted indeed a dispense for the marriage,
but the Duke sent in all have to demand it of his Holiness; When the Marquis de
Chaumont came thither. It was not as yet arrived, but hourly expected, and
though it was not brought but only a very few minutes before his death, yet the
Marquis of Strigio who knew how necessary it was for the State of affairs, told
the Prince de Rethelois and the Princess Maria, that they must forthwith marry,
or else be assured never to enjoy the States of Mantua. It was a business of so
great importance, that it would admit of no longer consultation, so that it was
concluded, and married they were about nine in the night, on Christmasse Eve;
the marriage was consummated, and not long after the news of Duke Vincents
death was brought unto them. This accident was of very great concern to the
Duke de Nevers. Who without it, might perchance never have enjoined the Dukedom
of Mantua. At that present he was in France, but hearing of it, he took post
and about the end of January came to Mantua, where finding all things according
to his own desire, he took proffession of the State, and the Marquis de
Chaumont returned back to France. He passed by Thurin, and used new endeavors
to persuade the Duke of Savoy to an accommodation, but it would not be: yet he
served the King in this occasion, by withdrawing diverse of the Nobility of
Dauphine, from the Duke of Savoy's Army, who had engaged themselves with him,
not knowing his design was upon Montferrat which the Duke hearing of, was much
offended, and told him, it would not be safe for him to stay any longer in
Turin.

Politic Observation.
THat Prudence, which obliges all Sovereigns to provide against such accidents
as may trouble the present State of their affairs, does equaly direct them to
make sure of such remedies as may prevent the future disturbance of their Peace
and quiety which cannot safely be effected, without the assurance of an Hair to
succeed. Augustus affords us a memorable example in this particular, who
governing an Empire not Hereditary, would however, join with himself some one
of his nearest kindred, in the conduct of affairs, to the end that ingratiating
himself with the Senators, Soldiers and people, he might by that means seem to
deserve the Soveraignity. For this reason it was, according as Tacitus has
well observed, that he finding himself destitute of Sons, and that Fortune had
taken from him, first Marcus Agrippa, and afterward Cajus and Lucius his
Nephews, advanced Tiberus, who though he had a Son then grown up, he caused to
adopt Germanicus, to the succession of the Empie, and this he did as the
Historian observes that the Crown might be assured upon diverse supports. By
this means he cut off the Senators hopes of reforming the State into a
Republique, and from his Enemies the means of aspiring to the Crowns.

Adrian in the like manner, seeing he had not any Sons, which exposed him to
the fury of some ambitious mind or other, who for the Empires sake might be
persuaded to attempt upon his Person, adopted Antoninus and also required that
Antoninus should in the like manner, he having no Sons neither nominate two
more successors, as Dion has observed in his life; and all this was, with
intent, that they who were to succeed in the Empire, might be always ready to
receive it, and to prevent his Enemies from attempting against his person in
hopes to obtain it for themselves.

To how many misfortunes have they, who have been defective in this Care,
exposed their Countries? Jane the second, Queen of Napels dying, without
nominating her successor, d' An^ou, whom she had once named, being deceased
before her, left her Kingdom cruelly torn in pieces by War, and him whom she
least of all desired, to inherit after her. It is very rarely seen, that a
Kingdom changes its Family, without great wars, and that Prince, whom God
has not blessed with Children will find many attempts made upon his person;
whence it follows, that he who would secure his Life and State from
misfortunes, ought betimes to appoint his successor, to keep him near to him,
with Honor, to instruct him in all affairs but not to admit him unto the
partaking of the Soveraignity, for that were to cure one evil by a greater,
seeing the ambition which usually attends young Princes, might perchance
engage him in some ill design, to be master of it, before his time.

Cabals of the Duke de Rohan in Languedoc, and the Succors wrought by means of
the Duke de Soubize his brother in England for the Rochelois.
THE Duke de Rohan was by his brother assured of the English assistance; and
long before their landing in Ree, he did nothing but contrive Cabals in
Languedoc, that he might place Consuls for his own turn in the Hugonot Towns,
and engage considerable persons in his private interests. Presently after their
landing, he openly declared himself, strengthened his party with Men, persuaded
some places to rise, and solicited others to do the like. He gave them great
hopes of high and mighty advantages by the inundation of strangers and he
provoked them the more by insinuating into them the ruin of their Religion and
diverse other imaginary evils. That he m^^ht the better strik these Panick fears
into them, he sent them a Manifest, filled with all those specious apparencies
mentioned in the beginning of this year; But may it not be said, that he
imitated those Pirates, who seeming to instruct the course which Ships ought to
keep in the Sea, set up Lanthorns upon the tops of Rocks to draw Pirates
thither and so to wrack them? For thus did he lay before the sight of them, who
were sufficiently inclined to ^action, diverse seemingly fair reasons of the
preservation of their party and Religion; by which means he drew them into that
revolt and engaged them in those misfortunes, which have since been the cause
of the ruining of their Towns and of levelling their Walls and fortifications
with the ground. Now that he might the more strictly bind the Hugonot towns to
his designs, he ^ound means to make an assembly in the Vi^e d'Vsez, where
diverse of their Deputies met together, and as he had no less eloquence then
courage, he persuaded them to whatever he had a mind to. They approved of those
succors, which he had negotiated in England, as just and necessary, they
commended his prudence and zeal; and gave him a thousand thanks for it: But
this was not all; They assured him not to enter into any Treaty of Peace with
his Majesty, without the King of Englands consent, and his own in particular.
Hereupon they deputed some of the most seditious of their faction to go to the
Towns of Languedoc and Guyenn^; withal they writ to those of Dauphine and
Vivarez to encourage them to unite with them, for the good of the cause: They
drew up a form of oath to be sworn by the Consuls, the Governors of Towns,
Lords and Gentlemen who would engage with them. An union very strange, which
divided the members from the head, and so separated subjects from their Prince.
After the Duke of Rohan had used all his devises, and seen the English Land at
Ree, he took up arms and appeared in the field. He summoned the Duke of Savoy
to send those Forces, which he had promised, but he could not obtain them,
because the Spaniards, who never wanted a good will to fall upon him, had at
that time an Army in Milan, as we shall here after declare, which made him
jealous: besides desiring to attend the English success, he saw them ruined in
their designs at Ree; All that he could draw from him, was a promise of fifty
thousand Crowns. Those Towns; which delivered up to him, were Nismes, Vsez, St.
Ambrose, Alets, Anduse, Le Vignan, St. Hippolite, St. J^an de Grandam^nque,
Samens, La Salle, and other smaler places; and joining the devises of his
prudence with those Forces, which they had drawn together, he took during his
year Realmont, Renel, Naves, Mazeres, Pamiers, Castres, Soyon, and other Towns
upon the Rhofere and in Vivarez, and more he had done, had not the Cardinal by
his care under the Kings authority prevented him. It cannot be imagined with
how much care and trouble, he kept those together, who were engaged in his
party; how low he was fain to stoop to work upon the meaner sort of people; how
many impertinencies he was forced to bear; how many inconsiderate discourses he
was necessitated to hear, and yet seem not to understand them, and to how much
constraint he was compelled to subject himself. He has since protested to
diverse of his friends, ingeniously confessing to them, that there is no care
like that of retayning a mutinous people in that order, which is necessary for
him to make them follow, who would raise any advantage to himself by their
revolt.

Politic Observation.
HE who makes himself head of a Rebellious party, engaged himself into an
Action full of hazard, and from which he cannot expect either good success or
honor. Whatever advantages or victories he get, yet he is still branded with
the Title of Rebellious. But though we wave this last consideration, and I am
of opinion, that every one will conclude with me, no man would imbarque
himself, into such dangers, did he forsee what cares vexations, and troubles,
he undertaketh. If there be any person of quality of his party, he must court
him with all kind of respects, for in Revolts, every one would be Master and
Command. They who are of an inferior condition do often carry themselves to
extremities, as thinking themselves the most necessary, in the vanities of
their Inconstancies. He may be assured, that as they are tied to him, only by
Interest, so they will forsake him, when they once perceive it best to adhear
unto their Kings mercy. It is indeed a difficulty to believe, how low he must
stoop, and what mean Acts he must do to keep them together. Rebellions withal,
being for the most part amongst the vulgar sort of people, it is impossible to
imagine how many dangers and hazards he will be forced to run with them. He who
in war depends on the Common people, builds upon sand. They are hardly eight
days together in the same opinion. Their fury is like that of Sea, they are
only guided by the Inconstancy of the winds. The least disaster is enough to
turn them quit about; and they are so fickle, that they presently slight him,
whose Fortune is but a little averse: They ascribe all their good success to
themselves, and their bad to their General. They are ever suspicious of those
who love them, and when ever the disorders which are inseparable from war,
chance to trample on them, they can as soon fall back, as they came on; The
least injury which they apprehend though really it be not any, is enough to
lead them to other resolutions. Neither will they in their Passion stick to
sacrifice him to their rage, whom not long before they had chosen to govern and
direct them. The History of Flanders has an example of this very kind, in the
person of James d' Arteville every one knows the power he had in Gant, and how
well the people there loved him, yet for all that, a little jealousy which
they apprehended of his fidelity, precipitated them to kill him, neither would
they hear his reasons to satisfy them, of the contrary. The Admiral de
Chastillon, one of the bravest men of his Age after he had experimented the
misfortunes of this quality, was glad and thought himself happy, in that he
could withdraw himself; he had much rather expose himself to all the hazards of
Fortune, then put himself upon the mercy of an unbridled people, who like a
Proteus, change every moment, and who speak bigg words, when they are far
enough out of danger; but sneak in their Horns, when they find their Master
once coming near them, with his Sword in his hand.

The Deputation of the Sieur Galland, Privy Counselor to his Majesty toward
these Hugonot Towns which the Duke of Rohan had attempted to revolt, that he
might confirm them in their obedience.
THe Cardinal, whose Vigilance was such, that nothing passed in the Kingdom,
which he was not acquainted with, having discovered these designs of Monsieur
de Rohan, represented to his Majesty how necessary it would be to take some
good Course to prevent his future attempts, either by opposing his progress
with Forces, or by confirming those Towns in their obedience, which he had
solicited to revolt. As to the first, It was needful to form the body of an
Army, which should be in those parts; and for the second, it was requisity to
dispatch thither some person of ability and credit with those of the Hogonot
party. The King soon apprehended how expedient this advise was, so he made
choice of the Sieur Galland, one of his Counselors of State who was qualified
for that employment, besides he was one of their own Religion, which gave his
Majesty reason to hope, they would be directed by him. His Commission was
dispatched, with all necessary Instructions, for his Journey into Languedoc,
Foix, Lauvaguez, Vivarets and de levennes, that he might hinder the Duke of
Rohans contrivances of raising the Hugonot Towns up in Arms; This was a great
Honor, unto this old Servant of the King, having received his Commission, he
presently set forward, and went directly unto Montauban, the Chief Town of
their party, next unto Rochel and by which most of the other Towns would be
guided. Upon his first arrival, he called the Inhabitants together; he
acquainted them with his Majesty pleasure; gave them his letter of Credence,
writ by his Majesty unto them, and began to confirm them in their obedience. He
laid before them in a speech, (wherein he ommitted not the least particle,
that might move, and persuade them to what he desired) the duty of subjects
toward their Prince; The miseries and Calamities, which they had suffered,
whilst they fell off from their obedience; he represented to them the disasters
which would infalliby fall upon them, if they should suffer themselves to be
led away, by some who endeavored it; he informed them, of the small reason or
hopes they had to believe the Duke of Rohan's promises, or the assistance of
the English Fleet, which could not hinder the relieving of the I Will of Ree; his
words thus animated, what with his address, and the confidence which they bad
in him, so wrought on them, that they subscribed a Declaration which they
delivered to him, in which they protested to live and dye, in that Loyalty,
which they owed unto his Majesty. This was as much as could be wished; for all
the other Towns great and small, uningaged in the Rebellion, did the like, and
his Prudence was so succesful, that the Towns of Briateste, Castres, Pamiers,
Puyl^urens, Mazares, Saint Amand, Cabarede, Maz^res, Masdazil, ^alat and many
others made the like Declarations under their hands and seals. But the
misfortune was, that having left diverse mutinous and factious Spirit, of
^onsieur de Rohans Party in Castres, Pamiers and some others of those Towns,
before named, they did not remain firm to the Resolutions he had insinuated to
them, by which means the Duke of Rohan, soon after became Master of them.

Politic Observation.
IN Public exhortations, Prudence is many times as effectual, as Force. But
for the safty of Towns, the Inhabitants ought to be prevented, their Arms taken
away, and the most Factious amongst them, turned out from them. To prevent
them, is of great consequence they being like the Camileon, which takes any
color, that is laid before it. Sometimes a very little matter will settle
them, if applied in time, and before Faction has got any great power in their
minds. One man well prepared and esteemed by them may easily stop their violent
proceedings by laying the miseries which follow war before them; by acquainting
them with their own weaknesses, and by assuring them of enjoying their goods in
Liberty and Peace. A mutinous people may at first be wrought upon by their own
Interests, the Rule by which they Judge of all things. For they naturally think
well of nothing but what pleases them, and reject that for evil which puts
them to any pains or trouble. To believe their promises and not disarm them
were a madness; seeing they never hold long in the same humor; the least show
of liberty charmeth them: They are always Enemies of the present State of
Affairs: Lovers of Novelties; moved with any winds nay those of their own
raising: They do more affectionately embrance those things which are
prohibited, then those which are permitted them: Great friends they are to
innovations: Infidellity is a Quality which they eat and drink, not to be
separated from them: insomuch that to leave them armed, when a revolt is
mistrusted were to permit a Sword in a mad man's hand. The apprehending and
securing of seditious persons, is the next thing considerable, which ought
especially to be done. A discreet Phisician, does make it his first work to
draw out all the ill humors from his Patients body, which serve to nourish his
Fever: and the first thing which a Minister is bound to observe, in a place
where Rebellion is like to break out, is to withdraw all such discontented,
mutinous and Factious persons as are any way likely to carry the people to
revolt.

That rigor which is used to such persons ought to be esteemed as a Commendable
Pity. If they should complain of their condition, it is much better, to suffer
the Insolences of their words in a place, where they cannot do any hurt, then
to run the hazard of their mutinous Actions in a City which they may probably
cause to revolt.

The King unable to stop the Duke of Rohan's proceedings by fair means, makes
use of force.
THe way which his Majesty used to hinder the proceedings of Monsieur de Rohan,
was very advantageous, but it did not totally to the business. The King
finding it, commanded an Army to be raised, and committed the Conduct of it to
the Prince of Conde, sending him a Commission of Lieutenant General of his
Forces, in Languedoc, Dauphine, Guienne, and Lyonnois. He had upon the first
rumor of those revolts there, expedited certain Regiments thither; but finding
there would be need of a greater power, to stifle the Rebellion in its Cradle;
he dispatched this Commission to the Prince of Conde, with order to raise new
Levies, and to take the Field with the first. He presently hereupon came to
Lion, but upon better consideration, it was found proper to divide the Army
into two parts, because there were several places to be looked after, and far
distant from one another, so the Prince of Conde had the better half, the
the other being committed to the Duke de Montmorency's care, then Governor of
Languedoc. Monsieur the Prince, marched out of Lion about the beginning of
December, ^^^nded by the Marquess de Bourg and de Ragny, Marshals of the Camp,
the M^^quesse de Nangis, Comte de Tournon, Comte de Charlus, Vicomte de l'
Estrange, Montreal, and diverse other Gentlemen Volunteers. He had two Troops of
Carabins, and near about two thousand foot, with these he lay before Soyon, a
strong place upon the Rhone, which did very much trouble the passage of the
River; he assaulted it, and in two days forced them to deliver.

There was likewise another little Town not far off Saint Aubin, which did much
infest those parts, the Prince surrounded it, took it by storm, and put all the
Soldiers in it to the Sword. From thence he went to Aiguemortes to confer with
the Duke de Montmorancy who was then there; and having sent for ten Companies
of the Regiment of Normandy, he commanded them to march against some certain
places, which the Duke of Rohan by reason of their importance had resolved to
defend; but the very fear which the Inhabitants and Soldiers, apprehended on
sight of the Army, made them open their gates so they entered without
resistance. At the same time he commanded the Marquess de Fossez Governor of
Montpellier, to go and besiege Corconne, and the Sieur de Ornano to secure
Aubenas, both of them behaved themselves with courage in it, and performed his
commands, the former taking Corconne a place strong of situation, being the
Key to Seveunes, and the second making himself Master of Aubenas, by persuading
the Nobility of those parts to fall into it. In the mean while, the Duke de
Rohan, was in the Comte de Foix, whether the Duke de Montmorency pursued him,
as well to fight him, as to oppose his designs. They followed him some days,
without doing any thing worth notice: But the Duke de Montmorency who had too
much courage, came up so near him near Castle Naudau, that he could not avoid
the fight. Orders were accordingly, and the Duke de Rohan being charged on the
left, by the Sieur de Arpageon, seconded by the Company of the Baron de
Lignieres, and Monsieurs de Vantadours Guards, and on the right by the Comte de
Bioule, and the Sieur de Enox who led on Monsieur de Montmorency's Company, and
the Sieur de la Croix who commanded his Guards, seconded by the Comte de
Bioules Regiment, he was at last constrained to give ground, yet he maintained
the fight above two hours, and saw about one hundred and six score Soldiers,
fifteen men of his guard, and seven or eight Captains of his Troops killed, and
diverse others wounded: And in conclusion, he found to the misfortune of his
Rebellion this other added, of being beaten in the Field, and saw at the years
end, that he had very little, or not at all, advanced his design.

Politic Observation.
TRue Religion gives a very great advantage to them, who fight for the defense
of it. He has Justice for his second, which is the Bulwark of strong place,
the Rampard of Towns, the upholder of Crowns, the Pillar of Authority and the
Chain of obedience; an Engine it is, much stronger then any of Archimedes
seeing it brings down God himself upon Earth to assist it. The Divine
Providence, ordained that the first Assizes of Justice, should be kept under
Palms, to teach them, who make any enterprises, as Philo observes, That
Justice is the most assured pledge of victory. What can that Prince fear then,
who fights to uphold it, seeing God fights for him? No power can resist
that of God, who has always, overthrown the designs of them, that rise up
against him unless when he has designed a people to be the Instruments of his
Justice for punishing the wicked.

In the old Testament he causes himself to be called the God of Battails, and
the Lord of Hosts, to teach the people, that he is Master of them; and that he
it is who turns the victory where he pleases. What did ever the greatest
Soldiers bring to pass, who have risen up against him? They have only felt
his power, and seen their own weakness: And every one may observe in History
that their Counsels have not only been vain and ridiculous, but have likewise
precipitated them into great ruins: They are like Icarus, who designing to
counterfeit wings, by joining certain Feathers together with wax, melted them at
the Sun Beams; just thus their rising up and soaring a lost, only serves to
make their ^^ls the greater, and their ruins the more certain.

And who knows not that the cause of true Religion makes Soldiers
courageous? Hence it happens that valor being the groundwork of victory, is
in this particular infallible. Machiavel in his discourses upon T. Livy shows
us, That Religion is a wonderful Foundation and Instrument of great Actions*
That the Romans made use of it to govern their City, in the carrying on of
their designs an^ in pacifing all tumults and seditions which did at any time
happen in their Commonwealth. Now if the false Imagination of a false deity,
which this people did believe were the punishers of Crimes and Rewarders of
good Actions, by a quiet repose in the Elysian fields, could make such great
impressions, upon their courages, what may not the true Religion cause us to
hope for, which promises unto us the infinite rewards of Heaven, when the
belief of it is truly imprinted in the Soul? The Soldier who fights for
Religion, obeys his Prince, as the Image of the God head; he will never spare
this life, which passes away, in confidence of another which shall be eternal.
If the Champions who heretofore fought in the Olympique Games, were delighted
to see their skins flayed off, their blood run down, and their bones broken
before a Laurel Crown, the reward of their pains, what would they not have
done, into with dangers would they not have cheerfully run, had they but
apprehended with the Eyes of faith, the Savior of the World, at the end of the
course, the Gate of Heaven open, and a Crown which shall never fade, as a
reward of their Loyalty and Valor? We have at all times seen, that those
Emperors who have been most Pious, have had the greatest victories.
Constantine became great by his embracing of the Christian Religion: It served
Pepin for a Staircase to lead him up to the Throan. It bestowed the Empire on
Charlemaine; and the Turkish Nation which seems to have been born for Arms
fears nothing so much as Christians Ensigns.

Anno 1628.
The Rochelois send to the King of England to demand Succor.
THE Heathenish Antiquities relate, That Pandora, going to meet the Rebel
Epimetheus in behalf of the God's, carried him a Box filled with all sorts of
Evils, amongst which he had only hope left him. It is a Fiction, yet may it be
aptly applied to the Duchess of Rohan the Mother, who being come to Rochel,
to encourage the Rebellion, brought all sorts of misfortune with her, insomuch
that there was not any kind of misery, which the inhabitants did not undergo,
and without any other hopes but only of relief from the English, which they
retained to the very last. In order to which hope, they finding his Majesty's
resolved to force them to live in the rules of obedience, had sent their
Deputies to England, with full and ample Power, to treat with his Majesty of
Great Britain, To beseech him to take them into his protection, and that he
would assist them, with a second Army which might force the King of France, to
raise the siedge. Their Deputies were received, with great kindness; The King
of Buckingham being much exasperated against France, for the late repulse given
to the English at Ree. They had audience granted, and after examination of
their Proposals, The King made a Treaty with them, by which he obliged himself
to assist them with such a number of Soldiers as should be sufficient for
their defense; To send them all sorts of Provision; and to permit a Collection
to be made in his Countries for their present relief. The Deputies obliged
themself in the name of the Rochelois to give an happy success to the English
Army, promising they would rigg out the greatest number of Ships they could
possibly procure, that they would provide Pilats and places for Magazins for
all sorts of provision in the Town; that if occasion were their Port should be
a place of retreat for their Fleet; that they would not hearken to any
accommodation with the King their Lord and Master, but by and with consent of
the King of great Britain, and also that before France should attempt any
thing against England, they should declare themselves for the English, and
should divert to the utmost of the power, all designs tending to their
prejudice. The King of Great Britain was not absolute enough to conclude upon
great enterprises, his power somewhat depending on the Parliament, so he was
forced to call one to authorize this, and to consent to such levies of money as
would be needful for this business; The anger which every one there bore
against France, and the desire of revenging the affront which they had so
lately received, persuaded them to a general consent. They wanted only the
third Vote, upon which the Levy depended, where upon they refused to contribute
any money, coloring their denial by diverse complaints, which they made
against the Duke of Buckingham, and most part of the Chief Ministers in
England, which made a great noise in the Parliament, and so incensed the King,
that being constrained to give way to the insolence of their requests, he told
them that he would examine their demands and complaints, and give them answer
accordingly; However be gave order for the rigging out of a strong Fleet in
behalf of the Rochelois, and gave the command of it to the Earl of Denbigh the
Duke of Buckingham's brother in Law. This was all the Rochelois could hope for,
yet it blinded them to all respect and obedience, They shaked off the yoke of
Loyalty which they owed to the King; they carried themselves to the utmost
extremities that possibly could be imagined; they trod under foot the Kings
Authority, and chose him for their Protector, who was Declared Emeny of his
Crown.

Politic Observation.
ALthough a People never has any lawful reason to become, disloyal to their
Prince, or to cast themselves into the Arms of the Enemy of his Country; yet it
is a thing easily resolved on, when there are no other means to secure them
from the fears which they apprehend, and which have engaged them in their
revolts. In Philosophy it is held for a Maxim, That granting one absurdity, a
thousand others will follow by consequence; It is no less certain among
Politicians, that a people carried into one fault, which is the taking up Arms
against their Prince, will be exposed to great extremities, and every day
augment the number of their Crimes. Their Custom is to promise to themselves
great matters, in desperate affairs from strangers, and such means as are
without all appearance of reason, probable ways, or ordinary instruments: They
are great lovers of Novelties and with a little wind carried to extremities;
and new thoughts, if they find their former resolutions and designs not come to
the account they expected. They easily follow those, who put them in hopes of
liberty; If any seditious person in credit with them, do but tickle them in the
ear, with telling them that they do not enjoy their full and perfect liberties
under their lawful Prince, nothing is then more easily persuaded then to
revolt, nay to throw themselves, into the Arms of their very worst enemy,
never considering whether the remedy be not worse then the disease. Being once
revolted they never return to their duties, but by force of Arms, and the fear
they have of paying the punishments they have justly deserved, inviteth them
rather to run, and hazard, then that of confessing their error, and repenting.
An Ancient Author said very wisely when he likened them to day-labourers, who
are at every ones service, that will make use of them; ready they are to
subvert all things, not for the public good, but in order to their own
design, and under pretense of liberty. The greatest part of such Revolts are
commonly accompanied with some Intelligences and encouragements from strangers
who offer their assistance, not for any love to them, but themselves, that they
may make advantuge out of their divisions, discord is their Music.

The History of Italy furnishes us with a notable example of this particular
in that of the Pisan's, who having been persuaded by one of our Kings and Lewis
Forza, to withdraw themselves from the obedience of the Florentines, presently
banish their Officers, gained many rich Merchants and began to live as free
people; but finding themselves too weak to hold out, at that rate, they
emplored the aid of their neighbor Princes, which was not denied to them, by
reason of the jealousy which all those States are in, of one another. Ge^^oua,
sent them men and Munitions, Lucqua money, and Sienna which was in hopes of
great advantages from them, sent both one and the other. Neither is this the last
degree of a mutinous people, for if they cannot attain unto their desiers by a
Foreign protection, they will rather totally deliver up and sell themselves*
the return to their Princes power especially if they be but a little persuaded,
of being hardly dealt with, and that they shall be reduced to a slavish
subjection; such difficulty will they find to stoop under their former yoke,
after a taste of licentiousness and impunity.

The King of Spain sends Don Frederick de Toledo High Admiral with a Fleet to
his Majesty.
THe King finding what need he should have of Ships, had as has been related,
accepted of the proffer which was made to him at Villeroy, by Don Diego de
Maxia, in behalf of the King of Spain. But their design in that proposal, being
only to engage France, in an open war with England, that they might the better
carry on their designs in Germany and Italy they were careful, not to be at Ree
to assist his Majesty to expel them.

At last Don Frederick de Toledo High Admiral of Spain, after many delays came
about the end of December with his pretended Fleet to the Haven of Morbian in
Brettaign. The King commanded the Duke of Guyse to receive him with all
possible Honor; and indeed such it was, that Don Frederick could not enough
admire, at the manner of his entertainment. Shortly after he departed toward
the I Will of Ree, where at that time was no great need of him: But however he
proffered his service unto the King, who received him with great kindness; His
Majesty sending to visit him, but his vessels were found so unprovided of
victuals, men and necessaries, that those things together with his long delay
considered. It was easy to Judge, they had no great mind to fight for France,
and that the King his Master would be very sorry to contribute to the taking of
Rochel; a place which might be made use of to raise a war in the Kingdom, and
that with a little charge, if he had a mind to send any Forces to them. At last
he gave an assured sign of the truth of this suspicion, when not long after he
went to his Majesty, and took his leave of him, to return toward Spain,
telling him that he could not now be any more serviceable to him. The King
would have much wondered to see him so hasty to be gone, considering he came so
far, but that he knew they had more mind to engage France in a war with a third
party then adventure on it themselves. His Majesty on the other side knowing;
That strangers and Foreign Forces ought not be employed but in urgent
occasions, and at last cast, did so much the easilier consent to his departure,
and in regard too that the Cardinal had assured him, That great store of
vessels would very shortly come before Rochel; So he finding the wind fair,
hoysed sail about the end of January to return to Spain.

Politic Observation.
THere may such occasions in war fall out, that it may be absolutely necessary
to make use of Foreign Forces, and the very greatest Princes are subject
hereunto, because at some one time, or other, they may chance be so surprised,
that it may be impossible for their own proper Forces to repel the Enemy who
assaults them. But without doubt, he that can make a shift without them, does
wisely not to make any use of them at all, for relying on the Forces of
strangers, he does in some sort make himself dependant on that Prince who
assisteth him, and also, they cannot in reason be so loyal, faithful, and
courageous in any his affairs, as his own subjects. Forriners fight more for
gain, and their own particular Interest, then for any good will to him, unto
whom they are sent; insomuch that could they find any where else more
advantageous conditions, though it were in the very adverse party, they would
make no scruple of running in unto them. This has been formerly evidenced by
the Celtiberi, who having bin first suborned by the Romans left the
Carthagians, and not long after were regained by those of Carthage, and did as
soon forsake the Roman Army, and return to their first Masters. Do not the
Swisses often do the same thing? Their Profession is not to fight but for money.
It once fell out that Lew^s the Eleventh, for some reasons of State being
unable to pay them so precisely as he promised, they resolved to seize on his
Person and the Chief of his Court, and to keep them, until they had received
the last penny, and he fearing to fall into their hands was forced to fly for
his safety.

The Baylif of Dion, who had raised them, together with some others could not
escape their fury, they were taken by them, and could not get off until they
were satisfied to the utmost farthing of their due. Whereas on the other side,
a Princes own subjects are tied to him, by the fidelity which they owe to his
Crown, and though not punctually paid, yet do they continue Loyal and
courageous; and whilst they fight for their own Interest and glory, no doubt
but they will show themselves more resolute and daring then strangers, who have
not any of those concerns. All Princes who ever obtained any signal victories,
have been beholding to their own native forces for them. The Turkish Emperor,
uses no other. Alexander by this means in a little while made so great a
progress in Arms, as never any one did the like. I suppose that it is with
Armies, composed of a man's own subjects as with the natural clean strength of a
man's own body, which is much more to be esteemed, then that which is infused by
art into sick persons: That Prince who uses strangers, cannot more fitly be
compared to any thing then a man in a languishing condition, whose natural heat
is decayed, who to warm and comfort his stomach has recourse to spices, which
instead of preserving him scorch up his blood and destroy his life; for just so
do strangers, to him that depends on them, advantage him they cannot, but will
(it may be) ruin him, as before is manifested by diverse pregnant Reasons.

Marquis Spinola, his Son, and the Marquis de Leganez come to see the siedge of
Rochel.
THE same day that Don Frederich de Toledo set sail for his return, came the
Marquis Spinola from the low Countries, and having passed by Paris, where the
Queen received him with great Honor, arrived at the Camp before Rochel, with
his Son his Son-in-Law and the Marquis de Leganez, Ambassador Extraordinary
from Spain. The Marshal de Schomberg went a League out to receive them, by the
Kings desire, and after he was arrived, the King Commanded him to be visited
with great Honor. His Audience was granted very shortly thereupon, with all
the endearments that possible could be expressed. Amongst other things the King
told him, that he came into those parts against his Physicians advices, being
not yet quite recoverd of a troublesome sickness, but he was forced to it, to
drive out the English, from his Teretories, who indeed had not made any long
stay; That having perceived his subjects of Rochel, to have been the Bringers
in of the English, he resolved to punish them for it, and to take them by
siedg, in which he observed for a pattern, that which was made at Breda; and
then he invited them to see the Works, though at that time they were not quite
finished. The Marquis highly extolled all his Majesty's Actions, especially
that of beating the English from Ree. He told him, that his Presence made his
Nobility invincible, and withal, that indeed nothing was so glorious for a man
of quality, as to fight in his Princes sight; That for his part it grieved him
never to have had the King his Master, for a witness of his Actions and that he
should willingly dye, to obtain that Honor. After he had gone the round, he
went to see the Banck, which he much admired, and openly said, that if they
finished that work of shutting up the Channel, and keeping the Soldiers in
good order, it would be impossible for the town to escape taking. He well knew,
what place the Cardinal was in, near his Majesty and that the King had not
engaged himself in this design, but by his advice; he observed that the
admirable order kept in the siedg, was an effect of his Conduct; so he went to
visit him, with great Respects. The Cardinal received him with the like, they
continued a long while in discourse together, during which they interchangably
contracted a very great friendship with each other, which was the cause, that
afterward meeting in Piedmont, one in the behalf of France, and the other of
Spain they carried on the war with courtesy and courage: showing that
civilities and kindnesses might be used amongst Enemies, without prejudice, to
their Masters Interests.

Politic Observation.
THE entertaining of strangers, who pass by a Princes Court, with Honor, if
they are considerable either in their Births or Actions, does much advantage
the glory of a Prince. He who would be esteemed a generous Prince as well
abroad, as at home, is obliged to it; The Honor which he does to such Persons,
is a Ray of Glory, which by reverberation does reflect on himself, for they who
receive his kindness are bound to be the Trumpeters of his Praise. Though the
Romans slighted all strangers, esteeming them Barbarous, yet they had a Law,
whereby they were bound to receive them, with greater Honor and respect when
they came to the City of Rome. And that I may a little open the quality, of
their reception. I shall first observe that it ought to be with all kind of
civility and courtesy; For this virtue is a Charm, so powerful, and so
captivating the soul: That as Lewis the Eleventh said, it does sometimes of the
greatest Enemies raise up the perfectest friends; whence it happened that he
himself, took great care and delight to caresse such strangers, as at any time
passed through his Court; besides it passes for a mark of Courage and
Resolution, whereas, insolency is only an Index of lowness and meanness of
Spirit. This courtesy ought to be accompanied with magnificence, that it may
be the more considerable, for words and behavior, do lightly pass away, if
not followed by some other effects. This magnifience consists, in Treating
them with splendour, for that the good entertainment which is given them,
serves no less to testify the affection, then the great and noble mind of
him who makes it. Paulus Aemilius was very industrious in making all people
welcome, who came to visit him, and being one day asked the reason of it, he
answered, that there was as great prudence in the well disposal of a feast, as
in the Marshalling of an Army for the Battle, for the one is to become
terrible to ones Enemies and the other agreeable to his friends. Next, he is
bound to make them presents, according to their qualities. A little expense of
this nature gives Princes a great reputation amongst strangers; for they on
whom it is bestowed are careful of preserving it in their families, as a
testimony of the Honor which they have received by such a head, which they
keep as Proofs of his magnificence, and I should think it much better, to cut
off from any other expenses, then from this. Agesilaus said, That which
appeared most Illustrious and glorious in all Kings, was, the doing good to
diverse persons; the Ambassadors of Corinth refusing to receive Dionysius of
Siracusa's Presents he seemed to be much offended at it, and told them, that
this was one of the chief means which Kings had to make themselves glorious: In
fine, who so wants liberality, is never heartily served by his own nor honored
by strangers.

The Duke de Rohan despaireth of doing any good in Languedoc.
THE Duke of Rohan finding that his Majesty began to raise works about Rochel,
to take it, prosecuted his designs with the more vigor in Languedoc, that by
making a Revolt he might if possible oblige his Majesty to it quite designs.
But the Duke had several misfortunes which crossed him, and that in the
beginning of the year at Montpellier, was none of the least; He had Commanded
his Kinsman the Baron de Bretigni to come to this Town, under pretense of a
certain suit of Law in the Court of Aids there, but with design, to surprise
the Cittadell if possible it might be effected; Bretagny set his engines on
work, so gain the Baron de Millay, last Captain of the Regiment of Normandy,
and one of his old acquaintance unto his purpose: He pretended himself very
willing and ready to heaken to his propositions, and to serve him, in that
particular design; But in the mean while the Baron de Milay, gave notice of it,
to the Marquis de Fossez, who was very glad of this discovery, and advised him
not to loose the opportunity of getting advantages from his Majesty by this
piece of service. The Baron assured him by all protestations of his fidelity
and zeal; and in fine he got out all the designs of the Duke de Rohan, by which
he pretended to steer himself; and he behaved himself in this affair with so
much address, that the Duke Imagined, he had not a more faithful friend then
the Baron was. In this confidence the Duke advanced his Troops about the
beginning of the year, toward Montpellier, giving out he intended to besiedg
Corcown, and about two or three at night, came to execute his design: But the
Marquis de Fossez, who had punctual Intelligence of all his designs, made
preparation to receive him, according to his deserts. He ordered every thing in
the Citadel, that nothing could fall out amiss, and then he hid in Ambush
near the Gate by which they were to march in, the most choice Soldiers which
he had; he ordered one of his Soldiers, to cut the Cord of the Port-Cullis,
when they were once got in, that he might make sure of them, and cut them off.
In this interim the Duke of Rohan sent one of his Captains to the Baron of
Millay, to be informed of the State of the place, and to learn what order
should be observed for their coming in: The Baron, showed him all the City, and
every place adjoining, only excepting that where the Soldiers were hid; The
Captain fully informed and satisfied returns to the Duke, gives him an account,
of what he had seen and concluded. The Duke, hereupon advances his Troops, to
the Counterscarp, and Bretigny leading them on, the Baron de Mellay, forthwith
opened the Port. Bretigny enters with fifty persons of quality and the Baron d'
Aubes, following of him with the second train of fifty more, all which got in
at the same door. Now he who was commanded to cut the Cord of the Port-Cullis,
did it sooner then he should have done, which vexed the Marquis de Fossez to
the very heart, for had he let it alone but a little longer, the Duke had lost
at least four thousand men: But however to punish those who had been so hardy
as to enter, the Soldiers in Ambush, let fly at them, and cut them all off;
thirty nine of them were Officers, and of good quality; and the Marquis Spinola
being then at Rochel, when the news came, openly said, that this blow was of
greater concern to the Duke of Rohan, then if he had lost two thousand
Soldiers. Neither was this all, for the Marquis de Fessez made the great Guns
be shot off at random upon those Troops which had not come in, and the morning
following there was good store of blood to be seen in several places, which
made the Marquis conclude there were many more killed and wonded, but that the
Duke had caused them to be carried off with him.

Politic Observation.
NAture, which has given Arms to all Creatures to defend themselves, has
bestowed on man understanding, that by it, he is able to protect himself, from
any dangers which threaten him, which Arms are more to be esteemed then those
of Force. One of the greatest perfections of it, is, to deceive a public
Enemy, and to repel Force by Force, and Mines by Countermines. Amongst other
Inventions which it affords; That, of pretending as correspondence, with an
Enemy, is not one of the least considerable, as Zenophon says, It being
certain, that a pretended Intelligence with an Enemy, and well managed, does
often effect, greater things, then Force it self. I shall add too, That they
are much more glorious, and that the greatest reputation of a Chieftain is to
break an Enemies strength, by Plots and contrivances, and to destroy him by his
own designs. It is indeed commendable to repulse an Enemy from an assault, by
valor and courage, but much more, to ruin an Enemies intents and purposes, by
designs, in which the Soldiers lives are not endangered. In Sparta he was much
more esteemed, who gained a victory by policy, then he who carried it by Force
of Arms. It cannot be doubted, but that this is the safest way of dealing with
an Enemy, provided it be managed without breath of any oath or Promises, passed
between Comanders of both parties, for otherwise, Stratagems only pass for
infidelity, yet it is lawful to use all devices, and win them to a Credulity:
and thus did every one commend the procedure of the French Army at the siedge
of Gisonne, near Saint Severin, against the Army of Ferdinand. The Arragonois
wearied out with the Incomodities of the siedge, had recourse to their devices,
and endeavored to practice with some French, to deliver up the place; The
French too generous, to be so cowardly, and too faithful, to be corrupted,
would not however loose the advantage, which they might make by this proposal
of theirs: they seemed to approve of it, and assigned the hour for execution.
In the mean while they inform the Governor of it, who laid some certain
Soldiers in ambush near the Gate, by which they were to enter, by which means
he slew about a hundred on the place, took diverse Prisoners, and by this loss
brought Ferdinands Army into a great disorder and trouble.

The King goes from Rochel to Paris, to dissipate those Factions which began to
rise thereabouts, by the Hugonots in Pircardie, Champagnie and Brie.
THE Cardinal who dived into the Counsels and designs of Foreign Princes,
acquainted his Majesty with those promises the English had made to assist the
Rochelois, and that his presence would be very needful in the Camp, both to
encourage his Soldiers, as also to hasten on the works where every one in his
sight would labor in emulation of one another. But on the other side his
Majesty was informed that his being so far from Paris had given opportunity to
the Hugonots, of the Provinces near adjoining to make assemblies, and to
encourage the people to revolt. He was advised of several meetings which they
made in Picardie, Champagne and Brie, under diverse pretenses, as sometimes of
Civility, of a wedding, or some quarrel, in all which meetings, there were
means used to persuade the people to rise and take up Arms. He was also well
acquainted that they designed to seize upon some strong place, or other, so
that his Majesty was obliged to return to Paris, that by his presence and
authority, he might dissipate these growing mischiefs. In the mean while, that
no time might be lost, and that the Rebels might have no advantage, order was
sent to the Queen Mother, to secure the Counts de la Suse, and de Roussy in the
Bastile. The former she arrested by an Exempt in her Antichamber, and the
second at Roussy by the Duke d' Elboeuf. The King having resolved upon his
Journey, thought it necessary, to commit the care of the siedge, of finishing
the works and the Bank, and of keeping the Soldiers in obedience and from
disbanding, which they formerly used to do upon his Majesty's removal, unto
some Person, whose diligence and credit might be capable of giving success to
it. Besides it was necessary, that this person should be exceeding Loyal, for
the preventing that misfortune which befell Charles the ninth, when he lay
before the same town, where he was put unto infinite trouble and charge, and
all to no purpose, because they whom he trusted with the Chief commands and
orders were not faithful and true to him. It being very difficult to find all
these three qualities in any one Person, the King cast his eyes on the
Cardinal, as the only man, in whom he could totally confide for carrying on of
the siedge, and all other things, in order thereunto. His Majesty discoursed
with him to that purpose; now the Cardinal although he was not ignorant, that
the absence of the Court, is commonly a great disadvantage, to such as are in
favor, by reason of the opportunity which they who are envious of their
condition, have to work them a mischief, yet he readily accepted of that
employment, and protested to his Majesty, that he would not spare any pains or
diligence to bring it to a happy issue, though it cost his blood and life,
which he should think well sacrificed in his Majesty service; so the King gave
him a full power to dispose of all things during his absence, and gave him the
command over the Duke of Angoulesme, the Marshals de Bassompierre and
Schomberg, the Marshals of the Camp, the Master of the Artillery and all other
Inferior Officers whatever: But I cannot omit with what reluctance his Majesty
went from him to Paris, For it is very remarkable, that his Majesty having
received the Adieux of all his Officers, rid up apart to a certain person of
quality, who was then to receive his Commands for Italy, and keeping close with
him said not a word for a good while together, so troubled he was at his
departure, until at last my heart quoth he, is so sad and heavy, to leave
Monsieur the Cardinal, for fear least some mishap befall him, that I am hardly
able to speak for grief; and therefore tell him from me, that if he would have
me think he loves me, that he must be careful of himself, and that he
adventure not hereafter into any of those dangers, which he usually does: That
he consider in what state my affairs would be, if I should loose him: I am not
ignorant, quoth he, how that there are many people who endeavor to obstruct
and hinder his bringing of his business to effect, but tell him, I do so much
esteem his service that I shall never forget it. These words were very
obliging, and assured testimonies of the great affection, which his Majesty had
for him. The glory too which this Grand Minister did every day obtain, by his
happy services in his Majesty behalf, was a tie very powerful to continue those
affections of his King and Master.

Politic Observation.
THE love of a Prince is a great Honor to a Statesman, and that not only in
respect of the particular Benefit which flows from it, but also in regard of
the Public good which he does watch over: Where he is not beloved, he wants
authority, without which he cannot do any thing worth consideration: For the
obtaining of this love then he ought to use his utmost art and diligence, and
he is bound to prefer it, before his own or any other Interests whatever.

Alcomiaas the Grecian, Servant to King Philip, being told that the Athenians
and Thebans, wished his death with a great eagerness, replied, he was sorry
for it, yet that he regarded it but little, so he could preserve his Masters
affection. This ought to be the Rule of a Chief Ministers conduct, when he
finds himself in his Masters good esteem; For to hope, that he may please his
Sovereign and the Lords of his Court too, is a vanity, and can never be brought
to pass. Now to the Intent he may enjoy his Masters love in an eminent degree,
I should advise him not to rely too much on Fortune, but to follow Plato's
advise, who in his Book de Republica says. That to be a King and to Rule, to
serve and be beloved, to fight and overcome, are three such things as a man
need not trouble himself to look after, they being the Gifts of Fortune and
only subjected to her power, who grants them to whom the pleases. I am not
of his opinion, but do suppose that a Minister is bound, having once obtained
any great credit in his Masters soul to uphold it by all the cares and
diligences, which may render him beloved. Philosophy teaches very well, That
to obtain ones desire, there ought to be causes applied to the subject, by
which a man designs to work: whence it follows that those qualities which
make a man perfect and accomplished, are the true causes of love, so that he is
obliged to let his Master see he is endued with those and the like
recommendations and virtues; amongst which, I place that of a faithful servant
in the Front; For as an ancient has observed, services have a particular
attractive power in them, which insinuate affection, and charm the mind: Those
subjects which are most useful, are most beloved: and as nothing is beloved but
for Interest; so those persons who are most conducing to the good of the State,
and the preservation of their Masters Authority are ever best affected. And to
speak the truth, I believe that necessity makes them more considerable then
any other quality whatever; For as the Bough of a Tree, is in considerable in
respect of the whole Body, yet it is of great use to him, who without it, were
in hazard of being drowned: Just so is it with him, he is beloved, embraced and
esteemed above all things, when there is a need or want of him. But a Minister,
what necessity so ever a Prince has of him ought not, if he would be dear to
his Master, become importunate or craving, either by being always in his
sight, on by begging any favor or boon of him. Too great a Familiarity will
bring his qualities into contempt, how eminent so ever they be, and the
consideration of his services would be much diminished by his importunities.
L^cullus one day asking S^neca his intimate friend, what course he should take,
to render himself acceptable unto the Emperor Nero, in the Government of
Sicily, was thus answered by him: That he is most in Princes favor who does
him most services. The surest Rules which in this case is to be observed, is
this, To see him but seldom to speak but little to him, unless when occasions
of State require it and then too, with great respect and submission, and in
such terms as may never clash with his Masters thoughts and mind. If there be
any ill news to be discoursed let others, first acquaint him with them. The
Souls of great men hate ill tidings, as of Broils and Insurrections, things
which diminish the respects which are due to their Authority. He will not a
little Fix and settle himself in his Masters favor, by testifying a good
courage in his occasions, and affairs. The Reason of this is, Princes do
naturally love those who are men of resolution, they look on such as the
supporters of their State, Authority, and lives, and they who are themselves
the greatest cowards, do yet love such as are courageous, stout and hardy.
Phalaris the Tyrant has given us an example of this particular, when he writ
to a certain emulator of his; I confess thou art a good man, and thou can
not deny but all in thy house are bad, whereas if thou do observe any vice
in my person, yet thou will find me still attended by wise learned and
courageous followers and attendants. These are the Chief Buttresses, which
support a Ministers favor: to these I will only add, That seeing there are not
any qualities how eminent soever, which the envy of some or other, will not
attempt to disguise unto his Prince, he therefore ought with great care to
remove such persons from him, and that with the more Authority, in regard
Justice allows of the punishing such who requite services done for the Common
good with Ingratitude.

Cardinal Richelieu Commands the Army, in his Majesty absence.
THE Prudence of a King is no less demonstrable, in his choice of Officers,
than in his Commands: and in particular, the King acquired no less Glory in
commiting the care of the siedge of Rochel, unto the Cardinal, then if he had
been there in person. The whole management of affairs did evidence, how
judicious a choice his Majesty had made. For Monsieur the Cardinal every day
animated the Soldiers by his presence; paid them weekly; gave them cloths to
preserve them from the cold; every day oversaw all his Officers and Commanders,
to give them necessary instructions, and to redouble their courages by his
words and Actions; by these means he so hastened on the works both by Sea and
Land, that his Majesty at his return, found the first finished, and the second
in such forwardness, that it deserved to be esteemed the eighth wonder of the
World. The Soldiers who are naturally addicted to mutinies, and plunderings,
lived in such decorum, that they had lost their very inclinations, to one or
the other; the Country men brought their provisions into the Camp, without fear,
and received ready money for them. The Merchants kept open their shops, as if it
had been in a well governed City; drunkenness and swearing, were criminal
faults: And the Religious Persons, whom his Majesty had sent thither of all
sorts, and orders, were respected, and held in such esteem, as if they had been
in a Church. The most experienced in Military affairs, could not sufficiently
admire the Cardinals conduct, in so much that they who knew him not, would have
imagined he had been bred all days of his life in the wars. Some certain
Persons there were, who flattered the Ambition of those Grandees then under his
Command, by telling them, it was unfit for them to obey a man of his
Profession; seeing their Offices gave them power to Command in his Majesty's
absence; But the wonders of his conduct and courage were such, that they were
forced to confess, nothing could out do him; and that considering how many
hapinesses he did atchieve unto France, by one and the other, it were
unreasonable not to obey his Majesty's choice of him, every one in particular
acknowledging, that no one but himself, could under go those daily laborious
knotty difficulties, which he so easily did.

Politic Observation.
MIlitary discipline ought the more carefully to be observed, in order to good
success, because without it, nothing follows, but confusion. Vegetius, a man
well versed in such affairs, says; The Romans had never been so potent, but by
their continual order and exercise, in Arms. The strength of a Fort, consists
more in the Form, then the matter: the Power of an Army is undoubtedly as great
by the good order amongst them, as by their numbers. Discipline is one of the
Chief sinews of war, and as a Body soon falls to the ground, if those nervers
which are destinated for its Motion, be cut in sender, so is it with an Army,
they soon moulder away to nothing, if not kept together, in good discipline and
order, and on the other side, where they are so disciplined they bring wonders
to pass, with little care or trouble. Alexander being asked, by what means he
became Master of the Universe, said, by the discipline and good order, which
his Soldiers observed, by the good Counsel which they had, and the eloquence
he used in animating them, and withal he added, that he knew not any means more
powerful to execute the greatest exployts in warfare. Domitius Corbulo, with
ten thousand Roman foot, and some few of his Allayes, sustained all the
attempts, of a multitude of Parthians, and this he did only by the good order
and discipline he caused them to observe. The Chief points of this order were
according to Tacitus, first to prevent any of their disbanding; a thing of so
great importance, that without it, the greatest Armies melt in a little whiles
to nothing, and this ought to be effected, either by furnishing the Soldiers
with all things necessary, or by severly punishing such as offer without leave
to forsake their colors. The second was that, no one durst go out to fight
without Command given for it: a thing of no less importance then the first:
For they who fight contrary to, or against their Commanders order, are easily
overcome both because they are not as well informed, as because they ever fight
in disorder.

The Germans, which went to relieve Ferdinand King of Napels, may serve for an
example of this kind, for presently upon their arrival, being provoked by an
extreme desire, to make themselves famous by some exploit or other, they
adventured to sally out of Troy, contrary to the order of Fabritius Colonna
Governor of the Town, that they might join themselves with King Ferdinand,
and fight those Enemies who opposed their passage; but Monsieur de Montpensier
perceiving it, fell upon them in a place where they could neither fight, nor
save themselves by flight, by which means not a man escaped. The third was,
that all guards, day laborers, and sentinels, should stand to their Arms, day
and night he having put two Soldiers to death, for having found them at work
in the Trenches the one without his Arms, and the other only with his dagger: The
reason hereof is, because by this means, an Army cannot be surprised by an
Enemy, and that in case he should attempt any thing on the Camp, he would
always find them ready to resist him. Avidius Cassius esteemed all these three
points of so great concernment in Arms, that he thought such as did not exactly
observe them, deserved to be cruelly punished, he usually cut off their legs
and Arms, who left the Army without leave, and he forbore putting them to
death, because quoth he it is a greater example of terror, for a man to living
in misery and shame, then to dye. It one day hapened that his Soldiers
discovered the Sarmatians kept no very strict watch, so they surprised them,
fell in upon them, and killed three thousand of them, but for their punishment
he crucified all the Captains, alleging, that the Sarmatians might have had
some ambush for them, unknown to them, which if it had so been, they might by
their rashness, have discredited the Roman Honor and Glory: Neither was he
less sever, in punishing those, who had stolen any thing, from their
quarters. The Emperor Aurelian, was so strict in this particular, that he writ
to a Tribune, that as he tendered his life, he should suppress his Soldiers
from stealing, but told him, they must look to enrich themselves, by the
pillaging of their Enemies, not by the tears of his and their friends. I shall
only add, that the Soldiers ought to be trained up to the use and exercise of
their Arms, which both keeps them from Idleness, and worse things, and makes
them perfect in their Trade; and if they have any other leisure time over and
above, it were not amiss to find them out some diversions or entertainment, it
being otherwise hard to keep them from disbanding. Marcus Aemilius, finding his
Soldiers lazy and in want of employment made them pave the way between
Plaisance and Riminy: and Julius Veter, made his work in a Channel, to join the
Sarna with M^lessai.

The Cardinal de Richelieu attempteth to retard Rochel.
DUring his Majesty absence, the Cardinal, disirous to save him the trouble of
returning back to the siedge, and knowing how needful it was to prevent the
English arrival, besides his great courage being impatient of delay, attempted
all means to make some enterprise upon Rochel. He proposed the breaking open
one of the Gates, and then the falling in with so great force, as might carry
the place, and having discoursed it with the Marshal de Schomberg, he at last
concluded on it, and carried his design so close and private, that had not
Marillac, Marshal of the Camp, in the Duke of Angoulesmes quarter been faulty,
he had doubtless succeeded in it. The Cardinal had get together, whatever was
proper or necessary, for the whole business. He gave out orders for the
execution of it, the night being come, he assigned the Rendevouz, The Marshal
de Schomberg sent diverse Companies thither, with ladders and bridges to cast
over the Ditch: The Marquis de Roselia Grand Master of the Artillery, brought
with him Petards, Grenades, and other Artificial Fier-works; The Cardinal was
there in Person, within Musket shot of the Town, that he might show some marks
of his courage, upon the first opening of the Gate, and be ready to command in
the assault, not like the Cardinal Ximenes at the taking of Oran, who was all
the while at his Prayers in a Chapel, but like a General indeed, and such a
one as would encourage his Soldiers, by his own words and Actions, so that
every one did plainly perceive he was no less, Soldier and Captain, when
occassion should require it, then Cardinal in the Church and Counsel: He so
behaved himself, that History need not make any excuse for him, upon the score
of his profession, as for that same Minister of Spain. But Marillac, who had
the charge for the bringing on the most part of the Forces to Rendevouz, not
coming to second the courage of his General, rendered his Conduct and Valor,
useless. He was sought after most part of the night, indeed, but could not any
where be found, but about day break he appeared, with more excuses though, than
courage: he endeavored to excuse himself, by many frivolous pretenses, which
the Cardinal was contented to put up, in consideration of the Queen Mother,
whose creature he was; yet was it a great displeasure and vexation to him, when
he came to draw off, least the Rochellois should have discovered them and
beaten him off with loss.

Politic Observation.
FAint hartedness is an Enemy to all good success: they who let it Master their
courages, do shun all dangerous honorable attempts, and if shame be that which
receives them, yet however they will never do any thing considerable Fortune
is a lover of valor, favourer of the daring, and courageous, and commonly
crowns their attempts with success. Great fears, meet great hazards, and
great Resolutions, great successes: it being as Salust says, most certainly
true; Great Resolutions are like Rampards in a Battle, every thing gives way
to their attempts: and a less every little thing repulseth a party, possessed
with fear, and want of courage; To fear is to be half overcome: If any one
should ask the reason of it, there is only this to be given. They fancy
precipices, in plain ways; they are ever upon the business of consultation,
never that of execution; they love to recede from all obstacles, which seem to
oppose them, not to vanquish or break through them; and if perchance they are
forced to fight, they do it so coldly, that they give their enemies al kind of
advantages by it: Fear seems to have dispossessed them of Life and Soul; and
whereas the face of dangers should serve to stir them to generous Actions; It
rebates them to an immovableness, as if they were void of sense or motion. I
may well liken them to the Timorous Hindes, which retain their Fruit to the
very last for fear of the pains, which they endure in bringing forth, and would
not then produce their young ones, but for fear of a greater mischief; or else
I may liken them unto the Elephant which is ten years in breeding, or to the
Palm, which according to the Naturalists is a hundred years before it yield any
Dates, for eyer thus it is with them, the apprehensions of dangers makes them
fearful, and to seek cut any occasions to avoid fighting, and if it should
happen, that they cannot prevent it, they do it so lamely, that they only do
it for fear of death. But to speak a little too of the seditious Rascal, he
does nothing else, as the Chancellor Olivier observed, but imitate Apes, who
coming to a Tree, get up Limb by Limb to the top, and there sit them down
showing there Posteriores; for just so do they who are of this temper they are
willing to be raised up into high employments and commands, where being once
arrived, their Artifices must cover the defects of their courages; but be it
so, yet when occasion is, the resolutions and glorious actions of others, shall
become demonstrations of their cowardice, and expose them for laughing stocks
to the whole world.

The King hearing that the English were come before Rochel to relieve it
rosolveth to return thither.
THe King had not long been at Paris, but he understood the English Fleet was
ready to hoise Sail for Rochel, which made him resolve upon his return thither:
I cannot omit observing how this resolution of his, was a mark both of his
wisdom and courage, who as he is not to be cheated out of his Authority by
Cabals and Intreagues, so is he not to be retarded by any fear of danger, from
those occasions where he might acquire an accrument of glory. At this time it
was, that the Lord Keeper Marillac, and those of his Faction, began to lay the
foundation of the Cardinal intended ruin; but it only served to convince and
show unto his Majesty, that one of the greatest mischiefs whereunto a Sovereign
can be exposed, is to be incompased with such persons as are passionately bent
against his chief Minister. The malice which they did bear against his glory
finding him much advanced, before the siege of Rochel, of which he was the
first contriver, did much instigate them against him. They were angry that he
had finished his works in such good order, though the enemies of the Kingdom
could not sufficiently admire them: it grieved them to see the place in a
condition of being taken by his means; and to prevent it, they now resolved to
use their utmost endeavor to raise up the Hugonot party, that they might force
the King from the siege of it.

Now as it was easy to judge, that in case his Majesty should return to
Rochel, he would repulse the English, and being followed by many of the
Nobility and Lords, who are always observed to be the Authors of victory and
success, that he would likewise infallibly force the Town, so they used a
thousand devices to stay him at Paris. The Lord Keeper Marillac told him with
many expressions of an extraordinary passion for his service, that considering
how strong the English fleet was, in comparison of his Majesty's, the issue of
the battle ought to be doubted, how great resistance they would make, and a
thousand other inconveniences he alleged would follow, in case they should get
the better of the day. Others endeavored to dissuade him by a tacit
discommending the air of Rochel, which might much endanger his health,
especially during the moisture of the spring every one commending the Valor and
Conduct of Monsieur the Cardinal, the better to disguise their malice, and
petswading his Majesty totally to rely upon his care in the management of the
siege. But they found the Pannick fears; made no impression upon his Majesty's
resolutions, which made them design to affrighten his Majesty and the
Queen Mother, as one whose Sex is most capable of fears, persuading themselves,
that in case he could be prevented by some apprehension, she might then have
power enough over the King, to stay him at Paris. Diverse Ladies who had the
honor to be near her, were won at that time to work several contrivances to
that purpose, but all to no purpose. It is true their design was not only to
hinder the Cardinal from reaping the glory due unto him by the taking of
Rochel, but totally to ruin him, as hereafter shall be showed. Now was it not
a little conducing to that purpose, to stay the King at Paris, for his Majesty
not going to animate his Army by his presence, they would not only have made
less resistance to the English, but also many Lords and Gentlemen obliged to
attend his person, would not have been there, by which means, the English would
have had the advantage of releeving- Rochel, and the whole blame of that
misfortune would have been laid on the Cardinal, which they thought enough to
disgrace him, and save his Majesty's honor. These were the first foundations
which this Cabal projected against the glory and favor of this grand Minister.
But they were all too weak, to surprise the Kings mind, who no ways ignorant
how necessary his presence was in such an encounter, would not refuse it, to
the honor of his Crown and the repose of France, which did much depend upon
it. He called to mind the example of the late King his father, who deliberating
whether or no he should go to the relief of Calais, so powerfully assaulted by
the Spaniards that there were small hopes to hinder their taking of it, said,
the place would assuredly be taken, if he went not in person to releeve it, and
that it might so happen that his presence might save it; and therefore that it
was better to hazard this latter, then to leave the former without remedy,
preferring his honor and the public good, before the particular consideration
of his person. The same courage carried his Majesty to the most glorious and
honorable design, that his good fortune, with that of France could lead him to
undertake, which was, forthwith to depart. Upon the third of April he set
forward from Paris, and arrived at Rochel on Easter-munday. Upon his arrival
the Artillery both of the Forts and Ships saluted him, and his presence so
revived the Army, that every one redoubled his courage and affection to behave
themselves with resolution: There were but the Marilacs and those of their
faction, who were troubled to see him on the Theater of his glory; but the
Laurels which his Majesty gathered there, did serve to set forth unto what
misfortunes a Prince is reduced, when he is councelled by passionate advisers.

Politic Observation.
ONe of the most dangerous qualities, that he who is Counselor to a King can
have, is to suffer himself to be transported with envy, hatred, anger, or any
passion whatever. Wise Council is an affect of Prudent reason, and it can be no
longer Prudent when it is once darkened, with the Clouds of some irregular
motion. The Irascible power, being once master of Reason, does so obscure it,
that makes men see no objects in their true colors, and that Passion carries
it away where ever it pleases with the same impetuousnesse as a hot metled
horse draws a Chariot into Precipices, that it is impossible to stay him. It is
reported, that the Flowers of Egypt, being watered by the vapors of Nile,
which are for the most part gross and earthy, yield not any smell, and it is no
less certain, that a Statesman, with how great a Genius soever he be endued,
is no more capable to give good Counsel, after he has once given himself up to
envy or hatred: His Passion makes him quarrel with truth it self, and to
approve of those Councels which are most prejudicial to the State, that he may
satisfy his own self-will. The disgraces of others are his delights, Factions
are his joys, and the ruin of those whom he would destroy is his sweetest and
most pleasing spectacle; neither is he concerned at the rise or fall of any
one, so he be satisfied in his own particular. To this purpose the Poets
feigned, that Hercules being transported with anger knew not his wife or
children, insomuch that he tore them in pieces. But how many other true and
assured proofs does History afford us? That of England tells us, how the Duke of
York, Henry the Eighths Favorite, being dis-affectionate to Spain, always
gave his Master advices in prejudice of Charles the Fifth; and on the other
side, being full of good will toward France, persuaded him to such resolutions
as might continue the friendship which was between them. Antiochus his
Favorites being incensed against Hannibal, caused him to be banished from the
Counsel, though he were a person very necessary and useful to him. In fine, he
who is mastered by Passion, only thinks of satiating himself for the obtaining
thereof, he disguiseth the disloyalty of his Counsels, with so many fair
glosses and specious colors that he may draw his Prince, to that end he aims
at; by this means if his Prince have any confidence in him, he will easily
deceive him, and quickly dead him into those misfortunes which he will soon
perceive, but too late to get clear of them. All Sovereigns are not so
fortunate as the Pisans, who refused to make a War against the Florentines
being invited thereunto by the Archbishop of Milan, for that Francis
Gambacortij gave them to understand he only advised to it, out of hatred to
the Florentines, and not out of any advantage to their interests.

The Rochelois are summoned by a Herald to surrender to the King.
THe King being returned to the Army, caused the Rochelois to be summoned by a
Herald to surrender, but their minds and answers were full of insolency, so
that his Majesty bended all his thoughts to make preparations for the fighting
with the English Fleet at their first coming. Diverse Lords and Gentlemen of
the Nation came from all parts to the Army, for this occasion, and to partake
of the glory of his Majesty's Arms; every one of them were on fire to be
engaged with the English and the Rochelois, that they might obtain a second
victory against them. Now it being expedient that he who commands an Army,
should exactly know the condition and number of his forces, that he may the
better resolve upon that which is necessary to be done, the King thought fit to
make a muster and to take a strict view of the Army. He caused them to muster
in his own presence which was no small satisfaction to him, especially when he
observed how dutiful they were, and how well Disciplined, not straggling up and
down as formerly they were wont to do, all which was an effect of the Cardinals
admirable care, Conduct, and Prudence. The Order which he had caused to be
observed was this, every eight days there was a muster of all the Soldiers,
every Regiment having a Commissary appointed to it, to whom the Soldiers pay
was distributed, and not to their Captains, as formerly had been the custom:
By this means the Captains were deprived of the power of mustring any foisted
hirelings, and every week there was an exact number of the Army, that new
recruits might be sent for, if occasion did require. This alteration you may
imagine did much trouble diverse Captains; especially such as preferred their
own Interests before his Majesty's glory; but it cannot be expected how
advantageous it was to the Kings service, who thus reviewing his Army, found it
composed of nineteen Regiments of foot, and eighteen Troops of Horse; besides a
very great number of Volunteers; insomuch that they were five and twenty
thousand men complete. The King likewise took a view of all his Vessels, and
finding them to be in good order, and enough to secure the Channel from the
English, he began to be impatient to see them appear, that he might make them
pay for the rashness of their attempts, and signalize his own forces by a
second Victory.

Politic Observation.
ONE of the chief cares a General ought to have is, that he keep his Forces in
good order, that none of them run from their Coullors, or muster any hirelings.
It is a business of so great importance, that oftentimes Victory depends on
it: as at Pavie, where the ill success which befell Francis the first, is by
diverse Historians attributed to the defect of this particular, for only
looking over the Commissaries Roules, he thought there had bin full as many
Soldiers as were there listed upon which the fight was begun, but lost, and
the King taken prisoner. Now for the staying of Soldiers in an Army, one of
the best ways according to Alexander Severus, is this, pay them well, clothe
them well, shoe them well, arm them well feed them well, and so order the
business, that they may always have some money in their purses: and when they
be thus well used, such as run from their Colors must then be severy
punished; Corbulo beheaded all such, without mercy, and it was observed, that
this severity of his, was of great advantage to him, for by it, he kept all his
toopes near at a stay in point of Number: Neither is it less needful, to
prevent Captains and Commissaries scroles, who can by a dangerous miracle,
revive dead Soldiers, in their companies, and make more to appear then really
they have. This is an inconveniency, of which the loss of the Kings money, is
the least consequent evil; for if it happen that a Prince assure himself
according to the Roles, is thereupon become confident in attempting any
enterprises, he may perchance, when it comes to a trial, find himself much
weaker, then he expected, and by that means run into the same praemunire, that
Francis the first did at Pavie. The best preventive Course in such disorders is
that which Darius used, who notwithstanding the vastness of his Army: and the
Extent of his States was however so careful of his Forces, that he would often
review them in his own presence, pay the Soldiers with his own hands, and be
perpetually in company with them, not only that he might be particularly
acquainted with them, but that he might take care to provide necessaries for
them, encourage some, and reward others who had well deserved of him. If after
all their cares the Captains shall still presume to make false musters, both
they and the Commissaries who admit of them ought to be punished, with so much
the more rigor, in regard their faults are of so dangerous a consequence.

The English Fleet comes before Rochell.
THE perpetual instance which they of Rochel made to the King of Great
Britain, at last wrought on him, to send out his Fleet to Sea, upon their
first being ready for it, and about the eleventh of May they were discried two
leagues off the point of Coreille. The light Vessels which the Cardinal, (in
his Majesty's absence, being then at Surgeres) had sent out to discover, the
Coast brought intelligence that their Fleet consisted in four Pinnaces, seven
men of War, of about one hundred and fifty Tun a piece, twenty smaller of near
one hundred Tuns, twenty Barques of about thirty and forty, and diverse
Fireships. There was such order taken to repel them, in case they should
attempt to pass the Bank, that it would be almost an impossibility for them to
effect it: For besides there engines which were at the mouth of the Bark, there
was also the Kings Fleet, composed of good store Men of war, and diverse other
Vessels which lay in the Channels. The Chevalier de Velencay was in the foremost
Ship of the vant-guard, and commanded as Vice Admiral, who had order to grapple
with the first Ship of the Enemies, and to fight those who were in it; The
others were to follow his example, and every one had order to beat the Enemies
as near to the Shore, as possible they could, where they would find it a hard
task to get off in regard of the great shot from the Forts and Batteries
thereabouts. If the Enemy should break through all those obstacles, of the
greater Vessels and shot from the Batteries, yet they would find themselves
entangled amongst fourscore other Vessels, Galleys, Galliots, and Barques, from
whence it would be difficult to get off, and at the worst they would be stopped
by those vessels which had been sunk, or the first Pallisade of three and forty
ships which were next to them. The Cardinal who knew that his Majesty's courage
would lead him to every thing, presently gave him advice of the arrival of the
English, and his Majesty presently took horse and came the same night to the
Camp. The strength of his Army, the Batteries which were built on the shores,
and the good order which he observed both in his Land and Sea forces, banished
all causes of fear from him, neither were his resolutions less fortified by
the confidence which he had in God, for whose glory he did fight, more then for
the Interests of his own Kingdom, to whom he caused public Prayers to be made
for his blessing on this occasion. In short, as he was not ignorant that the
presence of an enemy, obliges him who commands to be the more vigilant, he
sent to discover the enemies Fleet at a nearer distance within Musket shot,
then lying in the road of the Chef de Bay; he likewise called a Council of War,
where he resolved upon the following order for his own Fleet: He commanded that
upon the first motion of the enemy no Vessel should weigh Anchor until they
were near at hand, and that then they should board them before they came near
the Bank. That no Vessel should releeve his Companion being engaged with the
enemy, that in case any Vessel were in pursuit of an enemy, and should fall
foul upon one of his own party, not yet provided, then the first vessel should
cast Anchor to the end to stay the enemy, that both might fall upon him; that
if any vessel were fired the Shallops should presently come to assist, and that
in case she were grappled with a Fire-ship, they should remove the Wedges from
the Cannons that they might shoot over: That in such case too, they should
knock out the ends of their Barrels of Power, and pour in some Buckets of
Water: That they should not make ready any greater number of vessels then the
enemy should bring in between the two points: That the ships should every day
send their Boats to watch before the Fleet, and that their chief care should be
to prevent the enemies Fireships, by surprising their Shallops in case they
had any, or by casting an harping Iron whereby to draw them off from the
vessels: That for the more readiness every vessel should have a grappling hook
in the stern, and that whenever the enemy should hoise sail, they should have
their long boats armed, and ready to advance with assistance against any fire,
where it should happen. This order was resolved on by the King, assisted with
his Generals and Sea Captains, and so delivered to the Commander of Valencay
Vice Admiral, who distributed it amongst the Officers. Lastly, his Majesty took
a review of all his Quarters and Batteries, to see if all were in condition to
fight and repel the enemy, whenever they should appear.

Politic Observation.
OF all the Arts none more becomes a Prince, than the Military, which not
only preserves his own State to him, but gives him means to increase it and
raise his power to a higher degree. It cannot be doubted but that it is one of
the steadiest Pillars of his Authority, seeing neither subjects or neighbors
make any difficulty to assault him, whom they find negligent in Military
Discipline. For this reason it was, that the wisest amongst the Romans, were
against the ruin of Carthage; foreseeing with much Prudence, that that City
being no longer able to oppose the Roman greatness, their Commanders would no
more regard the training up of their Soldiers in the exercise of War, and by
consequence, put the Emipire in danger of a total ruin. I shall hereto add,
that the Prince unskil'd in this Art lies at the mercy of his Captains when any
War befalls him, and his Power subjected to their Fidelity; an evil so much
the greater, as the Grandees of a Kingdom holding for a maxim, that the
weakness of their Prince is the most assured foundation of their Authority,
would make no scruple of letting themselves be overcome, when thereby they
might hope for some advantage. Besides it is not to be imagined to what
contempt he does expose himself, whilst he is in an Army which he knows not
how to govern, how to quarter, how to give order in a March or a Battle. I have
formerly said, that that Prince is very unfortunate, who is necessitated to
make use of strangers for his assistance. But what good success can he expect,
who is not able to guide his own Subjects in War? To deal ingeniously, if the
Army which he has got together be the Body destinied for his defense, he is
then their head; but if he chance to be unable to do the Offices which belong
to that part, his Army will fall to be like the body of a man, whose head by
the many wounds it has received, is no longer able to govern or direct the
inferior members. Amongst the many ways to make a Prince Master of this Art,
no doubt, but the reading of such Books as discourse concerning History and
War, may be very useful, for by it may he observe the achievements of great
Captains and what orders they have followed in matters of fight: But yet the
Practique part is that which in military affairs is much more advantageous.
Neither ought a Prince to expect a War that he may accustom himself to the
attaining of this habit; for this is the time, when he must teach his Soldiers
to execute that which himself had formerly learned. The exercising and training
up of his Soldiers in time of Peace will be of a double advantage to him, for
he not only learns the manner of conducting them, but accustomes and
habituates them to his own rules and conduct, and makes himself beloved by
them, so that when occasion shall serve they will not easily leave or forsake
him.

Charles of Anson was esteemed a fortunate and good Soldier, but yet his
credit was much diminished for his disusing his Soldiers to the exercise of
their Arms in time of Peace. An Army not trained up to feats of War in times of
Peace, cannot do any great actions in War when occasion requires, says Julius
Caesar; but on the contrary there are great hopes from them who are well
Disciplined. Upon this account it was, that he made so little difficulty to go
meet with a handful of men, Pompey and his vast Army in the Thessalian Plains,
they being for the most part untrain'd and without skill; so that he himself
said, he only went to fight a head without a body. Scipio the Affricans
greatest care was in this manner, continually to exercise his Soldiers, that
he might teach them to be victorious and courageous. Philopaemon was much
commended by antiquity, for that in times of Peace, he was diligently intent
upon the exercising of his Soldiers for War, if occasions should so happen,
that there might be any sudden need of them, many times would he lead them into
the Field, and propose these and such other questions to them. If the enemy
(would he say) were encamped upon yonder Hill, who had the greater advantage by
it, he, or me? how should we assault him? what course were proper to be taken
if he should stay to attend us? If we should be put to retreat, how should we
do it with most advantage? Thus he knew their opinions, and showed them his
own, which used them to a readiness of all manner of exercises. In fine, he
who accustometh himself to this kind of action, may say what Camillus did to
his in a great Battle which he had with the Tuscans, at whose numbers his
soldiers were astonished: Companions and Fellow Soldiers (said he) put not
your selves to the trouble of doing any thing else, then what you have so often
done before my face. These few words gave them a confident assurance, and
doubtless a Prince whoever he be, shall banish all fear from his Soldiers,
and much increase their Courages, when he has trained them up to the use of
their Arms, and to the knowledge of what they ought to observe, he shall come
to say those or the like words unto them. Use makes perfection, makes Cowards
senseless at the greatest dangers, and enables them to do all things, who
before could do nothing.

The English attempt the Relief of Rochel, but in vain.
THE English Fleet lay eight days at Anchor, without moving a Ship, they having
agreed upon the order of fight with those of Rochel, who had promised by their
Deputies to sally out both by Sea and Land to second them; but they could find
no opportunity to send them notice of it; besides the ill welcome they received
at their first entertainment, made them resolve to attempt nothing without a
good information how they might escape those obstacles, which they understood
were prepared ready for them in the Channel. For being come near about the Chef
de Bay, they were received with a Volley of about fifty short from the Point
there; forty of which did execution upon them; especially upon one, in which
and English Colonel and diverse of his Company were killed. This Battery indeed
consisted of 9 piece of Cannon, and was raised there by his Majesty's own
direction, though contrary to the advice of his Generals.

But for all this, there was one Captain Braignant a Rochellois, in company
with them, who offered to attempt the passage in a small Boat with Oars,
cross the Kings Fleet, and over the Channels, to give those of the Town
information of what orders they were to observe: The English approoved of it,
who making use of the darkness of the night, went and mingled himself with
those of the Kings Fleet under pretense of enquiring out for a Galliot, and so
well played his part, that he got into Rochel. Presently the Rochellois made
Bonefiers upon the tops of their Towers; The day following, they set up three
Ensigns, one white, the other red, and the third Blew; the English did the like.
The King seeing of it, presently drew out his Army into Battalia; which had
bin during the eighth days last past much recuited, by the access of diverse
Volunteers, who had come in from all parts; and his Majesty had the pleasure to
behold with what eagerness, every one desired to be engaged with the Enemies:
Hereupon the English Fleet seeing the Sea smooth, and their Ships moved with a
fair Gale, came up toward his Majesty's Fleet, about Cannon distance; turned
about their Ships and discharged their Broad-sides, the like did the
Rochellois; and the Kings Ships were not long before they set out to receive
them, where they behaved themselves with such courage that the English had no
reason to believe, they had less resolution now, then they had lately shown
at the I Will of Re; that which most of all troubled them was, they were not
ignorant, with what obstacles they were to encounter, in the Channels that they
were to break through three Rayles, two of Vessels floating on the Sea, and
linked together by Chains and Anchors; and a third several Vessels filled with
stones and sunk before the Bank; the Channel too was covered all over, with
Vessels full of Soldiers and Volunteers of the Nobility, all eager of fighting
with them; besides they were to avoid the shot which would thunder in upon them
from both sides of the shore, by the Bank; al these difficulties made them
despair of doing any good upon it, and that time the water was too low, for
their Ships, in which their chief strength consisted, and their design could
not be excused, but at high water, because when the Sea began to ebb, their
Vessels of burden would remain as the mercy of his Majesty's great Guns,
insomuch that all things duly considered, they concluded it impossible for
them to break thorough.

On the other side the Rochelois who had promised them to Sally out, and do
miracles, did not appear at all, for they had found, that it would be
impossible to make way thorough to the Bank, there being so many Vessels full
of Soldiers and Volunteers, to be fought with; insomuch that the Earl of
Denbigh what out of anger, and what out of despair, resolved to draw off: many
complaints he made against the Rochellois, as that they had deceived the King
his Master, in assuring him that it was easy to pass into their Port, and not
informing him, of those obstacles, which he was to provide against, and with
forces the King of France had a board his Ships, and Vessels to fight with his
Soldiers; but yet al his complaints could not secure him, from being much
blamed: all that he did, before his going off, was, he had sent out a Fire-ship
with Petards and the like, from which he expected great matters, as that it
would burn all the Ships it came near: but it happene to work sooner then his
enginers imagined; so that they being unable to get of the Barque which was
fastened to it, they burnt their Vessels, and themselves, without any relief or
succor.

Politic Observation.
IT is unsafe to believe a unrevolted people, or to build any design upon
their promises; They themselves do commonly ground all their rebellions upon
vain hopes, of which being despoiled, they have present recours to such, from
whom they can expect assistance, without considering into how great disasters,
and to what little purpose they engage them; They want forecast to prevent
those inconveniences into which they are throwing of themselves and Friends,
and they judge of events by their own desires, rather then by the rules of War.
They never misdoubt of a good success, in that which they wish with passion;
and as nothing is so dangerous as rashness, which carries people blindfold
into disasters: so they frequently fall into those misfortunes which they did
not foresee, and in it ruin all those whom they have persuaded to become
companions of their enterprises.

Artaxerxes suffered himself to be guided by the fair words of Themistocles,
who being discontented with his own Country, persuaded him to a War against
Greece, where being arrived, he soon found Themistocles could not make good his
word to him; whereby he came exposed to many dangers; Themistocles indeed was
so ashamed of it, that he poisoned himself but what did that advantage
Artaxerxes's, It neither defended him from the discredit and blame, nor saved
him those expenses which he had bin at. In the same manner the Sieur de
Chaumont one of our Kings Generals in Italy, let himself be guided by
Bentivoglio, in the assalting of Boulognea, from whence he had bin banished,
upon the hopes he gave him, that the Citizens and Nobility would revolt; but
being come before it, he was forced to retire with dishonor, all those promises
of Bentivoglio, which were founded more upon his passionate desire, than
reason, being vanished into that air which gave him the first conceits of
them. I might add for another reason, the facility wherewith a people revolted,
do submit to their sovereigns, when they find themselves reduced to an
impossibility of executing their designs. For as they have not prudence enough
to foresee those dangers into which they run, neither have they generousnesse
enough, to observe their promises made upon any account whatever.

Thus Alexander King of Epire, invaded Italy upon some assurances, which a
revolted people called the Lucani, at this day inhabiting the Basilicate of
Naples, had given him, of a speedy subduing the whole Kingdom, and that they
would never forsake him, but he soon found it quite otherwise: For they having
made their Peace, with the rest of their Countrymen, to enjoy their goods and
liberties, upon condition that they slew him, forthwith fell upon him, and by
an extreme breach of Faith killed him, which might serve all Princes to beware,
how they credit a revolted rebellious people, both because they will usually
promise more then they can perform, feign and pretend several impostures to
draw any one in to their assistance and last of all, if they find it for their
advantage, make their own accommodation, and leave those whom they engaged with
them, to shift for themselves.

The English having attempted their utmost to relieve Rochel, resolve to depart.
THE sudden departure of the English passed for a miracle, not only amongst the
most Religious, but the wise too; and indeed it was apparent to be seen that
Heaven it self, did fight against them, and would that his Majesty should be
victorious over them, his thoughts being accompanied with so much Piety and
Justice. And was it not indeed a miracle to see so great a Fleet set sail from
England, with undanted courages, resolve to consume whatever should oppose
them, and on a sudden, seized with fear, insomuch that their Arms seemed to
drop out of their hands, and they could not be persuaded to fight? was it not
indeed a real miracle, that, on the third night after their arrival, in the
Road of the Chef de Bay, the Wind being favorable for the Rochellois to sally
out, according as had bin assigned between them, should presently turn about,
and that just as they were at the Oar? was it not, I pray, an absolute miracle,
that when at another time the same Rochelois were embarked, after the
exhortations of their Ministers, and their Captains had solemnly sworn, to
pass the Bank in dispight of all opposition, or die in the attempt, just then
they should be struck with such faint heartedness, that not a man durst stir
his hand, and their Minister Vincent who exhorted them, could no longer speak
unto them, as himself confessed in a Letter to a Friend of his? was not that a
real miracle, which hapened two days before the English departed, when there
fell so thick a mist, that one could hardly see his hand; which opportunity
they intended to make use of to force the Bank; and on a sudden to see it
dissipated, though it was thought that it would have lasted three hours at
least, and the wind which was at that time fair, to change about, and that into
so violent a storm, that one of their Vessels was forced on shore, near Pont de
la Pierre? Was it not miraculous to see the Kings Army clear from all
contagious diseases; notwithstanding that the Rochelois had often sent out
infected persons, on purpose to infect others? Was it not strange that the Sea
should grow so rough at the first laying the foundation for the Bank, and break
it open without doing any other hurt then enlarging of the groundwork, a thing
necessary in it self, and too narrow to uphold so great a bulk? And besides was
it not a miracle that whilst the Bank was not yet finished, the Sea Floods
which yield to nothing, should not do any hurt to it? They who are
eyewitnesses of so many wonders could not but confess that Heaven fought for
his Majesty, and that the Winds which observe nothing but inconstancy, were by
God subjected to him, to become favorable to his designs. Who can refuse to
acknowledge these things to be the effects of Gods extraordinary power; for his
Majesty, at the same time, did a great and evident miracle upon a child of 12
years old, who never having spoke word, only Ay and No spoke perfectly as soon
as ever the King had touched her. She was born at St. Jean de Angely, and
brought by her Parents, who confidently believed that she would be well if his
Majesty did but touch her.

Politic Observation.
THE Piety of a King avails much in the obtaining of Victory. Who can doubt
it, seeing God is the Author of them, and that Piety is a charm which
captivates him as the Royal Prophet has said, To hear the Prayers of them who
fear him, and to defend them from their enemies? Antiquity used to say
(according to Plutarch) that Fortune gave to Demetrius those Towns which he
took in Nets of Gold: Mercurius Tresmegistus says, that he whose Piety puts
him into Gods protection, is not easily surprised by any ambush, and St.
Augustine writes in his Book de Civit. Dei, That the Romans had not been
Masters of the Universe by Force and Prudence, but by the Virtue and Piety
which they practiced: The Victories they obtained being the rewards of their
deserts; indeed Justice and Piety are the strongest weapons a Sovereign can
employ to suppress his enemies: And if any one ask the reason of it, I shall
only allege this, that Piety renders them worthy to obtain Victories from the
hand of God, who has promised in a thousand places of holy Writ to employ his
power in the behalf of those Kings which are righteous. And how often has God
made the Winds and Tempests to fight their Battles who have been careful to
walk in his ways? How often has he opened inaccessible places to them, and
calmed the Sea for their sakes? Has it not been often seen that an handful of
men by his assistance have brought strong Armies to confusion, and became
Masters of places thought to be impregnable. To speak truly, nothing is so
strong, so powerful, so invincible, nor so generous as that valor which
marching under the Banners of Christian Piety, submiteth its self to Gods
protection, the true strength of all Christian Princes: And as it were in vain
to seek for Light without the Sun, Water without Fountains or Rivers, and heat
without fire; so it would be ridiculous to expect true strength from any other
then his protection, who is the God of Battles. The more a Prince is in favor
with him, the more courage will he give him, especially when he fights for
his glory, and this is a maxim which may serve for a foundation to the
happiness of all Kings, and who so observes it not, builds his designs upon
the sand. Alphonsus King of Sicily and Arragon taught his son Ferdinand, in
such terms as were very proper to be learned by all young Princes in their
infancy. It was then when he sent him to revenge the injuries, which he had
received from the Florentines, Behold his words:

My son (said he) That which I chiefly command you, is, Trust not so much upon
your soldiers courages, as upon your hopes of assistance from Heaven, learn to
day from me, Victory is not the effect of the Discipline or industry of men,
but of Gods power, who is the judge of Battles. The Military Art can never
assure of an happy success in our designs, if we be once defective in making
God our friend by the Piety and Innocence of our actions. In fine, all the
maxims of War, not linked with the Laws of God are weak foundations; and all
the fortunes which are not grounded upon him, who turns the Globe of the Earth
with his hand, are nearer to destruction then advancement. The Greeks though
brought up in the darkness of error, did they not design to teach us, when in
their fables it was said, that Mercury who was adored by them for the God of
Prudence, was nursed by the hours? For to what end was it, if not to teach
their people that all humane wisdom, if not regulated nor sustained by the
measures of Heaven could not have any nourishment or subsistence.

The Dissentions amongst the Rochelois upon the Departure of the English.
THE departure of the English cast the Rochelois into such despair, that they
had doubtless set open the Gates to his Majesty, so much were the inferior
sort oppressed with necessity and want, had it not been for the Duchess of
Rohan, and the exhortations of their Preachers, who never ceased from crying
out unto the people, that they never ought to despair of assistance from
Heaven, which never forsakes them who are the Protectors of the Gospel. There
presently did arise great dissentions between them, but the prevalent party,
imprisoned some, and executed others, whom they found disposed to an
accommodation; insomuch that from that time the poor people were ready to
perish by famine, and durst not complain of it. They were persuaded of a new
succor from England; for the procuring of which, they sent new Deputies to his
Majesty of Great Britain, with instructions to incite him upon the score of
honor, representing to him that he could not suffer their Town to be lost
without injuring of his own glory, they being thus under his protection;
withal to provoke him to it by a sense of pity; to which end they acquainted
him with the extreme necessities and miseries to which they were reduced, and
to persuade him that there was not any such impediment in the Channel which his
Fleet might not have overcome, if they would but have attempted it; that for
their parts they had not been wanting to make a Salley, if his Forces had but
once began the fight; and lastly, they astonished the people by the thundering
noise or the Cannon, which they discharged more in six days, then they had done
in six weeks before, to persuade them that they had now found an infallible way
to break the Bank, and to destroy all the Kings ships that lay in the Channel.

In the mean while his Majesty that he might not lose the advantage which their
divisions offered to him, sent to summon them by an Herald, but they rejected
all proposals of a surrender: however famine, pressing-hard upon the poorer
sort, and some of the better too, they began to murmr, insomuch that a Counsel
was summoned to satisfy them, and to consider of what was proper to be done:
the Counsel being met, most of the members were of opinion to accept of his
Majesty's bounty and one amongst them openly said, that they were now within
six weeks of their last provisions, that every one had reason to rejoice,
seeing it pleased his Majesty to be so gracious; as that he would preserve the
exercise of their Religion to them; the enjoyment of their goods, and the walls
of their City, all which they had reason to hope for, from his Majesty's
clemency and goodness: That on the other side, he saw no reason to expect any
relief from the English, as well by reason of the losses they had already
sustained as by the little courage they had testified to fight for them, as
also by those great difficulties which were to be remooved in the Channel: and
so saying, he did much settle and confirm the rest in their resolutions of
Surrendering. But the Mayor hearing this discourse came to him, and gave him a
Box on the ear; in answer of which another of the Connsellors did so much for
him, and thus they had falled into some greater sedition had they not bin
dissolved very quickly. The Council was much offended with the Mayor, and
issued out an order to seize on him; but he encouraging the people, made them
rise, and take arms, so away he went to the houses of those two Counselors, to
have slain them, as doubtless he had done, had it not preserved by their
escape out of Rochel, unto his Majesty at whose feet they cast themselves,
imploring his protection, which was not denied unto them.

These divisions, did not a little advantage his Majesty's affairs, and the
Cardinal persuaded his Majesty to foment them as much as possible he could, by
sending another summons to them to yield; whereupon Breton Herald at Arms was
commanded to do it in Form, with his Coat of Arms, who went into the City,
required them to lay down their weapons, assured them of pardon for their past
crime and follies, and threatening them with the contrary, in case they should
now refuse it. It made no little impression on them, who were reduced to want
and extremity, but they being animated by their Preachers, the town still
continued resolute in their insolences, The obstinate wilfulness, which is
natural to such people feeding them with fair hopes until the last.

Politic Observation.
THE people, says T. Livy, unable to govern themselves by reason, soon run
into extremities, and dangers; they are ever either too low or too high, too
forward or too backward. Another, and for the same reason likens them to the
foolhardy, who know no medium between the extremes of fear and audaciousnesse;
as soon as ever they despair of effecting their designs to advantage, they
break out into mutinies; but in case they find them in a condition of bringing
them to a good issue. Oh, how fierce are they? how insolent in their
expressions and actions? There need no other reason for it, but only this
Passion is naturally the Mistress of popular spirits, which are neither capable
of reason or generousness the two known causes of civility, modesty and valor:
Experience too has made it evident that they who are born with narrow low
hearts are terrified at the least dangers, and care not what evils they commit
if they have but the power to defend them. It is the property of passion,
either to yield to soon, or not at all; and by the impetuousnesse of their
motion it is, that many people have chosen after the suffering of a thousand
miseries, to dye within their City walls, rather then open their Gates, to their
besiegers. Calagurva a City of Spain, being besieged by Pompey, the inhabitants
of it, were so obstinate in defense of their Walls in Sertorius his behalf,
that after they had eaten up all their living creatures, they were so
sencelesly cruel, as to kill their Wives and Children, that they might eat
them: And the Saguntines too, who were of the same Nation after they had
suffered the utmost extremities, turned their rage upon their own selves,
insomuch that their fame became a proverb, for having nothing left to eat, they
made a great fire in the public place, where they first burnt, whatever they
esteemed rich, and then threw in themselves, choosing rather to perish in the
flames, then to let the Carthaginians become Masters of their Town and Persons,
rather to follow the impetuousnesse of that fury which tormented them, then to
be guided by reason, which would have taught them, that it had bin no infamy to
yield to a Conqueror, when he has reduced such as resist him, to an
impossibility of escaping.

A Feigned Treaty between the King and the Rochelois.
THE Mayor of Rochel seeing this fury of the people; who seemed unable longer
to endure the extremities, whereunto necessity had reduced them, and that that
party, who were inclined to surrender the Town, were grown strong, he resolved
to feign a treaty with the King. He had wit enough to know that the people love
rather to be deceived than forced, upon which thoughts, he prayed the Sieur
Arnoult by the Sieur de Fenquieres a prisoner, that he would come into the City
to advise upon such ways of accommodation, as might he thought reasonable. The
Sieur Arnoult procured leave for it, and upon discourse had with the Mayor, he
spent two days time in going and coming, after which he purposed to the
besieged to have recourse to his Majesty's mercy, as the most assured way of
pardon which they could fancy to themselves; so the Sieur Arnoult went to meet
the King at Tailbourg, and Monsieur de Cardinal at Chast^liers near Fontenay to
give them notice of what had passed. These apparent submissions brought them
both back to the Camp, from which they were a little retired by reason of the
infections which are in the Army. Now the Sieur Arnoult being returned to
Rochel, and having assured the inhabitants of the inclination his Majesty had
to pardon them, if they would really confess their faults, and give him reason
to believe that they would in future live within the bounds of their duty, they
named Deputies to wait upon his Majesty, who commanded them to acquaint the
Cardinal with what they had to say. They went to wait upon his Eminency at
Rousay, at the Quarter de la Bergery, where they were in conference full two
hours with him, after which every one guessed by their cheerfulness that they
were very well contented, they desired a safe conduct to wait upon him two
days after in the same place, which was not denied them, and being come
thither they testified a great resolution in the people to deliver themselves
up to his Majesty's mercy, seeing that notwithstanding their Rebellion, he had
been pleased to let them live in the exercise of their Religion, the enjoyment
of their goods, and withal the preservation of their Walls; the Cardinal sent
them back to the King, whom they found upon the Bank they were afraid to appear
before his Majesty, but being brought into his presence they cast themselves at
his feet, and begged his pardon and mercy with as many apparent submissions, as
could have been desired. His Majesty said to them, you deserve to be severely
punished; but since God has given you the grace to confess your fault, I
pardon you your lives. The Deputies returned to Rochel with great joy,
promising to be ready the next morning to conclude upon the particular Articles
of the Treaty. But the Mayor and those of his party had only pretended this
Treaty to gain time, that they might work upon the people by possessing them
how important it was to their liberty to keep up their fortifications; which
otherwise would be levelled with the ground; and at last having molded them to
their own temper, all the Treaty vanished to smoke: Nay their insolency was
such, that being confident, during this intercourse of parley, his Majesty's
Army would not keep so strict watch as usually they did, they had the boldness
to send out a fire-ship about three in the morning, amongst the Kings Vessels
near the Bank, which guarded the Passages, and at the same time shot off diverse
great pieces, but without any execution. The Cardinal who knew that an enemy
ought never to be trusted, caused the watch to be kept in as great strictness
as ever, so that the Boats which were upon the guard perceiving the fire-ship
drew her aside into a place, where she burned down without doing any hurt.

Politic Observation.
VIgilance is the savegard of Armies, and he who commands a siedge is the more
obliged to watch that he may sustain the enterprises of the besiedged, in
regard the wisest then attempt them, when they are least suspected. Negligence
and Victory do never any long time go hand in hand together, and the least
carefulnesses do often turn the scales in War. Those camps which are guarded
with most circumspection, are the most secure, and he who is not always in a
way of defense, puts himself into eminent danger; That General who lets his
forces sleep without good guard, commits the care of them and their lives to
fortune. Iphicrates one of the most famous Captains of Athens was far enough
from committing this fault, for his Soldiers kept the same guard in peace, and
with the same stricttnesse as in War, their arms being always ready by them to
fight. At first it was woundred at, but the reason he alleged, was, That a man
may be never surprised, he ought always to be in fear. By this means after the
shame of a rout, he will not be forced to say, I did not think there had been
any thing to fear. If a General has reason at any time to be upon his guard,
more especially ought he to be so then, when there are propositions of peace in
treaty; for one of the most usual wiles, which great Captains use, is that of
proposing some treaty whereby they might make advantage. Thus Pope Julius the
second, that he might gain time, to prepare himself against the Duke of
Ferrara, amazed King Lewi^h the twelfth with the apparencies of a fair
accommodation. In the like manner Ferdinando Arragon sent Philip Archduke of
Austria to amaze the same King by a treaty of Peace, which they swore unto,
that they might hinder him in consideration thereof from making necessary
preparations for the assisting of his own party; who by reason thereof were
forced to leave the Kingdom of Naples; and Ferdinand made it evident that to
that purpose was his design, for he could not afterward be persuaded to
ratify the treaty. Nothing is so safe as to treat a pear with distrust, and he
who so does, has a double advantage by it, first by depriving his Enemy of all
hopes to surprise him, and secondly because the good order in which he keeps
his Forces, gives him the credit to obtain more beneficial articles.

The Rochelois are reduced by famine to extreme miseries.
ONE of the remedies which the Rochellois used to relieve their necessities,
especially after the English were returned, was to turn out all the unnecessary
mouths; they found means by the help of a dark night and in a tempest, which
had broken in sunder some of the floating Vessels which stopped the mouth of
the Bank, to pass a Barque laden with women, which the Kings vessels then in
guard did not perceive time enough to prevent: but this was the only time they
could procure that advantage, but on the contrary, their insolency being come
to the height, they forced the Kings Justice Severely to punish such as
attempted to save themselves by Land; about the end of August above three
hundred persons of all ages and both sexes came out by the Channel at low
water, and being got to Land, fell to eating of roots and herbs with such
greediness, that it was easy to judge how much the inhabitants of the Town
were necessitated by famine. They had been fit objects with compassion, had
they been less insolent; but as nothing except necessity it self could bring
them to their duties, so the Sieurs de Brisfac, de Fourille and the other
Captains of the gards when they lighted on them, forced them back into he Town,
to augment the famine of the inhabitants. This just severity was oftentimes
used toward them, by which means their miseries were such, that having neither
bread, pulse, nor any thing usually edible, they found out an invention to boil
Beefs-hides in tallow and such other things. They were oftentimes seen to go
into the Salt Pits to gather herbs and cockles, and such other stuff as they
could fry, which they presently devoured as delicates. They eat bread made of
thistle-roots, and their hunger not so satisfied, turning into fury came to
that pass, that they eat dead bodies, and some persuaded the mothers to embrew
their hands in the blood of their innocent Babes for their present nourishment.

Had it not been seen, it would hardly have been believed, that after such
extremities they should long hold out: however they remained obstinate; so that
his Majesty's justice, guided by his prudence obliged him to prohibit the
coming out of any of them, yet how ill soever they were dealt with by his
Majesty's troops, when they came to the trenches, diverse of them daily came
out, which were still beat back again. It is true for their greater confusion
the men were driven back again naked, and the Women in their smocks forcing
them with forks and lathes to return: as for those who attempted to pass the
trenches in the night, or by any other devise, they were all hanged without
mercy, if it were their misfortunes to be discovered, because some of them hand
been taken with Letters and Tickets to hasten on the relief from England, and
this prudent Severity was at last the true case of their repentance.

Politic Observation.
IT is an equitable cruelty, to hinder the besieged from running out of a Town,
when their necessities begin to press upon them. If the War be lawful their
deaths must needs be just. It is true in point of sieges the inhabitants are
first to be gained by kindness, but when persuasions will not do, force and
rigor ought to be made use of, and this ought to be done with the less
difficulty, in regard the death of Rebels does well suit with Justice and the
public good. Famine is one of the chief weapons which forces a Town in a long
siege. It is that which takes them, where the Artillery cannot make breaches or
ruins enough to force a surrender. Now as this Famine is augmented by their
number, he who shall suffer them to get out and avoid the necessity which
press upon them, acts against himself, and depriveth himself of the most
assured means to take them. The more people that are in a besieged Town, the
sooner will their victuals be consumed, and they sooner reduced to famine, and
then follows death in its hideous and deformed visage, producing every day
spectacles of horror, which they who have any reason and find a necessities of
being forced, had much rather surrender then behold; famine makes the weapons
fall out of their hands. The Emperor Aurelian speaking of the Roman people
(said) Nothing is so gay as they are when their Bellies are full, and their
bones at rest; and on the contrary, nothing so cowardly as when they are
reduced to want and penury. Who knows not what violences they use upon the
Magistrate to free them of this necessity? Has it not been heretofore seen
that in a time of Famine, the Roman people went after the Emperor Claudius
injuriously reviling him, and throwing crusts of bread at his head? and they of
Constantinople, did they not in a great dearth throw stones at their Emperor,
Theodosius the first? The people do become so furious by famine, that nothing
can hold them, and as they prefer nothing before life, they at last resolve to
force their Officers to open their Gates and surrender. Indeed they are the
more excusable for it, in regard necessity is become their reason, the power
whereof is unsupportable either by one or the other.

The miseries of Rochel by Famine.
THE common people of Rochel had endured great miseries from the beginning of
May; however the hopes they had of succor from England, persuaded the best
provided amongst them to sow all sorts of little grain, as Pease, Beans,
Barley, and the like, about their Walls in all their spare places; it was
discretion in the Kings party to let them alone in it; but a great imprudence
in them to dis-furnish themselves of that whereof they had such present
necessity, and were likely to have much more in a very little time. They had
indeed the pleasure to behold what they sowed to spring up and grow; but just
when they thought to gather the fruits of their labors, the Kings Army came up
and cut all down, and so deprived them of the refreshment which they expected
from it.

Politic Observation.
THE usual rule in Sieges, is to keep the besieged close up, and to deprive
them of all kind of liberty; for by consequence, liberty which is one of the
most delightful things in man's life being once stopped, becomes very
displeasing, and is a sufficient reason to persuade those who are under that
restraint, to do any thing for the enlargement of it. However this rule
admits of some exception, and ought not to be used when a besieged people
pretend to sow any grain, or the like about their City Walls; For as the Corn
which they put into the earth does not a little diminish their main stock, so
the freedom which is permitted them, thus to cast it away, serves the sooner
to bring them to want and famine, and so to surrender. The chief end in long
sieges, is to famish the besieged, and as the sowing of their ground does not a
little contribute thereunto, so Prudence forbids that they should be hindered
in their work; and indeed commands that they should rather be invited and
allured to it, by winking at them if they attempt it. For this reason it was,
that Fabius Maximus having depopulated and wasted all the Country of the
Campani, retired about seed-time, that he might give them the liberty of
decreasing their store by sowing, which he never intended they should reap;
which happened accordingly, for coming upon them before Harvest, they were
easily famished and forced to surrender.

The Rochelois Salley out upon his Majesty's Forces.
THough there was but a handful of men in Rochel, compared with his Majesty's
Army, yet the mutinous humor which transported them, encouraged the
inhabitants to make diverse Sallies. It is true they made fewer then had been
seen in any so great siege, in hopes that the English would come and force open
the Bank but however some they made, and those great ones, but were repulsed
with loss, It was the Sieur de Fouquierres mishap to be taken Prisoner by them
in one of their Sallies, which they made about the beginning of the year; there
were diverse of theirs too taken, which were kept in durance for exchanges, if
occasion should be, and they of the City had notice given unto them, that in
case they did him any injury, his Majesty would cause all his Prisoners of
theirs to be hanged without mercy; so they dealt civilly with him, and when
their Victuals began to grow scarce, they permitted one of his servants to
bring him some every day from the Camp. Their insolency likewise carried them
to make several Sallies by Sea, especially upon the arrival of those ships from
Bourdoaux, which they attempted to have fired, but they had never any good
success in them, only once they took a small Galliot which belonged to the
Sieur de Thoyras; the Cardinals care and diligence, setting such a watch over
them, that hardly-a man could peep out, but he was presently discovered.

Politic Observation.
THose Sallies which the besieged make upon an Army lying before them, are
still accompanied with danger to themselves, for the least loss of their
Soldiers is of great concernment; because they being once gone, it is
difficult to have a recruit or relief of others. The valor indeed which they
have opportunity of showing in such incounters, may perchance quell the
resolutions of the Besiegers; especially if the place be well stored and likely
to receive fresh supplies; but that not being so, the Besiegers by standing
still in their Forts and Works, and keeping good guard in their Trenches, will
be sure every time to lessen their number of some few, and in fine reduce them
to none at all. Philip de Commines says, all Sallies made without necessity
are to be blamed; for they cannot without it be allowable, that which sometimes
makes to vanquish against hope, by the courage which it infusethinto the most
cowardly, for there is not any danger which they are not easily persuaded
toattempt who are convinced of the inevitableness of their present death. This
is that which all those who are besieged ought to consider; before they make a
salley: now as for the Besiegers, they have only two ways to avoid all
misfortunes, the first, the well ordering of their works, the second, the good
watch of those works. If the Trenches are well contrived, not any where at too
great distance from the Town, if they flank one another, if they be high enough
to shelter the foot, if their Parapets be Faulcon proof, if they be so well
fortified by Forts and Redouts, from distance to distance; if they be large
enough to fight in; and so disposed, that one be not surprised behind they will
bring great matters to pass; they ought also to be lined with Soldiers, well
accoutred, well disciplined, and such as will be careful to keep good watch day
and night, neither is it less needful, to place Sentinels, upon the Avennues,
and all along upon the Trenches; and at last when the Enemy does appear, then
is the time to repel force by Force, then ought the most resolute of the
Soldiers, be placed in Front, to sustain the charge, as likewise in that
quarter, which is nearest the Town, because they who bear the first brunt, are
the men that do the work; and upon whom all the rest does depend, and in those
places it is, that the first assaults are always made: But above all, he who
commands in the Trenches, ought always to have Forces in a readiness from
the out-guards, for seconding courage with numbers does much conduce to the
repelling of an Enemy, with advantage: and if he find that those who are upon
the guard, be not either proper or able to sustain a charge, if the Enemy
should come out, then ought he to place them in the strongest Redouts, from
whence it will be more difficult to force them, until recruits shall come up;
and this was the order which Caesar observed in besieging the City of Alexia,
as is to be seen in his Commentaries.

The Duke of Rohan continues his designs in Languedoc.
Whilst the Rochelois were acting these pieces of Rebellion, the Duke de Rohan
was no less intent upon carrying his designs in Languedoc, for the gaining of
such Towns where the Hugonots had most power to his party. About the beginning
of the year he attempted to make himself Master of Briateste, by means of one
Toubze, but the inhabitants who desired nothing more then to live in peace, and
under his Majesty's obedience, hearing of it, laid hold on that seditious
brother of theirs, and sent him to Thoulouze, where he was shortly after hanged
for his pains; Rohan was much displeased at the ill usage his forces had
received at Montpellier, whereupon he commanded the Seneschal de Castres to
send ten or twelve Horse and fifty Musketeers about the Castle of Clermont de
Lodove, knowing that there were diverse Lords and Gentlemen met there together,
that he might entice them to come out, and be revenged on them. The Sentinel of
the Castle, gave notice to the Count de Clermont, that he saw eight or ten
Horse eye the Castle, in such a manner, that he conceived them to be Enemies:
presently the Count and those that were with him, issued out in their doublets
and hose, with their Swords and Pistols, and fell upon them. These Horsemen as
soon as ever they perceived them made as if they fled toward a Wood, where
they had left their fifty Musketeers in Ambush; being come up to them* they
faced about, and discharging all together upon the Noblemen, who pursued them,
within Pistol shot, they killed twelve of them; The Baron d'Ambre being then
with the Count de Clermont, seeing his Cornet killed, vowed he would be
revenged of them for his death, and turning about again to charge them, he was
in an instant so surrounded that he saw it was impossible to escape: he asked
them if ten thousand Crowns would save his life, they told him no, and bid him
remember Montpellier. This seemed only to be a stratagem of War, but their
cruelty was in process evidently to be seen, for not contented with this
advantage, they cut off the noses and ears of all they took. Not long after his
exployt, the Duke de Rohan engaged the City of, Rohan to revolt. Those of his
faction in Montauban, where no less insolent, there they forced out of their
City, the Lieutenant Paxticulier, the Doyen of the Senechil, two Councillors
and the Lieutenant General, and presently persuaded the people to rise. Those
of Nismez, Cosne, Saint Sever, Saint Frigue, and diverse other places, of
Languedoc, Vivarets, and Dauphine, did the like, neither were these the only
Provinces, in which they had their Intelligencers at work. Mosieur the
Cardinal, had bin acquainted, about the beginning of March, whilst his Majesty
was at Paris, that certain Gentlemen of his party did endeavor to make factions
and divisions in Limasin against the Kings service, he not ignorant that such
fires ought to be extinguished on their first births, sent the Marshall de
Schomberg, Lieutenant General; of that Province, to take order in it, who no
less prudent then valorous, soon dissipated them, that not a man durst show
his head. About the same time, he had also by some device or other gained one
Le Parc, Son to one of the Captains of a Gate at Callais, to deliver the Town
to the English by letting them in at a Bastion, which was somewhat decayed, and
delivering them up the old Castle, where there was only one old Soldier of his
acquaintance, who lay in guard. But this contrivance being discovered by the
Vicompte de Fruge, Le Parc, was apprehended, his Process, drawn up and
finished and himself broken alive. On the other side the Sieur de Maritignon,
found out some correspondencie between certain Hugonots of Normandy, and the
English, and how they had contrived to let them in by a great Tower which stood
in the Sea belonging to the Sieur de Briqueville, as also into the Town and
Haven de Vire, in hopes that they of their party who were at Caen, Falaise, and
other adjacent places, would rise in a body together, and so force the King to
leave Rochel, that he might retake these places of so great importance.

Politic Observation.
REbels at their first rising may perchance get some advantages, either by
intelligences in strong Towns or surprisal of those which are but ill kept, but
in fine they do moulter away and are reduced to nothing. It were to be wished,
that before they attempted any thing, they did but know, what is the true
Reason hereof which it this, they are to seek for those things which are
necessary to continue a War, with good success, for the beginning there need
little or nothing, but those beginnings must of necessity terminate in
disasters, if he who is the first mover, have not store of Forces, and power to
recruite them, if he be not furnished with expert Officers and Treasures, if he
have not very good intelligences with the Lords and Princes bordering upon
those places which he pretends to assault, and lastly if himself too, be not
endewed with a soul and courage truly great that he ought of necessity to have
Forces and power to recuit himself, cannot be doubted, because otherwise, his
sovereign will presently crush him, the inconstancy of his Soldiers will by
disbanding leave him naked; and sicknesses will help to take away some too, so
that in fine he will be reduced to nothing, if he cannot repair his losses by
recruits, and new fresh Regiments. That which gave the Romans such advantage
over other Nations, was, first their discipline of War, but secondly their
Numbers; now the means used to get such great Armies, was to exercise those
Enemies whom they had overcome, in their Militia, as Tacitus observes on the
Life of the Emperor Claudian, and on the other side the Lacedaemonians, and
Athenians, not entertaining any Strangers, though by them subjugated, never
brought any great considerable Armies for number into the field, and
consequently could never attain unto so great an Empire. Next to the great
numbers of Soldiers, which he ought to have, comes Treasures, without which it
is impossible to prevent an Army from wanting victuals, clothes, and
necessaries, and by consequence from disbanding, Quintus Flaminius seeing
Philopoemon Captain of the Grecians, with a great Army, both of Horse and Foot,
but without any money, laughed at him; he has indeed, quoth he, store of Legs
and Arms, but no Belly; meaning, by like, that he wanted wherewithal to feed
them. Caesar how great a Soldier soever, and how valiant soever his Soldiers
were, brake open the Treasure Gate at Rome, contrary to Motellus the Tribunes
will: for he wisely foresaw, that it would be impossible to give a good account
of the War, without he were provided with store of Treasures. Next of all I
come to expect Officers who are not less needful, because they are as the soul
of the Soldiers; and as it is true that a Body cannot move without it is soul,
neither can any Soldiers do any thing considerable, if not conducted by the
example of their Commanders and instructed how, where and when, they ought to
fight. And then ought he to hold good intelligence too with the Grandees, and
those places which border upon that part which he designeth to attaque, for
otherwise, his Convoyes will be stopped, every day will make some hole in his
Coat, and they will serve for retreits to his Enemies to contrive Ambushes and
designs against him. For this Reason it was that James King of Scotland,
contriving to make War upon Henry the eighth King of England, was careful to
hold intelligence, with the English, who else might have endangered and
troubled his Forces; and that Hannibal assaulting the Romans; first made sure
of the Spaniards, French, and Africans; and that the Romans bending their
powers against Philip of Macedon, first sent their Ambassadors, to make a
League with Ptolomei King of Egypt. Lastly, and most especially he himself
ought to be of a genius and courage, every way truly extraordinary, for every
day he must be exposed to new dangers; the success of the greatest part of his
affairs, will depend upon his own prudence and address; the least distrust or
fear that shall appear in him will drive away whole troops from him;
extraordinary designs requiring a proportionate conduct to carry them on, in
regard Revolts have the more need of Fortunes assistance, because they are the
most hazardous exploits in which a man can engage, never any mean Low heart
arrived to any good succusse or Fortune by them. These are the chief things
necessary for a great enterprise, and they that engage themselves, without
these, do rashly run the hazard of their own destruction: It is only by the
want of these supports that so many Authors of Revolt have gone out with shame
and confusion.

Diverse Religious persons, settled in the Hugonot Provinces by the Cardinal's
diligence and industry.
THE Cardinal was not idle, though he had weakened the Hugonot Towns, diminished
their power, and clipped the wings of their Rebellion, but he endenvoured at the
same time, their conversion. To this end his Majesty was persuaded to settle
diverse Preachers, and Religious persons, who behaved themselves with great zeal
and courage. The Cardinal was not indeed less expert at Theology, then Policy,
so it was unreasonable, but that he should be still careful as well at this as
at his Arms. His Piety let him so seek out occasions for it, and having at last
found out by diverse conferences, which he had, with the Duke of Trimouille,
that he was not averse, from being instructed, he himself would needs take the
pains to become the chief instrument of his conversion. He bestowed diverse
hours of his leisure time, to that purpose and there being nothing which is
equal to his doctrine, and the clearness of his soul, he soon discovered such
lights to him, as quickly cleared all his doubts, and dissipated those mists
which error had laid upon his eyes.

The Duke of Trimouille converted to the Catholic Faith by Monsieur the
Cardinal.
THE Duke of Trimouille was a person very moderate, and temperate in all his
actions, his very youth was without heat and passion, neither had he any of the
pride and insolency which is too usual with those of his birth; and as moderate
sober men, are more desirous of instruction then the contrary sort, so he was
contented to be guided by the hand of God; yet would he see the truth, and
first be convinced of certain scruples and difficulties which did arise, in
which till then, he could not be satisfied: but having bin so happy, as to be
instructed by the Cardinal, it was the easier for him to see and leave his
error, in regard the incomparable soul of this grand Minister, did so clearly
evince the Catholic truth to him, and his own error, as himself has since
often acknowledged. It was not riches nor honor which induced him to change his
Religion: for he was both born rich and great: but it was the only knowledge of
Truth which persuaded him to it, neither did he that, until a most particular
and exact satisfaction in all things. The King was overjoyed at the news of
it, never was any spoil or Trophee of an Enemy so welcome, as this Victory, and
the more to testify his real joy for it; his Majesty promised him, that the
next Feast he would receive the Communion with him; as also the Sieur de la
Curee, being dismissed of his Charge of Master de Camp, which his age had made
him incapable any longer to perform, his Majesty honored him with it, studying
to show to all his Subjects, in his person, how dear their salvations was unto
him.

Politic Observation.
IF it be a work of Justice to chastise rebellious Heretics by the sword, it
is no less charitable to labor for their conversion by letting them see the
truth; for the better discovering of which, much charity, clearness of spirit,
and profound Doctrine are required: a Soul not well informed instead of
allaying, raises more doubts; insomuch that knowledge has as great a part in
the Church, as the Sun in the Firmament, and just as it is difficult to restore
a Traveller into his right way, during the night, until the Sun appear to
instruct him where he is, so neither can a man of understanding be disabused,
unless it be by Doctrine, at whose light a knowing Genius makes him perceive,
that he is at the brink of a Precipice, and far from being in the right way to
Heaven. But amongst those for whose conversion it is requisite to labor, no
doubt but the chief men are first to be attempted, for if the Stars continually
follow the motions of the Heavens, unto which they are affixed; it is in like
manner as common for men of mean quality, to follow as well the Religion as the
interest of the Grandees. The people of Rome being once in a Mutiny, retired to
the Capitol, upon an accident which befell Virginius, were easily appeased by
the Senate; by reoson as T. Livy says, that they had no Leader there that
durst speak a word in answer to those who had been sent unto them. For my part,
I hold it for certain that it will be no more difficulty to reclaim an
Heretic Faction, who should rebel without a powerful Commander: But I
likewise think it necessary besides Doctrinal instructions, not to spare either
money or dignity for the gaining of those, whose Birth renders them capable of
such qualities. Temporal interests do much conduce to Spiritual, and though the
advantages of Fortune be not the chief motives of conversion amongst them who
are strictly Religious, yet it is most certain they are no mean inducements
thereunto. Thus Justinian (according to Evagrius) converted many Heretics by
dispersing store of moneys amongst them. And the Emperor Leo the sixth, made
use of the same device for the gaining of many Jews, and there need no more but
the example of Constantine de Bergo, the Portugal Viceroy in the Indies, who
drew a number of those people to the Christian Religion, by the carresses and
favors which he showed to them that were newly baptized.

Soubize and the Deputies of Rochel, obtain a third saccour from the English
but in vain.
Whilst the Duke of Rohan was making diverse attempts in Lauguedoc, and used
his utmost endeavors to preserve those Towns, of which he was become Master:
The Sieur de Soubize and Deputies of Rochel, were negotiating in England for a
third assistance, they hoped to obtain it without any great difficulty, for
that Buckingham incensed as has been formerly related, did every day rig up
move ships and raise new Forces; but they found it a hard task, both in regard
of the troubles in which Buckingham was then involved by reason of the
complaint made against him in Parliament, as also of the impossibility to
remove the obstacles in the Channel, according to what the Earl of Denbigh had
related; yet at last Buckingham having overcome all his enemies devices and
contrivances; by the favor in which he was with his Majesty of Great Britain,
had persuaded him to Embark the Army then on foot, and to give him leave to
command them in his own person; to which end, all things were put in order for
a present dispatch: But as God over-ruleth men's designs, he was pleased by
Buckingham's death to put an end to this storm, he being assassinated by one
Feltou an English man, discontented, because the Captains place of the Company
whereof he was Lieutenant, had been twice vacant, and both times given over his
head to another, and who by hearing what complaints there were made against him
by the Parliament, imagined, that by revenging his own quarrel, he should
likewise do his Country good service in it; yet for all this, the Deputies
would not be denied, they continued their instances, persuading the King of
Great Britain, that the forcing of the Bank was easy, if resolutely
attempted, and that the glory of his Crown did in some sort oblige him to make
one more attempt, and that more vigorous then the former. The Fleet was then
resolved to put forth, and there were added three other ships full of stones,
and some other with dung, which were to be set on fire when they entered the
Channel, to the intent the smoke might hinder them from the sight. The Sieur de
Soubize, the Comte de Laval, and all the French Rebels then in England,
composed the Vanguard, next to them followed those Vessels which were for the
relief of Rochel; next went the Body of the Army, commanded by the Earl of
Denbigh, General of the Expedition, and on the twenty eighth being Thursday,
they arrived at Glonne. The Cardinal having notice of it the very same night,
dispatched a Courier to his Majesty to acquaint him with it, who presently made
himself ready, got on horseback, and came to the Camp, and after some
discourse with the Cardinal, he sent to discover the Enemy, as also to call the
Volunteers who were disperced, some here, and some there, to be in a readiness
together. This once done, his Majesty visited all the Quarters of the Army,
that he might put every thing in good order, and got himself an immortal glory
by his travel, labor, and diligence, by those dexterous orders which he
dispatched both as to the Sea and Land, by his raising of Batteries, designing
of Plat-forms, and levelling of the Cannon with his own hand. Upon Saturday the
thirtieth, the English Fleet came up to the Road of the Chef de Bay and some
few of them came before to draw out the French to fight; but the Kings Vessels
having order not to stir, because they were only to hinder the Passage into
Rochel, not one of them moved on Anchor, only both parts exchanged some
Broad-sides, and the King being in person upon one of the Batteries, caused
about thirty to be lovelled at them, which did not a little indamage them.

Politic Observation.
ALthough shame be the Child of evil Parents, yet it begets excellent
effects. It proceeds from some Actions which have a certain infamy with them,
and leave behind them some ill tincture upon the reputation; but then the grief
which a generous mind apprehends at it, when he finds himself disgraced,
makes him redouble his courage, and carries him to glorious actions. A thing
very remarkable in the persons of Sovereigns, who being jealous of their glory,
the fairest flower of their Crowns, cannot endure that it should be sullied by
any misfortune, which may seem to carry a faith-heartedness with it: It grieves
them, and not a little, to find themselves deficient in those successes which
have Crowned their equals. Hereupon it was that Caesar reflecting on himself,
how that during two and thirty years time he had not signalzied his Courage by
any one great exploit, fell into tears before an Image of Alexander, which
seemed to reproach him, by those great Acts which he had brought to pass in a
less time. But who can express, the lively impression which it makes, when it
has been seen to inflame the most cowardly an faint-hearted, with resolution
and courage? History affords us many examples of Armies, which after a
shameful rout have been possessed with the Army of the Persians when they saw
their wives come to them holding up their Coats, faced about and charged the
Army of Astyages, which then pursued them, with so much Courage that they
gained the Victory; and in the same manner, the shame which the Romans
conceived, upon their defeat by the Samnites, at the Forges of Caudine, did so
sensibly excite them, that they could not rest till they had been revenged;
they marched to Capua, but so sad that they could hardly speak, which they of
least understanding attributed to their despair; but Offili^^ Ascalanius, more
judicious then the rest told the Citizens, that this silence and confusion,
which was in their Countenance, did presage no great good, for he could not be
persuaded, but that the resentments of such extraordinary grief would transport
them to strange attempts for the recovery of that honor, whereof fortune had
bereaved them, especially seeing shame, when it spurs on a resolution, is an
hope of safety. The Roman Consul Agrippa, that he might encourage his Army,
would oftentimes take one of his Ensigns, and cast it into the middle of his
enemies, to the end the shame which his Soldiers should conceive at it, might
animate them the more, and oblige them for the regaining of them, to show all
proofs of an extraordinary Courage.

The F^ight between the Kings Fleet, and the English.
AFter the English had stood in this Posture two days they sent out between
Sunday even, and Monday morn, 10 or 12 floating Petards to set fire on the
Kings ships. The Composition of those Petards was of Lattin filled with Powder,
laid upon certain pieces of Timber, cross which there was a spring, which
touching any Vessel would fly off and give fire to the Petards; but only one
took effect, which did no great hurt, only cast water into the ship, and that
was all, the rest being taken by the Kings Boats; their Petards were answered
by good store of Cannon from the Kings ships, yet their Fleet continued still
in the same posture, insomuch that many believed that they would either return
that day, without any more ado, or else land their men. Now as he who commands
an Army is obliged to foresee all accidents, and to prevent them; so the King
commanded the Duke of Angoulesm, and the Marshal de Scomberg to guard the Point
de Coreille, and the Duke de la Trimoville, and the Comte de Alets, to stand
their charge with the Light Horse and the Cavalry, and took his own station at
the Point of the Chef de Bay with some foot and diverse of the Nobility, which
he intended to defend in his own person. His Majesty further gave order to
several Volunteers to go aboard the ships with his Soldiers; and which was
done in sight of the English Fleet, which had no great mind that day to engage;
but the day following being the 30 of October, and considering that the
reputation of their Master was too much engaged in the defense of the
Rochelois, for them to go away without doing of any thing; and having the Wind
favorable, they hoised Sails, made ready, and came up to the Kings Fleet,
which presently met them in good order. The fight began at 6 of the Clock, and
in about four hours time they discharged between them near 5000 great shot, but
never came nearer one another then Cannon distance. The Kings Fleet commanded
by the Commander de Valencay, did as much as could be desired; and though the
English had the wind of them; yet were they but ill treated by the Cannon; one
of their great ships being so torn, that they were forced to retire to the Isle
of Oye to mend her.

A Cessation of Arms for some days between the two Fleets.
IN the mean while the King being in the Batteries of the Chef de Bay, which he
had but raised two days before, caused his Cannons to be discharged by his
particular Order, without the least fear of the danger whereunto he did expose
himself, in regard of the many Bullets which fell at his feet, and came very
near him, he took a great delight to see his Guns do that execution which he
intended, the Elements fight for him, and the English betray their fear of his
presence, good fortune, and courage. And was it not much more glorious for him,
to give order for the standing of this assault, and to be himself present in it
by offering his life to God, then to have been in his Chamber at Paris, where
those of Marillac's faction would have stayed him? Was it not a greater
pleasure to him, to behold the Sea all on fire, bringing flaming Vessels to his
feet, as if they did him homage, and to command in his own person amidst the
Batteries, then to have been idle in the Louvre? In my sense he had been as
much too blame to have been at Paris whiles these affairs were acting, as it
was now glorious to see him here reducing Heresy to his obedience. And this
was as much as was done the first day.

The next morning the wind being still fair for the English, they set their
Sails, began to shoot but durst not come nearer the Kings Fleet, then before;
they were answered in the same language, and for four hours together, the Air
seemed to be all on fire. The little more which they did worth observation was
this, they sent 9 Fireships, seconding them with Ships filled with Stones and
full of dung; to which they had set fire with intent that the smoke of it
driven by the Wind to the Kings Fleet might cover them, and give the English
means to pass the Channel. But his Majesty's small Boats went to the
Fireships at the mercy of the great shot, seized on them, and diverted their
execution, only losing one man, without any greater hurt, and the Vessels
which followed them durst not advance; which the English Fleet seeing, and how
much the Forts did trouble them, they drew off to the Road not without great
disoder, leaving the Rochelois to despair. Neither was this the only
misfortune that befell them; for at that very instant so great a storm arose,
that they were forced to let themselves be carried at the mercy of the wind.
The English finding how unlikely they were to do any good, proposed under hand
that some accommodation might be made; they thought it would be more
advantageous to retreat after the making of a Peace, then to run the hazards of
a worse success. Monsieur the Cardinal desired his Majesty to observe that his
only aim being the taking of Rochel, this accommodation would much contribute
to it; for then the Rochelois would remain without any succor at all, which
induced him to give ear to those Proposals which should be made. But their
souls being yet exasperated, the Peace could not so suddenly be resolved on,
and all the conferences which were had to that purpose, ended in a Cessation of
Arms for some few days.

Politic Observation.
ALbeit, they who have been once vanquished in War, may recover the advantage
which they have lost, either when their forces are recruited with a sufficient
strength, or when shame shall excite their courages, yet so it is, that when
neither of these two conditions happen, there is a great reason to apprehend
the success of their second attempt. Fortune has sometimes smiled on those,
who formerly never saw but her frowns, but after she has been once and again
discourteous, it will be needful to employ more force and greater courage; for
she is a professed friend to the bold and prudent. Great Routs are attended
with dangerous consequences, whence Titus Livy, speaking of a certain faction
of Marcellus, against Hannibal at Nola, said that it was much more difficult to
worst an Army fleshed in Victory, then that which begins to lose its credit. He
gives the same reason for that victory, which the Romans under the command of
Consul Manlius, obtained against the Gauls in Asia, where he says, that as
Victories do heighten the courage of the Victorious, so they do much abate that
of the vanquished; and withal the Victorious are desirous only to fight as
may be observed in the example of Pompey's Soldiers after the advantage which
they had of Caesar as Plutarch reports upon the life of Pompey; whereas they
who are worsted, are hard to be drawn to the Battle; for being seized with
their usual fear, and the most part of them fighting by constraint; they behave
themselves with so little mettle, that they are easily overcome a second time.
Thus the Duke of Guise returning from Italy after the Battle of St. Laurence,
to command those French Troops which had been rallied and new listed, writ to
his Majesty that he had more ado to put them in heart and courage, then to beat
the victorious enemy, and therefore he judged it necessary before he hazarded a
second Battle, to cure them of their first baffle by getting some little
advantage upon the enemy, an advice which he well knew how to execute, as he
did in the taking of Calais, Guines, and Thionville.

The Deputation of Montague to the King from the Earl of Denbigh General of the
English Forces.
DUring the cessation of Arms, the French Rebels who were in the English Fleet
finding they had lost their courages, and despaired of forcing the passage,
concluded themselves utterly lost without obtaining the Kings grace. To which
purpose they beseeched the Earl of Dexbigh to employ his power with their King,
in the behalf of his Master the Earl of Denbigh thought it reasonable, and upon
deliberation had with the Officers of the Army what was fit to be done to
procure them this satisfaction, they agreed to send Montague to his Majesty in
the behalf of the King their Master to endeavor the making their peace for
them. M^^tague came to his Majesty's quarter, and having audience, declared
that he was sent from the King of Great Britain his Master to beg a pardon
for the Rochelois, that he would be pleased to promise them the liberty of
their conscience, to forgive the Sieur de Soubize and the Comte de La Val, and
to give quarter to those English which were in Rochel. The King answered them,
that as for those of Rochel, they were his own subjects, and that the King of
England need not intermeddle in their interest, and as for the English who were
there in garrison, that they should receive the like usage as the French
prisoners in England, yet his Majesty received him with a great deal of honor,
showed him the Forts of the Camp, the Batteries, the Bank, the Pallisadas and
the range of Vessels which overspread the Channel. The truth is it was not
done so much to gratify him, as that upon the relation of what he had seen,
the rest of his party might be discouraged from making any further attempts.
After he had been an eyewitness of those things, he returned to England to
the King his Master to reduce him to some accommodation.

A Treaty between the King and the Rochelois.
THE Cessation of Arms being expired, the English to testify it was not out of
fear, that they retreited, or had made those proposals, renewed the fight on
the twenty third of October, which lasted above two hours, yet all this while
had they not the courage to come up to his Majesty's Fleet; whereupon those
French who were with them resolved to send some Deputies to the King in their
behalf, to cast themselves at the Kings Feet, and to emplore his mercy; First
of all they sent four to Monsieur the Cardinal, who humbly requested him, that
he would be pleased to obtain the Kings favor and grace for them, which they
heartily beseeched, with all real acknowledgements of their faults. The
Cardinal answered them, he would speak to his Majesty concerning it, and
commanded they should be kindly entertained, and put into some place apart,
that they might not enter into discourse with any one; The King was easily
persuaded to grant them what they demanded, the Cardinal having told him, how
necessary it was to win them off from the English, which if he could once bring
to pass, the English would withdraw of their own accord, and leave Rochel, to
shift for it self. He then acquainted them how his Majesty had granted them the
mercy and favor, which they had beseeched of him, yet however he thought good,
that two of them, should remain with him, whom he would make use of as I shall
hereafter declare, for the regaining of the Rochelois, to their former duties
and obedience. Those Rebellious mutineers when they saw there was no hopes of
succor from the English, and that they died by thousands of the famine, made
diverse proposals of accommodation. Hereupon his eminency told them how that
those of their party on board the English Fleet had withdrawn themselves, and
had obtained the Kings pardon; that the English finding it impossible to force
the Bank and relieve them, had interceded for them; that they had moreover sent
Montague to make proposals of peace unto his Majesty: who had kindly received
him, that thereupon he was returned into England, to incline the King his
Master, to hearken to an accommodation, and that things being thus, they had no
other hopes, but, to die by famine, if they had not recourse to his Majesty's
mercy by a true confession and humble acknowledgment of their faults. This news
gave an Allarum to the whole City, The discreetest of them represented to the
rest how the Rich did now begin to dye of famine: as well as the poor, having
sold the greatest part of their victuals to those that had none, upon hopes of
the English relief, that death made an harvest of them, that since the last six
months there had died between eight and ten thousand of famine, insomuch that
not having where withal to bury the dead, and indeed having hardly any people
strong enough to make their graves, or carry them, insomuch that they were
forced to draw them with cords into the Churchyards, and there to let them
rot, that diverse had been seen to crawl with much ado to the Churchyards and
there lay down and dye; hereupon the rest of the people languishing, and
touched to the quick, with the remembrance, or indeed the present image of so
many horrible spectacles, resolved to try their fortune to appease, if
possible, the Kings just indignation by imploring his mercy: They entreated the
Sieur Arnoult to procure a safe conduct that they might send their Deputies to
his Majesty, which upon his Request was granted; But his Majesty would that
they should first make their proposals to Monsieur the Cardinal, to whom they
went with an unspeakable joy, and thereupon this grand Minister producing those
Deputies which he had kept to that purpose, let them discourse with one another
who having assured them that they themselves had obtained the Kings pardon,
represented to them that they likewise had nothing now to hope for, if they did
not totally submit themselves to the discretion of his Majesty's mercy; but
miserably to dye by famine, his Majesty being resolved never to depart from
thence, till he was Master of the Town.

They were much surprised at this news having not heard of it till then, yet
they were insolent enough to make propositions of peace, still relishing of
their former mutiny. This grand Minister declared to them, they must not think
of any other conditions, than absolutely to submit to his Majesty's will, but
however promised them that he would employ his utmost power in their behalf; so
they returned promising to dispose their Fellow-citizens to it, as much as in
them lay, testifying as much satisfaction and joy as they who are reprieved
from the Galleys. After this meeting they published all over the Town, how
kindly the Cardinal had entertained them with assurances he had given them to
employ his interest with his Majesty to obtain the same grace for them, which
he had for those with the English, whose Deputies they had spoken with,
conjuring every one to accept of it: The height of that misery to which they
were reduced did at last quash their mutinies, although some of their Ministers
not ignorant that power was the worthiest stipend of their insolences,
animated them by the hopes of glory, which they should obtain by dying for the
liberties of their Religion; so they could not presently resolve to surrender
to the Kings mercy, but proposed to make a general peace for all those of their
party that they might choose a Governor, that they might choose a Mayor, and
Sheriffs, and generally the preservation of their privileges, to which end
their Deputies made diverse journeys to and fro, but Monsieur de Cardinal, who
never omitted any thing that concerned the glory of his Master, and on the
other side knew the extremities to which they were reduced still told them;
They must either all dye by famine, or submit to his Majesty's discretion. This
plain dealing of his did at last force them to stoop, whereupon they chose
twelve of the principal amongst them, most of which could hardly creep to beg
his Majesty's pardon, to assure him that they would live and die in the
obedience which they owed unto him, without demanding any other conditions,
then what his Majesty should please to give them, and one of the best Orators
amongst them made their speech, which was all to that purpose. The King
granted them the pardon which they desired and the Sieur d' Herbant Secretary
of State read the Pattent to them, by which his Majesty pardoned their
Rebellion, discharged them of all acts of Hostility ordained that they should
be restored to their goods, granted them the exercise of their Religion in the
City, and commanded that all the Soldiers in the City should enjoy the same
grace; and that the chief Captains and Gentlemen should go out with their
Swords by their sides, and the Soldiers with Cudgells in their hands, but
first they were to swear, never to bear Arms against his Majesty's service.

Politic Observation.
THough Rebels have been so stout, as to let themselves be forced by a long
siedge and with great expense, yet it is more glorious for a King to deal
mercifully then severely with them. It is enough that they have already
suffered great miseries, unless there be a necessity of continuing the War
against others of their party, for in such case the evils they suffer are
examples to terrify others, and get moderation toward them is a charm which
may reduce those who are unconquered to reason. This moderation is sometimes
like a precious balm, which takes away the pain of any would how mortal soever,
whereas too too strict severity drives to despair, I should not be of this
opinion where Rebels are forced in a few days, but where they have endured the
miseries, which accompany long siedges: Then I must confess, it were not amiss
to expiate the crimes of all by the lives of some, which were a cruelty too
suparlative after the rigors and unconceiveable miseries of many months; for
then, a true courage is rather touched with compunction than revenge. The Roman
Valor is often comnended for this by Antiquity, and who knows not how
sensibly compassionate they were at the sight of their miseries, whom they had
vanquished? Marcellus having mastered Syracusa, and considering the ruin to
which it was reduced, could not forbear weeping: Neither could Pompey endure
that Tygrances King of Armenia should remain Prostrate before him, whatever War
he had made against the Roman people, but raised him up and restored him his
Crown; and the Emperor Titus seeing the calamities of Jerusalem, caused by his
siedge the multitude of dead carcasses which filled up the City, protested he
was not the Author of it, and that he was only the instrument of Gods justice.

His Majesty's Entrance into Rochel.
Upon the thirtieth of October the Duke d' Angoulesme, the Marshal de Scomberg,
the Sieurs de la Curee, Vignolle, Hallier, St. Chaumont, and diverse other
Lords, fourteen Companies of the Regiment des Gardes, and six of Swisses, began
about six in the morning to enter into Rochel. The Cardinal persuaded his
Majesty for prevention of any confusion which might arise in the Town, by
reason of some curiosity, or other that the people might have to go into it; to
command, that none but they who were appointed should presume to go within the
Gates, or into any Houses, until leave obtained, both to secure the inhabitants
from being pillaged, as also for purifying of the place, and men, who were most
infected by dead Bodies, insomuch that the ill air, bred many diseases. The
King placed himself upon the Fort de Beaulieu, to see the Forces march into the
Town, and having seen a certain Soldier, not belonging to the Companies
appointed to take possession of the Town, but of that of Sourdis, he commanded
him to withdraw, testifying by this procedure, that he had a most particular
knowledge of most of his Soldiers. They who commanded these Forces, seized on
all the Gates of the Town, the Ramparts, Cannon, and munition, and sent away
the Soldiers, the English by Sea, and the French by Land, who looked more like
Ghosts then Men. There were as many Citadels as Gates, and as many Castles, as
Towers, and this was it, as made the City be esteemed impregnable, especially
seeing it had an outlet by Sea, which could never have in broken up, but by
his Majesty extraordinary power and prudence, yet all served but as Trophies,
raised to his Majesty's glory.

Monsieur the Cardinal entered the same day with diverse Lords and Gentlemen
without any fear of infection, because his presence was very necessary both for
his Majesty's service, and to settle things in order, but he beseeched his
Majesty to forbear his own entrance until All Saints day, that his Quarters
might be purged from all ill air, and that every thing might be made ready to
receive him, according to his quality and that occasion. The day being come,
his Majesty made his entrance not with that magnificence which the ancient
Emperors and Kings used, into such Towns as they had taken, according as
History has observed, but clothed with Piety and the Mercy of a most
Christian King, Virtues however, which made him shine with so much splendor,
that those poor Rebels prostrated themselves as he rid by them, that they might
the more acknowledge the mercy and favor he had done them: He had his Arms on,
and rid in on Horseback without any Ceremony, only four Companies of his
Guards, two of Swisses, his two Troops of Lighthorse armed Cap-a-pe, his
Dragoons, and the Lifeguard marched before him, all the Nobility following
him, without any order to avoid the disputes of Precedence.

The inhabitants cast themselves on their knees, as his Majesty passed along
the streets, crying, God save the King who has been so gracious unto us: And
he frequently saluted those who seemed to be of the better sort amongst them.
They redoubling their cries and acclamations, protested they could not
sufficiently admire his Majesty's Bounty, who instead of putting them all to
death, as their Preachers had persuaded them he would, did even receive them
with respect and honor. But those submissions and acknowledgements were much
more increased when they received the tend thousand Loaves of Bread, which his
Majesty distributed amongst the^ the same day, together with diverse other Alms
which his Ma. bestowed on them; but when they beheld that there came three
thousand Carts laden with Wheat and Provisions into the Town with a
proportionate number of Beasts, and Cattle, which his Majesty commanded to be
brought as sold at the usual rates of the Army, they could then no longer
forbear to confess, that he knew how to pardon, as well as vanquish. They did
not so much admire that his Majesty should be victorious, as that he should
Crown it with an Olive branch of so great mercy. The King went and alighted at
Saint Margarites Church, which had been consecrated by the Bishop of Bourdeaux,
and where Monsieur the Cardinal with diverse Ecclesiastiques, had that morning
celebrated Mass by way of Thanksgiving for the happy Victory, which Heaven had
bestowed on the Crown of France, he was received by the Archbishop, assisted
by the Clergy and diverse other religious, who sung the Te Deum, and he himself
too sung it, with so great devotion, that a certain Gentleman who saw him, and
one of the Townsmen, professed they would shake hands with Heresy, protesting
they could not believe but that so fervent a devotion must needs be the Index
of a better Religion, then that in which they had till then lived. About two
days after his Majesty caused the Holy Sacrament, which had of late been so
much scorned and neglected in the Town, to be carried in Procession, which was
performed with as much Devotion as Pomp.

Last of all, that he might render thanks unto God whom he looked on as the
chief giver of this Victory, he writ to the Archbishop of Paris that a
public Thanksgiving might be made, and himself returning to Paris passed by
Nostre Dame des Ardilliers that he might pay his vows there; for to his
devotions there he ascribed his first Victories, as that of the releeving Ree,
upon which the whole success depended.

Politic Observation.
IT is but reasonable to give God thanks for a Victory, which is his own gift.
But he much more loves those who do it in effects, not by words. There can be
no greater return of thanks then to imitate his bounty which is pleased to do
good unto us. A generous Conqueror ought not to spill the Blood, and destroy
the lives of those whom he has overcome. Amongst the Pagans it was a usual
thing to succonr and assist the wounded, to relieve them with their own hands,
and do good unto them: how much more reason have Christian Princes then, to
imitate so Christian like a verrue? It is not less glorious to overcome an
Enemy by Clemency and meekness, then by Force and Prudence. Jesus Christ has
promised a reward to such as do good for evil, and he says, Mercy is that
which makes men known for the Sons of his Father, who has made the Sun to
shine both upon the good and bad; and Kings had need make themselves acceptable
to God, whose Image they are, by reason they have a greater account to render
him then the rest of men. God Almighty says, With the same measure that you
measure, will I measure out to you again* insomuch that the virtue of Clemency
and mercy used toward poor vanquished Creatures, ought no longer be esteemed a
virtue, but a necessary means of salvation. I should add one more reason out of
Polybius his History, which is, good deeds are a Chain of Gold, which do much
more fix and establish the interests of Kings then those of Iron; and if
Religion seem to invite them to practice it, neither does reason of State any
whit less; what was it which tied the Celtiberians so strictly and
affectionately to the Roman interest, but that generous and noble Act of Scipio
the Affrican, who restored a noble Lady his Prisoner to her husband, without
doing her any violence or injury, and returned him all the Gold which had been
brought for her ransom? Did not Cyrus gain by his handsome treating of Cresus,
after he had vanquished him? Did not that tie up the hands of all Greece, who
would out of the great affection they did bear to him, have highly resented any
injury done to him? The Roman Senate did much blame their Consul, Popilius for
his rude treating of the Genois, and commanded reparation to be made them,
because they esteemed the honor of a Victory, not complete, where it was
attended with any cruelties or rigours. Those Princes who are good to their
Prisoners, and those whom they have vanquished, are not only commendable, but
delightful to those they rule over. The Romans having reduced Capadocia to a
Province diminished the Tax which they used formerly to pay unto their own
King, because they knew that the clemency and sweetness of their Empire, would
invite others to submit to them with the less reluctance and resistance.

His Majesty's Declaration for estblishing of the Catholic Religion in Rochel.
IF it be glorious to overcome, it is no less important to take such care as
may confirm the Victory. To this purpose his Majesty before he left Rochel,
published a Declaration comprehending that order which he would have observed
there for the future, both to establish Religion, and to prevent this people
from relapsing into their former Rebellion. This Declaration contained, that
the exercise of the Roman Catholic and Apostolic Religion, should be freely
exercised there, both in the City and Government of Aulnis; that the Churches
which had been lately destroyed thereabouts, should be re-edified and restored
to them in whose possession they formerly were, together with all their
appurtenances; that a sufficient maintenance should be given to such Curats as
had not means to live on, out of those lands which belonged to the Townhouse.
That the Religieux de la Charity, and Les Religiouses Hospitalieres, should be
re-established in the Hospitals of the Town, to attend upon all sick persons.
That a Cross should be raised in the Castle-yard, at the foot of which an
Inscription of the taking the City should be inscribed; and that every first of
November a Procession general should be made, to give God thanks for his
mercies; that the Churchyard consecrated in the lands of Corcille, where those
of the Camp, who died during the siege had been buried, should still he
conserved to that use; that a convent of Religieux Minimes should be built
there, who might pray unto God for them, and perpetuate the memory of the
thing; this is that which his Majesty did for thanksgiving to God and the
consolation of the Catholic party in the Town.

The Course his Majesty took to keep Rochel in Obedience.
IF his Piety were so admirable in that particular, his Prudence was no less
in commanding all such things as were necessary for the preservation of the
Town in its duty. He deposed the Mayor, who had fomented the Rebellion with
such insolent stubbornness, and discharged the Shrivalty and Commonalty of the
Town without hopes of restoration. He ordained that the most seditious persons
of the city should forsake it, and amongst others, G^ison Mayre, God^^ray,
Sal^bre^, and Deserbr^^res, not so much as excepting the Dame de Rohan, who was
carried to Niort, by the Sieux de Lannay Lieutenant des Gardes des Corpse. Next
he revoked all the Privileges and Charters heretofore granted to the City He
commanded the Walls, the Rampards, the Bastions, and the rest of the
Fortifications to be razed, and the Ditches to be filled up, leaving only the
Tours de St. Nicholas, de la Ghai^^, and de la Lantern standing, with that part
of the Wall toward the Sea, to preserve the Town from Pirates. He further
constituted and appointed, that no stranger should have a house or family in
the Town, without his Majesty's permission had and obtained, or that any
Heretics should return to their former dwellings: To be short, he ordained
for the better keeping them in their obedience, that there should be an
intendent of Justice in the City, Country, and Government of Aulnis, who should
see the execution of his Ordinances, and have an eye to that which concerned
his service, all which was inserted in the said Declaration. He then commanded
the inhabitants to be disarmed, and that certain Regiments should remain in the
Town until it were quite demolished. After all these things thus appointed, he
returned to Paris, where he was received in great magnificence, the Companies
of the City, making Orations unto him: But I pass by the particulars of those
Ceremonies, and confine my self to my design of writing nothing but what
relates to the Government of the State.

Politic Observation.
HAnnibal was discommended for not knowing how to pursue a Victory when
obtained; and that Sovereign does little or nothing, who after a reducing of
those Rebels that attempted to shake off the yoke of their obedience,
neglects to fix and settle them by all necessary orders and rules, for the
continuation of them in their duties. His orders ought to be proportioned to
the quality of the vanquished; who if they be Rebels, ought to be treated in
another manner, then such as were under another Government: It ought likewise
to be remembered, whether they who are vanquished be of the same Religion with
the Conqueror; and in case they are not, then to establish diverse such persons
there, who profess the same with his own, and this he is obliged to by
Prudence as well as Piety: It being an assured remedy of weakening a people if
they be divided, and that a party be made sure of amongst them. The ancient
Kings of Egypt did wisely tolerate and establish all sorts of Religion in
their Countries and Kingdoms to the intent the diversity of opinions might
dis-unite them from any Revolts: On the other side, if those whom a Sovereign
overcommeth be his own natural Subjects, he ought not totally to destroy their
Cities and Towns, for that were to weaken his own power. Which is the same
thing that Craesus persuaded to Cyrus, when he had been vanquished by him, do
not (quoth he, I beseech you) destroy the Towns of Lydia, for by it you will
not destroy me but your self, to whom by right of Arms they now belong; but
however this rule admits of exception. For if a Sovereign has the least
suspicion that they may revolt a second time, he is then bound to deprive them
of all possible means to effect it, be it either by disarming the inhabitants,
or dismantling their Fortifications, nay by levelling their very Walls too, if
they are of any considerable strength. Thus did the Romans destroy Velitre, by
reason of their frequent revolts, turned out the Senate, and commanded them to
live on the other side of Tyber. The strength and Fortifications of a Town do
often invite the people to rebel, as Tacitus observes, speaking of Jerusalem:
To which same purpose did Xerxes prohibit the use of any Arms to the
Babylonians, and Cyrus to the Lydians, both of them commanding those people to
study Arts which might divert them from War. It were not much amiss to deprive
them of the means of making assemblies. The Romans have showed the way of it,
by destroying all form of Government amongst those of Capua, after they had
overcome them, whereby they had not any occasion of assembling any more
together as formerly they had used. To this same end too has the Turks
inhibited the use of Clocks, amongst the Christians, or any others over his
whole Empire, to prevent the meeting of any Assemblies, which might be contrary
to his will, and the obedience he requires from them. But they who are
Victorious ought always to accompany their commands with some sweetness,
which may tolerate to them the exercise of their Religion, the assurance of
their goods or the like, but then at last he must be sure to take from them all
possible means of a future Revolt and Insurrection.

The Honor which his Majesty got by the taking of Rochel.
THE most ingenious of men, and even the Pope himself, extolled the glorious
^tchievment which his Majesty had obtained; indeed he could not be praised
enough, considering he had defeated three English Fleets, releeved the Isle of
Ree, and overcome a City which through all Christendom was thought
impregnable, and by such a means too as was no less admirable then the taking
of the Town it self and without the loss of almost one man, although Charles
the ninth lost the lives of many great Commanders, and shot ten thousand great
Guns at it, and could do no good upon it. How glorious was it for him, to have
restored this Monarchy to its ancient splendor and luster, by destroying a
Faction which had so often armed some of his Subjects against the rest, which
hindered him from being assisting to his Allies, and prevented him from
regaining that honor and esteem in Europe, which his Predecessors had held as
their due. This rebellious Town had for above two hundred years banded against
their Kings, whenever they were upon any great expedition, as against Lewis the
eleventh, during the broyls of the Duke de Guienn his Brother against Charles
the Eighth, when all Italy expected him at Fornove against Lewis the Twelfth,
whilst he was in the Wars for the Milanois, against Francis the first, whiles
he was engaged with Charles the fifth, against Francis the second, and Charles
the ninth, does in his minorities, against Henry the third, arming his brother
to oppose him, against Henry the Great, just as he was engaging against the
Duke of Savoy: And lastly, against his Majesty himself, upon whom they had
thrice mad War; but now their strong Walls being overthrown, served for
Monuments of his eternal glory.

Monsieur the Cardinal did much contribute to the taking of Rochel.
THe Cardinal being the chief Minister in this Affair as well as that of the
State, it were unreasonable to deny him some part of the credit: They who writ
concerning those Subjects made the less difficulty of it, in regard his
Majesty attributed the whole management of it to his Councils, as by diverse
Declarations published abroad was apparent, neither could it indeed be denied
unto him, seeing he it was that advised the besieging of Rochel, who had
contrived the means of releeving Ree, who had beaten off the English, who had
first laid the Foundations of the siedge, who had drawn the Lines and Works,
who had preserved them in good order, who had kept the Forces from disbanding,
who had made them live in such a Discipline, as was formerly unheard of in
France, who had contrived the Bank, and at last concluded a League with the
English, who were come a third time to releeve the place. But as the most
glorious acts expose men to most envy, so some malignant Pens there were who
dis-esteemed and spoke lightly of him; nay would have made his greatest
services have been esteemed for attempts against his Majesty's Crown, yet all
would not do, some impression indeed they made upon them of the Cabal, who
could not behold without envy so shining a Star; they who are well acquainted
with him, cannot but know how that he always, and upon all occasions, avoided
what ever might expose him to envy, that he did ever ascribe all the glory of
his conduct and government to his Majesty; and that on the other side, the most
that he ever pretended to in his greatest Actions, was only the honor to have
served him faithfully and not improfitably; they cannot but know he could not
more fitly be compared to any one then unto Germanicus, Nephew and adopted son
of Tiberius, who having obtained a great Victory in Germany, prepared a fair
Trophy, at the foot of which was inscribed, The Army of Tiberius. Casar, as
Tacitus has observed, after the reducing of the people between the Rhine and
Elbe, raised a Monument to Mars, Jupiter, and Augustus, but mentioned not
himself: And thus the honor of doing those glorious actions which he every day
achieved, was by him esteemed both his satisfaction and reward.

Politic Observation.
WHat ever honor is attributed to second causes, upon the effecting of great
things, yet the chief glory redounds unto the first, not only because he
communicates all the power which second causes have to operate; but withal,
because those effects depend upon his particular influence. It cannot be
denied, but second cause deserved commendation, and indeed without injustice,
it cannot be gainsaid, but that they have likewise much contributed. The Sun,
in the Universal Principium of the generation of all Plants, he it is who
extracteth the Germinative quality, wherewith the earth is replenished, who
produces the Flowers and Fruits, wherewith it is adorned it being most
assuredly true, that without his influences the earth would remain fruitless,
dry and barren: Which though it be so, yet what Philosopher did ever deny, that
the earth was not one of the chief causes of all those effects? Have they not
all confessed that the earth produces Lillies and Roses? And was not that
Sophister esteemed a Novice who denied the Title of Mother to her? In the same
manner, God is doubtless, the first Author of every thing done in the World,
yet no Philosopher will deny, but that the Sun and Man beget Man, that the Sun
and Horse beget a Horse, they having some part of his glory, by the honor
which they have of being his Subjects; and God himself jealous though he be of
his own glory, as he protests in one of the Prophets, has he not commanded
us to honor his Saints, as the second causes of Miracles, to build Churches,
raise Altars, make Vows unto them, and to publish their praises, for those
Miracles which his omnipotent hand has wrought by them his instruments? And
were he not besotted, who should refuse this honor to the Prince of the
Apostles, when his very shadow cured so many diseases, though effected by a
divine power, really less inhaerent in him, then that which grand Ministers
have in themselves for the public good? If perverse obstinacy should transport
any one, to deny them this respect, may they not easily be convinced by Gods
own example, when he spoke unto Moses saying, Thou have led my people out of
Egypt, though indeed it was the work of his own hand? God well knew that he
had made use of Moses his servant, as the chief Minister of his Kingdom, and
for the Conductor of his people, and therefore how jealous so ever he were of
his own glory, yet he would ascribe it to him, as well knowing, that the honor
attributed to second causes, does not at all diminish that which is due unto
the first. This is the true image of honor which ought to be given unto
Ministers, for the services which they pay unto their Sovereigns; and who need
be jealous of it, seeing God is not? A King and his Minister are so strictly
united, as the hand and instrument in the Artificer, so that nothing but malice
and envy can oppose that praise which is due to a Minister, who has effected
any enterprise with success, tending to the public good of the Kingdom. As
the King is first and chief, so the first and chief honor is his, but then
without injustice his Miniser cannot be denied the sharing of some part with
him, who has been his instrument to obtain it.

The expenses of the Siege of Rochel, amount unto forty millions of Livres.
THe greatness of the expense before Rochel can hardly be imagined, without
considering the particulars, as the punctual paying of the whole Army, the
building of the Bank, Munitions of all sorts and the like. They who disbursed
the several sums reckon it at forty Millions, but the particular diligence and
care of the Marquess d' Effat, Superintendent of the Exchequer to provide all,
that there might not be any want, deserves (and undoubtedly so will) to pass
in History for a particular commendation. He entered upon the Treasuries at a
time when they were fifty millions of Livres in debt, and the Treasurers hardly
perswadable to assist his Majesty in any of his occasions, by reason of the
review which had so lately been made amongst them; the Parliament too had much
ado to be persuaded to rat fie Ed^cts for to raise money, yet he used such
address and diligence, that not only there was no want of money, but the
charge was less then formerly it had used to be, and in such expeditions where
the Soldiers were hardly paid at all, such and so great care did he use in the
charge of the Treasuries. There was a necessity of making some new Edicts, but
the chief means he used were, according to the Cardinals instructions, to cut
off all superfluous expenses to commit the management of those sums which were
expended unto persons of known fidelity and trust. The Cardinal did not only
lend out upon this occasion what moneys he had in his own Coffers, but engaged
his credit as far as it would go, to raise more amongst his kindred and
friends. He was not so sittle affectionate to his Masters service as the
Cardianal d' Amien^ was (...) who still sent out of the Kingdom all those
gratifications which he received, like unto those Courtisans who love the money
better then the man, and measure their pleasure by their profit, whereas the
Cardinal prefered his Masters glory, before the whole Indiaes, he studied
nothing but the increase of it, and the continuation of himself in his favor,
that he might to that purpose contribute his utmost care and devoir.

Politic Observation.
Physicians tell us, that man's body could neither stand nor go without Nerves,
Muscles, and the like, and it is no less certain, that the body of an Army
cannot march or long subsist, without a great mass of money to maintain them.
That Prince who has no Silver, will presently want meat for his Forces, be can
neither provide them Arms or Clothes, and necessity once pinching upon them,
away they all fly, if any perchance stay behind they are weak as water, faint
and unable to do any service; whereas Plenty of money makes an Army flourish,
and in heart one of the greatest means the Duke of Parma used, to uphold the
Wars in Flanders and France, was to see a daily distribution of the Ammunitions
and bread delivered out unto the Soldiers, to see them once a year clothed
from head to foot, and monthly paid, without which he could never have had
preserved his army so flourishing and victorious as he did. It is true indeed
(...) was to blame, so highly to vaunt before Solon the Athenian, when he
showed him his (...) riches; Solon told him he did not esteem him any whit the
more potent, because war was made with Iron not with Gold: however it cannot be
denied but that as Levies cannot be made without money, so in some sort money
is as necessary as Soldiers.

A small Prince if he have great treasures, may have the command of a great
army though his Subjects are but few, others will willingly let him make Levies
in their Countries; but he who wants money how great soever he be, can neither
raise any or keep them long together when they are raised. I have always much
esteemed the advice of Pericles, one of the ablest Captains of his time, who
said that Victories were commonly obtained by these three means, Money,
Soldiers, and Council; and to speak the truth, who is defective in either of
the three must not expect an happy success in his enter prises Caesar was not
ignorant how necessary a thing money was for the encouragement of Soldiers, as
I have heretofore observed, and History reports of him, that he was liberal in
distributing it among them, when by any exploit they had well deserved it; of
which he has left behind him one notable example, when after that his forces
had endured much hardship before Berry, he made a Donative of 2000 Sesterces to
every man. To conclude, it is no less requisite to settle an order in the
Treasuries, then to have as good foundation of money; for the effecting of
which, it were good to employ understanding faithful men, for the payment of
Soldiers, and the punishing of those who commit offenses, to make a weekly
pay-day to all the Soldiers, it being more proper to pay them often and
little, then seldom and by great sums, which they consume in a short time by a
natural ill husbandry, without considering that that once gone they are liable
to a thousand wants and inconveniences, which may happen by sickness to the
very great decay of them Courages and Resolutions.

The Kings Forces are Masters of the Field in Languedoc.
THe revolt of the Towns in Languedoc, which the Duke of Rohan had gotten into
about the beginning of the year, did at first make a great noise, but soon
after Monsieur the Prince, the Dukes of Montmorency and Vantadour, who
commanded his Majesty's forces, become Masters of the field, and before the end
of it repossessed themselves of all those palces, which were capable of being
forced in a few days; for they thought it improper to engage themselves in any
long sieges, because that might have given the Duke of Rohan opportunity to
seize upon others. Monsieur the Prince presently took Poussin, and many other
places upon the Rhone, which were of great importance in those Countries, by
reason of the hinderance they brought to Commerce. Not long afterward he
marched toward Tholouze, that he might confer with the Duke of Montmorency,
Vantadour, and d' Espernon, who were to be there, to consider what was fit to
be done. Now as he passed by Tarascon he had intelligence given that those of
Nismes, had seized of the Castle de Vauvert, belonging to the Duke of
Vantadour, and he finding himself obliged by many considerations, concludes to
pursue them; but they of Nismes seeing him come up near unto them, forthwith
surrendered it up into his power. His Courage made his journey to Tholouze the
longer, but having had the satisfaction of reducing this place, he arrived
there with great content, and after some conferences had with those Lords who
met there; it was ordered that the Duke of Vantadour should take some forces
into Vivaretz, to impede the Duke of Rohans proceedings in the Sevennes, that
the Duke of Espernon should march toward Milhaud in Rovengue, the Count de
Carmain, with some Regiments to Foix, which the Duke of Rohan had much ruined,
and that the Prince and Duke of Montmorency should remain in Tholouze until
March. Whilst they were yet there, the Parliament made the process against
the Duke of Rohan, and condemned him to be executed in Effigies, declaring his
Goods to be confiscated to the King, who bestowed them on Monsieur the Prince.
The States of the Province were at the same time assembled together, as well to
consult of the means for keeping their people in obedience, as to raise
contributions and taxes for the maintenance of the forces. The Kings Officers
pressed hard on the Rebels to engage them to fight, and sometimes met with
them; for they well knew that long deliberation is an enemy to good success,
especially in matters of War. The Duke of Vantadour went from Tholouze toward
Vivaretz about the end of January, and passing as near the Rebels as possibly
he could, he had notice given him that all their Cavalry were issued out of
Nisms, scouring up and down the Country, and that they committed all kind of
disorder under the command of the Sieurs de Laignes, de la Chassagne, and d'
Aubay. Hereupon he commanded his Troop of Curasiers, and that of his guard to
follow him, whom he carried up so near and advantagiously to the enemy, that he
engaged them broke their ranks, cut some in pieces, took diverse Prisoners, and
put the rest to flight.

The taking of Pamiers, and other places, by the Prince of Conde.
ABout the same time, the Sieur de Perant Governor of Vsez, fell upon six
hundred foot of Mamoirac's Regiment, seconded with a hundred Curassiers, and
fought with them. Marmoirac two of his Captains, one Ensign, and about one
hundred Soldiers were killed upon the place, the rest were pursued to the very
Gates. As for Monsieur the Prince, and the Duke de Montmorency they departed
from Tholouze, directly to Pamiers, where Beaufort the Duke of Rohans
Lieutenant General in Foix, had built a Citadel, which by the leisure he had,
was made very strong; they led up the Army to it, and made their approaches so
happily, that they only lost two men: Monsieur the Prince, raised a Battery,
filled up the Ditches, and prepared every thing for a Breach, the Battery was
so quick that in a few hours there was a reasonable way open, which the Prince
having notice of, he would needs go with the Marshals of the Camp to view it,
who drew out some of every Regiment to fall in upon the Town; which they did,
and being got over, lodged themselves under the Wall, being unable to pass
further on, by reason of the Trench they met with; but the standing which they
had was so advantageous, that the inhabitants could not offend them at all, and
not a man of the Town could appear, but they presently fetched him off with
their Muskets, insomuch that they forced them to demand quarter, which the
Prince caused to be given unto them, from thence he went to ^ealmont, a strong
Town in Alkigeois, against which place he raised three Batteries, which
thundering upon them, forced them to surrender upon composition: The next thing
he did was to dispatch the Marquess de Ragny with the fore guard toward
Castle Franc, which they reduced under his Majesty's obedience, and thence he
caused some Troops to face Cos^^ and Saint Seve^, Brassao and Castebrian, which
places were forced to open their Gates. The Harvest now was commin^^on, and the
Cardinal gave him and the Officers under him notice, that his Majesty thought
it not amiss to Forage round a hour Monta^^an, Cas^res, Nismes, and diverse
other principal Towns in Languedoc: These orders drew the Prince near to
Castres, the Duke de Montmorency before Nismes, and the Duke ^ Espernon before
Montau^^^. They (...) Castre having notice of the Princes design, drew all the
Forces they could make out of the neighboring Towns and Garrisons to prevent
the Forragers, and at first coming they made some skirmishes with his
Soldiers, and upon those who came within shot, they le^^flie their great Guns.
The Prince was not dismayed at it, but only looked on it as an occasion to
increase his glory. They whom he commanded to make the wast, fell lustily to
their work, to the admiration of all those in the Town, who with their whole
forces made a salley out upon them. Their first was a very violent encounter,
and maintained with great courage, until at last they were beaten back to the
very Ditches; from which time they did no more attempt to beat off the
Forragers from their work. The Duke de Montmorancy for his part, took Poussin
in his march, a Town re-fortified by the Duke of Rohan and Mirabel, a place of
importance, and then joining his forces to those the Duke de Vantadour, and
Marquess Desporsez, he went to Forage about Nismes, where the Duke of
Vantadour cut off about one hundred foot, whom he fell upon at unawares in a
Village not far from the Town. They were so fortunate that they did not only
bring Nismes to famine, but Vsez, Aletz, Aduze, and all the Sevennes, having
burned above fifty Villages with all the Corn then standing on the ground, both
old and new, neither durst the Duke of Rohan once attempt to prevent it. The
Duke of Espernon did the like about Montauban, and not long after the Duke de
Vantadours Troops of Curassiers, his Gardes and Carabines which were in
garrison at Beaucair, being commanded to march up toward N^smes, that they
might draw out their Forces to fight with them, went up and drove away all
their Cattle in sight of the Town, on purpose to invite them out; they
presently made their sally, and were so resolutely charged, that their horse
was broken, and the Dukes Forces broke quite thorough to the foot, left
threescore and seventeen dead upon the place, and about fifty wounded. After
this blow the Rebels durst not appear any where, their lucks was so bad, so
that the Kings Army were Masters of the field. The Prince finding his presence
was no more useful in those parts, obtained leave of his Majesty to return to
Berry.

Politic Observation.
HE who has persuaded any Towns to revolt, must not expect to keep them any
long time, unless he be Master of the Field; his hopes of maintaining them in
his own power will vanish, and he will soon see them re-taken by his Sovereign,
before his face, if once he be master of the Country: For as there is not any
place how weak soever, which does not hold out some small time, especially if
it be assisted: so there is not any place how strong soever, that can always
hold out it not releeved, that is, unless there be a sufficient power on foot,
to force him who is sat down before it, to raise his siege, or at least to
send Forces and Ammunitions into it. Places cannot defend themselves, but must
have men to do it for them; neither can the men ever do it, unless they have
refreshments both of victuals, munitions, and Soldiers, otherwise the
troubles, necessities, and discommodities of a Siege, will enforce them to
surrender whether they will or no. It is evident that if the Sovereign be
Master of the field, then the revolted Towns can hardly be releeved or
assisted, because of his greater power, to prevent and hinder it. Those places
I must confess which are strong indeed, seem to command and keep the Country
in subjection, but this power of theirs can be of no long date, unless their
fellow Rebels have a potent Army to assist them with Convoys both of Men,
Victuals, and Munition. The Tyrians were so insolent by reason their Town was
so strongly built upon a Rock in the Sea, that they mocked at Alexander when he
besieged them, and made a Bank about them to keep off any relief from coming
unto them; they asked of him if he designed to make himself greater then
Neptune, by that device of his to overcome the Sea, his Soldiers they called
Asses and beasts, because they labored without ceasing in carrying matterials
toward the Bank; but at last Alexander having reduced the neighboring
Country, finished his works which he had projected; and finally, forced them to
render at his mercy. Which being so, the best advice that can be given to a
Sovereign for the preventing of a Revolt or the progress of it, is, forthwith
to make himself master of the field, and to fall upon them and their Towns,
without giving them leisure to increase their numbers, or fortify their
Cities. For showing a resolution to force them by Arms, if they submit not by
fair means, is a most powerful way to open the strongest gates whatever.
Maharbal General of Hannibals horse, was not ignorant of this particular, when
his advice was forthwith to march up to the Gates to Rome, after that famous
Battle of Cannes, telling him, that there being hardly any forces at all near
or about the City, he would infallibly in a little while become Master of that
too; Hannibal followed not his Council, but those who persuaded him to give his
Soldiers breath, but yet every one concluded he lost a most fair opportunity;
it having been a most easy thing in that conjuncture of time to have carried
his victorious Troops to Rome, and to have forced the Citizens to set open
their Gates unto him. Caesar never did so, but when ever he found himself
master of the field any where, presently went on to the perfecting of his
Conquest, which he could not think complete, whilst there remained any thing
undone, or any small place untaken.

The Duke of Savoy enters into a League with the Governor of Milan, to fall
upon the States of the Duke de Nevers and Mantua.
Whilst his Majesty was thus engaged before Rochel and in Languedoc, the Duke
of Savoy, and Do^n Joncales de Cordona, Governor of Milan, seeing the Duke of
Nevers had taken possession of the Duchess of Mantua and Montferrat made a
League together. The Articles imported that the Duke of Savoy should endeavor
to make himself master of all the places in Montferrat, excepting Casal, Po^t
Desture, Nice, Aqui, and some other places, and that the Marquess de
Montenigro, should fall in upon the State of Mantoua, and get what he could
there. The Emperor being wrought to it, by the Spaniards, commanded without
regard had to the Duke of Nevers submissions, which he had sent to him by the
Archbishop of Mantua, that those Dutchies should be in sequestration until the
claim of Prince Gastles, who pretended himself heir to them, were adjudged and
determined, and sent the Comte J^an de Nassan, in the quality of an Imperial
Commissary, to seize on them, and there to fortify himself that the King nor
Princes of Italy might enter upon it. In brief, the Duke of Savoy having his
Army ready, upon the first news of Duke Vincents death, seized upon Albe,
Saint Damien, Dian, Trin, Gabian, and Motecalvo; Don Joncales, went with his
Army to Casal, where finding himself opposed, he made himself Master of the
adjacent places; and the Marquess de Montenigro invaded Mantua to get what
advantages he could. The Duke of Matnua hereupon, dispatched one in all have
unto his Majesty, for those succors which had been promised to him; and in the
mean time he himself had raised an Army of about twelve thousand foot, and two
thousand horse; part he sent into Montferrat the rest he kept in Mantua and
thereabouts, to binder the Marquess de Montiningro's progress in the Mantu^^.
The King being informed of these violent emotions, permitted all Monsieur de
Mantua's friends to go to his assistance, and his Highness to ralse what
Forces he thought fit in the Kingdom of France; insomuch that shortly after
the Marquess de Beuuron, carried with him store of French over the Mountains
of Savoy, who cast themselves into Cazal, and so encouraged the inhabitants
that Don Joncales began to lose his former hopes of so speedily taking it. The
Sieur de Guron was likewise sent by his Majesty thither presently after, who so
got the good Will of the people there, that they parted willingly with any
thing they had; nay the Women would deliver up their Rings and Jewels, that the
Soldiers might not want their pay. The Spaniards in the mean time were not
idle, but used their best endeavors to gain the place, but were always
repulsed with such courage that they never went off but to their great loss.
The Marquess de B^uuron made diverse Sallies upon them, and did as often put
them to disorder, but was at last killed, after he had on many occasions
testified, that fear had no corner in his heart, and that his courage could
have make him withstand a Puissant Army with a handful of men. The Sieur de
Guron commanded in the town after his death, where he so behaved himself, that
the Townsmen were persuaded to hold out in expectation of relief from France.

The King having give leave to the Marquess d' Vxelles, to make Levies for
Monsieur de Mantua, he had at last raised as many as he thought would be
sufficient for the business, which was about fifteen of sixteen thousand men
effective. The Rendezvous was appointed in the Bailiages of Ambrun, Gap and
Briancon, where being all come together, they who had the orders to make the
muster, and pay them, and make provisions necessary for their passage over the
Mountains, were so neglectfull, that they were forced to stay thereabouts in
those Bailiages about twenty days time, during which they committed many
insolences and wastes, which the Marquess de Vxelles finding he was almost in
despair, to see such disorders, all that he could do to remedy it, was, he
procured the Country people to provide a certain quantity of Provisions both
for Man and War, and to carry them after the Army over the Mountains, some part
of their money he paid them down in hand, and for the residue he obliged
himself in his own name to pay them, upon the first Muster. Whereupon he began
to march, and on the twenty seventh of July, entered into the Mountains, where
he no sooner appeared, but the Duke of Savoy came up to them and opposed them
wherever they went. The resistance which he here met, did not very much
trouble him, for he often beat them before him; but it was his misfortune,
that the Provisions promised by those of Dauphine, did not follow the Army;
insomuch that the Soldiers having marched some days without any bread, he was
at last forced to resolve upon returning back again; their retreat indeed was
honorable enough; for the Sieur de la Ferte Marshal de Camp facing the enemy
with three Regiments upon the tops of two Mountains, gave opportunity to the
rest of the Troops to retire into Dauphine, which the Duke of Savoy could not
perceive until they were quite gone.

Politic Observation.
THE Laws of military policy require the preparing of great Magazines near the
places designed for an enterprise, before the first attempt; and especially not
to enter upon an enemies Country without making sure of a daily provision for
the Soldiers, that they are not brought to want. Armies are oftener ruined by
hunger then by Battle; whence it happens that he who is not very careful of
carrying his Provisions with him, or sure of finding them where he comes, will
soon see himself destitute of Troops; and in such confusion as will render him
contemptible to his enemies, and despicable to his friends. This was one of the
rules Cambises taught his son Cyrus, as Xenophon relates it, and Cyrus was no
less careful to practice it in the Wars which he made against the Assyrians,
as the same Author observes. The Turks are very exact at it, indeed their
temperance gives them one great advantage, because the carriage of them is not
very difficult, amongst them, who use neither Wine nor other dainties. It were
to be wished that ours would follow their example, because the plenty in which
most of our Commanders have used to live, renders them unable for labor, or to
make any great enterprises upon the Spaniard, by reason of the difficulty of
carrying provisions with them. The Romans were not ignorant of this truth, when
their Empire was in its most flourishing condition; and for this reason it was,
that they accustomed their forces to great abstinency, and those Nations which
were least brought up in delicacies, were always by them esteemed the most
warlike. Thus Julius Caesar thought the Flemmings more valiant then the rest
of the Gauls, because they lived upon harder fare. Hannibal to his cost found
what losses befell his Army, after they had been accustomed to a lithe ease and
plenty, when after the battle of Cannes, warring with less fear of the Romans,
he permitted them to live in all pleasure and abundance, and afterward being
to make use of them, he found that by that means they had lost their courages.
A Captain however in avoiding this delicacy, ought not to be defective in
carrying that which is necessary for his Soldiers. The inconveniences which
will follow by such neglect, are not only as has been said, that he will see
them disband, but withal he will find them to run to his enemies Quarters, in
hope to find there better maintenance. Thus did the most part of Afranius and
Petrius soldiers fly to Caesar's Camp, and those of Caesar upon the like
necessity went unto Pompey; besides all this, want occasioneth diseases, as the
French found at Carignan (as Guieciardin reports) and sometimes causes a
Mutiny: In fine, it is impossible in such occasions but a Commander must soon
see his forces in confusion among themselves, and vanquished by their enemies,
as Vegetius has very judicially observed.

The King takes care of the Affairs of his Allies the Grisons.
ALthough his Majesty was careful of Monsieur de Mantua his affairs, yet did
he not abandon those of the Grisons his ancient Allies; but endeavored to put
them into the enjoyment of that, which had been accorded them by the Treaty at
Mouson: He had about the end of the last year sent a Declaration to the Sieur
Nesmin, his Ambassador with those people; which imported, that according to a
Clause of the first Article in that Treaty, the agreements made at Lindan and
Coire, between the Archduke Leopold, the Governors of Milan, and the three
Cantons of the Grisons in the year 1617* until the day and date of the Treaty
at Mouson, ought to be null and void, and that all the Ambassadors assembled
in Treating with the Spaniards, were promised as much; yet now the Spaniards
would needs give other interpretations for their own advantage to that first
Article, though in it self nothing could be clearer, upon which great contests
did arise between the Grisons, the Spaniards, and the Archduke Leopold. Now
the Grisons desiring his Majesty would clear the doubt, he could not only not
refuse them, but moreover promise them that they should enjoy the benefit of
the said Treaty, and that he would assist them with his Arms, against any that
should pretend to make use of revoked Treaties to their prejudice. They
received this Declaration with a great deal of joy from the Sieur de Mesmin,
but that was not the only difficulty in the execution of the Treaty. The
Deputies of the Grisons and the Valtolines, did press his Majesty for an
exposition of other Articles, each of them pretending to interpret it according
to his own advantage, they that they ought to be established in the right of
Sovereignty over the Valtoline. The Comter de Chiaveunes and Bormio which they
had in the year, 1617, excepting what had been nominated in the Treaty; to wit,
the Justice and civil Government over the Valtolines; for which they were to
pay them the yearly rent of twenty five thousand crowns. The other were
animated by the Spaniards, that they ought absolurely to be exempted from the
Sovereignty of the Valtolines, without being obliged to any other duty then the
bare payment of the 25000 Crowns. Now it was likewise agreed in the said
Treaty, that in case any doubt should arise upon any words the interpretation
of it should be referred to the two Crowns, who should freely declare their
sense of it. His Majesty had oftentimes, by his Ambassadors, requested the
King of Spain his Brother in Law, that they might make a Declaration together
for the quiet of that people; but the Spaniard who only sought advantage from
their division, delayed the Ambassador so long, that his Majesty was at last
forced to make a Declaration himself conformable to the true meaning of the
intent of the Treaty, which implied, that not only the Treaties made at
Lindaw, Coire, and Milan, should be void and of no effect; but withal that
conformably to the second Article, the affairs of the Grisons and Valtolines
should be reduced to the same state they were in, in the year, 1617. by which
the Grisons were restored to the same Authority and Sovereignty, which they
that year had over the Valtolines, and the said Comtes; and that consequently
it belonged to them alone, and not the Valtolines their Subjects to make
Treaties of Peace, Alliances, War, to coin moneys, to grant or refuse the
Passages of the said Countries, to imposeTaxes, Contributions and the like, and
that the Valtolines could only pretend to the Justice and Civil government,
which for quietness sake had been granted to them under the yearly payment of
twenty five thousand crowns to the Grisons, who had the power of confirming the
Magistrates and Potestates by them elected. This Declaration was sent by the
King to the Sieur Mesmin, that he might by his Prudence procure is to be
accepted by both parties; to the end they might live in Peace; but with order
however not to deliver it until both parties had agreed, to submit to it
according to the form and tenure of it; as also not to discover it to one or
other, if he imagined both of them would make any difficulty to receive it,
that he might not put his royal authority into their hands. This was a
remarkable effect of the Cardinals Prudence, who knew that a Kings authority
ought never to be exposed to the contempt of his Allies; and not knowing
clearly how the people were inclined, persuaded his Majesty to commit the
execution of it to his Ambassadors discretion: The Sieur Mesmin finding the
Grisons and Valtolines not disposed to accept the Declaration according to all
its Clauses, after he had under hand discovered the pretensions and designs,
which the Spaniards had put into their heads to hinder their good intelligence,
that they might not shut up the Passges of the Valtoline against him, did not
propose it in public to have their common approbation of it; only gave his
Majesty notice of what he had done, who approved of it, and left the deciding
of those differences, until such time as he should carry his Arms into Italy,
and have that in his hands which might maintain the justice f the cause.

Politic Observation.
PRudence teaches a Minister that distance of place does hinder the knowledge
of the particular inclination of strangers, and that thereupon it is necessary
to commit many things to the Ambassadors who are with them in the behalf of
his Master; and especially concerning the form of executing such Orders as are
sent him. It is a commendable discrecion to be persuaded that he has not
knowledge and power enough to do all things of himself; whereas, they who
suffer themselves to be led by a vain presumption, upon their own parts, do
usually commit their Masters authority to the inconsiderateness and
inconstancy of neighbors, expose them to scorn by the little respect they give
his Orders, and in fine leave them without effect. For this very reason a
discreet Politician laughed at the Florentines and Venetians, who in his time
would needs give themselves all particular Orders in their Army, even to the
appointing of the places for their Batteries. We see in History that the Romans
did commit the execution of their Commissions to the Prudence of those whom
they employed, were it in Peace or War. Caesar upon his resolution for an
expedition into England, gave the command of three Legions and two thousand
horse to Labienus, to look after France in his absence; but he gave him no
particular Orders, only to act as the necessity of affairs did require.
Tiberius one of the wisest of the Roman Emperors did the like (as Tacitus
reports) when he sent his son Drusus into Hungary, for the reducing of some
revolted Legions unto obedience, giving him no other order for his Conduct, but
that which himself should think proper to be done, when he was upon the place.
He must needs be ignorant of the Roman custom, who knows not that it was their
use to insert in their Commissions whom they employed, a particular command
that they did not interest in any thing which they did in the public concerns
of the State; and if any one should suffer him to be carried by his own will to
do otherwise, they were never wanting for the most part; but to confess that
it was not possible for them being at a distance, to know all that is proper to
be done As when the Consul Fabius had beaten the Tuscans near Sutres, and had
resolved to pursue them through the Forest Simine to invade Tuscany; the
Senate misinformed of what he might do, sent two Senators to him to dissuade
him from the attempt; but before the Senators had come to him, they found he
had already passed the Forest, and obtained the Victory which he sought for,
at which they were much astonished. This serves at least to show that a great
liberty ought to be left to those who are employed, especially when by reason
of distance there cannot be a particular information of all Occurrences; and
that he who does otherwise, loses many advantages in War, and also in
negotiations of Peace; and instead of getting glory, renders himself
contemptible both in one and in the other.

Anno 1629.
NO one can with dry eyes behold a Vessel in which diverse of his friends are
driven by a storm, beaten by winds and waters, now raised up on high, and anon
cast down again, and sometimes ready to be swallowed up by the Waves: But when
the Tempest is once over, then the whole pleasure is, to discourse in what
danger they were, and the future remembrance of it is a satisfaction and
delight. In the same manner, who could behold the violent emotions, in which
France was agitated during this year, and not be moved to pity! Surely he must
be devoid of a French heart, and destitute of all those resentments which
nature infuseth into all men for their own Country: But now his joy and delight
must be equal too, the storm is blown over, and it is become a pleasure to
discourse the hazard she has escaped.

The King after the taking of Rochel, releeveth Cazal in person.
THe King having reduced Rochel, his courage invited him to relieve Cazel in
his own person. The enterprise was difficult, and there was no hopes of any
good success, but after great labors, hazards, and difficulties. There was a
necessity of passing the Alps, and that at a time when the Ice and Snow was
enough to have stopped up the ways; but besides this, the Duke of S^v^ys Army
must be passed through likewise; many strong places were of necessity to be
taken in, and an inevitable necessity of marching five or six days through an
enemies Country, where they were sure to find no Victuals, where by reason of
the ways, it was as hard to get any to be carried for the relief of the
Soldiers. These difficulties would have troubled a resolution less courageous
then his Majesty's, but it being his only desire to obtain glory, by the
hardest things, especially where his Justice is concerned, he was not so much
as moved at it. He assembled his Council to consider of it, presently after his
return to Paris; some of them indeed were against it, as doubting lest the
French falling thus directly on the Spanish forces, might make a Breach between
the two Crowns, which experience had evinced to be very prejudicial to the
State. The Spanish power had by little and little become terrible, until the
Cardinal pulled away the Visard, and made it apparent, that those were only
Chimeras and vain Clouds, which would soon be dissipated by the luster of his
Majesty's Arms; insomuch that his Eminency (who is not to be shaked in any
thing where his Masters glory was concerned) began to discourse the business,
that at last every one of them submitted to the reasons which he produced; and
it was then concluded that Cazal ought to be releeved, Sir (said he) seeing the
taking of Rochel has ended a most glorious enterprise for your Majesty, and
the most profitable for your State, that can possibly happen again in your
whole life: Italy now oppressed for almost a whole year by the Duke of Savoy
and Spaniards, attends a relief from your power, and a deliverance from their
evils by your most victorious Arm: Your Honor obliges you to defend those
neighbors and Allies of yours, who are unjustly despoiled of their States: But
besides these important reasons, your own interests do oblige you, to turn your
thoughts and arms thither; and I dare assure you, that if your Majesty resolve
upon it, and it be executed as it ought, the issue of it will be no less happy
and honorable to you, then that of that rebellious City. I am not I confess a
Prophet, but I am confident that if your Majesty lose no more time, but carry
on the design; you shall both releeve Cazal, and settle Italy in Peace before
May; from whence returning with your Army into Languedoc, you shall likewise
settle all there before the end of July; so that I hope your Majesty will in
August be returned both safe and victorious to Paris. These were the chief
points of his advice, spoken with such Grace and Courage, that not a man in all
the Assembly but approved of it, and I have the more willingly inserted them
here, for the preservation of them to posterity, as an Oracle of his Prudence,
which might indeed pass for a Prophecy, seeing that every thing fell out just
as he had Prognosticated.

Politic Observation.
^T must be confessed that eminent Souls have extraordinary fore-sights, and
somewhat, I know not how, more then humane, they see all effects by their
causes; they do commonly speak of things with assurance, and prognosticate
things to come, as if they saw them presently acted before their eyes; they
behold all dangers long before they happen, which they fear not, because their
Prudence applies fit remedies; they know the weakness of their enemies, when
and where they ought to be assaulted; they know all their stratagems, all their
designs; and thus it is that their Prudence makes them frequently judge of
things with certainty.

Some have been of opinion that these extraordinary knowledges have been
communicated to them by their Genius, and to speak more Christian-like by their
good Angles, which me thinks cannot well be denied; seeing the like has
befallen the Grandees amongst the Pagans, as Socrates, Brutus, and Caesar, and
of latter ages diverse other experiences of the same kind: But I may well add,
the Angles do but seldom afford those their favors; and as seldom, as that
eminent Prudence whereunto they add their foreseeing quality, is rare.

Prosecution of the History.
THe Cardinal did clearly foresee that this expedition being well managed, it
would be impossible for the Spaniard or Duke of Savoy, to raise a force
sufficient to oppose that of his Majesty: He knew that in all Italy there were
hardly three thousand natural Spaniards; that their forces were but small, and
divided; that they were monilesse, and harassed with losses on every hand; that
there was such an inclination in the minds of most part of the Italians to
revolt, that there need no more then to tell them they should be set at
liberty, and discharged of their great burdens, and that this would be enough
to make them take up Arms; that there could not a more favorable conjuncture
be wished, then this, for the securing of Monsieur de Mantua from the violence
of Spain, and that it were as great imprudence to lose this opportunity, as it
would be discretion to lay hold on it, This was that which made him deliver his
advice to his Majesty with such confidence, and which induced his Majesty first
to an assurance of it, and then to command an extraordinary diligence to be had
for the raising of Levies, and providing all necessary munitions for the
expedition into Italy.

Politic Observation.
THe discreet Pilot guides his Ship, and spreads his Sails according to the
Wind, that he may come in safety to the Haven; and a Prudent Statesman, ought
to make his resolutions and to regulate his Conduct, according to circumstances
and the advantage of the time present, the former would be much found fault
with, if he should lose the Wind when it is fair; and the latter would commit a
deplorable oversight, if he should neglect those advantages and opportunities
which should present themselves unto him. Opportunity is oftentimes of greater
advantage then several Troops; and Experience has daily evidenced to the
World, that the advantages of time is the only thing, which if laid hold on,
carries great actions to a prosperous issue. Nature observes her time to put
forth her works, we never see her bedight with Flowers, but when the Sun smiles
gently upon her; just thus is it with a Prudent man, he must strike when the
Iron is hot, and not strike until it be hot. For this reason it was, that the
Pythagoreans held opportunity to be the first cause of all things; and it is
but truth, that opportunity is that which gives them all their perfections,
and causes them to terminate in a happy success. Antiquity did much esteem of
Pittacus his advice, which was comprehended in two words only, know thy time,
that is, lose not thy opportunity, but make sure of it, it being certainly
true, that the least smile which she bestows is the groundwork of great
successes, above all, an enemy ought to be assaulted at his weakest, before he
be fortified, and that his other Troops come to join with him. The valiant
Scipio would no longer defer his fighting with the Carthaginians, when he
foresaw that if he gave them time, Asdrubal would come up and join with them,
which would augment the difficulties to overcome them, Marius in the 25 Book of
T. Livy, resolved to prosecute the enemy, because his Prudence foretold him.
that in case he deferred it, their whole force would in a small time join
themselves together, and then instead of one Captain, and one Army, he must
encounter with three Generals and three Armies. Caesar as himself observes in
his first Book of the War with the Gauls, having learnt that there were certain
forces coming from the Swedes, which were to pass the Rhine, presently
advanced to fight with Anovistus, as doubting least if those forces should come
up to him, he might be too weak to encounter them.

The King having resolved upon his Italian Expedition, commits the Government
of the State to the Queen his Mother.
THe King before he departed from Paris, would as reason was, settle the
affairs of his Kingdom and State in the hand of a person, of whom he was well
assured. He knew that Kings being out of the way, gives opportunity to
seditious minds to act and stir, who in their presence, durst not think a
thought that way tending. Whereupon he concluded it necessary to entrust the
management of all things with some one person, upon whose Credit, Fidelity, and
Ability he might rely. The Cardinal who was never deficient in procuring all
kind of honor to the Queen Mother, advised his Majesty to fix upon her, as he
had done at the siege of Rochel; though indeed he was but ill requited for his
pains, it being at that time, that she conceived the first seeds of her hatred
against him, and suffered her self to be deceived by the false Impostures of
her and his enemies. That which did most of all clash with the Cardinals
thoughts, in persuading the King to devolve his power upon her, was, that she
still was guided, by those very persons, who labored nothing more then the
increasing her Majesty's hatred against him, and who would act to that purpose
with so much the more insolency, when they found themselves supported by her
authority: But as he ever preferred his Majesty's before his own Interests, he
did not long stick at it; but finding it most fit for the Government of the
State, he advised his Majesty to resolve upon it. For, first the Government of
the State could not have been left with any other, but it would have raised
great broils in the State; and secondly, he had much rather have been thought
improvident in foreseeing that might hurt him, then ungrateful in not
procuring to her all possible honor, lying in his power; and lastly, he had
some reason to hope, that the absolute power which his Majesty left with her
during his absence, might open her eyes, to discern with what zeal and fidelity
he had served her. In fine, his Majesty give the Queen his Mother, full, and
absolute power, and caused the Commission which he had made for that purpose,
to be read in the Parliament.

Politic Observation.
NOthing does so much allay the hatred of a woman, as to procure some honor to
her, for as they are naturally passionate of ruling, so there is not any thing
does more please them then power. It should seem, that nature having created
them to obey, they become so much the more ambitious of governing both in
private families and in States too, for either of which they are very improper.
Hence it is, that they arm themselves with fire and anger, against all who
oppose them, unless they are mollified and appeased by love; next to which,
nothing does so much please and satisfy them, as the procurement of some
extraordinary power and honor unto them. It is a long while since a
Philosopher said, no water does so readily extinguish the fire of anger, as
good deeds, which as they make a greater impression on the mind, by how much
they come nearer to their inclination, so there is nothing which does more
please or delight them; and hence it is, that they are the fittest and most
dexterous ways to recall and reclaim their unjust and groundless anger and
displeasure.

The King charge the Lord Keeper Marillac, to choose out the best rules which
had been esteemed proper, for the good of the Kingdom, by the States met at
Paris, Anno 1614. and to propose them to the Council to be drawn up into
Ordinances.
AT the same time, the King who cherished Justice as the best Flower in his
Crown, resolved to publish diverse Ordinances, relating to his peoples good,
such as he had chosen out of the best rules, which had been thought most proper
by the States General at Paris, in the year one thousand six hundred and
fourteen, and by the Assembly at Rouen, in the year, 1617. and at Paris in the
year one thousand six hundred twenty six. His Majesty knew, that God who had
put the Scepter into his hands, had not more commanded him any one thing than
to administer Justice indifferently to all, whereupon he gave order to the Lord
Keeper, to pick out from those rules such choice ones, as might be thought most
advantageous for his peoples good, to propose them to the Counsel, that they
might be made Ordinances, after mature deliberation had upon them; all which
was done accordingly, and thence sent to the Parliament of Paris, whether his
Majesty went, to hear them read in his presence, as his predecessors had used
to do, who have ordinarily deposited their power into the hands of this
assembly, as being the chief of the Kingdom, and that to which they have
always given most power and authority; with intent that the people might the
more readily give obedience to them. Now this Parliament consisting of a great
multitude, which cannot be without many diversities of opinion, some of them
made Remonstrances to his Majesty upon several of the Articles presented to
them, and beseeched his Majesty would grant them time to consider of them. The
Lord keeper, in his lofty humor thinking nothing like his own judgment, was
offended with them who would contradict what he had resolved on, and believing
he had another Egerian Nymph, which would not let him conclude on any thing but
what was conformable to the will of Heaven; he persuaded his Majesty with his
utmost power, not to grant them the time they desired for deliberating on the
Articles proposed to them: But his Majesty, who knew that the greatest
Monarques, ought to accompany their Authority with Meekness as well as Justice,
granted them their desires of six month's time, to consider of them, and to
draw up their Remonstrances, which however were to be referred to his Majesty's
disposition and judgment.

Politic Observation.
AMongst the many and sundry powers which are in the Persons of our Kings, as
so many Glorious Rays which encompasse their Majesty, Justice is one, and one
of the greatest Suster; The Scepter which they carry in their hand, is an Index
of it, and seems to say, that their will is the Rule by which their subjects
must be governed: whence a Lawyer defining Law, confounds it with the will of
the Prince declared to his subjects. It is true, they hold Justice in their
left hands, that they may remember their Commands ought always to be
accompanied with Equity. But besides all this, they are not bound to give an
account to any one. It is only God from whom they receive t heir Scepter, and
it is to him only that they are to be accomptable for the Reason of those Laws
which they establish: Their power is high and so absolute, that there is no
refusing of what they ordain; and indeed their Laws are of force and power,
not so much because they are Just, as because they are by them commanded.
However Prudence obliges them to be advised by their Parliaments, whenever
they would make any Laws or Ordinances. This was the ancient form as History
observes, when any General Ordinances were to be established: and this is it
which makes the people receive them with the more submission and willingness;
for nothing is so acceptable to them as that which carries the least show of
absolute Sovereignty; and besides Kings do no less Rule their people by
Prudence then Power. Now this Prudence requires, that nothing ought to be
acted but by the deliberation of those who are to give a Credit to it, for the
observation and obedience which is expected to be paid unto it. All our Kings
have allowed their Parliaments to make Remonstrances, and give their opinions,
as occasion should require: Indeed they have always done it with great
submission and respect, as being a thing without the limits of their power.
S^lomon the wisest of Kings says, It is a folly to play the Wise man before a
Kings presence, in the seventh of Ecclesiastes; and Quintus Curtius, did much
extol Ephestion, that giving his opinion or Judgment before Alexander, he
always did it with such great respect, that every one who beheld him, might
know he did not speak as his due, but as an Honor permitted to him, and no
more. Some Kings, it must be acknowledged, are not thus absolute, but are
dependant either upon their States or people; and the reason is, because they
first accepted of the Crown upon such and such conditions. But the thing is not
so with ours, they are only accomptable to God for what they do, and do
acknowledge no other Superior, in any thing which relates to their Temporal
Government; as St. Gregory said of our French Kings, they are says he as
Eminently above other Kings of the Earth, as they are above inferior men.

The King before he goes into Piedmont, finds the Hugonots in Languedoc
ready to rise, he compels them to lay down their Arms, and to declare in
form before his Parliaments and Judges, that they will live in all duties and
obedience hereafter.
ONE thing more remained to be considered, before his Majesty's Journey into
Italy, which was this; The Hugonots in Languedoc could not resolve to live in
that absolute submission which they owed unto his Majesty, notwithstanding they
saw the proud Walls of Rochel thrown down before their faces, which might have
served them for a sight of fear and confusion. His Majesty was advised of what
assistance they had demanded from Spain, England, Holland and other places.
That several of those Town's accorded to them for their security, were resolved
to revolt, and resist his Majesty's Arms, if he should attempt to ruin those
Walls which were the Protectors of their Insolent Rebellions: Whereupon the
Cardinal persuaded his Majesty, that it was obsolutely necessary to reduce
those places to their obedience, and his own mercy, before he passed into
Piedmon; as also to make a Declaration, importing an express Command to all
Heretics, who either were or had been in actual Rebellion against his
Majesty, that they should lay down their Arms, return to their duties, and
make Declarations of their future obedience, in ample manner and form before
his Parliaments, or the Judges Presidiaux dwelling next unto them; and that all
Towns should send their deputies, to make protestations of their fidelity;
promising them, on the word of a King, that upon their so doing, they should
quietly enjoy their goods, and the Liberty of their pretended Religion; but
protesting that if they should refuse so to do, and continue in their obstinacy
and Rebellion, without regard had unto his grace and mercy, that he would then
proceed to punish them as for de crimine laesae Majestatis, from the greatest
to the lowest: ordaining and requiring, that their goods and persons should be
proceeded against accordingly, and in the utmost rigor of his said
Declaration. His Majesty caused his said Declaration to be read in Parliament,
himself being present, which put a stop to all the Hugonots affairs until after
the taking of Suze.

Politic Observation.
HAppy is that Kingdom, whose people live under one Law and the same Religion;
for the least Diversity which is in either of those two parts, breeds
unfortunate disorders in the whole. If any should be so unhappy, as to fall
under either of those Afflictions, they may learn how to remedy it, by this
Declaration of his Majesty, which produced most admirable effects, in hindering
the progress of the present Rebellion.

It cannot be denied, but that Kings have an absolute power to compel their
subjects, who are Heretics, to forsake their false, and turn unto the true
Religion; and in case they become obstinate to punish them by the Ax. Heresy
is a Crime laesae Majestatis Divi^ae; and as Heaven has endued them with no
less Authority, to punish those offenses committed against God, then those
against their own persons, so it cannot be doubted that they have an absolute
and Just power to punish Heresy, with all the severity that it deserves. But
however, discreet Princes have always used much moderation in this particular,
because they ever conceived violent means were proper in the first growth, and
when it might quickly destroy Heresy, without any likelihood of its springing
up again; but that being once spread abroad and increased, Rigors and
Severities would more fix and confirm it; besides the confusions and disorders
which would follow in the State, by such cruelties and punishments. It should
seem that for the confirmation of this their judgment, the Son of God
prohibited his Disciples from picking out the Tares from the wheat, which grew
together in the field, and were hard to be divided, it being most certain, that
it is full as difficult, nay no less impossible to exterminate Heresy, when
multiplied, without great confusion even to the State where it is, and some
trouble to the true Church it self. But granting all this to be so, yet the
Laws of Prudence, do not allow, of at least, whilst a Prince may avoid it, that
he should grant them any Towns or Places for the exercise of their Heresy;
for that were to divide his Kingdom to nourish an Enemy, in his bosom, to
foment a Rebellion against himself, and to furnish them with arms and means to
cut his own throat; It is also to give advantage unto strangers, who are still
fishing in troubled States, and hinders a Prince from assisting his Allies,
when their necessities and his own Interests invite him to it: and in fine it
were to expose himself, the true Church and Professors of true Religion, unto a
thousand affronts and tyrannies. That Prince, who allows them but weapons,
submits himself to greater troubles the he is aware of, but he who employeth
his power to destroy them, does an Act not only of Religion and Generosity,
but also of great Prudence and discretion.

The Kings departure on the fifteenth of January, in the year one thousand six
hundred twenty and nine, toward Piedmont.
THe same day, that his Majesty went to the Palace, to publish his Declaration
and Ordinances, and to cause the Power which he had committed to the Queen his
Mother to be read, he likewise departed out of Paris toward Cazal. But I may
not pass by the observation of a singular act of Prudence, in his Majesty, who
had already advanced the most part of his Forces to Auvergne, under the command
of Monsieur de Thoyras, immediately after the taking of Rochel, that be might
every day draw them nearer and nearer to the place, where he intended to make
use of them, insomuch that he lost not one hours time, upon which he knew the
success of affairs did often depend. His Majesty, desired to go by the way of
Bourgogne, and Champagne; as well to avoid the sickness, which was very hot,
upon the Road of Lion, as also because he had not as yet, passed by the Towns
of Troyes, Dion or Chaal us, Where he made his entrance with great Splendor
and Magnificence showing the people by this, what respect they were obliged to
show unto him.

Politic Observation
WIse Politicians have not thought it proper for a King to let himself be often
seen by the subjects, yet they have all concluded it fit, that he should visit
at least once the principal Cities of his Kingdom. This gives them an
acquaintance of the people, whom they are to govern, and the magnificence with
which they are accompanied makes impressions of obedience in the thoughts of
their subjects; Which magnificence does so much the more contribute to beget
respect, because the people are often guided by their own senses, and Kings
ought not to neglect occasions of making themselves, reverenced and esteemed.
The Sun is venerable in our eyes by reason of his luster and Splendour, and with
the vulgar nothing does breed so great a reverence toward the persons of their
Princes, as the pomp where with they are accompanied: whence it comes to pass
that many have been of opinion, that a King ought not to make himself be
feared, yet none ever thought but he was obliged to use all means to beget a
respect and obedience toward him. Humility is a virtue, which in this
particular is to be dispensed with, because the meanuess of his train or
reception could diminish the respects of his people, and for this reason it is
that God has obliged them to enforce that honor, which is due unto them, and
to maintain themselves in a State correspondent to their Majesty, in reference
whereunto the wisest Kings would not permit any to approach near their persons,
but with great respects, and seldom would appear in public, but when with
great attendance. The ancient Kings of the Persians, Medes and Judians,
required their subjects to salute them prostrate on the ground: Amongst those
of China they are adored like Gods, others are served upon the knee and suffer
themselves to be seen but seldom, and then with great Ceremony too, and men do
the more readily reverence them in regard God Almighty has stamped his image
upon them for their greater honor, and that there is still something in their
face that speaks them more than humane.

The Duke of Lorrain comes to visit the King before his departure and promises
after his return to come and do him homage for the Duchy of Bar.
WHiles the King was at Chaalous, the Duke of Lorrain came thither to wait upon
him, hoping that by his bare complements and civilities he might satisfy his
Majesty without doing homage for the Duchy of Bar, which was in his possession
by the death of his predecessor. The King had often called upon him to do his
homage, knowing that as God had put the crown upon his head, so he was by it
obliged no less to preserve the Authority which he had given him over stranger
Princes, then over his own subjects. The Duke refused it not, but pretended
that the Duchy of Bar belonged to him in chief, as also that of Lorrain by
virtue of a certain Salique Law, which had been likewise confirmed by those of
his Family, and was yet to be seen amongst his old Record, and thereupon would
do homage in his own name and not in his wifs to whom really it belonged. The
King, who could not endure injustice, would not permit that the Duchess his
wife, who had put the Ducal Coronet upon his head should be so dealt with; but
resolved that either she should do the homage, or he in her name. Upon this
account it was that he came to assure his Majesty, he would suddenly after his
return acquit himself of the homage in that form, which should be thought
reasonable, and in the mean while to beseech him, that he would excuse him for
some little time. He presented unto his Majesty a Kennel of as find hounds as
could be seen, which his Majesty kindly accepted of, and yet to let him see
that he looked upon hunting only as a diversion, when other important State
affairs gave him some leisure time, he hereupon made him a discourse which is
not amiss to be observed in this place, for the instruction of Sovereigns, in
what degree they ought to hold those recreations, which tend to their pleasure.
Cozen, said he, I have left off hunting, I must confess, I delight in it, when
other affairs give me leave; but at present my thoughts are altogether taken up
to show how affectinately I interest my self with my Allies; after I shall have
relieved the Duke of Mantua, I may perchance return to my old recreations, till
some other of my friends may have occasion to make use of me. And most certain
it is, his pleasures never withdrew him from theears of his State. He would be
informed very exactly of all affairs how mean soever, neither would he allot
any time for the recreations which other Princes used to allow themselves,
because his piety forbid him, as knowing them to be contrary to the Laws of God.

Politic Observation.
HUnting is a kind of war, not only, not misbeseeming, but sometimes very
comendable in a Prince. It was Xenophons advice in his Cyropaedia, It teaches
them, says he, to rise betimes, It inures them to heats and colds, habituates
them to riding and all other labors. The resistance which salvage beasts make
against them teaches them to fight, and to use their Weapons seeing they ought
to observe a time when to beat them, when to prevent them, and to have the free
command of their body to cast themselves to and fro when once they come up upon
the pursuit. Does not the chasing of those who may endanger them accustom them
not to fear any perils? I have often observed that those Princes who are great
hunters, have been likewise esteemed very valiant. History tells us so in the
examples of Ulysses, Pelopidas, Pompei, Alexander. The Prince of Roman
eloquence, says that a man at hunting uses a kind of military exercise.
Plinius Secundus thought it the more agreeable for Princes, it being a solitary
and silent exercise and giving them leisure to think on their State affairs; to
which give me leave to add one effect more which renders this recreation very
commendable in Kings, and that is, it keeps them from vice. It is reported that
Hippolytus. Theseus his Son, did use this diversion to live chastely and avoid
idleness, the source of all vices and evils. The Poets feigned that Diana
spent most part of her time in that manner in the company of Arethusae,
Calista, Cranae and diverse other Nymphs, who were all desirous to preserve
their virginities, each of them knowing, that they were exposed to many
Shipwracks, by the diverse companies with whom they conversed. Plutarch observed
upon the life of Pompey, that this great conqueror imagined that Princes get
no little honor by this exercise, and after he had vanquished Domitius in
Affricque, and reduced all in those Countries to his power, himself spent some
days in hun^ing Lions and Elephants, to the end, quoth he, that the stoutest
beasts themselves might not be ignorant of the Romans good fortune and courage,

A Victory obtained by the Kings Forces against those of the Duke of Savoy upon
the 14. of February, 1629.
THe King departing from Chaalons, passed by Lions (but did not go into the
City, by reason of the sickness) to Grenoble, where he staid 7. or 8. days,
during which he oftentimes sent to the Duke of Savoy to acquaint him that he
was come thither, resolved to relieve Cazal, and to demand passage through his
States, which he was obliged by Treaties to grant, under assurance of not doing
any acts of hostility or any other damage The Duke being engaged with the
Spaniard, and having promised them to assist them in the taking of Cazal, as
Comte Lou^s d'Ast, one of his Residents at Rome had openly declared, had
recourse to his usual artifices, and returned many complements and fairs words:
he beseeched his Majesty to give him leave to find out some expedient to
dis-engage him of those promises he had made to the Spaniard: The Duke proposed
several overtures, but so void of reason and Justice, that it was no hard
matter to discern his intent was only to stay the King until Cazal was taken*
which as was well known, could not hold out above -- days, but it was all in
vain: for the King (a person not to be delayed but with just reasons, and who
was well assured that Cazal would yet hold out in expectation of him two full
months) marched from Grenoble, and by great Journies came to Oux, a place
bordering upon the Frontire and passage of Suze. The Duke having but ill
intelligence, heard not of his Majesty's advancing, for indeed he made such
haste, that it was hardly credible but by them who were eye witnesses of it.
The Duke thoug^t he had been still at Grenoble, when indeed he was not far off
Suze: But for fear of that storm which threatened him, he resolved to send the
Prince of Piedmo^t his Son to delay his Majesty, by giving him some hopes of
opening the passages, not without expectation that Cazal would in the mean
while be taken. The Prince was hardly come to Chamberry, but he heard the Kings
Army was passed the Mount of Geneva, this made him return directly to Chaumont,
where he found the Cardinal already arrived with the Vanguard. He had at that
place a long discourse with his Eminence, who no less powerful in his words
than arms, entertained him with a great deal of address, and pressed upon him
such reasons, that he at last promised to do whatever should be desired of him.
The Cardinal at first told him, he was much astonished that notwithstanding the
Treaties between France and Savoy, that his Majesty and his Army should be
denied to pass his Country, to assist one of his Allies; He remonstrated to
him, how injurious this procedure was to the honor of a Prince, it being
contrary to his word and faith; that his Majesty's Arms marched in a just
cause, but that his did unjustly protect injustices; That if he should have the
advantage at any time to hinder his Majesty from entering into Italy (which
however he could not well hope for) yet it would be as great a discredit to
him, to support an unjust oppression, as the design of a protecting a Prince
would be glorious to his Majesty: withal that he did apparently deceive
himself, if he imagined to raise any advantage by assisting the Spaniard in the
taking of Cazal: that his hopes of sharing the Montferrat between them, was
vain, and that they would suffer him to have no greater a part than in six
hundred and thirteen, when they absolutely opposed him, and that the most he
could expect* was some paltry Town: whereas adhering to his Majesty, he would
find means to induce Monsieur de Mantua to let him have Tri^, and other
handsome places to the yearly rent of fifteen thousand Crowns. That withal he
disobliged the Princes and extremely much wronged himself by favoring the
growing greatness of Spain in Italy, upon which they had already testified but
too great a design: That Cazal would give him great advantages and that he had
the more reason to be susp^tious of it himself, he being so near a borderer
upon Milan; and that the Spaniard having drawn him off from France would
quickly invade his territory, as being assured himself alone could not resist
him. It were much to be wished that we knew the Cardinal', whole discourse in
this conference, or that I could discribe the gracefulness and authority, with
which he spoke. But that not being, I shall content my self to say, that it is
impossible to defend ones self against his discourse, when he undertakes to
persuade any thing, his words being accompanied with certain charms which in a
little while force a surrender. It is not possible long to deny him, his
discourses are replenished with such an, I know not what sweetness, which
insinuates it self into the heart, his gesture and complasance do no less
second his discourse, and they ought to be esteemed for such, as the best wits
have confessed, it was impossible to defend themselves from him, whatever
promises they had made of sticking close to any resolutions of theirs contrary
to his desires.

Politic Observation.
ELoquence is an ornament, so much the more necessary for great Statesmen, in
regard they are obliged more then others to persuade diverse things to the
people, and those Grandees with whom they treat. The Roman Prince of Eloquence
says, It is Rhetoric which raises men above beasts, and I may add that it i^
Eloquence and a volubility of discourse gives a Statesman great advantages
over those with whom he treats. Prudence teaches him good counsels, and the
ways to obtain his ends, but Eloquence is that which gives him the persuasive
power, so that in some sense, it is the soul of Counsels. Rash Eloquence would
do him no good, it being like counterfeit Gold, glisters indeed, but is worth
nothing; and a mute prudence, where there is a defect of good expression, is of
no great use, but is like a fair statue whose proportions and sculpture are
admired by every one, but cannot speak, whereas Eloquence and Prudence joined
together work miracles. The Ancient Sages, says Cicero, who have established
the foundations and Laws of the most famous States, as Lycurgus, Solon,
Pit^acus and the like were equally endued both with one and the other, with
prudence for the invention of those just Laws, which they published, and with
Eloquence for the persuading the people to receive them. It cannot be denied
but that Eloquence was one of those qualities which did insinuate into the
peoples belief that Doctrine, which Jesus Christ preached, seeing the Gospel it
self recorded it, where it is said, that the sweetness of those words which
came from his mouth, ravished the people with admiration. And who can doubt of
the power which Rhetoric has on men's minds, seeing that tongues were the
first Arms given the Apostles, when they were sent abroad to preach? Indeed
there cannot be an handsomer ornament added to the dignity of great Ministers,
then to discourse well, nor really stronger Arms to their Prudence. Their
affairs will continually lead them to treat with Grandees, who must be
satisfied with reasons, which when well expressed, are the more persuasive.
They must know how to appease, to mollify, or provoke passions by the address
of their discourse according as occasion requires. Is it most certain that
naked reason is commonly weak, whereas clothed with the ornaments of Rhetoric,
it captivateth the soul, insinuates into the most unreasonable, cures the
disaffected, softneth the most obdurate hearts, reclaimeth the most irregular
actions; and in a word exercises an absolute empire over the will? The
Athenians were not ignorant of it, when being oppressed by Alexanders Arms to
deprive themselves either of their Captains or Orators, they chose rather to
banish the former than the latter, preferring the Gown before the Sword.
Eloquence in the person of a Statesman is then most powerful, when accompanied
with affability and complasance, for these virtues rendering his person as well
as his reason agreeable, do insinuate themselves with such power and charms,
that it is impossible to hold out against them.

Prosecution of the History.
THE Prince of Piedmont had promised to return the next morning with the Duke
of Savoy's ratification, but however he came not, his persuasions not having
that power over the Dukes reason, as the Cardinals had over his. He only sent
the Comte de Verru^e with Complements and Civilities, in stead of a positive
resolution. The King was not satisfied with it, and Monsieur the Cardinal, who
is in nothing more sensible, then that which concerns his Majesty's glory,
took these delays of the Duke of Savoy with a great deal of regret and
Impatience; So that his Prudence telling him, there was no more time to be
lost, he sent word unto his Majesty, that the next morn by day break he would
secure the passages; who unwilling to let the attempt be made without him, told
him he would make one of the patty; to which end he presently took Horse, and
accordingly having taken order, and given instructions concerning the main Body
of the Army then near him, he came away about ten or twelve at night, and
marched four leagues in so great a darkness, that he was forced for the most
part to walk on foot; yet at last he came to Chaumont, where he met the
Marshals de Crequy, Bassompierre and the Schomberg, with the Cardinal
contriving every thing for the assault, and for carrying of the Baricadoes upon
the very first break of day, which they were all resolved to do,
notwithstanding the snows, the weariness of the Soldiers, and the fight it
self, which could not be but furious, in regard the Duke of Savoy had laid his
choysest forces for the guarding of those passages, which of themselves were so
strait and strong that a hundred men might defend them.

Politic Observation
IT is no less advantageous than seemly for a Prince to give Orders in his
Battles, and to appear in his own person to see them executed as well by his
example as command. I say it is seemly, in regard Kings have not received their
swords from the hand of God, only to devolve the charge and conduct of their
Armies upon their Captains; Their crowns are not bestowed on them so much for
the honor of their own persons, as to oblige them to maintain and increase by
the prudence of their counsels, and the force of their Arms, the glory of their
States: they are like the Sun, who does not only communicate part of its light
and influence to the Stars, to the end they might contribute to the generation
and conservation of all things here below; but does likewise himself daily go
round the world to cooperate with all particular causes, and does in some
sense do all in every thing; thus likewise a great Prince ought to watch
whatever happens of importance in his Army; to pass from Quarter to Quarter,
and to issue out all principal Orders from himself, without relying on his
Officers, but in things of less consequence; remembering the excellent Counsel
which Salust gave Caesar, when he told him that they, who are advanced to an
high degree of honor in a State, are obliged to be much more vigilant and
careful than others. Who can express the advantage which happens to a King by
being himself the Oracle of his Counsels, who obliges his Soldiers to observe
his Orders, as well by his example as command. The example of a King needs not
indeed any words of command, for it insinuates it self into their courages,
and animateth them with such resolution, that it leads them to all enterprises
how dangerous soever; his courage is the fire which heats all his Soldiers, and
the least action which he shall do among them, will more powerfully persuade
them to fight, then any words he can give them, be they never so many or fair.
Was it not for this reason that Germanicus, as Tacitus relates, used to open
his Helmet in his Battles, that he might make himself known to his Soldiers;
that the Kings of Persia went bare-headed, and that Cyrus, as Xenophon
witnesses, would often call his Captains and Soldiers by their names, and give
them such Orders, as himself saw fit? and does he not give a good reason for
it, where he says, that if a Physician were to be blamed for not knowing the
names of his medicines, and the artificer for being ignorant of the use of his
instruments; a Prince deserves much more to be discommended, if he knows not
the names of his Officers and Soldiers, the instruments of the glory which he
acquireth in Arms?

The Prosecution of the History.
THe Duke of Savoy had great advantages in this fight, the passages were of
themselves very strait and uncouth, that there was no great need of any forces
to hinder their ascent; a few persons are enough to stop them, excepting
against his Majesty, whom all things obey: he had placed for the defense of
them the very choicest troops of his Army, whereas those of his Majesty were
newly come off from the disorders of a siege, which had lasted above a year,
and had also suffered the hardships of a march near 200 leagues long, during
all which they had been fought by the rains, snows, and colds of a sharp
winter. But his Majesty knowing what mettle his presence infused into his
Soldiers, and seeing there was not a man amongst them, who thought not himself
happy in being exposed to all sorts of hazards, he resolved that all those
hardships should not divert him from acquiring fresh victories: However knowing
that it is Gods providence, which does contribute more then man's force to happy
successes, he would hear Mass before he engaged with the Enemy, to recommend
his enterprise to God; then he came into the field with the Cardinal between 6
and 7 in the morning, and gave order what troops should make the onset. The
Duke of Savoy had formed 3 Baracados before the passages, the first a Quarter
of a league from Chaumont near upon the borders between France and Savoy, the 2
about a quarter of a league farther of, and the 3 under the Fort de Gelasse,
situated upon a rock, at the foot of which they must of necessity pass at the
mercy of the Cannons and musket. All 3 were 12 foot thick and large, 20 high,
the Ditch deep, and 8 foot over to defend the Avenues; He had likewise made
between 25 and 30 Redoubts guarded by 2700 choice men. Upon the first discovery
of their situation, the victory was thought difficult, but as there is nothing
impossible to the King and the Cardinal, they lead up their forces at the first
peep of day. The King had sent the Sieur de Comminges to the first Baracado, to
demand passage for the Marshals of his Majesty's Army, to the intent they might
go to Suze, as friends, and under assurance of doing no hurt. The Comte de
Verru^e appeared, and demanded some time to acquaint the Duke of Savoy with it,
who was not then far off, and told him that he did not come to demand it with
any show of peace, but however they should be sure to guard their passages, and
that they had not now to do with the English. The Sieur de Comminges replied,
he had not any order to wait, and that he should shortly find the French knew
as well to beat the Piedmontois as the English: at the same instant, it being
no longer time to dally, the Marshals de Cr^quy and de Bassompierre, assisted
by the Sieurs d'Auriac the Commandeur de Valencay and de Thoiras Marshals of
the Camp, made ready for the fight. Le Comte de Sault advanced with the
forlorn hope being about six score, next to them followed the Kings
Musketeers and the Regiment of the Guard, the Duke de Langueville being in the
head of the Voluntier Nobility. The Dukes de la Trimou^ille and de Halloin led
up the files, as also the Sieurs de Lion Court, de Breze and de S. Simon, the
troops being seconded by the Regiment of Suisses, d'Estissac and de Navarre,
who advanced upon the left wing. The Comte d'Essault falling on with his
Forces, came up to the Barricado's, defended by Marc Anti^io Belon one of
Piedmont, assaulted and forced them in the midst of a shower of musket shot
which fell upon them. The Enemies endured the first charge with great courage,
both parts being equally resolute; so that the one defended themselves as
gallantly as the others assaulted them, till at last a party of the French foot
opening one of the passages fell like lightning upon the Duke of Savoy's
forces, and Barricado's, presently forced them and became Masters of the
passage, and also of Suze after they had slain, wounded and routed whatever
resisted them. Amongst those who were wounded, the Comte de Verru^e was
observed to have a shot in his cheek, and the Marqu^sse de V^lle General of the
Horse had his shoulder broken by a musket shot. There were 9 Colors taken
which were without any great trouble presented to his Majesty because he was
himself in that action, and amongst diverse Prisoners there were 10 or 12
Captains, Lieutenants and Ensigns.

Politic Observation.
A Generous mind is never dismayed at the fear of danger, or if perchance it
make any impression on him, it is only to oblige him to give necessary orders
to overcome them. It is enough that he know he must vanguish and that his duty
obliges him to make a virtue of necessity. He is more apprehensive of the
discredit to loose an occasion of glory, then of the misfortune, and is
always more careful to preserve his honor* than his life, his courage
fortifies him, and makes him confident of the means dictated by his prudence;
he does not fight rashly with his eyes shut as the Andabates, or precipitate
himself into dangers without looking what is necessary to secure himself, but
guiding his courage by reason, he takes such Order as is fit and needful* and
then engages without fear. There is no courage so commendable as that which is
accompanied with prudence, and when the heat of Anger exciteth an obligation to
repel al obstacles, his reason ought to serve him in examining his designs, his
prudence to make choice of those means which are most likely to obtain an happy
success, and his Anger to make him quick in action. Last of all he delay, not
the exposing himself to combats, where his prudence tell him there is not any
danger, but knowing that fortune is the friend of courage, and does often
favor the bold, he assaults his enemies as soon as ever his prudence has
given Orders for the fight: he carries deeply engraved in his heart that
saying of Salust, They who are most fearful, run most hazards; and sure it is,
confidence is a rampart, and every thing gives way to him who falls in with
courage, as every thing repelleth him who is carried away with cowardice. To
apprehend resistance is to be half overcome and he who scorns danger is half
master of his enterprise. Valor is very needful for the obtaining of an happy
success in all af^airs. Fire is the noblest of all the Elements, because it
works quickest, and nothing resists it; and that man is most to be
commended for his courage, who acts the most boldly, and whom no dangers are
able to affright: It is also true, that resoluteness does oftentimes bring a
good issue, where prudence and counsel had no part: whence it (...) appears
that in many affairs of war, long deliberation is unnecessary and often
prejudical in the success of attempts, besides the diminishing of his honor,
who conducteth them. Something must be ventured, and where there is no clear
demonstration of a good success, there a good resolution seconded with
judgment will go far, which once concluded on, then comes action into play and
the sword to execute.

The Prince of Piedmont comes to Suze with full power from the Duke of Savoy to
Treat with the King.
PResently after this victory the King sent to summon the Governor of the Fort
Jaillon, belonging to the Duke of Savoy, bordering upon Suze, to surrender: he
refused it, but not long after fled with 300 men into the mountains, and left
the Fort to the Country people, who left it to the King, who put ^00 Soldiers
in guard there. At the same time his Majesty caused some forces to march to
Roussillon, a league and half from Suze, being in all about an 1000 foot and
2000 Horse, under the Command of the Marshals de Creiquy and Bassompierre, who
were saluted by those in the Citadel of Suze with about 1000 musket, and 200
great shot, but no hurt, only the wounding of about a dozen men; This
insolency of theirs made his Majesty resolve to assault the Citadel, and for
that purpose the Regiment Estissac was drawn out upon the top of Mount Brunet,
which adjoyneth to it: In the mean while hearing that the Duke of Savoy began
to repent his being engaged with the Spaniards, and opposing of the French,
fearing belike (and that not without good reason) that his State would be
seized on as a punishment of his rashness, his Majesty sent the Sieur de
Seneterre toward him to understand with he did intend to do, and to let him
know, that if he would hearken to an accommodation, that his Majesty out of his
natural goodness, and in consideration of Madam his Sister, would forget what
was past, without making any other advantage of his victories; only for the
assisting of his design to raise the siege of Cazal, he expected to be assured
of the passages for the conveyance of victuals to his Army, and to be furnished
with all things to revictual it, paying for what he had. The Duke thought
himself very happy to be quiet upon such slender terms, and presently
dispatched the Prince de Piedmont toward the Cardinal, to make the Treaty,
inpowering him to give his Majesty all content. The Prince came to Suze, and
the same day it was concluded with Monsieur the Cardinal, that the Duke of
Savoy should give free passage through his Country to the Kings Army, that he
should furnish the markets both to Cazal and back again, that he should
contribute to the revictualling of Cazal, by furnishing victuals and munition
of war, for which his Majesty should pay him; withal, that in future he should
open such passages as the King should desire, and should set out as many
Soldiers for the securing of Montferrat, if need were, as his Majesty should
think fit; that for the better assurance of his promise, his highness should
presently deliver the Citadel de Suze, a the Fort de Gelasse into his
Majesty's hands, and shortly after things being thus concluded, he came to
salute his Majesty, and rendered him all kinds of respect.

Politic Observation.
NOthing is so requisite in a Prince as to attempt all things with Justice, and
such as are within his power, without this he will inevitably fall into
confusion, and see himself exposed to as much shame, as he proposed glory.
Imprudence is the spring of ill success, and rashness throws a Prince into the
Gulf of confusion; it inforceth the courages of those who have more heat than
judgment, charming them with a certain show of glory, for which it makes them
hope; but indeed, only to engage them in greater disasters. True generosity
consists not in a blind impetuous rage, which adventures upon all, without
considering the power, or weighing the design by the Laws of prudence; but it
follows a medium between defect and excess; Holding the head too high does
oftentimes throw down into praecipices: and the want of prudence is no less
dangerous, for it oftentimes obliges to discover not only a deficiency of
power, but also of heart. That Prince is greatly to be blamed, who falls upon a
King incomparably more powerful than himself, and who pretends with an handful
of men to oppose that, which at last he will be forced to grant. It is no shame
for necessity to take the Law of one that is more powerful, but if power
prevail, the who is forced to it, is discredited with interest: besides, in
passages, how strait or difficult soever they be, he cannot be able to defend
himself from the danger which is falling on him, unless he be very strong
seeing that enemy, who comes to assault him with a great Army, will at last
force him, although they loose some men in the gaining it: Commonly there is
not above one or two difficult places in a passage, and it is impossible, but
that a great Army of resolute men should gain them. In fine when they who
defend them shall find an whole Army thundering in upon them, it strikes a
terror into them so that they are forced to fly, and by that means destroyed,
for this reason the Romans would never put themselves to the trouble of keeping
any passes, unless they saw it necessary to expect the Enemy, because they who
were in the chief Stands, should be always assisted: but it is not the same
thing when a Garrison has nothing to second it, or where there are no reserves
to assist those whom an Enemy shall first have routed.

The Duke of Mantua is delivered from the Spanish oppression by his Majesty's
Forces.
DOm Goncales de C^rdua, Governor of Milan, who commanded the siege of Cazal,
upon his first hearing of this Treaty, resolved to break up the Leager; It had
been concluded by one of the private Articles, for the satisfaction of him,
That the Duke of Savoy, should give him information, how his Majesty upon the
said Dukes assurance of him, that the Spaniards had not any intention to
despoile the Duke of Mantua of his Estates, had been contented, that there
should be some Swisses put into Nice de la Paille, who should declare they held
it in deposit in the name of the Emperor, but upon promise and assurance, to
restore it unto the Duke of Mantua, or his Assigns, at the end of one month,
whether the Emperor should by that time have invested him in the said Dutchee
or not; and that as to the rest, his Majesty had not any design to fall upon
any the Territories, of his Brother in Law, the King of Spain, but did desire
still to continue in friendship and a good Correspondency with him. This was
the leaf wherewith this Spanish Pill was gilded. Dom Goncales staid not long
for any farther Illustration of this Article, but raised the siege before his
Majesty came near him, as doubting least his stay there, would only serve for
an addition of glory to the French Army, which they had all ready got at Suze;
so he marched away about the fifteenth or sixteenth night, leaving the City to
rejoice, that they were now delivered from those miseries, which for two months
last past they had endured, in which time they had eaten all the Horses, Dogs
and Ratts, which they could lay hold on: The Duke of Savoy relieved them, with
those Victuals which he had promised, and thus his Majesty obtained all the
Honor, and success in this enterprise, that his heart could desire; this
Fortune and Courage seemed in emulation of each other to conspire his glory,
which indeed was a debt, due to the Justice of his cause, who though he might
at that time, have overrun all Italy and made himself master of it, as was
well known to every one, yet he contented himself, with the having delivered
the Duke or Mantua, from the Spanish Tyranie and oppression.

Politic Observation.
ALthough Prudence have a great share in good Success, yet the greatest
Captains have held, that Fortune, has no small part in it; Prudence alone may
indeed make some progress toward it; but Fortune is at last needful to be
joined with it toward the obtaining of the proposed end: hence it was that
Octa^ian making wishes for his little Son, desired he might have the Gravity of
P^mpey, the Courage of Caesar and his own good Fortune. For this reason likely
it was that Seyravenaes a Persian, as Plutarch in his Morals has recorded it;
answered unto some who were admiring that his enterprises should have such ill
success; seeing in his discourse he seemed to be a very prudent and discreet
man. That he was only Master of his Language, but that Fortune was Master in
Military Affairs. And do we not for this reason likewise, say, that the
discreet man is not obliged to render an account of those enterprises which
depend as much on Chance, as Conduct, but only of his Councels, which is the
only thing that was in his power to dispose? It is sometimes only Fortune
which raises a siege without a stroke; it is Fortune which does sometimes
strike a terror into an enemies Forces, that they have hardly the courage to
defend themselves; Fortune it is which has often opened the strongest places
at the first Summons; and it is Fortune, which at the appearance of an Army,
has caused many Provinces to stoop under their Power and Obedience. But
notwithstanding all this, we must not conceive Fortune to be, as the Heathens
did, a blind Goddess, who over rules Battles, and gives the Victory to what
side she pleases; no, it is of the divine Providence, that I speak, which is
usually so called, when any thing befalls us above our expectation, or beyond
our hopes. God is the first cause of all good success, and it is his only
gift, he it is who blesses Councels, and it is by the favor of his
influences, that we see good fruits or follow sage resolutions. Neither may we
imagine, that the Prudence of great men does not contribute to an happy
success; for they are the instruments of Gods power, but not such as are dead
and void of life, or such as want motion and action to cooperate with the
first cause. As it may be said that Alexander was fortunate in all his
enterprises: But this fortune was improved by Prudene, conserved by cares,
preserved by Labors, and seconded by Courages. Most certain it is, those
extraordinary events which the vulgar attribute to hazard, do for the most part
arrive by the Prudence and Conduct of wise, eminent men, who operate by
Springs* which are the more esteemable by bein invisible to the vulgar, yet
such as procure no less glory in the minds of them who are able to judge
aright of things* though they fall not under the Rules and Laws of mean and
ordinary understandings.

Prosecution of the History.
HIS Majesty in this Treaty had obtained as much advantage as could be desired
against the Duke of Savoy, yet he desired to let him see, or at least some of
his party who might relate it to him, that he had power enough to have forced
it from him, if he had not done it by fair means. His Majesty laid hold on the
occasion, upon Madam, the Princess of Piedmonts coming to Suze to visit him,
he entertained her with a great deal of kindness, according to the particular
friendship which he had always for her, and designed that the honor wherewith
he treated her, and the Prince of Piedmont then with him might learn him, that
he had no reason to engage so easily with the enemies of France. His Majesty
went before her, and causing part of the Army to follow him, he placed the rest
in Battalia by the way side, in such places where they might best be seen; that
the Prince of Piedmont might with his own eyes behold, that he ought not upon a
small occasion, engage so many of the brave Nobility and resolute Soldiers, to
return a second time into his Fathers Country of Savoy, lest they made him pay
for all his Treacheries together.

Politic Observation.
IT is no less Policy in a Prince to make himself feared by strangers, then
beloved by his own Subjects. To pretend that he is in friendship with them were
a vanity, for they having no end but interest care not for any one longer then
he is useful. The greatest piece of their friendship, is, not to offend their
neighbors, or attempt upon their Territories, and there are but a few who are
thus reserved; whence it happens that he who shows them his Power, and
sometimes lets them feel his strength, that he may curb them by fear, is the
most of all to be commended.

I do not approve that he should make himself feared by abusing of his power,
or by using any injustice or cruelty upon them as the House of Austria has for
a long time together; but that he should let them know he has wherewithal to
punish them, in case they attempt to do any thing repugnant to their duties.
There are but two ways to retain men in moderation, love, and fear, if the
first be not sufficient, then the second must be made use of. No one will
easily be provoked to offend a Sovereign, who has ability to revenge it; and
nothing is more natural then to respect them whose power is feared. They ought
to render themselves respected and feared according to the example of God
Almighty, whose stretched out Arm is terrible through all the World, not
because he imployeth it to do evil: but severely to chastise those who offend
and provoke him to indignation and displeasure.

Certain Intreagues of the Ladies at Paris, concerning Monsieurs pretended
Marriage with the Princess Maria of Mantua.
DUring that little stay which his Majesty made at Suze, there happened a
dangerous Intreague at Paris about the Queen Mother, she had designed to match
Monsieur with a daughter of Florence; but finding how particularly he was
inclined to the Princess Maria daughter to the Duke of Mantua, she was much
troubled at it, although that Princess by reason of those admirable qualities
both of her person and birth, was not thought altogether unworthy of so great a
match. The King himself was much of this opinion, out of the particular esteem
which he had for the Princess although at that time he had not positively
resolved on it* by reason it was so lately that Monsieur had buried his Lady.
Now it happened that certain Lady, of quality, who were always near and about
the Queen Mother, used their utmost endeavors to hinder Monsieurs marrying
with the Princess Maria. Some of them because they had hopes of having him to
marry into their Alliance and because it was against their particular
Interests; othersome who did not aspire so high, made use of it to incense the
Queen Mother against the Cardinal, pretending that he supported this of Mantua,
in exclusion of her choice of that Florence, The Queen Mother had never
discovered any violence in her Conduct; but she was at last so beleaguered by
those of this Cabal, that they transported her so far as to command the Sieur
de C^sac, one of her Gentlemen in Ordinary to take some Archers of the Guard,
to go to Colummiers and Arrest the Princess, with the Dowager de Longueville,
and to Conduct them to the Boys de Vincennes, whither they were accordingly
carried.

Monsieur was at that time at Fountainbleau, but so troubled at the
imprisonment of the Princess, whom he much respected; and especially, for her
ill usage at the Boys de Vincennes, that instead of coming back to Paris; as
the Queen Mother expected, he went in a discontent to Orleans; and true it is,
the displeasure that he conceived at it, was one of the chief reasons which
afterward carried him into Lorrain, where all those wicked designs which have
since been acted were contrived. The Queen Mother presently dispatched a
Courier to Suze, unto his Majesty to inform him of the reasons which moved her
to this imprisonment: And they on the Cabal having persuaded her to lay all the
blame on the Princess and Monsieur, she did so, though indeed their innocence
might well have exempted them from any blame; besides the interests of the Duke
of Mantua, were so joined with those of France, that there was great reason to
treat the Princess his daughter with all kindness and civility. The Queen
Mother was easily persuaded to follow their advice, her honor being engaged,
not to be disowned by his Majesty, and also to lay the whose fault upon them
who did not deserve it. They did use the more address to confirm her Majesty in
her resolutions because they foresaw that Monsi^ur the Cardinal must of
necessity have a Breach either with the Queen Mother or Monsieur, which would
much advantage their own interests and designs; Oh damnable devices! not
sufficiently punishable, though with the greatest rigors, but yet such devices
as rendered the Queen Mother so much the less faulty, in regard, it was almost
impossible for any, the most Prudent, to defend themselves from such baits,
laid by the most dexterous persons in that Art of embroyling; so that I cannot
but ascribe the whole blame unto those women of the Cabals.

Politic Observation.
AS all Womankind has by birth received certain qualities contrary to the good
conduct of a Kingdom; so it is very dangerous for them who govern, to lend an
ear to their charms. I cannot more fitly compare them to any thing, then to the
Sun in the Springtime, who has then power to raise and attract vapors into
the air, but not to allay or dissipate them: Just thus it is with them, many
are the broyls which they raise and foment in a State; but the remedying of any
one of them lies not in their power. It should seem that whatever is proper to
trouble the repose of a State, is naturally imprinted in them; every one
knows what disorders violence breeds, and who can be ignorant that the
heats and emotions of their Passions, are like impetuous torrents, which pull
up Rocks, root up Trees, overthrow whatever stands in their way? they do
nothing by halfs, all their desires are accompanied with fire, and although few
of their resolutions are grounded upon any consideration or foresight yet there
is not any obstacle which they will not force themselves to overcome, in the
executing of their Wills and Inclinations. Imprudence too carries no less
broyls where it goes; this is natural to them, and daily experience shows
us, that they have in all their actions more rashness then discretion. Pallas
her self, the Goddess of Prudence, was born of J^piters brain, to let us know
(says Lucian) that this virtue is hard to be met with in any women, who are
born the usual way. The spirit of revenge where it is Lord Paramount, is enough
to set a State on fire; for whilst they who are possessed with it, endeavor
to execute their wills upon persons in power, upon the least resistance they
she out into extremities, and by force attempt to repel force; but who are more
prone to revenge then women? their natural fearfulness does the more easily
engage them, because they attribute the most part of their faults, unto some
neglect or dis-esteem. They have not wit enough to dissemble those many defects
which are in them, though it were most for their advantage, especially in such
miscarriages as happen more by their weakness then malice. Their Soul is
offended at the least touch, whereas great personages ought to know, that it is
more glorious to pardon then to punish; Briefly, the irresolution which they
discover in all their actions, and which they cannot for their lives hide, is
the cause of a thousand disorders, especially when any one ingageth to follow
their advices and directions; now they counsel one thing, and by and by
another, then they know not what to resolve, and the least difficulty they meet
with, makes them change a thousand times over. Not but that they have a
reasonable Soul* as well as the greatest Princes that have governed on the
earth; but are, as it is said of the Flowers of Egypt, always soaked with the
vapors of Nile, which being gross and earthy, are the cause that they do not
yield such fragrant smells as those in other Countries; just so their Souls
being troubled with a thousand Passions, which proceed from their weakness and
violence, are unable to produce such generous Counsels as those of men, who are
endued with a stronger and more vigorous constitution. I could allege several
other reasons; but I shall content my self with that saying of God himself,
speaking by the mouth of Isaiah the Prophet: The Government of women (says he)
is one of those afflictions wherewith heaven punishes Mankind: and that other
amongst the Verses of the Sybils. A Woman's Reign shall be esteemed as the
overthrow of the whole world.

Prosecution of the Subject.
THE King both Prudent and Just, would not condemn Monsieur where he was not
guilty; and yet that he might give some satisfaction to the Queen Mother, and
not diminish the Authority, which he had committed to her in his absence, by a
dis-owning of her, he resolved on a ^edium, which was this, he sent the Comte
de Noient unto Monsieur then at Orleans, to tell him, that his Majesty would be
very much pleased, if he would send unto the Queen Mother, to beseech her to
let the Princess be freed from the Boys de Vincennes; and at the same time, he
writ to the Queen Mother, that she had done discreetly to hinder Monsieurs
marriage, for which he thanked her, and assured her he could not willingly
consent to it: Whilst she was against it, only he desired her to deliver the
Princess from the Boys de Vincennes, in case Monsieur should desire it of her.
This was as respectfull and satisfactory as the Queen Mother could have
desired; for the King did not condemn her proceedings but seemed to believe her
information, that Monsieur would have married the Princess Maria, without his
Majesty's permission; and did moreover so confirm her Authority, that he would
not of himself order the Princesses being set at liberty, but referred it to
her whole dssposal^ and desired she would rather not do it, unless at
Monsieurs entreaty. Yet notwithstanding all this, those who got the Mastry over
her soul, were become so dexterous in putting into her such thoughts and
motions, as were proper for their own interests and designs only, that they
persuaded her this answer of his Majesty was a disguisement, and not ample
enough to justify her Procedure* and that it was (in some kind) a disowning of
her. They who were the craftiest amongst them, durst not openly as yet, accuse
Monsieur the Cardinal unto her or ^ot contributing his utmost power, in the
procuring her a full satisfaction in this business, lest they should have
split themselves upon that R^ck which they designed for his destruction; but
they insinuated unto the Queen Mother, that it had not been much amiss if the
Cardinal had persuaded his Majesty to send the Princess Mari out of France,
without any more ado, because now Morsi^ur might still watch his opportunity
and marry her: By this they knew, that no Logic could so soon learn the
deducing of consequences, as that of a Woman's choiler and ambition, which can
quickly do it without teaching; and thus it cannot be imagined, what, and how
many contrivances and devices they made use of, to incense her against the
Cardinal* who in the mean while, employed his utmost both of Prudence and
Justice, to hide the violence of her Proceedings.

Politic Observation.
When it happens as oftentimes it does, that Ministers are to redress the
disorders committed by Grandees, who are persons tenderly to be dealt withal,
they ought to follow the example of the wise Pilot, who though the Wind be
contrary, yet he so orders his Sails by turning and winding too and fro, that
he nevertheless goes on in his voyage. It is with them as with Metals, the
noblest are the most flexible, and if they want discretion and address to bend
and comply, when occasion is, they will be sure to meet with enemies, who will
stick upon their skirts. If there be any Ulcer in their minds, they must never
open it with Iron, unless there be first of all some soft cotton tied about
it, though in a case of extremity, I must confess, they are bound to make use
of fire and Rasors to cut and burn out that which corrodeth within them, or
grateth without them. Great freedom of speaking the naked truth, is not proper
in a Court, or amongst Grandees, with whom all kinds of devices and Artifices
are to be used for the disguising of it; nay some, disguise it how you will, do
not willingly love to hear it. The respect which is paid unto them in this
kind, is not so much a bare complaisance or simple submission, as an effect of
a good judgment, which knows that their discontent does often raise great
broils in the State, which by this means are prevented, because it keeps them
from anger, and allayeth any of their heats and emotions. When Ministers are,
as oftentimes it happens to treat with Women, who are persons of quality and
concernment in affairs, they ought to remember there is no way to satisfy
them, but by doing whatever they desire good or bad, their Souls being
incapable of bearing a denial, how just and reasonable soever, when as they are
once bent upon it; wherefore it is not safe to discommend their Proceedings,
unless they have a mind to have their eyes scratched out. But at last Prudence
does oblige them to do that which is fittest and most proper to be done; so
that having once done that which is just and reasonable, they ought to sit
still and leave the rest to Gods Providence, who is the King of Kings, and
Governor of all Kingdoms.

His Majesty departs from Suze toward Languedoc, after Cazal, and the strong
Towns in Montferrat were revictualled.
HIS Majesty having stayed at Suze as long as was needful for the securing of
those advantages which he had got; as also for the conveying of Wheat and all
other necessaries into Cazal and the places of Montferrat in case they should
be again set upon after his with drawing back, he at last resolved to pass
through Languedoc. His design was only to bring the revolted Heretics under
obedience, who had of late showed their teeth against him, upon all occasions
and opportunities whatever. Notwithstanding his Majesty's Declaration made at
Paris, as has heretofore been observed, they had made an Assembly at Nisms,
where they published a sedition manifest, by which they endeavored to
represent his Majesty's gracious proffers, for so many snares to entrap them;
and that notwithstanding his Kingly word, he intended to put them all to the
Sword; whereupon it was resolved not to lay down their Arms, but by and with
the consent of the King of England; to which effect, all they of the Town and
Party, were to bind themselves by oath, which was as much as to say, they
peremptorily resolved to continue the War as long as ever they could. The King
of England being troubled for the affront which had been given his forces both
at Ree, and before Rochel, desired nothing more then to see France divided, and
at War amongst themselves, which would be a great dimunition of his Majesty's
strength and power. Monsieur de Rohan had likewise been with the King of
England in the behalf of the Assembly, to implore his Protection, and to let
him know that they of his party having built all their hopes upon the
expectation of his succors, did humbly beseech him not to defer any longer his
assisting of them. Were not these so many evident signs and tokens of an
intended bloody War, for the securing of themselves in those Towns which were
strong, and in their own powers? did they not hope his Majesty would find work
enough to be diverted in Italy, and that he might neither have time nor power
to fall on them, or oppose their designs? And after all this what reason was
there to give any longer way to this rebellious people, to fix and root
themselves any more in their obstinacies and wilful perverseness? Must not
his Majesty in so doing have been defective both in Prudence and Courage? But
the Cardinal was too industrious to suffer any such blemishes to lie upon his
Masters glory; so that he persuaded his Majesty, that it was now high time, to
call them to account, and that he should forthwith set forward to curb in their
insolences, and to set bounds to their unlimited Pride and Rebellion.

Politic Observation.
REvolts are the most dangerous Convulsions in a State, and as in man's body
there are Symptoms which are as so many Prognostics, to tell us the event of
them, so those of States are most commonly accompanied with certain
circumstances, which give a just cause to fear, lest they may end in the ruin
of the Kingdoms, where they are first born, without present remedy to prevent
it. The wise Pilot when he fore-sees any storms, as usually he does, by some
secret Winds, and I know not what tremblings upon the surface of the Waters,
provideth himself against they happen; and a wise Minister, discovering by a
revolt, such signs which may make him suspect their consequence ought no longer
to defer the employing of his utmost power, to divert those misfortunes which
are threatened. Now among ^ll such Prognostications, none are more apparently
evident then manifest Decla^ations, unlawful Assemblies, Levies of men,
keeping of watch in Towns and Ci^ies against their natural Prince. For these
things are indeed the forerunners of ^aying aside all respect and duty; and in
some sense the dividing their Kings Authority and his Kingdom too. These are
manifest Symptoms of a mortal disease which threatens the State.

Now as a wise Physician when once he discovers in his Patient any one, or more
signs of death, does no longer delay his applying of all necessary preventions.
So a Minister when he finds any people either resolved or inclined to it, is
obliged to make use of his masters forces to prevent it, and allay such storms
in their first growth, which if delayed would perchance in danger the whole
structure. In such occasions, he ought to use an extraordinary diligence; for
if vigilance and care be necessary in such enterprises as are made abroad, much
more is it in those nearer home; especially when it concerns the keeping of a
people (inclined to Rebel) within the limits of their duty. By this means was
it, that Alexander prevented that general insurrection which was intended in
Greece; for he appeared there in the head of his Army, before there was a word
heard of his being upon his march. And how much recommended was that vigilance
of Rhodoginus King of the Persians, who being one day told whilst he was
washing of his head, of a certain rebellion newly began amongst his people, had
not the patience to sit until he had made an end; but tying up his hair,
mounted on horseback to go and take care about it, well knowing that Rebellion
is like a Viper, easily killed in the Birth; but much more difficultly
overcome, if let alone until it gain force and strength.

The King of Spain treats with the Duke of Rohan, for the raising of more
troubles in France.
THey who have once delivered themselves up to a revolt, are easily led into
all extremities, upon hopes of a good success. Thus was it with the Duke of
Rohan, he had so much forgot himself, as to demand assistance from the King of
Spain, who glad of any opportunity to trouble the Waters in France, caused his
Agent de Clauset to be received with honor, and assured him of all assistance;
for which he could reasonably hope. A Treaty not long after was conc^uded, in
which the Duke of Ro^an obliged himself to continue in the War in France so
long as his Majesty of Spain should think fit; and generally to further and
defend all the interests and affairs of Spain. And lastly, that he should not
treat or conclude of any League or Peace, without his Majesty of Spain's
consent and approbation; and the King of Spain did reciprocally promise him all
manner of assistance, particularly that he would pay him down at two payments
six hundred thousand Ducats of Gold, toward defraying of the charge of the
War, and to make a diversion in Provence, Languedoc, Dauphine and other such
places, as his Catholic Majesty should think most convenient for his interests
and designs; and besides, did grant unto him a Pension of forty thousand
Ducats yearly, and eight thousand to his Brother the Sieur de Soubize, and ten
thousand more to be yearly distributed amongst his Officers, as he should think
fit. O most blind madness! thus to run into the Arms of France's sworn enemy,
and to uphold a Rebellion against his own Country: But with what Justice could
Spain pretend to protect such Rebellious Subjects, and thus openly to maintain
Heresy? What was now become of Religion, that specious Cloak of theirs, which
had so often been the stalking horse to their ambitious designs? Did he not
herein evince to the whole World, that his pretended zeal and counterfeited
devotion, was only a Vail to cover the injustice and violence of his designs,
seeing he did not stick to maintain Heresy, when it served to support his
pretenses? He was no long while deliberating upon the giving this assurance to
the Duke of Rohan; for that he clearly saw, if his Majesty did once absolutely
overcome the Hugonot party, or reduce them to an inability of raising any more
broils, that he would then soon bound in his Ambition, and force him to
renounce those designs which he had so long contrived against France and our
Allies; because if France should but once unite and become one, he would then
find him self prevented in all his designs against them; nothing of good
success could in reason befall him, and besides there was no way left to
secure himself from these and many more misfortunes.

Politic Observation.
IT is not lawful for one Prince to support the Rebellions which another
Princes Subjects raise against him, seeing he is no less bound to deal justly
with his neighbors, then with his own Subjects. If Equity does not bound in
his Ambition, God who is the Judge of all Kings, deals justly with him, if he
be whipped with the same Rod; and as there is not any Crime in a Subject, so bad
as that of Rebellion; so neither can one Prince do a greater outrage to
another, then by protecting it; seeing it is that which wounds the very heart
of a State, and disordereth the most powerful Spring by which Sovereigns
govern their people. Justice is without doubt the strongest Pillar of Kingly
Government; that which makes them long to Reign; that which secureth them from
foreign enterprises, and the strongest Bulwark to defend them, as the wisest
of Kings has said in his Proverbs; and it may be truly said, that, that is
it, which renders their Government exempted from the Dominion both of Time and
Fortune. That King who offends another, inviteth him to retaliate the like;
and he who supporteth a Rebellion, enforces him who is so injured to arm
himself with fury, that he may repay him in his own kind, and thus both a the
engaged (by this means) in one another ruin. God Almighty does sometimes
(indeed) permit the Ambition of a Prince to obtain great successes against his
neighbors for their punishments; but although he does permit it to be so, yet
he does not approve of it. That which is unjustly got, will not long last
unless preserved by Justice: Kingdoms are said to be like Tortoises, which as
long as they keep within their own Precincts are safe and secure; but in danger
when once they are abroad. And I do verily believe, that, that which has made
the French Monarchy of so long a continuance, is, because it never yet carried
its Forces without its own bounds, unless for the just defense of its Allies,
or at least to preserve that which belongs unto it. It has imitated the
River Nile, never over-flowed its own Banks; but it enriched those places where
it passed. Whereas, they of the house of Austria, ambitious of assaulting other
Countries, are now assaulted by every one, and receives notable decreases of
its power, though it has been but of a few. Ages; and they find that ancient
saying, to be true, to their loss: That although Earthly power does promise an
escape for all Violences whatever; yet Heaven does never grant any long
duration of it.

His Majesty Summoneth Privas.
HIs Majesty being well acquainted with all these Passages, concluded that it
was not fit any longer to suffer the Insolences of the Heretics; but that
they ought to be prevented before their assistance from Spain were yet come
unto them. This made his Majesty depart from Suze with some part of the Army,
directly, toward Privas, the Capitol Town of the Vivarests, which place he
resolved first of all to chastize, for the Rebellion of the rest; this having
been the chief Firebrand of the Rebellions, which had happened in sixty years
last past; but in the interim, (there being little or no credit to be given
unto the Duke of Savoy's promises, who made no reckoning of his word, but when
it stood with his advantage,) his Majesty thought good to leave the residue of
the Army at Suze, with Monsi^ur the Cardinal, for the better securing of his
victories, and gave the Marshal de Crequy full power to command all the
Soldiers, who were designed for Italy, after the Cardinal had repassed the
Alyes. Not long after, to the same purpose, the three Regiments of Villeroy
Rabarac, and la Grange, were sent into M^nt^errat who were quartered in Nice de
la Paille, Agoui, Pouson, and other neighboring Places, under Command of the
Sieur de Tho^ras, then Marshal of the Camp, that in case either the Duke of
Savoy, or the Spaniards, should attempt any thing, those forces might be in a
readiness, to make head against them.

Politic Observation.
THere ought not to be any Tie more indissoluble between Princes, then that of
Treaties; but seeing there is little Trust in them, by reason that most Princes
are apt when they have any mind to it, to raise pretenses, whereby to break
them; it is therefore great prudence so to conclude them, if possible, that a
Prince be not always necessitated, to keep upon his Guard. With a Prince, who
has formerly used, to break Treaties and Leagues, this care ought to be the
greater, seeing he, who has once been worse then his word, ought ever to be
suspected. A Minister ought to know this for a certain Truth, that most States
have ruined themselves, in the abundance of their confidence; That this is it,
which has been the inlet, to so many disorders, and that he who is the least
distrustful is the easiliest surprised and ruined. He ought to be like the
Lion, who sleeps with his eyes open, and so to be upon his Guard, even after
the conclusion of a Treaty, that he be not within the reach of a surprise.
D^strust is the Mothe^ of good success, whereas Credulity, and the Confid^nce
which one man has or another, serves most commonly to ruin. This san^^
Frankness of believing every one, is very prejudicial; It cannot indeed be
called an offense, because it is grounded upon the esteem of others: but surely
it is a great deficiencie, when it m^keth any one live in a secure neglect.

It seldom happens, that distrust brings any danger with it. Princes are the
more obliged, not to rely at all on the promises or words of any one, because
they have only interest for their end, and make it their profession, of being
more faithful to their own Grandeur, then to their Allies. As for those
Princes, whose inclinations carry them to believe the promises of others, for
Truths, and are not in league with this same diffidence, they are not to be
discomended for it, only I would advise them, so to stand on their Guards, as
if no such promises had been made at all.

Prosecution of the Subject.
HIS Majesty being come near to Privas, took up his Quarter in a House, where
he might both see the Town, and his whole Army; within a few hours of his
arrival, he commanded the Marquis d'Vxelles, to go view the place and its
fortifications. He went out accordingly; but perchance too well accompanied for
his safty, for the inhabitants of the Town, shooting out upon them, he was
wounded by a Musket, of which he dyed within four or five days. But at last
the place having been viewed, his Majesty's Army, began to take up their
Quarters, and after a hot sketmish the Inhabitants were beaten out of the
suburbs, within the Precinses of their Town Walls. The Peace with England had
been concluded and signed at Suze but not as yet sworn, so his Majesty thought
good, (to the intent he might dispossess them, of all hopes from that part,) to
cause it to be read a loud unto them, at such a distance, that they might
easily see and hear the publication of it. They were not a little surprised at
it: but that which more troubled them was, they saw two Batteries raised in an
Instant, which so belabored their Walls, that in two days there was a breach
made, at which very time, the Cardinal arrived from Suze; who concluding the
breach was sufficient, it was resolved to give an assault. All the Army was
very resolute and high, every one wishing, it might be his good luck to fall on
where most danger was, that he might curb the Insolence of those rebellious
Heretics. The assault was begun about eight at night, and lasted until ten,
at which time, the Regiment de Falsbourg entered the Quarter where they fell
on, and those of Champagne and Piedmont became Masters of Fort Saint Andre and
Tourlon. The Inhabitants fought more like mad men, then any thing else, so that
the whole Town could not be carried at this bout: yet the taking of those
places, struck such a terror into the City, that the next morning, not a man
durst appear, though Montbrun the Governor commanded them to follow him, every
one flying for his own safety, and Saint Andre himself trying to make his
peace. The Cardinal thinking it just, for the terror of others, and for the
punishing of a great many, that some ought to pay their lives, for their
Rebellious Insolences, would not admit of them; but upon condition to
surrender themselves to his Majesty's Mercy: This redoubled their Fears who
were in the City, and made many of them to get out, some here, some there,
amongst the Mountains, who being met with, by the Soldiers were all put to the
Sword. His Majesty having notice of what disorder was in the City, Commanded
the Sieur de Gordes and the Marquis d' ^ssiat, to go into the Town under
pretense of speaking with the Sieur de Saint Andre, who had sent unto the
Sieur de Gordes, to desire him to make his peace; but in effect it was only to
discover, if the place were so deserted, as had been informed. They marched up
to the Gate, and finding no resistance, took some more with them, went in, and
soon became Masters of the whole Town, which was presently given to the
Soldiers to pillage. Thence they passed up to the Castle, and the Soldier
whom they sent, telling who he was, and his business, The Sieur de Saint
Andre, came presently out unto them, but could not be persuaded at first, to
yield unto his Majesty's mercy, but stood very resolutely upon Quarter for his
own life, and theirs, who were with him: but at last, being told, once and
again, that there was no other way to save himself, and seeing the Town entered
and given to be pillaged, he conse^ted and went to the door of his Majesty's
lodging, where the Guards seized on him, and by his Majesty's order carried him
to Bassompiere and Marillac, to be by them lead in the head of the Regiment des
Gardes, before the Castle Gate, to summon them this last time, to surrender
unto his Majesty's mercy, which was done accordingly, and they forthwith
yielded: But being just upon coming forth, some amongst them set fire on a
Barrel of powder, which killed several of his Majesty's Soldiers, and so
incensed the rest, that they slew all they could lay hands on; The rest in
stead of coming forth quietly, as had been promised, that they might be
conducted to his Majesty's feet, ran away, some this way, and some that way;
and others leaped over the very Walls, insomuch, that it was with much a do,
that any of them had their lives saved: But besides all this, as if Heaven had
not yet been satisfied for their Insolences and Rebellions, the fire kindled
over all the Town, on a sudden, neither could the Author be discovered, nor the
fire extinguished, until the Town was quite consumed to ashes, notwithstanding
his Majesty's care and Command to save the Churches, or at least some Houses
which might serve for a Church.

Politic Observation.
IT is no less just then prudent, to chastise one, for exemples sake, amongst
many, be they either men or Cities, engaged in a Rebellion together. The
Insolency of them who hold out a Town against their Sovereign, obliges him, to
be deaf to all their last entreaties, which they only fly unto, when all other
hopes have left them: If his Clemency has been ineffectual to reclaim them, he
is then obliged to let the Arm of his Justice thunder upon them, to punish
their insolent fu^y and rashness. If love cannot force them to ease their
Rebellion, nothing but fear, can then make them lay down their Weapons. And
indeed, upon whom can a King with more Justice, exercise the rigor of his
Arms, than upon his Rebellious subjects, who by their Insolences have rendered
themselves unworthy of his Mercy? He ought but seldom to employ his Revenge,
but unless he do, on such an occasion as this; he will quickly find his whole
Authority, trampled under foot. He who accustometh himself, in his usual
Actions, to violence, cannot avoid being hated by all men, which will in fine
be his ruin: And he who in Rebellions shall totally neglect it, will soon be
scorned by all men, and that will ruin him, on the other hand. Princes who
endeavor to make themselves be feared, ought not to be discommended; but only
when they do it, by undue ways. Man being free, ough^ to be governed by
sweetness, but if his passion shall transport him to abuse his Liberty, he must
be reduced by the severity of Justice, to his duty. The Horse who is only used
to walk, and never put to any swifter motion, may be ruled with a silk thread;
but if he be resty or fiery be will need a bit to hold him in: Just so it is in
this case, The goodness alone of a Prince, is enough to Govern a people, who
endeavor and make it their business to live in Peace; but if they shall
attempt to shake off their yoke, they then ought to be retained by fear, which
is the most propper Curb to compel them, not so much to fear their Princes
power, as to refrain themselves from those actions, which deserve to be
punished: It is to imitate God's own order in his Government, who rendereth
himself terrible, to affright men from si^, which is as much for their own
good, as their Kings Glory. Fear is not in excess, but when it impresseth an
apprehension of Rigor and severity, from an unjust Tyrannical Cruelty.

The Sieur de Marillac comes from the Queen Mother unto his Majesty at Privas.
IMmediately after the King was come before Privas, the Sieur de Marillac, came
to wait on him from the Queen Mother, with new Justifications concerning her
procedure in the affair of the Princess Maria, and to deliver unto him such
other letters or recommendation, as she had then writ, unto his Majesty,
desiring to make him a Marshal of France. The Letters were of such a tenor,
and with so many Commendations, that his Majesty never thinking he deserved the
one half, was much surprised at them: and that which is more considerable, is,
they were contrived by the Cabal, the Enemies of the Cardinals glory. This
Cabal was composed of some of the ablest persons, of the whole Court, in
matters of Sedition, Faction, or Broils, who did for see that the only means
to withdraw her affection from Monsi^ur the Cardinal, (whom she did then much
honor,) was, to engage her in a good esteem of Marillac, the person by them
designed to succeed in the Government of all affairs together with his Brother,
the Lord keeper, whom they both knew to be Favorers of their designs. Every
one made it his work, as if it were in Emulation of one another to speak well
of him, before her Majesty, who was the sooner overcome by their devices, in
regard she ever had a good esteem of him, and these Praise seconding it, made
no small impression upon her. They of the Cabal, seeing that her opinion of him
was now grown up to a height, and confirmed in her soul, thought it best to
loose no more time; as also that they could not have a more favorable
occasion, seeing the Queen Mother, had expressed some little disgust against
the Cardinal, upon the Princess Ma^ia's Business: So they insinuated into her
mind to procure him to be made Marshal of France, and to bring him into favor
with the King; They told her he would be a person totally at her devotion, one
who would carry on her Interest, both with and against all; as himself too
would commonly say, to increase their esteem of him; That she had so much the
more need of a Man of his Temper, seeing the Cardinal, was most commonly out of
the way, and much taken up in affairs of State. These were the ground-works
which they laid to work upon her and to induce her to write effectually unto
his Majesty, to make him Marshal of France. They thought all well, if the Queen
Mother did but once request it, for then, in case his Majesty did make any
difficulty of it, they could easily persuade her that it was a loss to her
Honor, and the whole Kingdom would take notice, of the little credit or power
she had with his Majesty her Son: This their contrived design was accordingly
put in order: For his Majesty did at first refuse to do him that Honor, which
by the Queens own apprehension and their instigation did much incense and
provoke her; neither were they hereupon deficient to add oil unto that fire,
they had made already in her mind against the Cardinal; as yet indeed they
durst not speak against him with that insolence, which shortly after they did;
but they so played their game, that they well knew the jealosie of him which
they had already infused into her, would soon overcome that little kindness,
which she had then left for him; only they thought it enough for the present to
discourse to her how injurious this refusal was to her, how powerful the
Cardinal was with her Majesty, how he retarded and altered his Majesty's
inclinations, who never denied her any thing; but they never told her the
Reason of it, which was, because she never asked any thing of his Majesty but
what was unreasonable. But I pray was not this to hint to her, that she had
less power with his Majesty then the Cardinal, the ready way to touch her to
the quick? and to the quick she was touched, for she laid all the Blame of the
Kings denial upon his score, she began to be offended and in an ill humor
against him, testifying to him, that it was her absolute desire he should be
made Marshal of France, and forcing him to obtain that honor for him from his
Majesty; The Cardinal used presently his utmost power with his Majesty to
persuade and incline him to it; he represented to him, that there is a
necessity sometimes to bestow Honors and Offices upon them, who deserve them
not, but upon diverse other considerations; and that the Queen Mothers
satisfaction was one chief reason, insomuch that his Majesty did at last bestow
a Marshals staff upon him; The Cardinal, who could not be ignorant of all
their Contrivances, assured himself, that these Instances of the Queen Mother,
proceeded from the Suggestions of some Cabal or other, and not from her own
Natural disposition: But however his Genius did acquaint him with the Remedy,
as soon as the desease, he intended rather to hazard his own Interests, (though
it were with some repugnance) and to take his own advantages against this new
Officer of the Crown, then to deny the Queen Mother, governing himself in this
particular by the Laws of Prudence, which oblige a man, to wink at some
disorders, for want of means potent enough to redress them.

Politic Observation.
NOthing is more dangerous, then to advance an Ambitious man, to high Honor;
It is the ready way to put a Sword into a mad man's hand; That Minister who
contributes to his advancement, cherishes an Enemy, whom he must not long
after, fight with. The Honor which is done to an Ambitious person, serves him
only to be the more active and stirring; and as he believes all things to be
his due, so he thinks not himself obliged for any thing procured to him: and
besides all this, The passion which he has, still to be soaring a loft being
greater then the Remembrance of him, who procured him his Honor, will engage
him in designs against that very person, who has obliged him, if he does but
once apprehend it to be for his private interest. Nay I shall go a little
farther and say; It is very unsafe for the Public affairs, to advance persons
of this temper into high employments. Ambition is commendable, and deserves to
be cherished, when it excites generous Courages, to great Actions, for the
getting of Glory, but that, which leads men to obtain the highest dignities
by all, nay by any means, whatever, is as much to be discommended, in it self,
as it is pernicious to the public good. They who are once overpowered by
this passion, think on nothing, but how to advance their Fortunes; they are not
concerned at any mishaps in the public, provided, they obtain what they aim
at, in their particular affairs; what care they to put the State into disorder
and trouble, if they increase their own power by it? There is not any one
person, in the whole Kingdom, how advantageous or useful soever he be, to the
General and Public good, whose ruin they will not procure, if they apprehend
his downful, may serve for a Footstool, to their own advancement. The more
power they have, the more dangerous they are, for an access of Authority,
adds fuel to their fire. They care not though to whole world perish, so they
may but arrive to that pitch which they propose to themselves. If any obstacle
encounter them. Oh! they are all in fury against him, whom they suspect to have
occasioned it; and if they see their fall inevitable, it is their proud
pleasure to see all fall with them. Princes, (not necessitated by other
considerations) take a good Course, when they bestow honors on them, whom they
know to be more faithfol to the State, then Passionate for their own
particulars, and on such, who study not so much to grow great, as to obtain
that glory, which does inseperably attend on virtue.

The King after the taking of Privas, prosecuteth his Victory into Languedoc,
and gains great advantages by it.
THE siege of Privas being ended, his Majesty designed to advance into
Languedoc, and to visit some other of the Hugonot Towns* Those whom he could
not reclaim by fair means, he resolved to do by force. He had already commanded
the Chiefest of them to be forraged, which had been done accordingly, as
Montauban, Castres, Nismes, and Millaut, and the Marshal d'Estree being gone to
make the Forage about Nismes, had cut off a good party of their Forces, who
sallied out, to hinder him. The King no sooner advanced, but the Towns of
Gorce, Vallon, Vaguas, Saint Ambroyse, and many other of the Sevennes returned
to their obedience: So without loosing more time, he wen^ before Al^ts which he
besieged. The Duke of Rohan, had used his utmost art to persuade the Townsmen
to be courageous, and had sent them Soldiers, there being only two hundred in
the Town, which was very strong by situation and Art; but as ill luck would
have it for those whom he sent, it was their misfortune to be most of them cut
off, before they got to the Town; which was thus. They attempted in the
obscurity of a very dark night to break through the Kings Army, they had
wounded the first Sentinel, but the second discharging at them, gave the
A^larum, and the Cardinal, who never sleeps but when all is safe, came thither
in a moment, at the head of two hundred Horse, and charged them so resolutely,
that the darkness of the night, and the lightness of their own heels, was their
best security* some were however taken, and put to death; This defeat of their
succors and the sad example of Privas, wrought upon them in the Town so that
they resolved to yield, and accordingly they sent to beg his Majesty's pardon,
which was granted, with liberty for the Garrison to withdraw where they pleased.

This happy success, was of great advantage unto the Kings Forces, and did so
perplex the Duke of Rohan, that he could not tell how to steer his course. Some
who were well affected unto his Majesty's Interests, gave notice of the trouble
in what Monsieur de Rohan then was, and the Cardinal, who is sure never to
loose any the least occasion of serving his Majesty, found means so to work on
him, that he got him to submit unto his Majesty's mercy; he represented to him,
how rash he was in supporting this revolt; That nothing but misfortune could
arrive to him in particular by it, for that his Majesty was fully resolved to
cut the wings of heresy and Rebellion; That he ought in reason to be
satisfied, with the exercise of his Religion, as also those of his party, and
that returning to his duty, he might in time hope to receive those honors
which were due to his Birth. The Duke hereupon went privately unto his Majesty,
promised in future to continue Loyal, and protested to live in an exact
obedience. The King freely pardoned him, on condition, that he should spend
some years out of the Kingdom. Now he being the head of the party, his
repentance could not be so closely carried, but that many began to perceive it,
and follow his steps. Diverse Deputies of the principal Hugonot Towns came in
and did the like. The rest being allarumed by the happy success of his
Majesty's forces, and fearing to become Subjects of their fury and rage,
disposed themselves to accept of peace, and made diverse Proposals for a general
accommodation, which were brought unto the Cardinal, but thought unworthy for
the King to grant. But the Duke of Rohan having made his accommodation, though
as yet not publicly known, persuaded his Majesty to give him leave to call a
general Assembly of the Deputies then at Nisms, to be kept at Anduze, which was
approved, and being there met, the Duke so dealt with them, that they were a
little more reasonable in their demands then formerly. The Cardinal observing
his time, so wrought with them, though of a fiery, harsh, and stubborn nature,
that what by his presence and discourse he at last overcame them; insomuch that
they relied on his only word, which was, that they should have the free
exercise of their Religion, and enjoyment of their goods. Whereupon they
resolved to beg his Majesty's pardon, and to submit themselves to his will and
pleasure; withal* they were contented that their Fortification should be
demolished, according as his Majesty should command, to take off all occasions
of any future revolts, and to give Hostages for the performance of their
promises. The King pardoned them, and Proclamation was made of the favor his
Majesty had granted them, which was to the great joy of his Subjects in
general, and particularly to the satisfaction of the Hugonots themselves.

Politic Observation.
THere is no better way to prevent Civil Wars, then by disabling those who are
discontented from fomenting a party, or at least to make sure of their
Loyalties. And when once a Revolt is on foot, no surer way to dissipate it,
then by winning those who are the Leading men amongst them. There ought to be
great care had, that such men grow not great in the State, or if they be
already, then ought they to be tied to their Princes Interests by sure and
strong obligations; when things are once at this pass, there is no danger; well
may the people grumble and stir, but all will soon end in nothing. They are
then like Ivy, which indeed grows close together, but yet creeps on the ground,
or like the Boughs of Trees, newly cut off, which bear no fruit, and in two or
three days wither to nothing; or like a Ship, which though it have a Mast,
Cords, and Sails, yet without a skillful Pilot, she runs at random wherever
the Winds will carry her, and at last dashes upon some Rock, and is there split
in pieces. Or I may well compare them, to those lofty raging storms, which for
a time seem to threaten Heaven, but at last weary out themselves upon the sides
of the Rocks which are not moved at it; or to those thick black Clouds which
hang in the Air, and are driven by the Winds this way and that way, but are
soon dissipated by the weakest Rays of the Summers Sun.

The Chief is the Head amongst a mutinous rabble, who if once he leave them,
they have no more life or motion then a Carcass. He is the Primum mobile, who
draws them after him, like so many little Stars, and he is called their Head;
only in consideration that as the parts of the body are without motion or
life, if that be ^^ken off, so are they without him unable to go or stand.

His Majesty enters into Usez, Nismes, and other Towns with the Edict of Peace.
SOon after the accommodation was concluded, his Majesty made his entrance into
Vsez and Nismes, to the great joy of the inhabitants. During his stay there, he
caused an Edict to be published, containing that Order which he required to be
observed in all the Hugonot Towns, who until that time denied the exercise of
the Catholic Religion amongst them. He pardoned the Sieurs de Rohan, Soubize
and all others, who had born Arms under them. He ordained that the Roman
Catholic and Apostolic Religion, should be established in every place. That
the Goods of the Church which had been taken away, should be restored to the
Ecclesiastics, together with their houses, Churches and Monasteries; that
every Parish should be provided with good and able Curates: And in fine, that
the Religion pretended to be Reformed, should be allowed as free exercise. But
to secure them from all future Revolts, the Fortifications of all their Towns
and strong Holds were to be rased and thrown down, only leaving them their
Walls standing; and that for security of their Peace and good behavior, until
their works were demolished accordingly, they should deliver Hostages unto his
Majesty, to be by him kept until the execution of it. This Edict being thus
finished, and according to the Articles and Conditions which had been agreed
on, gave a great deal of satisfaction to the Heretics, who all of them now
thought on nothing else, but to live in Peace and Quiet, excepting those of
Montauban, who proud of their strong Walls became so insolent, that they
refused to accept of those conditions which the rest had with so great joy and
gladness. They imagined themselves able a second time to resist his Majesty's
forces, but considered not how things were altered, and that affairs were not
now managed, as formerly they were, how that his Majesty had by a Prudence,
eternally happy for France, committed the Conduct of all things to the
Cardinal, who had furnished him with all the means of taking Rochel, a place
lately thought impregnable, who had broken all the designs of Spain, who had
repulsed the English force so often, who in one hours discourse, had reced the
Prince of Piedmonts Spanialized soul, to become absolute French, woe had
persuaded the Duke of Savoy to whatever he had a mind; and upon whose only
word all the rest of the Hugonot Towns were resolved to have suffered their
Walls and Fortifications to be demolished and thrown down. The obstinacy of the
Town was such, that his Majesty thought himself obliged to go before it, that
he might overcome it with force, seeing no fair means would work upon it. But
the Cardinal considering how the sickness began in the Army, and in diverse
Towns of Languedoc, beseeched his Majesty not to hazard his person, which was
of greater concern to France, then any other thing whatever; and that he would
be pleased to leave him to fight with the rest of this Rebellion; with much ado
his Majesty was at last overcome, and resolved to return to Paris, as he did,
after he had in six months time, taken Suze, saved Cazal, forced Privas, and
reduced the most part of the Hugonot Towns under his obedience.

Politic Observation.
Heresy and Obedience are inconsistent with one another, whilst there is any
hopes left of force. The Poets seem to have alluded to it* in a Fable which
they tell of Juno, who being angry that Jupiter had gotten Pallas on himself,
she would needs breed something on her self too; but instead of a Child she
brought forth Typhon a mighty ugly Serpent, who making War against Jupiter
himself, was looked on as a Monster of Rebellion; just so it is with Heresy,
who having separated it self from God (who in his Church begets children
full of respect and obedience) would needs have children of its own; but what
are they? Children of revolt, and incapable of any subjection; never did a
perfect Heretic yet love his King. And I wonder who can doubt or think it
strange, that they are such enemies of Temporal, seeing they cannot endure any
spiritual Monarchy. Heresy has never any sound* solid reasons or arguments to
defend its belief; and therefore the next thing it flies to is force: Besides
they finding that Kings have both an Authority and Power to punish them, und
that they do allow and approve of the true Doctrine in all Schools, which is in
prejudice to their false Tenants, they presently become their mortal enemies,
and do their utmost to shake off the yoke of their Obedience. How many wars and
jars have they raised on every hand of us? No one but knows that the Arians
filled all the East with troubles. That the Macedonians raised a great party in
Greece, and that the Donatists put Afric into confusion. How many Revolts and
Rebellions have been in process of time, set on foot in the West by the
Iconomiques, by the Albigeois, by the Lutherans, by the Calvinists? France,
Germany, England, and Holland, have been theaters where they have played their
pranks. They pretend that Gods cause and their Religion goes hand in hand; and
they do therefore the easilier believe, that Heaven will protect, assist, and
go along with them, and upon this groundwork, do they build any insurrection,
revolt, or rebellion. But why do they not remember, that the Laws of true
religion, published by the son of God himself, do only permit them to die or
fly, but never to break the ties of their obedience, or to take up Arms,
against their Prince? Union in Religion, is the strongest Bulwark of a State,
whereas diversity is the certain foundation of Revolts, of which there cannot
be any doubt raised; for that God has said in the holy Scripture, A Kingdom
divided within it self cannot avoid destruction.

Cabals against the Cardinal.
AT the same time that his Majesty began his journey toward Paris, the
Cardinal mounted on horseback, for the reducing of Montauban; but I cannot
behold him thus blindly, sacrificing his own interests to the good of France
(whilst sundry great ones were contriving his ruin and destruction) and not
answer that malicious pen, which being unable to asperse him with any truth,
takes the liberty and boldness to find fault with, and condemn those actions
of his, begun, carried on, and finished with so much judgment, zeal, and good
success for his Majesty's glory. This Calumniator searching for pretenses,
whereby he might incense the Queen Mother against him* and instigate her to
complain unto his Majesty, and whereby she might be provoked to do her utmost
for his destruction; amongst other forgeries, writes, That she could no longer
endure to see him expose his Majesty's person unto so eminent dangers, as
passing over the Alps in the dead of the Winter, and commanding of an Army
infected with the Plague, and thorough a Country full of sickness, in the very
heat of all the Summer. But how sencelesly has he alleged it, how without
truth or judgment? Surely nothing but passion and heat, the two enemies of
reason and truth, could thus guide his Pen, whose only quarrel is the
meannesse and disorder of his Fortune, which he thinks must all be attributed
to the Cardinal, without considering that it is the effect of his own
misdemeanors and ill behavior. Is there any man living so senseless, besides
himself, as to believe, that the Cardinal should hazard his Majesty's life and
person, when as all his Fortune and hopes depend only upon him? Was he not at
that time well acquainted, how mortally the Queen Mother hated him? that
Monsieur had no affection for him? and that by consequence, if his Majesty
should miscarry his disgrace and ruin were unavoidable? The Queen Mother could
not possibly be of his opinion, seeing her complaint was, that the Cardinal was
too much tied to his Majesty's Interests; which one consideration alone, were
enough to have kept him off from hazarding his Majesty's health upon a slight
occasion, if his Loyalty had been capable of so great an Infidelity: But what
would not the detaining of his Majesty have been, to ravish from him one of the
greatest Subjects of glory that had been presented to him since his Reign? had
he stayed at Paris, he had been hindered from his journey to Suze, from the
raising the siege at Cazal, he had never forced the Alps in despite of the
Duke of Savoy, though seconded with the forces of Spain; he had not returned by
Languedoc, and there brought all the rebellious Hugonots under his obedience,
who had had the boldness to take up Arms against him. The Kings Generosity was
such, that should the Cardinal have dissuaded him from the expedition withal
his Art, yet I am confident he would never have been persuaded to let any one
else go and gather the Harvest of that glorious expedition. Besides the
Cardinal had much forgot himself, should he have attempted to divert the King
from this design, seeing there could not be any apparent hazard of his health;
does not every one know, that his Majesty was used from his Infancy, to endure
the air, and that he could not suffer much more in this Journey then he
commonly did in his huntings? I shall only add this one consideration more. Hi^
being there was an absolute necessity, for the encouraging of his Forces, which
we newly come off from the troublesome siege of Rochel, and just then to begin
a new voyage, no less laborious and painful.

The presence of a Prince is the soul of his Army, and without it the Soldiers
are never so courageous. The Duke of Savoy, the Spaniard and the Hugonots, were
to be overcome, they were no small encounters, and it was to be doubted whether
his Majesty's Army could have gone through with them, without his presence, to
whose sight they were formerly wont to ascribe all their victories. Without all
peradventure, some trouble and labor he must needs endure, and who knows
not, that never any great Prince, did yet refuse it, for the obtaining of an
honorable victory?

Politic Observation.
THE way which leads to victory is Thorny, to think of arriving to it,
without labor, is a vanity* That Prince who cannot compose himself to endure
labor, and travail, shall never attain to any great matters. Crowns are only
proper for their wearing, who win them by fight; and our Caesar and Alexander,
had never been so much commended, had they not exposed themselves to all kind
of Labor, Hazard and Danger. A generous courage never apprehends any pain,
and he who fears it, is not worth a thought* To Labor, was the first lesson
which the Romans taught in their military Art; and cannot sufficiently commend
that Invention of theirs, whereby they designed to traduce it to posterity;
They built the Temples of Honor, and Victory, in such a manner, that there was
no coming to that of Honor, but through that of victory, wh^re there was
nothing to be seen, but Swords Javelins Darts Helmets, Bucklers and the like,
to teach all people, that there was no Glory without Labor, and that there was
no coming to victory, but through the industrious painful exercise of Arms. I
have oftentimes much admired that devise of the Emperor Severus, who gave this
for his word, Let us labor; and that of the Emperor ^ertinax, Let us fight:
Both which seem to teach al^ Princes whether in Peace or War* that nothing is
more proper for them, then to be in Action and Labor. The same thing too, we
may gather from Adrian the Emperor; to whom Florus one day writ three short
Verses, telling him, he would not for his part, ^e Emperor if he might seeing
he was bound to go into England, and anon into S^i^^thia, to humor those
troublesome Broylers; But Adrian returned him Answer, that he would not
exchange with Florus, seeing he spent most of his time in Taverns and good
fellowship, which was as much as if he had said, nothing is so becoming a
Prince, as to endure Labor and Travail.

The Sieur de Guron sent to Montauban.
THE Cardinal having at last persuaded his Majesty, to commit the Army to his
Government for the reducing of Montauban, he thought good to send the Sieur de
Guron, some few days before he advanced, unto the Inhabitants of the Town, to
let them know his Majesty's pleasure, and to incline them to peace, by all fair
ways; He had express order to assure them, in his Majesty's behalf, of the
free exercise or their Religion, the enjoyment of all their goods and Estates,
and a full pardon for what was passed; but on the other side, to refuse them
all other their demands, of Fortifications and the like which they did usually
heretofore require for their security, (and as a pledge of performance) because
subjects ought not to pretend, to any other Gages from their Sovereign, then
his Princely word. The Sieur de Guron began his Journey toward them, with a
Convoy of certain light Horse; and being arrived at Villemur, where the Comte
d'Arpajon then Quartered, the Count forthwith dispatched a Trumpetter to the
Chief Consul of Montauban, to give him notice, That the Sieur de Guron was come
thither, sent by his Majesty to declare his will unto them, and also advised
him, that he thought it convenient, that they discoursed with him before he
were admitted into the Town; to which effect, if he would the next morning come
to Corbariou, the said Sieur de Guron would meet him in the Meadow just over
against the River Tar; which was prudently done of them, to avoid any
dis-esteem or neglect which might be put upon the Kings Authority, there being
little or no assurance to be given to revolted people, especially to them,
seeing they had retained a Trumpetter, sent to them on a Message not long
before by Monsieur the Prince, at which time they likewise protested, that they
would keep all that were sent to them* peradventure for reprisal of some, whom
the Duke a'Espernon had kept of theirs* The Chief Consul of Montauban, with
about two hundred more of the ablest Townsmen, came out the next morning to
Corbariou, but making some scruple of passing the Tar, to go unto the Sieur de
Guron, who then was in the Close before mentioned, they sent two Deputies to
him* to entreat him he would come to Corbariou. This procedure of theirs was
against the respect which they owed unto his Majesty, by their thus treating of
him whom he had sent unto them. Neither would he suffer it, but sent them word,
That their hearts were yet too full of Pride, instead of a sense which they
ought to have of their faults, that he would neither see nor speak with them,
but would return, in hopes however, of coming again a little better
accompanied then he was; so accordingly he caused his Trumpet to sound, and
away he went the direct way to Villemur, but the Discreetest amongst the
Deputies, considering that this offense would reflect on his Majesty's Person,
who might hereafter punish them for it, presently sent after him, to assure him
that they would the next day send their Deputies to him, to crave his pardon
for their fault, and to beseech him, he would do them the honor to come see
them at Montauban: accordingly the next morn, six Deputies came to Villemur to
him, entreated him to excuse their fault, and beseeched him with a great deal
of submission, that their error might not hinder them from his Majesty's grace
and favor, which they hoped to receive by his Mediation. The Sieur de Guron,
finding how desirous they were to see and treat with him, (a sign, that many
had a good inclination to submission) accepted of their excuses, and resolved
to go with them the very same day; He went with them, and they of the Town
being now a little more humbled, sent out all the Nobility and Gentry which
were then there, about half a league, to meet him, who accompanied him to the
lodging prepared for him, and the whole Corporation of the Town came to salute
him.

Politic Observation.
IT is an Act of Imprudence to incense the minds of a Rebellious people* by
denying them their Liberty and enjoyment of their goods. Those two things,
ought to be granted them at first word; but then, discretion commands a
Prince to hold them close to it, and to refuse them any other demands, which
the fickleness of the multitude will propose unto him* Experience has often
made it evident, that the vulgar being rude and rough, are only to be bent by
severity, now when once they are warmed in a Rebellion, what but that will work
any thing at all on them? A fiery Horse is only to be tamed by the whip and
spur, and it is a vanity to hope for the reducing of a people by caresses and
kindnesses: Admit you grant them whatever they demand, yet it is well known
they are of so insatiable a nature, of so greedy an humor, that the more is
given them, the more they desire: If they find their first desires granted with
ease, instead of being contented, they assume the liberty to demand more, like
Hydropiques, whom drinking makes more thirsty. Lewis the twelveth, found it
thus by experience, presently after he had taken Milan, as Guicciardine has
observed: Besides his natural Bounty, which inclined him to favor the people
in almost every thing, he thought himself a little more obliged to grant them
of Milan some extraordinary favors, that he might render them more
affectionate to himself, and that he might by this means assure and confirm his
new Conquests: Insomuch that he easily granted them all the favors they could
reasonably have desired. But his design succeeded very ill; for the Milanois in
stead of being satisfied with their first gratifications, took the boldness to
desire the being exempted from certain Impositions, which lay a little too
heavy on them; which the King, though with some difficulty, did at last grant
unto them; but the obtaining of this made them so insatiable, that their next
request was, to be freed from all taxes whatever, nay so unjust and
unreasonable they were that they became more incensed against him, for his last
refusal, then if he had never obliged them; which they had never done, had he
not been too free with them at first; his safest way having been, to have taken
time to deliberate, and consider on their first proposals, and have given hopes
of obtaining some part of them, which would have made them more modest in all
their succeeding Requests.

Prosecution of the Subject.
THE Sieur de Guron, having received the Complements and visits of all the
Townsmen, by their several Companies, he addressed himself to treat with the
Consuls concerning his business; It was agreed between them, that he should the
next morning come to the Town House, and show his Majesty's letter of Credence,
as also that of Monsieur the Cardinal, and acquaint the Assembly with the
subject of his Commission. The Cardinal, by a provident foresight, had sent two
of the Deputies of Nismes, with the Sieur de Guron, Gentlemen of great esteem
in the Hugonot party, affable and well spoken, who might testify to those
stubborn people of Montauban, with how great Clemency and Mercy his Majesty,
had pardoned them; and on the other side, how severely he had chastised those
of Privas for their Rebellion; how that they for their parts lived in a great
deal of quiet and freedom in the Exercise of their Religion; how punctual
Monsieur the Cardinal was to perform whatever he promised to them, and all
others; how it was in vain to hold out in hopes of succor or assistance,
seeing those very persons who had engaged them in the War, had already made
their Peace. These Deputies upon their first coming, began to execute the
design for which they came, to wit, to dispose the Chief of the City to submit,
as they had done. The next morning the Sieur de Guron came to the Town house,
where he discoursed to them with such Eloquence, Ingenuity and Address, that he
made a good Impression on them; He related to them the many victories and good
success, which had always accompanied his Majesty's Arms; the misfortunes of
Rochel and Privas, which they too could not possibly avoid, if they persisted
in their Rebellion; he likewise told, that his Majesty was fully resolved not
to suffer any people or places in his Kingdom, which were not in his power and
under his obedience; Next of all, he acquainted them, that his Majesty did
pass his word to them, for enjoyment of their goods, and the exercise of their
Religion, whilst they for their parts continued in their duties and obedience,
and lastly he gave them to understand how inviolable an observer the Cardinal
was of his word and he conjured them to be absolutely confident of whatever the
Cardinal should promise to them: They were generally so touched with this
discourse, that they presently seemed to be as much inclined to Peace, as
formerly they had been to War. The Deputies of Nismes seconded the Sieur de
Guron's speech, and were not wanting to acquaint the people unto what
misfortunes some other Towns of their party had been reduced; The Peace and
quietness, which they enjoyed by the Kings bounty, the deceits of them, who had
engaged them in this War by their great hopes of succors, which were now
vanished, seeing their head had made his Peace with his Majesty; That the great
victories, which his Majesty had of late obtained, might sufficiently let them
see that nothing was able to resist him, and that this had been the chief
reason which had induced them, and those of their City, to cast themselves at
his Majesty's feet, and that after, had had the honor to confer with the
Cardinal, they admired the incomparable virtues which were so eminently
apparent in him, experimented his meekness, and been sensible of the truth of
his promises, they could no longer defer their resolutions, but had great hopes
of receiving as many favors by his bounty, as they had heretofore suffered
mischiefs by the ambition of those whom they had chosen for their heads. It
cannot be expressed how great an impression these reasons made upon the people.
However their Rebellion having taken a deep root in them, they could not
resolve till after two days to send their Deputies to the Cardinal, neither
would they give any other answer to the Sieur de Guron, only beseeched him
that their Deputies might have the honor to wait upon him. Thus was their
final submission reserved by Heaven for the Cardinals Prudence, who alone was
able to produce so admirable an effect.

Politic Observation.
THE fear of those miseries which usually accompany revolts, is of greater
efficacy to reduce a people to their duty, then any other reasons whatever. As
nature has given them a rude and unpolished spirit, so the respect and
obligations which they owe their Princes, can hardly make any impression upon
them; but he who can once possess them with fear, may do what he will with
them. Whence it is, that they are not so much to be persuaded by reason, as
forced by the apprehension of rigors inevitable, if they consent not, to what
is required of them. Tacitus in his History does notably well describe these
qualities of theirs, when he says, That thought they have extraordinary
forces, yet nothing is so cowardly, so fearful, nor so wavering, if they be
not led and animated by a generous Commander; That as they cast themselves upon
enterprises with fury, so do they faintly abandon them, and fall into disorder,
upon their first apprehension of danger, and that holding no mean in their
actions, whilst they are fearlesse, they are no sooner at a stand, but they
may be wrought to any thing. Titus Livy, spoke with no less knowledge of them,
when he said, the nature of a people is; either to serve too abjectly, or to
command too insolently, they being incapable of any medium. Now when is it that
they command with too much insolence, but when they find themselves of the
stronger party, and that they fear nothing? and on the other side, when do they
creep with too much abjection and servitude, but when they are abased and
pulled down by rigors or chastisements? Upon this ground was it, that Drusus
went into Panonia, to appease a great sedition; but finding all fair and gentle
means were to no purpose, he made use of force and power, which they no sooner
felt the smart of, but they returned to their former submission and obedience.
Now the surest and safest way to touch a people with fear is, not to be too
hasty upon them in their first heat and fury; but to let that a little pass
over, for nothing does more decrease and allay them then time; they being like
the Sea, which of it self is calm and quiet; yet however subject to great
storms and agitations, when the impetuous Winds begin to stir up its Waves, and
to arm them with fury against one another, but returns to its own calmnesse,
when the winds once cease to move it. Thus it is with the rabble, of themselves
they are not capable to act or stir, but when they suffer themselves to be
carried by the suggestions of some sedicious, furious spirit; Oh how do they
then rage and rave! No violent thing can last long, neither indeed can their
fury hold out, if once they who first raised them, forbear to lead them; and
then, if in this nick of time, they are threatened with punishments, and see a
power able to force them, you may presently lead them to what you will, so
great an influence has that Passion of fear, over their low and narrow hearts.

Montauban Surrenders to the Kings Obedience.
THe Deputies of Montauban came to P^zanas, in company with the Sieur de Guran,
at which place the Cardinal then was They had Audience upon their first desire,
and made all protestations that could be imagined of a firm and strict
obedience unto his Majesty's will and pleasure; but stood stiffly in demanding,
that their Fortifications of the Ville, Novel^e and Bourbon should be left
standing, and seemed as if they had condiscended a very great deal, in
permitting their outworks to be slighted: But the Cardinal returned them
answer in that strain and garb which was proper for a General, and one who
represented the person of the King. That he did much admire (after they had
understood his Ma^esties intentions by the Sieur Guron) they should thus come
to treat, as if it were upon equal terms, and exempt themselves from the
conditions of other Towns; and then told them, these delays of theirs would
make their case the worse: That his Majesty's will was unalterable, and that
they might be confident if they put the Army to the trouble of coming before
their Town, they would soon see it reduced to the same pass with Rochel or
Privas. This discourse did much daun^ them, so they desired time to return and
bring their last resolutions, and requested the Sieur de Guron might go with
them, to persuade the people to reason; but to that it was replied, the Sieur
de Guron not having any further thing to do, but only the acquainting them
with his Majesty's good will and pleasure, he could not consent to his
returning with them, and yet at their request he was contented, that the Sieur
de Guron should go somewhat near the Town with them, and remain there at a
little distance, in some place thereabouts. These things thus concluded and
agreed, he fell to talk with them of other affairs, but such as his Prudence
told him were most proper to work on them; and indeed they were so charmed what
with his presence, garb and discourse, that they went away fully resolved to
persuade their fellow Citizens, to yield unto whatever he should require of
them* They being once returned, he cause the Army to march up within three
Leagues of the Town, under the command of the Marshal de Bassompierre. Now it
happened that about two days after the Sieur de Guron, had been in a house very
near Montauban, that the chief Consul, with about two hundred of the Townsmen,
came to him, and told him, that they had run a hazard of their lives, and that
the people cried out they were betrayed by them, in granting under hand
whatever he had desired of them; wherefore they beseeched him, that he would
tell them, if there were any hopes of moderating their conditions. The Sieur de
Guron answered them, that it was in vain for them to hope the keeping up of
their Fortifications, and that indeed they did much wrong themselves, to stand
so stiffly in their own way, seeing the Cardinals word was a greater security
then all their Walls and Works; and lastly, that he could not be persuaded, but
that it was in their power to work the people to what was reasonable and fit,
or else that they must look to suffer all possible extremities they could
imagine. They then entreated two days time more; during which, they used their
utmost to reduce and persuade the people to reason. Which at last they did, by
representing to them, that the Army was just at their Gates, and that their
ruin was unavoidable, if they did not lay hold on this occasion to make their
Peace; as also, that they might rest confidently assured of any thing which the
Cardinal promised, seeing all the rest of their party did give so high a report
of him; and in conclusion, they ^o satisfied the people, that the next morning,
forty Deputies waiting conclusion, they ^o satisfied the people, that the next
morning, forty Deputies waiting on the Si^ur de Guron, went unto the Cardinal,
then at Alby, and gave him assurances of their submission.

Politic Observation.
A Prudent Minister can bring greater things to effect, by the means of his
Conduct, then others by the strength of Armies, Battles, Sieges, or Conquests.
Titus Livy says, he who knows how to command well, deserves the first rank
amongst men, and that those Captains who execute his commands, are only his
instruments and agents. An opportunity laid hold on, a Magistrate gained, a
good credit insinuated into all men, a consternation thrown amongst a people;
these and the like are the means with which Prudence drives on all her
designs; and by these it is, that she brings greater things to pass then
Armies and Multitudes, which without Prudence are nothing worth. Force of it
self, is blind, all the eyes it has, is Prudence, without which, Force does
most commonly run into disorder. Whereupon the Poets feigned that Jupiter fore
seeing the Gods intended to Revolt, and seize upon his person, took advice of
Pallas, before ever he sent to Briarius with his hundred hands to defend him:
Signifying, that Prudence keeps the key of all those Springs which move Force,
and that without it, Force only serves to ruin those who employ it. A great
Genius has certain Engines and Springs by which he works, as it were
invisibly, and the effects he produces, are the more admirable; because vulgar
spirits not seeing how it is done, are the more surprised at it. He will do
more with a piece of Paper, then a whole Army in a Battle. Upon this very
reason it was (as Plutarch has observed) that Agesilaus advised the
Lacedaemonians, being just then engaging with the Athenians at Mant^neas, that
they should only contrive and bend all their thoughts to lay hands on
paminondas, telling them, if they could but once make sure of him, the Victory
was infallible. By this it appears, that success depends in matter of
fight and force on them, who are the instructers and designers of the time and
manner, how, and when an Army must move, and when not.

Prosecution of the Subject.
THE Deputies of Montauban, had soon carried their submissions to the Cardinal,
who was not a little glad, thus soon to reap the fruit of his Conduct; yet in
regard he only sought his Majesty's glory in it, they had much ado to persuade
him to go in his own person, and take possession of this place, whose people
had never yielded to such terms, but on the confidence they had in his word and
promise, which they did more rely on, then in the very strength of their Walls
and Fortifications. But at last they were so earnest and urgent with him, that
he consented to them. The Marshal de Bassompierre, entered with part of the army
to take possession of the Town, and the next day the Cardinal marched in, to
the peoples great joy and acclamation. The Consuls, the Corporations of the
City, and the Justice went out a League from the City to meet him; where the
first Consul, and the Lieutenant Criminal, made speeches to him, testifying
their joy to see him, and how much they were transported with the apprehension
of those favors which they had already received from him, and what confidence
they had in his goodness, for the continuation of his kindnesses unto them. It
cannot be imagined with what honor they received him; nay they offered him the
Cloth of State but he refused it, notwithstanding their instances; and telling
him, they desired then to carry it before him, which was usual, when any
Governors or Lievtenants of Provinces came into a City; but he absolutely
denied it: neither would he that the Consuls should walk on foot by his horse,
but desired them to attend at his lodging, whilst he went to the Church,
seeing they were not of the same Religion. He went directly to the Church,
which was only covered with Tyles, it having been ruined by the Heretics,
where he sung the Te Deum, assisted by all that could throng in, as well
Catholics as Hugonots, so much were they delighted to behold him; and indeed
his sweetness, his agreeableness, his Civility, and the Bounty which his word
and behavior testified to all the World, did not a little captivate them, and
charm their courages. Thence he went to alight at the lodging which had been
prepared for him, where the whole Town waited to receive him; he entertained
them with such familiarity and freedom, that they could never enough be
satisfied with his sight: And that I may the better describe the content they
took in beholding him, give me leave to add, this one thing, that never any
one, yet saw him but loved him. He gave so discreet Orders for the Government
of his Soldiers, that not a man had any cause to complain of Rudeness or
abuse, for he severly punished the leaft insolency whatever, which did not a
little please and content them of the City. They would gladly have kept him
longer amongst them, but his time drew on, and he had not now any other affair
to detain him in those parts, he having ^ettled al^ things in Peace, to the
great Glory and happiness of his Majesty, and the whole Kingdom; that he
provided for his return to his Majesty, who desired even to longing, to see
him, that he might take order for the affairs of Italy, which began to be
re-imbroyled.

Politic Observation.
ARms are not all the means, for the obtaining of victories, Prudence has
some; if the victory be nothing but the attainment of that end, for which a War
is began; and provided that a man once Master his design, what matter is it
whether it be by one or the other. It is the end, that is all in all; So that he
who overthrows a City or wins a pitched Battle, is not the only man,
according to Quintus Curtus, who is victorious but he may justly be likewise
termed a Conqueror, who by his Prudence forces them to surrender and lay down
their Arms. In the History of Italy, we read of a great Contestation, between
the French and Italians, concerning the Battle of Tar, each of them ascribing
the victory to his own Nation: The Italians they pretended they were Masters of
the field, because their Quarters and Bagage were safe and whole whereas they
had pillaged all the French even to the Kings Tent: The French on the other
side pretended, they had the better of the day, because they only lost two
hundred men, and the Italians left three thousand behind them, and were also
forced to quiet the field and pass over the Tar; and that which was more then
all the rest, was, they had obtained that end for which they began the fight,
to wit, for a free passage to return into France, and for ^his reason i^ was
adjudged, that the French indeed had the better of them, it be^^g certain, that
the Honor of a victory, does not alone belong to him, who h^th killed most of
his Enemies, or indeed has lost fewest of his own, but likewise to him, who in
conclusion of the fight, obtains that end, for which he began the Battle.
Besides (...) esteem those victories which are got by prudence, much more to be
commende^ then those which are got by Force of Battails, in regard the one is
a^^chieved with little noyses with safety, and without diminution of the
strength, or loss of men's Lives; whereas the other, does obtain but the self
same thing, by a way quite contrary, that is, fu^l of trouble, danger, loss
and expense. Those Victories which are achieved by Force have Violence for
their Chief cause, whereas those which are obtained by Prudence have the Rule
of all other virtues, for theirs; and besides, who will not more esteem these
then the former, if only because there is less blood spilt? Tigers who delight
to shed blood, may perchance rejoice to see the earth dyed with (...); But true
Honor and Glory, which proceeds from sweetness and humanity, cannot but
abhor such sights, which are so far from being accompanied with real Honor,
that rather on the contrary, nothing can be more ignoble or unnatural.

Prosecution of the History.
AT this time France was happy indeed having overcome that Monster called
Heresy which had been long conquering; The Power of France was now become the
greater, in regard, it was not divided, as heretofore, within it self. Those
Forces which had of late so often drew their Swords within their own Country,
were now at Liberty to be employed abroad in defense of the Allies of the
Crown; The house of Austria was no longer such a Bugbear, neither was there any
fear of discontented persons; Who formerly, with the help of fifty thousand
Crowns, could raise a civil War, at their own pleasures. Those great Taxes did
now cease, which were of necessity to be kept on foot, whilst the Kingdom was
governed at random. Those Expenses which the State was forced to bear, for the
suppressing the Hugonots, in Pensions, Fortifications, Garrisons, Colleges and
the like, were now laid up: The King was absolute Master of Poictou, Guyenne,
Languedoc and Dauphine, which formerly he had only at six and seven. But how
much then was the whole Nation beholding unto the Cardinal, seeing the King had
principally made use of his Prudence and Courage, to bring all these glorious
things to pass, as his Majesty himself, had often published and declared in
his letters, and on many other occasions? There cannot be any reasonable,
indifferent Judge, but will conclude, he deserved all monuments, both of Honor
and Glory, and that such as should be ungrateful, for these his services, or
attempt to procure him any displeasure, ought to be punished with shame and
confusion. But alas, that Passion of Private Interest, like a thick vail, which
takes away the sight, would not let those of the Cabal, near the Queen Mother,
behold his deserts, and the praises which were due to him; But on the contrary,
led them to take advantages by his absence, to invent new devices, and contrive
sundry Artifices, whereby they might incense that great Princess against him.
If the King acted any thing, not agreeable with her humor, presently some one
or other would acquaint her with it, and add; It was the Cardinals doings. When
once they perceived, that she began to be jealous, because his Majesty did no
longer follow her Counsels, (which indeed were not much to be commended) they
were never quiet until they had entertained her with some discourse to that
purpose, which might blow the Coals of her passion and discontent. If at any
time she could not presently effect, whatever she designed, then the Cardinals
power was to be lamented either by words at length, or (perchance because that
was not at all times permitted) by the language of their Eyes, no less
powerful than the other. I should be too to long, if I should describe all
their tricks. But who could endure that they should thus employ their time,
whiles he employed his in procuring the Kings glory and the happiness of
France? Had he been then present, they never durst have been so bold, but his
frequent absence was that which gave them opportunities to embitter the Queen
Mother against him, who formerly had a great respect for him. They raised her
anger to such an height, before she was aware of it, that upon the Cardinals
return from Montauban to Fountainbleau, she could no longer conceal her
discontent, her eyes darting anger, which formerly were pleasant toward him;
her eyes dar^ed out flames indeed, and such as would have burned him, had not
the King interposed his absolute Authority to defend him.

Politic Observation.
ABsence has always been known to be very prejudicial to Court favorites, It
is difficult for them to be long away, and that some one or other raise not a
faction against them, especially the Women, whose affection being more guided
by sense than reason, verifies that Proverb, Out of sight and out of mind.
Their memory is treacherous, and they who are not in their sight, are easily
removed out of their favors. Importunity works more upon them then merit,
and he who desires to be Master of their affections, must necessarily be
continually in their sight. The Spaniard has a Proverb, much to this purpose
and a good one it is, Women do easily blot out of the roll of their friends,
those who are either dead or absent. But admitting this were not so, yet the
envy of those, who appertain to great men, never permits them to lose the
opportunity of any absence, without attempting their ruin; The eminence of a
Favorites genius, or the virtues which shine in him, are not able to secure
him, for envy is a passion so malign, that those persons who have most
reputation, true worth and glory, are the usual objects of it. Whence one of
the most famous Captains among the Ancients said; He for his part thought that
he had not yet done any thing praise worthy, because that envy that companion
of virtue, had not found him out. It is true the services and generous actions
which they atchieve for the glory of a State, do sometimes raise them to so
high a degree of honor and repute, that the despair of bettering them, secures
them from the emulation of others, but it never exempteth them from hatred.
There is an inevitable necessity, that they who bear a great sway in a
Government should be hated, not only, because men borne free are carried by a
certain natural inclination to hate those who command them, but also because
there are diverse persons of the Court, who flatter themselves, that they
deserve more Honor than they have, and that they who Govern the affairs,
depriving them of that which is their due, do attempt to hurt them: Such people
are they, who blame the Sun, because they cannot confidently look upon him, but
consider not that the fault is in their eyes, not his luster. They can no more
endure the sight of an extraordinary virtue, than that of a bright Star, were
it not for the night they would hardly know what the day is, and it is the
glimmering of the Moon and Stars, which does only teach them what esteem they
ought to have of the greatness and power of the Sun: such malign Spirits there
are, who are excellent at nothing but finding faults, that they are excellent
at, who never cease to contrive the downfall of others; and only because they
want merit to advance themselves. But happy is that Minister, whose favor is
chiefly grounded upon his Princes knowledge of his services, upon his Princes
sense of the increase of his glory, upon his Princes affections, which are no
less assured to him in his absence then when he is present. Happy is the
Minister then, when his Master looks upon him as the Sun, which has no less
virtue or light, when it is furthest from us, then when it is nearest to us.

The Comte de Merodes Chamberlain to the Emperor, seizes upon the Grisons
without declaring a War.
THE Hugonot party being thus reduced, the History requires my looking back
into Italy, and I must tell you, that notwithstanding the Ratification of the
Treaty of Suze, made in Spain, upon condition however that the French should
depart out of Italy, yet the Comte de Merodes his Imperial Majesty's
Chamberlain, whom we may look upon as a Spaniard, both by reason of the strict
Union between Spain and the Empire, as also because in this affair, the Empire
was totally guided by the Spaniard, invaded the Grisons, seized upon the
passages between Germany and Italy, took Meyenfeld and Coire their capital
Cities, and built forts in such places as were most convenient for the marching
of his Troops. This breach was occasioned by Monsieur de Savoy, a person
naturally turbulent, and whose courage besides the affront which he had so
lately received at Suze, transported him presently after the Treaty of Peace,
and as soon as ever he saw the King engaged at the siege of Privas, to
negotiate with the Emperor and King of Spain a new War, but upon the old
design. He had acquainted the Emperor that the violence which had been offered
him at Suze, did not so much concern his eminency in particular, as it
reflected on his Imperial Majesty, seeing he, for his part, had never attempted
the stopping of the passages, but only in defense of the rights of the Empire;
that the reliving of Cazal was a contempt of his Authority, seeing the Duke of
Mantua was his vassal, and had not at that time rendered the obedience which he
ought to his Majesty: He likewise gave the Spaniard to understand, that the
affront which he received before Cazal, brought a disrepute upon him through
all Italy, and that it was to be feared, lest in prosecution thereof, they
might attempt something upon his Dominions there; that the Cardinal had already
projected his ruin in Italy; that the Common wealth of Genoa, was just ready
for a revolt, that an expedition was already prepared against Milan; and that
they had already proposed to engage him in it, by assuring Bresse unto him, and
offering ready money for the Marquisat of Saluces, which would much facilitate
the entrance of the French into Italy; and that in case they should thus
deprive him of those two inlets, the one by Sea, the other by Land, there would
then nothing be more easy, then to despoil him of the Kingdom of Napl^s. These
considerations were of no little power to stir up both those two Potent
Princes, seeing it concerned their honor; but there was as little honor and
truth in these his discourses, as there was Justice in the C^mte de Merodes
seizing the Grisons, without declaring a War against them; or without any cause
given of hostility. It is true being come near the Grisons, he sent indeed one
of his Company with the Emperors Letters to Coir, in which he demanded to
pass through their Country; but instead of expecting an answer, he presently
invaded the Territory of Mey^nfield, where he made great havoc, and not long
after surprised Coi^, and made a Garrison of it, without regard had to the
Public Faith, and without any care of this outrageous dealing with a people
who had nothing to do with him.

Politic Observation.
IT is a very unjust act in a Prince to force those Passages which are in his
Allies Countries. It is an act full of hostility, not to be used but toward an
enemy. I condemn it for unjust according to the judgment of the Thessalians,
who when they opposed themselves against Brasidas, desirous to pass through
their Country to fight against the Athenians, told him, as Thucid^des relates
it. That he who forced a passage without their knowledge to whom it belonged,
did an unjust act. Every one that has power in his hand, ought not to exercise
it in outrages and violence against his neighbors, seeing he has only
received it from Heaven for his just defense. The Romans were hertofore much
commended, for that they never invade any Country, no not their enemies,
without first proclaiming a War; so far were they from seizing upon any thing
which belonged to their friends. If the Romans did at any time pretend to any
thing which was their neighbors, they sent their Ambassadors to demand it; if
within three days after demand made, it were not delivered, they denounced the
War; neither then did they enter upon them, but after many Ceremonies, which
are described in Titus Livy. But that we may not go so far back, did not the
Heralds of Florence, and that not above three hundred years since, declare War
against their enemies with Ceremonies much after that kind? Those ancient forms
(indeed) are now no longer in use; but yet that Prince who seizes upon any
Passages or Towns without it, cannot be considered but as an Usurper. But
ambition is now grown to that pass, that it is enough be the means what they
will, so they serve his designs, without considering that divine Justice throws
down, whatever is founded upon injustice; that as the Laws of man do punish
private Thefts, so God the judge of Kings, will chastise their usurpations;
that they who endeavor to grow great by violence will at last meet their own
ruin in a greater, and that the greatness which is obtained by injustice,
cannot long last, though force uphold it for the present.

Prosecution of the History.
THe Comte de Merodes having taken Coir, and knowing that the Sieur Mesmin his
Majesty's Ambassador with the Grisons, had employed the utmost of his
industry and prudence (which by his employment he was bound unto) for the
keeping of those people in that friendship which they had promised unto France,
and for the confirming them in their resolution of denying the Passages to any
whatever, who should attempt against his Allies, surrounded his lodging with
Guards, and seized on his Papers, without any regard to the Law of Nations,
which declare the persons of Ambassadors to be sacred, and forbid that any
outrage or injury should be done unto them.

Politic Observation.
SEEing Ambassadors represent their Masters persons, they cannot be affronted
(without great injustice) by any Prince who is not in open War with him. He who
does otherwise, breaks that Law which is so generally received among all
States, and injureth the person of his Master. He is guilty of an outrage,
seeing their persons have been always esteemed inviolable; and (as Tacitus
says) it is rarely seen among enemies, that Ambassadors are ill treated.
Besides, how unworthy a thing is it to affront such persons who can neither
defend nor revenge themselves, but only dispute it by reason. All that can be
done toward an Ambassador, from whom one has received an injury, is to
license his departure without permitting any injury to be done unto him. Thus
did the Romans to the King of Persia's Ambassadors, they gave them eleven days
to depart out of Italy, with order to tell their Master, that the Consul
Publius Licinius, should shortly be in Macedonia at the head of their Army, to
whom he might hereafter send his Ambassadors, if he had any thing to propose
to them, and not put himself to the trouble of sending them to Rome, where they
should be no more received. They likewise ordered Sp. Carilius, to conduct them
out of Italy to their ships (as Titus Livy reports.) And the late King Henry
the great, whose conduct may serve for a President to other Princes, has
showed us a rare example of that respect which ought to be used toward
Ambassadors, when he discovered that Tassas and Dom Balthazar de Cuniga his
Successor, Ambassadors of Spain, held intelligence with Haste and Merargues,
he had more regard to the Law of Nations, then to their sedicious practices,
which in reason might have passed for acts of hostility. To injure or imprison
an Ambassador in times of Peace cannot be done without injustice, neither can
there be other reason for it, then for the satisfying of some ambitious and
rash pretenses.

The Sieur de Sabran is sent Ambassador to the Emperor.
SHortly after the Comte de Merodes had been thus active amongst the Grisons,
his Majesty who pretended not to uphold Monsieur de Mantua with an high hand,
but only to satisfy that injustice which obliged him to preserve his Allies,
thought good to send the Sieur de Sabran his Ambassador to the Emperor, upon
the business of the Treaty of Suze. His principal intent was to acquaint him
with the sincerity of his actions and designs; and to obtain (if possible at
his recommendation) that Monsieur de Mantua might be reinvested in the Duchy.
His Majesty for the preserving of the Peace of Italy, would not make use of
that advantage which his Arms gave him at Suze, or the opportunity of diverse
Princes of Italy, who proffred him their assistance, but would have been glad
to have continued it, by paying this civility to the Emperor. The Duke of
M^ntua had discharged his duty, when he sent the Bishop of Mantua to demand his
instalment, and the King could not imagine that his entreaty wined to the
others submission, could have been refused, seeing that the same Laws which
require the Princes depending on the Empire to demand it, do likewise oblige
the Emperor to grant it, at least without the prejudice of any other; in case
there be several who claim it, which in process of time, ought to be examined
by the usual ways, and the Laws of Justice. To this purpose was the Sieur de
Sabran sent to the Emperor. Whiles he was yet in his way, he received new
orders, to wit, that he should complain unto the Emperor, of the little
respect, which the Comte de Merodes, had showed unto the Sieur de Mesmin his
Majesty's Ambassador; and of his violent proceedings among the Grisons, by
seizing on the Passages of Steir, Pom du R^in, the Towns of Coir and
Meyenfield, and all this without declaring the War; but at that instant when he
began it, and that he should press his Imperial Majesty to command the Comte
de Merodes, to withdraw his forces from Italy and the Grisons, and than he
should satisfy his Majesty for that want of respect to his Ambassador. The
Sieur de Sabran acquitted himself very worthily of that employment, he used his
utmost prudence to justify his Majesty's proceedings and intentions, and to
convince unto the Emperor, that the King his Master had not done any thing in
prejudice of the Empire. He further informed his Majesty, that the King had not
drawn his sword until the Spaniard had besieged Cazal contrary to reason and
justice, and that his most Christian Majesty was bound to protect the Duke of
Mantua, by the Treaties of Cambray and Veroins, neither did he omit any thing
for the getting of satisfaction for the violences, of the Count de Merodes. But
the Emperor being prepossessed by those of his Counsel, that Embassy came to
nothing, and all the answer he could get, was that the Duke of Mantua should be
righted, if his Majesty did withdraw his Army out of Italy, with all that he
could not but wonder that his Majesty should interest himself with the Princes
under his obedience, without taking notice that his most Christian Majesty was
obliged by diverse treaties to succor him, and that it would be a great
dishonor to him, if he should not now assist him, considering he was more
exposed to danger, than ever by reason of the Emperors, and Spanish Forces
then in Italy, and designed particularly for his ruin.

Politic Observation.
IT is an honorable employment* to be the Mediator of Peace between Princes,
but he is more to be pitied then envied, who takes that office upon him,
whilst their first heat is not yet over. It is with such Negotiators, as with
Physicians, and as these who are called upon the amendment of a disease a^e
happier then the others; so those likewise are very fortunate, who are
entrusted in treating a Peace between Princes, when they are a little cooled,
and the great expenses of War have discomposed them, and when they are a little
wearied out by continual Cares. The first Emotions of anger, are like clouds
which obscure the light of reason and hinder the apprehension of the great
benefits of Peace, not permitting them to lend an ear to it. Anger it self
must make them feel those pains, which accompany it, that they may at last be
sensible of the Just Cause they have to hate it, and by consequence be the
easilier appeased. It was the continual inconvenience of War, which induced
Fr^ncis the first, to have a liking to Peace; Neither had Charles the fifth or
Philip the second ever embraced it, during the advantages which they made by
the Treacheries of some French, had they not been tired out, by the vast
expenses, great cares and dangers, to which a foreign War exposed them. In
short, Princes ought never to be so ex-asperated in their differences, as not
to seek the good of Peace, by some means of agreement, by their mutual giving
one another to understand their Intentions, by their Ambassadors. He who
undertaketh to carry all things, by a high hand, forces all others to fly no
extremities, which are accompanied with great Evils. The distance which is
between Princes, is oftentimes the Cause of misunderstandings between them; but
their Ambassadors acquainting each other, with the Justice of their Intentions,
does not a little allay their Angers and dispose them to sweetness. The Wise,
admit not of any injustice; and though they are free from obedience to others,
yet will they be subjected to reason. They know, true greatness does not so
much consist in the power to do what they will, as what they ought: Neither do
they measure their greatness, by the licentiousness of satisfying their own
passions, but by their power to do that which is Just. It is their glory, to
make it appear, that though they can do all, yet they will not act any thing
but what is commendable: Whence it comes, that first putting themselves in the
ways of reason, they do not afterward scruple to solicit others to do the
like. Thus likewise is it not an act of Lowness, but of great Prudence, and
Civility, which Princes owe to each other.

Prosecution of the Subject.
I Return to the Comte de Merodes amongst the Grisons, whose actions there did
not much surprise the King, too well informed of all the passages in Europe to
be ignorant of other Princes designs; They only obliged him to give order to
the Marshal de ^req^y. to inform Monsieur de Savoy, that it was contrary to the
treaty of Suze, for the execution of which he was bound by word and deed to
join his Forces to those of his Majesty, and to summon him to declare himself
in this occasion. The Duke of Savoy, having solicited their invasion, need not
have pretended time to inform himself of their design, yet that was it which he
fled to, to hide his infidelity, after the knowledge of which he promised to
give his Majesty all satisfaction. The Marshal de Crequy that he might put him
to it indeed, gave him some time, which once past, he pressed him for an
answer, which was this; That the Surprisal of the Prisons passages, had nothing
of dependence in Monsieur de Ma^tua's affair; yet however, if the King of Spain
might be satisfied, who desired the French should withdraw out of Italy, as
also from Suze, he made no doubt but to obtain of the Emperor, that he should
withdraw his Forces, though offended with the King for intermedling in those
differences, which he had with the Duke of Mantua his Vassal; but did not all
this while discover any thing of his own particular designs, because he could
indeed pretend nothing not comprised in the treaty of Suze. The Marshal
acquainted the King with this answer, who commanded him to reply unto the Duke
of Savoy, that this answer of his did not at all relate to the obligation under
which he was by the treaty of Suze, that is of joining his with his Majesty's
Forces, and therefore to continue summoning him to declare himself, but withal
to assure him, that if the Emperor should invest Monsieur de Mantua; he would
recall his Forces from Italy and Suze, his Majesty having no other design but
the hindering the inv^sion of the Duke of Mantua's Estates, his Ally, and under
his protection, by the ^reaty at V^rvins it being unreasonable that the
Emperor should out him of those D^i^ to which he was Lawful Heir: and that as
concerning any difference between the Dukes of Mantua and Savoy, he had
endeavored to accomodate them, by proposing convenient expedients between them
both. Nothing could be replied to so just reasons, neither said he other thing
to Monsieur de Crequy, but that he would remain Neuter, and become a Mediator
of Peace, without replying as to the obligation of the treaty at Suze, and
without considering how prejudicial it might be to him, to sit still after he
had kindled so great a fire betwixt so great Princes.

Politic Observation.
THat Prince, who has raised a War between two others more potent than
himself, cannot fix upon any resolution so inconvenient for himself, as that of
becoming neuter, though he have no part in the broile: yet it is prudence to
declare for one or other. How much more reason then has he so to do, seeing
^^e first raised the War? It is offense enough against the other to have raised
the War, and though he should then sit down and be quiet, yet he would
nevertheless be looked upon as an Enemy; he cannot possibly prevent it, but
that one of them should be revenged, for he has provoked both; him against
whom the War is, who will be ready enough to call him to account for it, and
him whom he has engaged to make the War; because he withdraws from him, when
he has put him into danger: but admit he had not raised the War, yet I look
upon neutrality as very dangerous; he had much better run the hazard of
overcoming, by declaring himself, or to fall with a neighbor who may
afterward help to re-establish him, then to be reduced by an inevitable
necessity of being oppressed by him, who shall get the victory, and perchance
by both of them. The Example of those of Sienna may serve to confirm this
Counsel, who after they had remained Neuters in the War of Italy, were in
conclusion pillaged by both parties, by which they gave a just ground to King
Alphonsus to say, that it happened to them as it does to Lodgers, who lie on the
second floor, who are troubled with the smoke of those beneath them, and the
noise of those above them. Aristenus Praetor of Achaja, and Lucius Quintus,
Consul and Captain of Rome, found that Counsel to be very ill, which C^^omidon
the Macedonian Ambassador had given to the Achaians; that was, he advised them
to remain Neuters, as to the War between the Romans and King Philip: The first
of them not enduring he should call Neutrality a middle way; said, if it must
be called a way, it was a very useless way, seeing the best success that could
happen, could be of no advantage to them, but would at last expose them for a
prey to the Conqueror. Perchance he may avoid this storm, if he can manage his
words and actions so circumspectly, as absolutely to persuade them, that he is
neither inclined to one side or the other; a thing which I imagine to be
impossible, because his most indifferent actions will raise some jealousy or
other, each judging of him as he pleases; at least he cannot avoid but that
his Neighbors will forsake him, when he is in necessity, in the same manner as
he neglects to assist them. For Neutrality does provoke both parties, the
stronger because he imagines his greatness obliges the rest to join their
forces out of respect with his; and the weaker, because being not defended, he
thinks himself wronged. And this is not good either to defend himself from
Enemies, or to preserve his friends. Perchance he may imagine to save the
charge of keeping some forces in the Army of his Ally, but yet every Prince is
obliged to entertain Forces in his Country, to hinder both one and the other
from invading him.

The Sieur de Leon sent Ambassador into Zwizzerland.
HIS Majesty was advised, presently after the news of the Comte de Merodes,
that the Spaniards were making of parties amongst the Swizzers, and
endeavoring to gain the Catholic Cantons. Whereupon his Majesty sent the
Sieur de Leon Brulant Ambassador toward them, to assure them of the affection
which he still had for their interest; to exhort them to continue in that
alliance which had been for many years between them; and to persuade them to
preserve that correspondence which was between their Cantons, as also to
preserve the Cantons their Neighbors and Allies from the oppression of the
house of Austria. He was not wanting to acquaint them, what devises had already
been used to divide them from the Grison^, which was the inserting of a clause
in the treaty of Madrid, by which it was provided, that the 13 Cantons, or the
Major part of them, should see the performance of the Articles of the Treaty,
and at the same time to contrive under hand, that the Catholic Cantons should
not consent to this warranty, and to persuade the Grisons, that those Cantons
had fain off from their interest; the design being by sowing this darnel among
them, to weaken them by division, and consequently to enable themselves the
better to seize upon their Forts and passages; and last of all he represented
to them by very evident reasons, that the Spaniard had design to sow the like
division amongst their Cantons, to the intent he might also seize on their
passages, which he had already sent letters to demand; and that therefore to
secure them from this danger, the more important to them, in regard all their
force consists in the good intelligence of their Cantons, and that of their
Allies, they were obliged to be careful, that no division were cast amongst
them by any propositions which should be made, and also to take up Arms to
assist the Grisons, not only because they were part of their Commonwealth,
but to keep off from themselves the like misfortune wherewith they were
threatened. The Sieur de Leon negotiated this affair with a great deal of
prudence, and made them see their interests by such lively reasons, that they
resolved in an assembly at Soleur held the 5. of August, to preserve themselves
in a strict Union, and to write unto the Emperor, that if he did not restore
the Grisons to their first State, they would then join themselves with the
most Christian King to be revenged of the injury he had done them. This
Resolution gave the Spaniard an alarm, who presently sent Cassate to destroy
it, and disunite the Protestants from the Catholics who are Masters of the
principal passages: They employed their continual cares to that end, and being
more considerable amongst them then we are by reason of their commerse, and
trade with Milan, they so prevailed that at last they changed their minds, and
we were forced to be contented with the raising of some Troops, which were to
stay in their own Country to guard and defend the passages against the
Imperialists, in case they should attempt to enter.

Politic Observation.
SEeing the Laws of prudence advise us to raise advantage; as well from our
Enemies as friends, I cannot be blamed if I observe from the practice of the
house of Austria, who after they had disunited the Grisons from the Swizzers,
endeavored to raise division amongst the Swizzers themselves, that the best
means to weaken ones Neighbors, to seize on their Countries, or at least to
make use to their passages as occasion shall serve, without their being able to
prevent it, is to raise some division amongst them. The good intelligence of a
people is the principal strength of a Kingdom, and their disunion is the
cause of their ruin whence Lycurgus assured the Lacedaemonians, that nothing
could so much contribute to the increase and preservation of their State, as an
invincible courage against their enemies, and an inviolable concord among
themselves. The devise which Philip of Macedon, made use of to overcome the
Precians, was the fomenting of some differences between them; he assisted one
part of them against the other, and so long preserved the division between
them, till at last they were both easily to be overcome; and who knows not
that, that which heretofore brought France into the power of the English, was
only the division which the house of Burgonie, and several other Countries had
raised within it? The Stars which are in an ill aspect, cannot but produce very
ill consequences here below; so likewise when confederated Provinces shall
begin to look awry one upon another and with animosity; they cannot but
endanger one another. The stateliest Palaces are soon ruined by little cracks
and the greatest people by small divisions. I might insert here that the
greatness of the Godhead consists in its unity, and that if it could be
divided, it would not be infinite. Thus that which renders a State invincible
is concord; and that which destroys a Kingdom is division, that same thing
too that it does in public, it does in private families.

The House of Austria enters very strong into the Duke of Mantua's Country.
THE taking of Coir and Meyenfeld was the Gate by which War entered into Italy:
For the House of Austria, presently after the taking of Suze, sent two Armies
into Montferrat under the Marquis Spinola. The Spaniard had caused the said
Marquis to quite the Low Countries and to come into Italy. His first business
was to set all things right between his Master and the State of G^noa, which
Commonwealth was upon the point of revolting. He came thither in July, and used
his utmost to make a good Intelligence between them; and indeed, he was so
successful in it, that he did the Spaniard one of the best pieces of service,
that he had ever yet done. The next thing he did, was to store up great
quantities of Corn, a Comodity very necessary in those parts, for the
entertaining of any War, though never so little, by reason of the Scarcety in
that Country. He declared every where that his Master desired Peace; but it was
only until his Forces were got together, and that he was in a condition to
begin the War; for as soon as ever he found himself provided, he entered into
Montserrat, took some small places, and amongst the rest Pontdesture, and made
his approaches toward Cazal, but would not absolutely lie down a second time
before it, until he saw an impossibility for France to relie^e it. The ruin of
the Hugonot party, did not a little stagger him, for that now his Majesty's
forces were at full Liberty to march out of the Kingdom; but he conceived us
to have been so weakened and entangled by the divisions, which those of the
Spanish party had raised in the Kings Family, as also by the very doubt in
which the Cardinal himself was, that his Majesty would not be persuaded, to
repasse the Alps, Winter now coming on that he hoped by this means, he might
effect his design; and the sooner, seeing Canzal and Mantua, were assaulted at
the same time, which would so surprise us, that we could hardly tell which we
should first assist. For the German, Lutheran, Army, led by Colalte, had
entered into Mantua, at the same instant that he did into Montferrat; and thus
instead of the Justice, which the Emperor had promised the Sieur de Sabran, and
published, by a Declaration wherein he undertook to restore it to the right
owner, the Army Committed such cruelties, as are incredible, burning and
pillaging Churches, wi^h greater violence and fury then ever the Iconoclasts
did, breaking all Crosses Images, Saints, and what not? The Soldiers would
commonly tie the Images with Cords and so dragg them up and down, sometimes
they would throw them into the water, profane the consecrated Plate, ravish
Women and Maids, and fill the whole Country which mourning and blond; in
short, they made it apparent, that that Cloak of Religion, which they so boast
of in Germany, was only a Pretense to cover their Ambition. This great
violence, seconded and upheld by Force of Arms, gave them the Lib^rty of
overrunning almost all Mantua, most part of the Natives, flying from them a as
heretofore they had from Alaricus, and Attila, by which means at last they came
up to Mantua it self and besieged it. But Colonel Duran^ had gotten in a little
before them, with a thousand expert Soldiers well commanded, and Monsieur de
Mantua, had likewise drawn in thither the choysest of his own men; so that the
Spaniard resolved to sit down before the Town, though their Army was equally
pestered with the Plague and Famine, which at last forced them to retire; yet
before they went off, they committed the most infamous piece of treachery, was
ever yet heard. They made several propositions of Peace, and Monsieur de
Mantua, seeing how willing they were of an accommodation, consented to a Truce
of three hours, During which and in confidence of their faith he opened the
Port Fort-Bourg, which is on the other side the Bridge: now they more regarding
their advantage, then the Fidelity which ought to be inviolable between
Princes, after about three thousand of them were got in, seized on it; A
Treachery very strange, but as few base actions succeed well, so that served
them, but to small purpose, for Colonel Durand made a Sally out upon them,
during which there was a Trench raised, and Cannon planted on it, which
Commanded all the Fort-Bourg, by which means it came unserviceable to the
Imperialists.

Politic Observation.
THE faith of them who Command Armies, has been ever esteemed sacred: He who
once breaks it, loses his Honor; And indeed, if there were not an
obligation to keep it, to what pass would things come? There could be no
security in Treaties; One Prince could not trust another; and in Leagues, every
one would be catching at all advantages, which he should find. A General ought
to respect nothing more then his Honor; now there is not any one thing which
can more obscure it, then Infidelity, which breaks the Justice of Military
Act, which gives a Liberty, to do any unreasonable thing, and converts War into
Pyracy. He who would have his Soldiers be true to him, must be Just to his
Enemies; Neither may he recede from one single word passed to them: Besides he
is so much the more bound to the observance of it, as it is of consequence to
them. Stratagem are allowable, but they must be of War, not Infidelity. The
Romans were such strict observers of this particular, that they placed the
Image of Fidelity next to that of Jupiter in their Capitol, to the end every
one might respect it as a Deity. They knew Heaven would be very severe in
punishing those who violated it; and they would not only be overwhelmed with
Infamy but that it would be of ill consequence to the State, considering how
true it is, that Justice and Fidelity, are the two chief things which support
the Thrones of all Kings.

Prosecution of the Subject.
I Cannot omit the great assistance which the Venetians did this year send unto
the Duke of Mantua, it being impossible for his Majesty's whole. Army to have
been with him soon enough, although some few Troops had already come to him.
The King had by his Ambassador negotiated those Succors with the Venetians,
upon the first discovery of the House of Austria's design. Now the Venetians
were the easier inclined to send these Succors, it being their very great
Interest to hinder the Spaniards growing power in Italy, especially so near
them, they having so often and so long had designs upon them. Besides they well
knew, that they had at that present, several good Towns and places which
formerly belonged to the Duchy of Milan, but had been taken from it, by their
Commonwealth; which peradventure the Spaniard might have a mind to recover
from them. In conclusion they send diverse times, Money, Victuals, and some
Troops unto the Duke of Mantua, which did not a little help to preserve him.

Politic Observation.
THere is not any thing more dangerous, then to suffer a potent Ambitious King,
to seize on a Neighbor Princes Country by violence; seeing his conquest will
only serve for a Bridge to the next Kingdom. An Ambitious King is like a great
River; ever eating into it is Banks, without regard had either to the Justice or
Injustice of his designs: When he has once proposed his end, he cares not by
what means it is achieved: His chief care is, how to make a party in his
Neighbors Country, how to raise a division, which may open an entrance for his
Ambitious designs: He spares no cost to corrupt their Officers and Ministers,
He is like some people in Afric, who sleep with their eyes always open; and
as he believes the greatest glory, to consist in possessing the greatest
empire, so he imagines the design of Command to be a just cause of War; If his
Forces be not strong enough, he blows division amongst his Neighbors to make
them revolt, and makes use of those who are credulous, that he may subject
their fellows to his Dominion. He winks at Justice, not that he may Judge with
Equity; but that he may not behold, if possible, the injustice of his own
intentions. In short, there is not any thing which he will not do, if it lead
him to new conquests.

Which being thus, who can be ignorant of the obligation which lies upon all
Allies to assist one another, when any attempt is made upon any single Country
amongst them? The assistance which they lend is a security to their own States,
and in fighting for him, they confirm their own quiet: But above all, they who
are nearest bordering upon one another, ought to be careful in this particular,
because they run a greater hazard. When an Army is at our Gates, it is little
worth then to call upon a relief far from us, for great Armies do not fly; no,
they march but slowly, and before they can arrive to assist us, we are lost and
taken. He who being unable with his own strength to defend himself, calls in
a friend far distant from him, is like a sick person, who being taken with a
sudden dangerous fit, sends for an able Physician to another place twenty
miles distant, and in the mean time, before his Doctor arrives, becomes
incurable. Antiquity has furnished us with an admirable example of the thing,
in that of S^g^nte, which being besieged by the Carthaginians, was taken,
before the relief from Rome could come up to it: And of later times the City of
Sienna, being besieged by the Imperialists, was in expectation of the French
assistance, but to little purpose, they being at too great a distance to come
up to them. In such occasions, those Countries nearest at hand are to be
employed, they being in reason bound to rise in their behalf, and hereupon it
is, that Alliances and Leagues made with them, are much more advantageous then
any others whatever.

Prosecution of the History.
NOtwithstanding that the Treaty of Peace, and the Renewing of Alliance between
France and England, had been concluded in April, whilst his Majesty was at
Suze, yet the final confirmation of it was used to be done by oath, and by
extraordinary Ambassadors, interchangeably sent, which Ceremony had been put
off, until his Majesty's return back to Paris from his Italian-Expedition, and
was now performed in September at Fontain-bleau, whither the Lord Esmond came
from the King of Britain, for that purpose; The King caused him to be
entertained with very great honor, as had been accustomed on such occasions,
particularly invited him to dine with him, at his own Table, that day when the
Ceremony was celebrated. The appointed hour being come, he was conducted into
the Church of Bourg, magnificently prepared for that purpose, where the King
and all the Princes of the Court waiting on him, heard Vespers. At his
entrance, he saluted with great respect the King and Queens, after which he
took his place in a Scaffold made ready for him. The King made the oath, in his
presence, and swore upon the Holy Evangelists, to observe and perform all the
Conditions of the Treaty which he had signed. The same oath was made at London
the same day, with no less Ceremony, by the King of England, in the presence
of the Marquis de Chasteauneuf, Extraordinary Ambassador there, forth at
purpose.

Politic Observation.
AS Sacraments render Actions the more venerable, so have all people thought it
fit to confirm their Treaties therewith, that Princes might be obliged, the
more Religiously to observe them. But in all times, they have been as various,
as Nations. That which was most universally observed, was to drink in the same
Glass. It is true those of Thracia and Egypt, did not use the same Cup, but
the same Oxhorn. The Jews used to kill certain Beasts and divide their
entrails. The Caldeans, passed through certain Flames, holding a Sword in
their hand, to confirm their oaths: But the Ceremonies of the Arabians seem to
me more extraordinary, then all the rest; Some eminent Person of the Treaters,
placed himself in the amidst, and beating his hand with a sharp stone, drew
blood, which was gathered up, with some part of their Cloths, wherewith they
besmeared seven other stones, about which they stood, invocating the names of
Denis and Urania; The Scythians mingled blond with Wine, dipped their Arrows,
their Hatchet and Javelins in it, with several Protestations of Fidelity, and
then drank it up, causing the witnesses of their oath to do the same. The
Romans were accustomed to call their Great Priest, who raised an Altar of Turf,
placed a Hog on it, which he smit with a stone in their presence, beseeching
Jupiter to strike them in the same manner, if they should break the Treaty. We
likewise read in the History of the Sieur de Join'eville, that St. Lewis the
King being at Caesarea, a Knight of the House of Concy came to him, and desired
him for a greater assurance of his fidelity, that he would be pleased, that his
Majesty's Soldiers and his, might in token of a strait alliance, mingle blond
with Wine, and drink it one to the other, and that the King approved thereof: and
the same History adds, that moreover; they forced a Dog to pass between
their Ranks, at which every one struck with his Sword saying, so may he be
struck that fails of his word.

The Monsieurs retreit into Lorain.
AFter the Kings return from Languedoc, the Queen Mother passionately desiring,
that Monsieur should marry one of the Princes of Florence, though he could no
way resolve to love her; she being no beauty, saving the Honor of her Family,
otherwise little recommendable, suffered with great impatience that Monsieur
should bear any good will unto the Princess Marie. Whereupon she was very
earnest with his Majesty, that he would expressly prohibit him to marry her,
without his Royal permission. Now though the King seemed to have a good esteem
of this Princess, yet however the rule which he had always imposed on himself
to give the Queen Mother al content obliged him to forbid; and respect and
obedience the other, to accept of it; but which such discontent it was, that
unable longer to stay at Court, he retired into Lorain. The Duke of Lorain
received him with great Honor, whether it were because he was bound to respect
him, or because himself being already discontented with France, and of the
Spanish faction, did hope to find some occasion to satisfy his own hatred. His
faithful Servants indeed would gladly have diverted him from this retreat, but
as most great men become jealous and suspicious of them, who give them not such
Counsels as tend to extremity, but endeavor to moderate their actions, so they
durst not speak their thoughts to him. The most judicious among them found
themselves reduced to the condition of the Romans, who seeing their City on
fire by Nero's command, durst not endeavor to quench it, lest they might anger
the Emperor, for that they saw several of his servants adding more fuel to the
fire, whereby they might please him. Neither wanted there some persons about
Monsieur, who having no other design then to flatter him, for their own ends,
persuaded him to such resolutions as in their own consciences they could not
but condemn. I may add that they endeavored from that time more then ever to
raise distrusts in him against the King and the Cardinal, whereby they might
possess him with fear, and they became so much the more considerable unto him,
in that they found means to oblige him to look upon themselves as the only
means of his safety: They having been thus, the principal causes of his
departure, deserved much more to be blamed then he did; because he having once
confided in them, it would be an hard matter for him to defend himself from
their treacheries. The Queen Mother was not to be excused, she having
something contributed to drive him into these extremities, which could be
advantageous to no one, but very dangerous to France, as experience has made
it appear; and withal the Cabal which was then at Court, having grounded all
those broils which since happened upon his departure. The Cardinal foresaw the
ill consequences, if not remedied, therefore he omitted nothing in his power,
which might induce his Majesty to solicit him to return; but the discontents
of Grandees are like those sicknesses which must necessarily have their course,
and cannot be cured until the natural heat has overpowered the malign powers
in the body, so there was a necessity of expecting what time might produce,
that he might be persuaded to return.

Politic Observation.
PRinces of the Blood Royal cannot possibly follow worse counsel, than to
withdraw themselves from the place of their birth. There it is that the Center
of their glory is, and where they are respected with more honor than they can
hope for; there they only see the King above them, whereas in other Countries
they are inferior to many. The Stars in the Firmanent have not any light, but
when they are within sight of the Sun, and Princes are never so glorious, as
when in their Kings presence; it being their greatest glory to be of his blood;
they are like burning-glasses, which out of the Sun are of no use. Their King
is as their soul, and all their greatness consists in his Majesty, and the
splendour ^^ich they receive from him, gives them so great Authority, that they
may upon the matter do whatsoever they desire, whereas when once they go out of
the limits of their own Country, they change their Commands into entreaties. It
is only near their King that they live in the abundance of pleasure and
delight, but when once they forsake him, they are presently reduced to want and
necessity. Here they are only restrained from being Prodigal, nothing is
refused them that is necessary; whereas among strangers they are forced to be
contented with that, which at home would hardly maintain their Officers,
neither have they that without submission. Is it not then with little reason
pretended that they retire for more liberty, seeing they are never so much
observed as amongst strangers, where every thing they do is suspected? If they
have any liberty, it is to foment divisions in their own Country. But why do
they not consider that in so doing they act against themselves, against their
own greatness, for that they are not at all considerable, but by the Kingdom
from whence they are extracted?

The Reasons and Causes of Monsieurs Retirement.
AS it is natural to seek pretenses for the hiding of faults, so Monsieur gave
diverse reasons of his departure, for his own justification. Those Grandees who
complain of a State where they are born, cannot better be compared then to
those who are in a deep water, where they lay hold on every thing to secure
themselves from danger. He first of all complained of the disorders in the
State, a thing usual in all those that revolt, as if the true reason of their
discontent were not known; when the truth is, nothing but their own particular
interest withdraws them. They who had been with him, should have informed him
what alterations the Cardinal had made in France, since he first came to the
State. He found it in the most deplorable condition that could be, by the ill
management of certain Ministers, who unable to second the Kings prudent and
generous intentions, had cast all things into confusion. The Hugonot party was
then so strong that they would shake off the yoke of obedience at their own
pleasures. The Princes of the Blood, would usually revolt upon the least
discontents. The Governors of Provinces were like so many petty Kings. The
Kings family was maintained by two or three years advance of the Treasury
before hand, exhausted to enrich those who were factiously inclined, and
without any honor to the King. The Allies of the Crown were left to the mercy
of their enemies, of whom the Kingdom stood in fear. The case was now altered,
the Heretic faction was brought upon their knees, the Princes of the blond
were forced to live in obedience, the Governors of Provinces durst do nothing
but what was just, the Treasuries were well regulated and employed for the
Kings Honor and State. In short, the whole body of France heretofore sick and
languishing, began to recover strength, with assurance of perfect health, when
as its Foreign and Domestic enemies did not at all divert the Cardinals
designs. All these things were so apparent, that the Cimmerian darkness could
not hinder the sight of them, but who knows not that the strongest reasons
cannot touch them, who are over-mastered with Passion, as we have reason to
believe they could not those about Monsieur, seeing they were so blind in
persuading him to a course so directly contrary to that which the Cardinal had
projected for the establishment of the Kingdom? They should have learned that
as the Planets do not immit their influences here beneath, without causing of
great alterations in the world; so neither do the Princes of the Blood ever
separate themselves from their King and Country, but they cause great troubles
and disorders, and in case there were any others in the State, this were to
remedy it by a worse, a thing contrary to the Laws of Prudence; but a thing not
much by them regarded, so they could but overcome their Masters spirit, that
they might afterward lead him to whatever they desired.

Politic Observation.
IF Divine Providence does not appear with more splendor in any one thing,
then the Government of the Universe; then true it is, that humane wisdom is
never more admirable then in the Conduct of Kingdoms, especially when they are
fallen from their first height, and that there is a necessity to re-establish
them. This reestablishment does undeniably depend upon that particular Minister
who governs affairs, next under the Authority of his Prince; for he is in the
State, as the Sun in the World, as the eye to the Body, and as the Primum
mobile among the Heavens. Yet however two truths cannot be gainsaid, the first
is, that a State being a society of free men, who not exactly following the
motions which their chief minister gives them, it cannot be avoided but that
some disorder must follow, unless diverse others besides himself be assistant.
The principal causes share indeed the chief glory in producing their effects,
but not of being the only producers of them, and the Sun himself could not
enamel the earth with the Flowers of the Spring, unless other causes did
cooperate; and as no Labourer how vigilant soever can hinder the fields from
producing Weeds; so it is likewise impossible that a chief Minister how prudent
soever, should so settle a State that no disorder should appear in it, seeing
it is no less natural for people to he unruly, then for the earth to bring
forth weeds. The second, that it is a work of time to re-establish a State once
fallen into confusion. Nature works slowly, produces the seed out of the
grain, the sien from the seed, the tree from the sien, the flower from the
tree, and at last the fruit. Thus likewise a Minister of State, how excellent
soever he be, cannot reduce confusion into order, but by little and little, and
by setting his Engines on work one after another. There must needs be some time
spent in inquiring into the true causes of these evils, it being impossible to
apply convenient remedies without discovering the original defect. He had need
be instructed with Prudence and experience to consider those things which have
heretofore conduced to make that State flourish, which he would now restore,
and also that which has been glorious for other States. He ought to imitate
good Physicians, who having observed those ill humors which cause the
sickness, use their art first to purge them out, and then to bring their
Patient to a good temper. The principal causes of the ruin of a State, are
civil Wars, disrespect of authority, the too great Power of Princes of the
Blood, Strangers and Governors, Factions, negligence in Judges to punish
public disorders, want of good Discipline among Soldiers, and the oppressures
of the people: now what a deal of time must there be to redress all these and
establish one quite contrary? It cannot be done but by time and labor, nay
impossible, if the Kingdom be either in civil or foreign War. Lastly, the
Minister has need of some time to reduce the neighbor Countries into such a
condition that they may not endanger his. Physicians are careful for the
restoring of their Patient to perfect health, that neither the air, nor any
thing about him, may be offensive to him, and a Prudent Minister is no less
obliged to be careful; not only that his neighbors may not injure him, but
that they may be serviceable to him. He must keep a strict intelligence with
his Allies, not injuring them, but assisting them in all occasions, as the
Romans did, who sent their Ambassadors from Town to Town, to make a friendship
with them, and to divert them from the Carthaginians. He ought to endeavor the
breaking off all Leagues between foreign Princes, whose strength by their
uniting might become suspected, whence it follows, that he ought not to be
overhasty in extinguishing any Wars between them; nay some he is bound to
foment, as Lewis the Eleventh did, to divert those storms, which else would
have fallen upon France. These are the chief means which can contribute to the
establishment of a State; but who sees not that amongst a thousand different
causes, it is impossible totally to effect it, unless after a long time, and
with extreme care and diligence.

The Marshal de Marillac is send by the King to Monsieur.
THey of the Queen Mothers faction, would by no means let slip Monsieur's
retreat, without making advantage of it. They despaired of ever overcoming his
Majesty, considering how great an esteem be professed to have of the Cardinals
services; They very well knew, that the Queen Mother could not countenance any
one against him, so powerfully, as Monsieur, whereupon they did their utmost,
to breed a good understanding between them; and when his Majesty had sent
diverse to Monsieur, they did at last work the Queen Mother, to procure Marillac
to be sent to him, a person whom they knew to be fit for their design. The
Cardinal gave him his instructions, as to what he should say from his Majesty,
which tended to remember him, how really his Majesty did affect him heretofore;
to assure him, he was not at all altered at that present; That his Majesty did
not complain of him for his departure, but of his Servants, who had persuaded
him to it, and that he was so much the more obliged to return with speed,
because all Europe would blame him, in case the Emperor and Spaniard should
make any great progress in Italy, whilst his Majesty stayed at Paris in
Expectation only of his coming thither. The Cardinal also considering, how
lately he had obliged Marillac, by procuring the Marshals staff for him, could
not suspect any double dealing from him, whereupon he very earnestly
recommended this one thing more to him, that he would testify to Monsieur how
desirous he was to serve him, and to assure him, that next to the preservation
of his Masters favor, he had not any greater ambition, the of being known for
his most humble and faithful Servant. But he instead of performing any tittle
of this second Commission, no less important for the good of France, then the
former, only discoursed to him, of the great power this Grand Minister had in
the Kingdom; concerning the many strong places in his Government; of the great
Expenses he made, and those vast benefits which the King bestowed on him; he
well knew this to be the only way, to provoke him unto Jealousy, and to
increase those disgusts which he had already conceived against him, which were
still fomented by those who were about him. Indeed he did not quite forget to
tell him, that the Cardinal recommended his very humble service to him; but
Monsieur asking whether he would pass his word for performance of it, replied
No; by which and the like answers he raised so great a distrust against him,
that it was impossible to persuade him to return to his Majesty, until the
Cardinal had passed the Alps.

Politic Observation.
PRudence and Fidelity are two of the most necessary qualities in a person,
employed in Negotiation of Affairs; The former to serve, the second to prevent
all disservice to him who employeth. He who transacteth any affair without
Prudence, is like a Workman without Art; well may he have his Tools, but he
knows not how to use them, and just as a Workman marrs his subject matter, if
he know not what form to give it, so does an Imprudent Negociator, ruin both
public and private affairs, committed to his charge and care; for Prudence
ought to be his guide, the Conduct of his thoughts and words, and the square by
which he rules his Actions; without it there is not the least hope of a good
success. Now although this virtue be thus and thus necessary, yet fidelity is
in some sort, much more; By fidelity I mean, a firm constancy, and an
unalterable resolution to serve them who set him on work; Without this, all the
Abilities and Prudencies in the world are not worth one Rush; For admit
Prudence inlightneth his Soul, yet fidelity is that which guides his desires;
though Prudence tell him what are the fittest ways to obtain the end of his
Commission, yet it is fidelity which preserves him from turning either to the
right or left, after any particular advantages; and if Prudence preventeth him
from being cheated and deceived, yet still fidelity defends him from all by
Interests. Fidelity teaches all men, that a Negociator ought not to look upon
what lies in his power, but upon what his faith obliges him, which is, the
inviolable preservation of his Interests who employeth him, and that with so
sacred a respect, that no passion prevail upon him, to divert him from it.

Breach of Trust is a fault so much the more odious in a Negotiator, because
public affairs are entrusted with his integrity. Now for the choice of such
persons, most fit for this kind of employment, I am of opinion, that they who
are of an indifferent Temper, and of an approved honesty, are much more proper,
then refined crafty men. The former are much more capable of a true affection;
They will at least stick close to every tittle in their Instructions, and
return a right and exact account of the State of affairs, where they are sent:
Whereas the latter, are apt to refine every thing, and to imagine, that only to
propose what they are commanded, is too little. They are commonly addicted to
engage themselves in a thousand things, if they concur with their particular
inclinations, or Interests, instead of adhering barely to that which is given
them in charge.

Monsieur's Pension is augmented.
THE Cardinal was well informed of the many devices used by Monsieur's
Creatures to divert him from that esteem which he ever had of his Services,
neither was he defective in using his utmost care to give him all satisfaction
and content, whereby he might oblige him to return; for he evidently foresaw,
that strangers might raise advantages from these our intestine broils,
whereupon, although he could not serve him in making up his Match with the
Princess Marie; (a thing so passionately by him desired) in regard the Queen
Mother opposed it with all her Interest, yet he procured his Majesty to
increase his Revenue, by granting him the Dutchyes of Valois and Chartres, and
one hundred thousand Livres per annum augmentation out of the Exchequer, which
was two thirds more then the Revenue of all the Princes of France that had ever
yet been, and withal so wrought with his Majesty, that he promised him the
Command of the Army of Champagne, and Government of the adjacent Provinces to
Paris, in case the Queen Mother went into Italy, with his Majesty, as she gave
out she would. The King made some difficulty of increasing his Revenue, because
he had so often found him capable of evil Counsels, which made him misdoubt
lest he might employ them only in raising new Broils in the Kingdom. But the
Cardinal whose admirable soul foreseeth all remedies, proposed to his Majesty,
which he very well approved, that whenever he should so do, his Rents and
Revenews should be seized to his Majesty's use. Monsieur was acquainted with
these affairs, and withal told, he was now obliged to be satisfied and
contented in case he did only design to live within the limits of respect and
obedience, seeing his Majesty had given him sufficient to live like a Prince,
and to satisfy his smaller diversions. And he being by nature and of himself
well enough inclined to live in obedience and order, accepted of it, and
accordingly his accommodation being thus made, he promised, his Majesty, that he
would very suddenly return into France.

Politic Observation.
Concerning the Revenues for life only, the remainder being in the Crown.
Appanages of the Princes of the Blond.
IT is very dangerous to allot any chief Provinces for Appanage to the Princes
of the Blond. Their Birth renders them great enough, neither need they any
additions of Honor, especially such which may serve them to make revolts,
which commonly draw their ruin with them, if their Kings rule as they ought to
do. If they demand them for security, they may be answered, that they ought to
expect none, but from their own obedience, and their Kings bounty. Their
weakness is the Kings strength, neither can they increase, but his must
diminish. He who intrusteth them with power, raises a dangerous enemy against
himself. The Sun is but one, and all the Stars receive their light from him;
yet upon condition that he may at his pleasure deprive them again of that
splendor; just so is it with Princes, their greatness proceeds from the
King, and he may despoil them of all their honor in a moment if once they
recede from the due respect they owe unto him. The Riches which he bestows on
them, are for the discharging of those expenses which are proper for persons of
their eminency, not for the upholding of Factions, and abetting of Revolts.
What advantage did Charles of France take in Normandy, (given to him for
Appanage) toward making a War against Lewis the Eleventh his Brother? And the
States assembled at the same time at Tours, did much admire his Majesty would
so give it to him, but advised him to recall it, and grant him only an Annual
Revenue, some in Lands and some in Pension, in lieu of his Appanage. Who did
ever bring into so many eminent dangers, as the Appanages of Berry and
Bourgogne? Were not these two Provinces the retreats of all discontents? Were
not the Courts of those two Dukes, the Forges where all the Thunderbolts that
were afterward thrown about the Kingdom were formed and contrived? Were not
there the springs of all dissentions, discontents, and civil wars? And were not
they the persons who brought in the Kings of England, and Dukes of Britain,
only to favor the designs of their Ambition?

The Cardinal is declared Generalissimo of the Kings Armies in Italy.
THe spirit of division which had till then kept Monsieur from the King, gave
great hopes to the enemies of the State, to advance their designs in Italy.
They doubted not of inflaming a civil War in France, which might so divert his
Majesty's Armies, that he could not have the leisure to come up to them a
second time. The Duke of Lorain offered Monsieur as many forces and money as he
could desire, and the Duke of Savoy who never yet escaped a broil, sent twice
to him to complain, that he being so much his servant, he should take any other
country for his retreat, and to offer him his, with protestation of quitting
the Sovereign authority to him; nay, that he would even forsake it, to make him
absolute Master thereof, as also of himself and children to be disposed at his
Will and Pleasure. These Offers were sufficient to have charmed any Soul, had
he been at that time so distrustful as after he was; but he rather chose to
follow those just reasons which the King had proposed to him, and to submit
himself to his pleasure. All that foreign faction was wonderfully surprised at
the news of his accommodation; and the Cardinal who stayed his Army from
advancing into Italy, only in expectation of his return, persuaded his Majesty
no longer to defer his resolution, that the Spaniards might not make any
further progress. The King desired to go in person, he being too courageous to
entertain himself in a Chamber, whiles his Armies were in the field. But the
Cardinal who foresaw that the unseasonableness of the time might endanger him,
advised him to stay some time, and offered himself to undertake that
employment. The King received this Proposition as an assured testimony of his
fidelity, but such and so tender was his affection to him, that he could hardly
be persuaded to part with him, he being as much grieved to consent to his
departure from him, as he was heretofore joyed for his return, as was seen by
all the Court at Rochel, Privas, and Fountainbleau. Yet at last his Majesty
knowing how important the assisting of Monsieur de Mantua was, as also how much
the glory of his Armies and Authority were concerned in it, could not entrust
them with any but the Cardinal, who was not only the chief Minister in his
Counsels, but also the greatest Commander in his Kingdom. He knew in what
reputation he was amongst strangers, and what Courage his presence infused into
the Soldiery. Of his Prudence he was assured, having oftentimes seen his
Enemies Plots discovered by him, and prevented before ever they were ready to
be put in execution. His good conduct too he could not be ignorant of, he
having by often experiment found it to be exact and excellent, and such as was
to be preferred before any other. In fine, he could not doubt of Victory,
whilst his Army was encouraged by so brave a Commander. These were the reasons
which induced his Majesty to give him that command of Generalissimo. As soon as
he had received his Commission he departed from Paris, being about the latter
end of the year, which his Majesty intended to celebrate by as famous an Act as
he began it. As great exploits beget emulation, so some there were who muttered
that such an employment should be conferred on a Cardinal, an Ecclesiastical
person, but they betrayed their own ignorance; who knew not that History
affords us diverse examples of several Cardinals, who at sundry times have
commanded Armies. Spain in the time of King Alphonsus, made use of the grand
Cardinal Albornoz, who followed him through the midst of the most bloody
Battles. Then Ferdinand and Isabella employed the great Cardinal Ximenes,
General of their Armies in Afric. Italy has had many Cardinals out of the
families of the Colonni, the Vitilesci, the C^r^^ffi, the Fregosi, who have
showed their valor in Armies, that we might know, that as the Romans with
their long Robes, did heretofore Conquer the greatest part of the Universe, so
that that habit was not inconsistent with Victories. Besides the ignorance of
those Censurers could not be excused, seeing they knew how that the ancient
Laws of this Kingdom do oblige several of our Bishops to follow his Majesty in
person to the Wars, as also that they are bound to it by the Tenures of their
Temporal Estates. It is to be seen in Hugon and the Chronicle of St. Dennis, in
the year, 1209. that Philip Augustus being at War with the English, called upon
all the Bishops to accompany, which they did accordingly; and afterward that
the Bishops of Orleans and Auxerre, seeing the King was not there, returned
back again, they pretending themselves not obliged to it, unless when the King
were there in person: The King seized upon their Temporal Estate, which they
complaining of at Rome* could have no other redress, but that they ought to
obey his Majesty, the Pope being unwilling to break the customs of the
Kingdom, neither were they restored to the enjoyment of their goods, until
they had paid their Fines for it. In the same manner, I have seen an Act of
the Bishops of Auxerre, dated in the year one thousand two hundred twenty and
two; by which he confessed himself obliged to send to the War of the Albigeois,
being unable to go thither in person, by reason of his infirmity; and another
injunction made to the Bailiffs in the year thirteen hundred and four,
commanding all Prelates and Ecclesiastics who were bound to attend his
Majesty's service, that they should be ready to wait on his person. These
examples may serve to demonstrate, that Prelates have heretofore been
accustomed to serve our Kings, so that there cannot be any just exceptions made
against their following of his Majesty in Arms.

Politic Observation.
THe General of an Army being the second person of a Kingdom, had need be
endued with all the qualities necessary to the King himself, but those which do
most contribute to his glory, and the good success of the Armies under his
command, are Prudence, Courage and Reputation: Prudence is like the eye which
beholds those things that are proper to be done, and what is fit to be
commanded; Courage is that which executes them, and Reputation is like the
soul in courageous Battles, which gives motion to the Soldiers with so
extraordinary a generosity, that it is easy to know, when they are commanded
by a General in whom they have a confidence. Prudence is necessary for him to
deliberate with judgment, what is sound and fit, and to command them to good
purpose, which teaches him to keep his Army in good order, which acquainteth
him with the humor and disposition not only of those Officers who command
under him, but likewise of his Soldiers, that he may the more readily know how
to command them upon his designs, which teaches him the observation of
military Laws, which helps him to foresee and prevent great dangers, which
gives him means to judge of Treaties, and make advantages of them as occasion
shall happen; which furnishes him with resolution to prosecute his designs,
with courage of mind to bear misfortunes and with moderation in good success.
These are some of those effects of that Prudence which is requisite in a
General. I could add a thousand other subjects in which it is needful, but for
the present, I shall only say in general, terms that Prudence ought to be the
rule by which he squareth all his actions. Thus did the Egyptians acknowledge
it for an inseparable companion of command, whiles they represented it, by an
eye placed over a Scepter. If a General have need of Prudence, surely Courage
is no less necessary for him, that he may break through all obstacles which
may happen for the assaulting of his enemies with rigor; that he may adventure
upon dangers without fear; that himself may be in the fights, and that in his
own person he may lead up his forces to infuse the greater resolutions in them.
It is not that he should rashly run into dangers, but to look them in the face,
and to send others on without apprehension of fear. It is an error in young
men who think that a General cannot be courageous, unless he run madly into
dangers; that were rather fury, and would procure him the discredit of being
rash, rather then the honor of being courageous. If he had an heart without
judgment, to what purpose were it? He being the Soul of War, and others lives
depending on his, he is bound to preserve himself for the preservation of
others. Not that he ought to be absent when orders are to be given, or his
Soldiers encouraged, but that he ought not to run headlong into the heat of
the Battle, unless when he finds the Victory wavering, and that his example is
requisite to renew the courage of his Soldiers, and to carry the day by some
extraordinary attempt. In such occasions he may adventure himself, else not.
His staff of command being to force others on, and the Sword in the Soldiers
hand to execute his commands. Lastly, Reputation is requisite in a General, for
without it, the Soldiers have not any confidence in him; whereas, when they
once esteem him, it intitles him to a greater power over them then any other
thing, when they shall have oftentimes seen him break through dangers, they
will not flinch at any thing. The Sun his vigor makes all things the more
fruitful; and it is most certain that the reputation of a General is that
which makes him more resplendant amongst his forces, and adds a great life to
his commands. The Soldier moves but by halfs under a low spirited Commander,
and is hardly persuaded to any extraordinary enterprises. He seems only to
have Arms for his own defense; but when his Commander is a person of
reputation, it is far otherwise. I am of the same judgment with him, who said,
Opinion has so great an Empire, that it governs the whole world; at least it
is so far true, for that virtue her self would have but small authority in
commanding, without being beholding to her. Thus an ancient, and that wisely,
held that the happiness of success, was the daughter of authority, and of the
reputation of great men.

The End of the First Book.
THE HISTORY OF THE ADMINISTRATION OF THE Cardinal de Richelieu.
Second Part.
Anno 1630.
IF Antiquity has made Afrique to pass for one of the most wonderful
Countries of the World; because it every day produces something, which is both
new and Monstrous, I am most confident that this years History will enforce the
judgments, of those who shall consider it to confess, that Europe runs the
same Parallel: and the extraordinary diversity which is here met with, is
ground enough for it, seeing every Sun brings to light, somewhat which is not
common, and seems to give a new face to all State affairs. Bellona sets all
parts on fire with the flames of War. Peace endeavored which all it is might to
extinguish it in Italy: Honor and disgrace breed strange effects; Ingratitude
will cause us to behold such Monsters, that the Age to come will want faith to
believe the qualities of them. Love and hatred, will a like strenuously act
their parts; The Stars of Heaven in their malignities one against the other, seem
to conspire the ruin of Nations and Armies; In a word there is not any one
thing which a man may call strange or unheard of, but I find acted to the life
in this years compass, not to say in Europe, but even in France it self.

If should seem that Heaven, which cannot justly be more admired at for any
thing then that of its various twinking lights the Stars, is sometimes
delighted to show us an extraordinary diversity in Negotiations of States, and
partly to afford those who govern, fit opportunities to testify their Prudence
to the World: The Divine wisdom permits their Splendour to be sometime Eclipsed
with thick clouds, which are soon after dissipated and blown over, to make
their light appear the more glorious. Such is the condition both of Kingdoms
and particular men, that they are both equally subject to the changes of
Fortune. But as the wise and prudent Pilot saves and keeps his vessel, in the
greatest and most violent storm, not losing his judgment, either at the flashes
of lightning, or the claps of Thunder which cuts and rends the air on every
side. So likewise a great Minister cannot be moved at any shocks of Fortune,
his courage never permitting her to Triumph in the least over his resolution,
or to Byas him from the Laws of Prudence, the rule of all his conduct, and this
it is you will find our Cardinal to practice in all and every the transactions
of this year.

The Promotion of the Archbishop of Lions, and Monsieur Bagny to the
Cardinalship.
I Will begin with the Honors which the King procured his holiness to bestow,
with, the Cardinals Hats on the Archbishop of Lions, and Monsieur Bagny the
Popes Nuntio. The great Worth of the former at the least equalized that honor
of the Cardinalship, and his sublime virtue, made it apparent to all the World,
that to have left him in the solitudes of a Cloister, had been a great injury
and wrong to the whole Church. I shall not need say more of him, then that he
was the Cardinals Brother, seeing that qualification were sufficient to render
him capable of so eminent a dignity. The King who slips not any occasion of
acknowledging the services which he had done both to his Person and Estate,
could not endure to see him have a Brother in the Church, and not advanced to
the utmost degree of Honor which the French are capable of: and the Pope had
but too much assurance and knowledge of the great advantages he had procured to
the Church; so that he could not do less then honor his Brother with a hat
seeing it was not in his power to raise himself to any higher Eminency. Its
true by the Laws of the Roman Court, it is not permitted that two Brothers be
Cardinals at the same time: But as these Laws are not so considerable as those
of gratitude and acknowledgment, so his Holiness did not so much as once
scruple at it; And for that which concerns Monsieur de Bagny, besides the
custom of ordinarily conferring the Cardinalship on such as have for some time
resided near his Majesty, in the quality of his Holiness Nuntio, which seems to
give him some right or claim to the Hat; His own Worth, which rendered him
deserving in the judgments of all the Grandees in the Kingdom, not only of the
Cardinalship, but even of the Papal Miter, every one predicting that he would
one day wear is, invied, nay enforced the King to contribute his utmost to
obtain it for him; and not only that but the quality of his Genius caused every
one to conclude, that he would one day be very considerable in the Court of
Rome, when before he had arrived to that pitch of Honor, he could not but be
very advantageously useful to the Interests of France, which upon frequent
occasions depend upon their well management in the Consistory.

Politic Observation.
ALthough the Cardinals are not regarded in France, but as Princes who are
strangers. Yet this their promotion does not render them less useful or
important to the State; they being more considerable, then other Princes of the
same condition, by reason of the affairs which are daily negotiated with his
Holiness the Pope, and indeed ought to be respected, as the principal
conservators under the King, of the Liberties and Franchises of the French
Church and State; they being his Majesty's Chief Ministers in Ordinary, near
the Pope: and it has been always held necessary, that there were some one of
this quality, either a French man by Nation, or at least very affectionate by
Nature, to the Interests of France, who might cordially advance the designs and
concerns of the French King and Church, with his Holiness the Pope. And from
hence it came to pass, that if they were naughty French, little affectionate
either to the State or his Majesty's Person or infected with the Maxims of
Spain, that great Inconveniences befell, as has been heretofore seen; and for
my particular I believe it to be safer for his Majesty, to permit France to be
with out any, rather then such Cardinals. But we live not in an age, which has
any reason to complain of such an unhappiness, seeing France owes the
restoration of its greatness and glory, to the Cardinal, as to the Prime and
first of second Causes, which Act under the King; for to him chiefly belongs
the Honor, in that he had so great an influence upon the Popes disposition,
that he gave the Italians themselves a just occasion to say, that his Holiness
was turned Cardinal.

The dispatch of the Marshal d' Etree to the Commonwealth of Venice, concerning
the Affairs of the Duke of Mantua.
I Shall pass from the consideration of those reasons of State, which might be
made, upon the aforesaid Lords Promotion to the Cardinalship, that I may tell
you how about the end of the foregoing year; Fortune being become seldom
favorable to the house of Austria or their Arms, the Imperialists found
themselves, so oppressed with diseases, and encumbered with sicknesses and
necessities, that they were enforced to raise the siege of Mantua. But it was
as if they had only withdrawn themselves into their Winter quarters. The Duke
of Mantua was vigilant for the preservation of his State, and well knew the
ambitious humor of Spain, which had sought all occasions for fifty years past,
to render themselves Masters of Italy, and would not now be wanting to
reassume their former design, in causing new Troops to come from Germany, and
in giving better Orders and Instructions, then heretofore, that they might give
new life to their intentions and designs. This moved him to make addresses to
the King, that he would be pleased to interpose his Authority with the
Venetians, to induce them to raise an Army, and make themselves Masters of the
field, which would discourage the Imperialists, to return or make any more
approaches toward Mantua: This request of his was granted, and the Marshal d'
Estree, dispatched toward Venice about the beginning of January, to treat
there, concerning those succors, with order to retirs himself into Mantua,
after the conclusion of his Embassy, according as the Cardinal had persuaded
the King to be most proper, before he had began his Journey thither. And thus,
it being business of no small importance for the Venetians to hinder the
Spaniard from seating himself so near them as Mantua. (His Dominion, being like
the Eagles Feathers, which frets and eats away those which are next and
nearest unto it,) they readily embraced the protection of the said Duke of
Mantua, and chose the Duke of Candal for their General, and gave him after many
importunities continually suggested by the Marshal d' Estree, about twelve
thousand foot, and three thousand Horse, to which were joined the Regiments of
Candale and Valette, which were about three thousand men a piece sent by the
King.

Politic Observation.
IT is very necessary to know the designs of an Enemy, before he be in a
condition to put them in Execution, and this foresight is so much the more
commendable, by how much it is profitable and commodious to the good of a
Commonwealth. That Prince is much to be blamed, who begins to make preparations
of defense, when he sees an Armed Enemy at his Gates, and he is oftentimes well
beaten for his negligence.

The preparations of War, which a Prince makes in expectation of being
assaulted or set upon, are a certain Index of his courage, and a sure testimony
of his resolution, which allayes and cheques, the heat and fury of an Enemy,
who may from thence gather, that he disposes himself in good earnest to
entertain the War, and that one thing is sometimes capable of frighting them
from making any incursions or invasions into a Country. It is very dangerous to
despise an Enemy after a victory, and as great a fault to slight him before a
fight. Fear is still attended with shame and confusion, when it faintly
withdraws from the Battle; But that which produces no other effect in the Soul
of a Prince, then the resolution of preparation for the War when he finds
himself threatened with an Invation, cannot but be allowable, honorable and
commendable. On the otherside, the little esteem which a man has of his
Enemies, gives them a notable advantage, seeing it causes a neglect of the
keeping Forces in a condition of repelling Enemies, and gives them oportunities
of time and place to advance, to fortify and to put all their designs in
Execution; so that it will be at last full as difficult to compel them to
retire, as at first it had been easy to have stopped and impeded their entrance
or approches. And this Maxim I learn from Caesar, who instead of neglecting or
slighting his Enemies, made his Soldiers always believe that their Enemies
were very strong, that every one might dispose himself to fight, either by
redoubling his courage, or resolving to preserve himself in that Station and
Orders, which his Officers should allot and assign unto him.

The Kings departure toward Italy.
THis very consideration drew the Cardinal to advance, with all diligence to
Lion, where he soon found what he before suspected; The Duke of Savoys being
Guilty of Infidelity, and that he sought for pretenses and excuses, that he
might not keep his promise with the King, to which he was obliged by the Treaty
at Suze: which was, That he should keep open the Passages of Savoy and
Piedmont, and furnish the Markets with victuals for the Soldiers in
consideration of such wheat and money, as had been accorded between them, and
whereof a good part had been delivered into his Custody. Of all which the King
was advised, whose courage was so sensibly touched at it, that he presently
resolved to set forward in his own person, so that neither the length of the
journey, the extremity of the Ice or Snow, nor the most violent storms of the
Winter, were able to divert him from it.

Politic Observation.
A Generous Prince, cannot bear indignities without resenting of them, his
courage is a fire which tormenteth him with continual impatiences, until he
has punished the Authors which such usage, as they deserve: he is not at all
allayed with the injuries he has suffered, but thence takes fresh courage to
assault them the more furiously; He well knows that a firm a strong
resolution, is the best Counsel which can be taken in such affairs, not to be
astonished, at any thing whatever and to keep ones self immovable to his
Principles of rendering himself known to his Enemies by the strength of his
Arms, and how they do but wrong themselves in attempting any thing contrary to
the respect, and the fidelity, which is due unto him.

The Prosecution of the Subject.
AFter the King had been once assured of the resolution taken by the Spaniards
for a second siege of Cazal, that they might recover the Honor and glory which
they had lost before it the last year; He was not ignorant that the Marquis of
Spinola's being in Milan, with so puissant an Army was to no other purpose,
then to attend, till the first fair season of the new Spring, might give him an
occasion of commencing the siege with less disaster and trouble. And as he was
not ignorant, how necessary his own presence was with this Armies, who knew not
what it was to be vanquished and to loose that Honor, which they had once
acquired, so his Majesty, to whom nothing appears difficult when a Battle is
once in Question, ingageth himself in this expedition, that by his presence, he
might animate his Troops and gain as much glory in the head of his Army, as the
Princes of Austria do shame, and reproach by being in their pleasures and
recreations, whiles their Soldiers run the hazards of a Battle, or suffer the
toilsome incommodities of a siedg.

Politic Observation.
IT is most true, the presence of a King works strange effects, in their
Armies; there is a certain vivacity and gallantry of courage, which flows from
their Majesty, which does so strongly animate their Soldiers resolutions, that
nothing is able to resist them. The most generous are troubled in their feats,
if they have not the eyes of a Prince for witnesses of their actions, from
whence they either hope for a glory or a reward: And the most cowardly, at the
sight of them, are touched to the very Soul with such a strong influence and
resentment, that there is not any danger how great soever able to infuse the
least fear into them, and they only apprehend a defect of occasions to
signalize themselves, before such extraordinary testimonies of a great valor.
The late King Heury the Great, showed the World in six several encounters, how
much valor his presence instilled into his Soldiers, when with a handful of
men he carried away the victory from the most puissant Armies of the Enemies of
his Crown, most especially in the Battails of Arques and Fontain-Francoise,
where he gave a sure testimony, that his only person was capable of
vanquishing, though seconded with never so small a Troop. It would be an
offense to the generous Courage of the present King, to imagine he has less
valor, then him from whom he received his Crown; after he has testified in
many occasions that he does much surpass him: and therefore there is nothing
else to be expected, but his sudden departure, which presently followed, and
he appeared in the head of his Troops soon after the first news and advise,
that the Duke of Savoy made it a difficulty to open the Passages for his Army.

The Queen Mothers journey to his Majesty.
THE Queen Mother was strongly bent not to leave the King in any of his
journies or expeditions, not only that she might have a hand in the disposing
of affairs and to divert (if by any means she could) his Majesty from assisting
the Duke of Mantua, whom she did not thwart out of any hatred, but that she
might pick an occasion of ruining the Cardinal in his Majesty's good opinion;
Neither could the consideration of the extreme Illness of the season, or the
difficulty of the Passages any whit divert her, but from Paris she soon
followed him, by the persuasions of the Chancellor Marillac, who after he had
made himself Master of her will and mind would as willingly have rendered
himself Dominus factotum in his room, who had placed him, so near her Majesty.

Politic Observation.
ANger is a Passion, which forces a man to undertake any thing, nay all
things. It is a Torrent which bears down, whatsoever does resist it, and its
Rhetorique is so persuasive, that there is no difficulty whatever, which it
will not break through and make appear feaseable, to those who will but lend an
ear to its Reasons, so there be but any time fixed, in which it may arrive to
take that revenge which it proposes it self. Anger is most Industrious and
Vigilant upon every opportunity of offending those whom it ayms at, and there is
not any thing which it will not patiently endure, so that it may arrive to the
end of its designs. Anger too, as it has no fellowship with Prudence, but a
great friendship with boldness, (which makes it hope and attempt the levelling
of Mountains) so it does frequently tumble those whom it possesses into those
pits, and snares which they had provided for others. Anger, has always its
eyes and thoughts fixed upon the end of its designs, not once considering the
difficulties, dangers or wickednesses, which accompany the means of obtaining
its desires. And it is apparently seen, that the minds of those who are once
transported with this Passion, reflect on nothing but how they may quench that
fire with which they burn, concluding there is no other water to extinguish it,
then the ruin and downfall of those whom they hate and malign, little imagining
that a Remedy of this quality will consume them in a worse heat, and render
their disease the more tormenting.

In fine, it is most of all dangerous in great Personages, because the designs
into which it transports their courages, are not always conformable to the
good of the State; And by reason they have more power to execute their
revenges: which induced an Ancient Writer to say, they ought to have so much
the less of this passion, by how much they have more power. This Anger, being
but a simple poor fault in private persons, is like a Thunderbolt in the hands
of great men, which overthrows every thing, without any the least consideration
or thought that they are subject to other Laws then those of their own violent
humors. Stars that are highest, move slowest. And Grandees ought so much to
moderate their emotions and ebullitions of choler, by how much their qualities
and conditions are more eminent then those of others.

The Duke of Savoy would not perform the Treaty agreed on with the King.
THE Prosecution of this History compels me to look back on the Cardinals
expedition, of which we have already said, that it was about the end of the
foregoing year. As soon as he was arrived at Lions, he would not lose any
longer time, but after he had writ to the King, that it was not expedient for
his Majesty to venture himself, considering the extreme ill season of the year,
he presently dispatched the Sieur de Servient, Superintendent of Justice in his
Majesty's Army, toward the Duke of Savoy, to inform him that he was come with
forty thousand men, with design to assist the Duke of Mantua, and to defend him
from the Spanish oppression. His Highness was obliged by the Treaty of Suze, to
join his forces with those of the King for the preservation of that Prince,
and of the Liberty of Italy; and but a very little before he had renewed those
his promises to the King by the President of Montfalcon, who had assured his
Majesty in his behalf, that he would advance ten thousand men, and keep his
Marts well provided with necessaries for the Soldiers; and all this that he
might be as good as his promise. The time was now come, in which he must
declare himself, and reduce his words into Actions. The Cardinal commanded
Monsieur de Servient to press him to it in the King's behalf; The answer which
the Duke of Savoy should have made, if he had proceeded with that faith and
truth, which ought to go hand in hand with the Promises of all confederate
Princes had been this, that he would not go one tittle less then his word; but
instead of that fair and clear dealing, his first answer was, that he did
totally disown the President of Montfalcon, without the least show of a
readiness to execute his promises, which gave evident causes of suspicion, that
he held Intelligence with the Spaniard, and of which there had been former
notice and advise given from other hands.

Politic Observation.
THe words of Princes ought to be as inviolate as the Sanctuary. Whatever
consequence they apprehend in their affairs, is not a sufficient ground for
their double dealing; but they ought to blame their own foresight. It is as
dishonorable for them to say, I did not think it, as it is glorious and noble
for them to keep their words. That Prince cannot be thought faithful, who will
break his promise upon what occasion soever it be, which whosoever does,
deceives and cheateth himself; for that the truth and faith of Grandees, gives
then as much power and credit, as their Swords. It is esteemed by the most
wise, to be a good Storehouse or Armory, when a King can assure himself of the
assistance of all other Princes, which he may safely do, so long as they are
reputed faithful. But when any Prince becomes faithless, it is lawful for
every one to break with him, who first breaks himself. He who has been once
treacherous, is for ever looked on as a Coward, the only going back from his
word, being an assured sign that his fear of others is that which makes him
abandon his own Allies. A courageous Prince will keep touch with his very
enemies, and it is neither fear nor necessity that can divert his gallant
resolutions, whilst it is his maxim, that if Prosperity obliges him to this
high point of virtue. Adversity does it in a more particular manner. The
Gallantry and Valor of Attilius Regulus, was much esteemed of by all the
Ancients, who returned willingly to the tortures of his enemies, rather then he
would break his Parole once past unto them.

But the Duke of Savoy is not so well Principled, and being in league with the
Spaniard, thought perhaps he would as little regard his word as they do, it
being grown a Proverb amongst them, that the Wind drives Words and Feathers,
yet in it he will find himself much mistaken, and that to his own very great
disadvantage, as well as in his many other tricks, artifices, and designs of
amusing and deceiving the Cardinal.

Proposals made by the Duke of Savoy, to the Cardinal Richelieu.
FIrst of all it was proposed to the Sieur de Servient, that a conference might
be had, if it were thought fit, with the Prince of Piedmont, upon the Bridge of
Beauvoisin, there to determine what should be done; designing that this
interview should entertain them with specious hopes, and so prevent their
absolute breach with him, and seizure on the Passages by force of Arms. The
Cardinal very well knew there was nothing to be thought on, but to be done;
that was, to open the Passages, and furnish the Markets, as it had been
resolved on; so that after a full debate with himself, what honor he was bound
to render to this Prince, being the Kings Brother-in-law, he concluded, that in
going to confer with him, who had falsified his word, and intended nothing but
to surprise him, he should do an act quite contrary to the Kings Majesty's
Grandeur, who had done him the honor to make him Lieutenant of his Army, so
that he absolutely declined this meeting; as well knowing, that the Duke of
Savoy's design in it, was to amuse and delay the Army in their march; and by
this means to disperse and bring them by little and little to nothing; so the
Cardinal advanced to Embrun, not being willing to come near Suze, lest in case
the Army should want rest, they should there meet with many inconveniences, and
eat out all their store of Provisions.

Politic Observation.
IT cannot be denied but that it is a baseness in a General to go meet him who
has broke his word, and who designs in his interview, nothing more then the
loss of his Army. If he will needs go meet him, let it be with his sword in
his hand, to chastise him for the injuries he has done. I am of the same
opinion with the Grand Cosmo de Medicis, who said, a man may forgive his
enemies their faults; but its fit to punish the offenses of such as call
themselves our friends, and under that notion betray us. But if a King, or he
who represents his person, do not desire satisfaction, or to revenge the
injuries which are offered unto them; yet it would be ignominious to go meet
and confer with a Prince, who aims at nothing but his own interest and
advantage. This were to be defective both in the Rules of Prudence and Valor.
Besides those conferences of face to face, between incensed Princes, do rather
increase their hatred, then breed any hearty good will between them; and of
this Plutarch has well adjudged, upon that conference between Pompey and
Lucullus. And Tacitus in his Annals, upon the meeting between Germanicus and
Pison. It Is true, the place designed by the Duke of Savoy was proper enough,
and such as has been sometimes used between Princes and great Commanders, who
have chosen to meet upon Bridges, in the midst of which Rails and Barriers
have been set up, to prevent any attempts of either party. And thus Lewis the
Eleventh, met Edward King of England (as Philip de Commines has it) upon the
Bridge of Pequinis. But the same Historian does much dis-approve of such
meetings between Princes in the midst of their discontents, and esteems it
more to the Purpose, that they should refer the accommodation of such
mis-understandings to their Officers and Ministers of State, who have not
resented any offense done to their private and particular persons.

The Duke of Savoy's Artifices discovered by the Cardinal of Richelieu.
BY this refusal of the Cardinal, the Duke of Savoy concluded, that all his
designs were discovered, and misdoubting that a just punishment would follow,
he had another trick to take to, which was, he granted the Passages and Marts,
but in such places as were accessible by none but Bears, and if those were not
approved of, he promised others, but with this reserved resolution, that he
would so long delay the furnishing the Army with Victuals and other
necessaries, that in effect it should not pass at all. The Cardinal whose Soul
fore-sees the Effects in their Causes, guessing he would fly to such tricks
and shifts, gave advice of it to the King. His Majesty's Orders soon came,
which were to accept of no other ways then those usually called the military,
it being impossible to lodge the Troops in any of the other Passages, but most
facile for his Majesty's enemies, if they had but as much power as they had ill
will both to impede their march, and indeed totally to ruin them. So the
Cardinal utterly refused any other ways, the difference now was concerning the
Markets, which the Duke endeavored to retard with all his might and main, that
the Imperialists and Spaniards might have time enough to fortify themselves in
their Passages and places of Mantua and Montferrat, and that he might force the
Army to break up, either by mutiny or famine. The Duke gave out that the^e was
no Corn in Savoy, though it was well known there had been great quantities
brought thither from Bresse, Dauphine, and Bourgogne, and that which the King
sent from Nice, had been likewise already received. He demanded a greater rate
too for Provisions, then had been agreed on, which however the Cardinal
submitted to, that he might take away all occasions of excuses, and paid down
the advance money. Notwithstanding all this, there were fifteen days spun out,
in which he had not provided one loaf for the whole Army, creating every day
new difficulties; and in conclusion, would open no other Passage but that of
Cand^n, which in Summer was good enough, but at that present so full of Boggs
and Quagmires, that they could not be passed but with very great danger; so
that all his whole proceeding for some time, was nothing but a continued
imposture and cheat, that he might render his promises made to the King of
opening the Passages, and providing Victuals for the Soldiers ineffectual and
to no purpose.

Politic Observation.
ITs usual amongst Princes who would deny any thing to their Allies, rather to
pretend an Impossibility, or at least a most extraordinary difficulty, then
point blank to refuse them, and it must be granted for a prudent put off, when
such excuses are not contradictory to any promises formerly made, which if they
be they rather serve to condemn them of injustice. If any great or notable
loss ensue, as the destruction of an Army, or the breaking a design, it
renders them for enemies, and administers a good reason of commencing a War
upon the Authors, without breaking any Treaty. He being reputed the first
breaker of the Peace, who gives the first occasion by his unjust Combinations
and Practices, not he who first takes up Arms. As Procope the Armenian
Ambassador, suggested to Cosroes King of Persia, when he advised him to take
up Arms against Justinian. Indeed he who would serve himself with such excuses,
had need be well assured, that he is the stronger, for admitting him to be the
weaker, the punishment of his falsenesse will be unavoidable, there being no
one thing so difficult, as for a weak and low person to attempt and enterprise
the deceiving and crafty undermining of others who are more able, and want
neither prudence or intelligence to discover and detect him, nor force and
power to punish and chastise him.

Prepositions of Peace made by the Nuntio Pauzirolo on the Duke of Savoy's
behalf to the Cardinal Richelieu.
ONe other device the Duke had, by which he verily imagined to surprise and
allay the Vigilance and Prudence of the Cardinal, incausing his troops to
advance together with the Artillery and Ammunition, which was to send him every
day new Propositions of Peace, sometimes by the Nuntio Pauzirol^, who had no
power to conclude any thing; otherwhiles by Mazarini another Lord of his Court,
but never consenting to the Kings demands, without which, he knew his Overtures
would never be admitted. The King was positively desirous to have the Passages
free and open for him to succor the Duke of Mantua, as often as need should
require, and the Duke of Savoy as peremptorily denied it, alleging that the
Emperor never would consent that the Princes of Italy should undertake his
Protection with. and against the whole world, and that the Spaniard never would
give way that he should entertain any French Troops in his service, which were
however very needful for the surety of his Estate, it being impossible for him
to raise a sufficient party in his own Dukedom. The Cardinal long before had
sounded the vanity of all these propositions, which did no way prevent his care
of giving all necessary Orders for the carrying on of the War, never would he
stop his ears to any Proposals of Peace, but used his utmost endeavors to
obtain such conditions, as without them, the King neither would or could with
his honor quit his Arms. And indeed had a Peace been concluded without such
terms, it had been but of a short continuance, for that it had only given
opportunity of time to the Spaniard, and the Duke of Savoy to fortify the
Passages, and render themselves Masters of the Dukedom of Mantua with the
greater ease, a design which France could not brook, though the hindrance and
prevention of it was at that time most difficult to bring to pass.

Politic Observation.
MOst certain it is, that by how much a War makes a State to be lamented, by
so much Peace is to be wished for and embraced. Peace is the most sweet bond of
humane society, the delight of nature, the nurse of good Laws, of Order, and
Policy, it peopleth Deserts, and makes the Land fruitful, every one finds it
the more agreeable by its being accompanied with safety and abundance. On the
other side, War is a fatal source of misfortunes, the desolation of Countries,
the demolition of Cities, the destruction of Nations, and the cause of all
sorts of miseries.

There are, I must confess, two Occurrences, in which War is better then
Peace. The first, when that Peace cannot long last, for who can imagine that a
man would take any great care to obtain that which he does verily conclude will
be as soon lost. Such was Archidanus his advice, when he dissuaded the
Lacedaemonians from making a Peace with those of Th^bes. in Isocrates opinion,
wise Princes make a War for the procuring of more certain and established Peace
to their estates and Countries, and they endure without regret the troubles of
a War, that they may the longer enjoy the Tranquilities of a Peace; and most
certain it is, that the Arms which are in the hands of a wise Prince do much
contribute to ferment and fix it Besides the most wise men have ever preferred
War before Peace, on all such occasions, where no accommodation could be made,
but to the prejudice of the Kings honor or estate. Peace is not to be wished
for but upon honorable conditions, not only because the Glory of a Prince is
to be preferred before all things; but because without this he has but a
slender assurance of any thing; it being apparent, that whosoever does patch up
a Peace with any confusion or disorder, will quickly be the first that shall
break it to recover his lost honor and reputation. As you may find in T.
Livius, the Carthaginians did after the ratification of the Treaty, upon the
first War with the Romans.

The Revictualling of Cazal.
AFter all this juggling, the Cardinal was forced to break with the Duke of
Savoy, but his Courage was still governed by his Prudence; though he did not
believe that the Kings enemies would accept of those very conditions of Peace
which themselves proposed. Now the reason why he would not so soon break off
the Treaty, was, because he would cast the blame on them and their party, and
that the Kings Army might appear with more Justice on its side, who had
prosecuted their desires or Peace, so long as they might with their Honors
endeavor the obtaining of it; moreover, that by this means he might pierce
into their designs, as also to revictual Cazal, which he could not have done,
should he have fallen out with the Duke, as soon as there was an occasion
offered for it. For though the Duke had not force enough to carry away the
Victory from the Kings Army, he had however sufficient to hinder the transport
of any releef to Cazal (without which, the Soldiers there could never have
endured the Siege, and for which Spinola had began his preparations) and to
skirmish with them in Piedmont, and there to hold him play until his enemies
had began the Siege, and fortified themselves in their Trenches, which would be
in a short time impregnable. As soon as Cazal was thus victualled, and that he
was not able to procure an honorable Peace, his Zeal and Courage for his
Majesty, was not then longer able to break the insolences of his enemies,
which till then his Prudence and discretion caused him to pass by, and take no
notice of at all.

Politic Observation.
IT is not always fit to break off a Treaty of Peace, as soon as one dispairs
of concluding it. But I think it very expedient, and a matter of great
concernment to prolong it, as long as honorably one may, provided he get any
advantage by it. And as Salust in his Oration of Philippus against Lepidus,
has well observed, a man ought principally to have a care that in Treaties he
do not testify his desires of Peace, with too great an Ardour or Affection,
because that were an assured sign of fear and weakness, the knowledge of which
gives a considerable advantage to ones enemies. Though in a Treaty of a Peace,
a Prince reap no other benefit then this one; to wit, the sending abroad with
more liberty, his intelligences into his enemies Quarters, under pretense of
Conferences, there to find out his enemies designs, yet the advantage were not
despicable. In this Overture, the Cardinal was not behind hand with them in any
of these particulars, for there passed not any day, in which he did not send to
visit the Duke of Savoy, by persons both of great quality and judgment; well
knowing, that men so qualified are capable in their negotiations; not only of
knowing the State of Affairs, but also to penetrate into the very secrets of
their enemies Counsels. And so Plutarch has well observed, that Hannibal was
not to seek of this Prudent course in the Wars which he had with Scipio.

Diverse Conferences between the Prince of Piedmont and Cardinal Richelieu.
I May not pass by the many conferences which the Cardinal had with the Prince
of Piedmont, in which the Prince could say little in his own defense, for that
the Duke of Savoy had promised the opening of the Passages, and furnishing the
Marts with necessary Provisions. At last all occasions of discontent were
removed, and the Cardinal did no longer refuse to see him. I am the willinger
to be a little particular in this affair, that the model of it may serve for
Princes to guide themselves by, in interviews of this kind. The main ends of
the Prince of Piedmont drift were to sift out the Cardinals designs in his
discourses, and to sink into his thoughts, if he could find any manner of
hopes, that the Cardinal would relinquish and wave the general Peace, with this
belief, that Peradventure those many inconveniences, which the Army had smarted
for in their first Quarters, might have somewhat abated, and it might be
altered, the Cardinals last resolutions: But the Cardinal who well understood,
both by his own discretion and experience, the ends of such meetings and
discourses, especially when such persons are concerned in them, who in former
procedures, have evidenced their intentions of lying on the Catch, so managed
himself, and kept himself in so retired a garb, that the Prince of Piedmont
could not pick the least advantage out of him. At first nothing of business was
named, only Complements and Civilities. The Cardinal made his Excuses, that he
should not first propose any thing, being obliged to pay that Honor to the
Prince of Piedmont; that he might thereby learn what it was they would be at:
And the Prince fearing to discover himself, would have slip't his Neck out of
the Collar, and left all to the Cardinals Proposals. The time was best spent in
discoursing of the general Peace, after both Parties had made their proposals.

However the Cardinal stuck close to those Articles, which he had proposed on
the Kings behalf, with this provisionary promise, that if they were ratified,
then the Duke of Savoy, should expect satisfaction from his Majesty to whatever
he should desire; more then this he would by no means discover telling, the
Prince of Piedmont very plainly, that for his part, as he was not at all
curious to pry into their designs; so he could not think it strange, that he
did not discourse to him his Majesty's intentions and resolutions.

Politic Observation.
STayedness and discretion in Grandees, who are employed in treaties of this
Nature, is a matter of very great concernment for even by this means, those who
are but meanly versed in affairs, do discover the others most secret thoughts,
and consequentially, are prepared to oppose them and lay rubbs in their way
when occasion and time serves. By this means they do as it were besiege and
Block up a man by their diverse prepared Questions and Artifices, so that if
then he be not altogether silent (which will make him pass for an impertinen^
man, and render him suspected) it will be impossible for him to tell what he
would have himself. There are but few men who indeed can discuss an affair of
State in so reserved a disguisement for any long continuance, but by some means
or other they will be discovered, for oftentimes the Behavior and Gesture,
speak a man as well as words; so that it is necessary for a Statesman to arm
himself from head to foot, before he attempt any such Treaties; to be well
instructed, advised and prepared not only to keep his thoughts locked up in his
own breast, but also to make such propositions as may not in truth be any whit
a kin to his thoughts, but such as all else would conceive to be the main
things he drives at: and thus he ought to be complemental, with all kind of
Civilities, with an open free discourse, ever referring his resolution upon
such new proposals as are made to him unto some other time, and never giving
his answer upon the sudden, upon any occasion whatsoever: For this same
prolonging of a Resolve, is a sure hold to every wise man in his negotiation,
but it is very difficult, I may say impossible for a man to prevent his being
snapt and caught, if he shall presume to give an answer in that instant when
the Question is first started: Those with whom a man treats have commonly
cunning and craft enough, so to address themselves, that thereby they may
discover that which they pretend, though they appear to be far enough from ever
so much as speaking of it: indeed without this referring and delaying of a
thing to another time, there is no way to shun the ruining and downfall of a
whole design. In brief, If a Statesman would have his affairs to succeed
according to his designs, it were requisite that he got the repute of being a
Frank, open, generous person, and a speaker of truth, otherwise his words will
not be belielieved, and are looked upon as no way tending to the design he
has, which is in effect to persuade his Enemies, that his Intention are quite
contrary to his meaning: He ought also to be secret, not to speak one tittle of
his designs. And lastly, he must make himself a Master in the Art of
dissimulation, feigning to watch every thing and place, but that which really
he does, and by his discourse slyly endeavoring to persuade his designs, to be
any thing but what they are.

The Prosecution of this Subject.
A Man can hardly imagine how much the Cardinals Prudence, in these interviewes
did hamper and perplex the Duke of Savoy, the Prince of Piedmont, Spinola, and
all others who treated with him. The Valor of the French Nation, is that which
has made them so much redoubted, they having been otherwhiles taxed with want
of discretion in their Treaties; but here they found to their confusion, that
the Cardinal had as much Prudence as courage, when as all of them had tried
always to discover somewhat of his intentions, by their practices to tire him
quite out with prolongings and delays; but he at length caused the Avaunt Guard
to March from about Suze, and to draw near toward Ceseletta, they not guessing
at his design in it, because he drew farther off from Cazal. The Cardinal
pretended to do it principally, to engage the Duke of Savoy to join his forces
with the Kings, and therefore brought the Army to his Frontiers which was
strong enough to have made him jealous of somewhat else; and certainly the Duke
was somewhat more then ordinarily engaged so to have done, for that the
Cardinal presently sent him word, that the King had accorded him the vale of
Sizery on the Bridge of Gresin, according to his own desires, and that he had
also received his Majesty's Express pleasure, who would not have any thing
omitted which might render him well pleased and contented.

Politic Observation.
OUr Minds having more fire then Earth in them, have much a do to contain
themselves in negotiations: They drive on with too much vigor to the
conclusion of an affair without considering, what way is the most honorable or
advantageous to give an end to it Something they would willingly part with,
that they might have a quick dispatch. Strangers who know our humors and
dispositions, use to delay us, and leave us to champ upon the Bit as they say,
in our heats and passions, and to weary us out by length of time, by which
means they keep our very souls as 'twere in prison, amongst the intricacies of
several proposals, giving us both subject and scope to fret and vex our selves;
to increase our desires of getting quit and free from them: from whence it
follows, that at the first Proposals they make us, be they never so little
agreeable; it is with us as with Prisoners, whose design being only how to get
forth, they throw themselves out at the Window if it be but open, indangering
the breaking of their very Necks; and will not expect till the door be unlockt,
that they may walk out with more Honor and Security, which is a fault from
whence nothing but great Inconveniences must needs flow. That lively
sprightfulness which is in a man should never transport him in his business
beyond the Rules of Prudence, or raise up in him any passions contrary to the
Laws of a discreet Conduct. He must be endued with an immovable fidelity, that
he may mock and laugh at their artifices, and with an invincible Patience, to
surmount all their coldnesses, that he may make them despair of ever raising
any advantages by their delays.

The Affairs of Italy.
AT length the Cardinal found by experience, that these fetches of the Prince
of Piedmont, did end in nothing but the retarding the Army, which till then he
had passed by, and put up, that it might be known to all Christendom, that the
Spaniard and the Duke of Savoy were the hinderers of the Peaces conclusion, as
also that he might revictual Cazal; but being now satisfied, that he could not
longer endure it, but with much dishonor, and the loss of his Army, he
resolved to give an end to this affair; to which effect he called for the
Marshals of Crequy and Schomberg, the Sieurs d' Auriac, de Thoiras, de
Fenquires de Servient, and d' Esmery, and having made them a relation of all
which had passed till that time, both concerning the General, and particular
Peace, he desired their advices, what was proper to be done in that juncture of
time. The Question being the keeping of Cazal from the Enemy, it was their
joint resolution that it was absolutely necessary to make sure of a Passage
both for their inlet into Italy, and for their retreat back again, as occasion
should serve. Withal, that to pass thither was not so difficult, they being
strong enough to force their way, in despite of any opposition, but how to
make sure of a way to convey recruits, of men, money, victuals, and other
necessaries, for the refreshing of the Army, and to assure themselves of a safe
regresse, in case the Army should be worsted, this was the main debates. That
to trust in any promises of the Duke of Savoy was absurd, after he had so often
played fast and loose, and after he had falsified his word, to their great
damage already; The result of all at last came to this, that they were to make
themselves Masters of the field, and neither to leave an Enemy or a Place
behind them, which should be able to annoy or offend them in the least; that
truth and sincerity being like the soul, once out of the body, it never returns
but by miracle, so there was no color of reason to hope it might find any
place in the Duke of Savoy's breast; that if they should have left his Army
behind them, he might with ease stop up the Passages, against any recruits
whatever, as he had already seized on the Bridges of Alpignan and Colligny, and
on all the Keys upon the Doria; and that there was so much the more reason to
defy him, because he did openly side with the Spaniards; That they were no
longer to defer the declaring of the War against him, for that the Army did
already begin to be infected with sicknesses, and many Troops were forced to
disband; as also that they had no reason to defer the punishing of the injuries
and indignities offered to the King, in so often breaking his word, and causing
the Army to suffer so many hardships and necessities, that he had thereby
almost endangered the utter loss, and ruin of them all.

That the Laws of Prudence and Policy assure us, that a Prince may justly raise
a War, if any injury which he has received, make him take up Arms; or if any
just fear of imminent danger threaten him or his Armies; he is obliged to
provide against the worst, though he be not as yet openly assaulted. Now all
these reasons were so strong on their parts, that they could admit of no reply.
It was then unanimously concluded on, to assault the Duke of Savoy; Every thing
was disposed and prepared toward the War. However that all the blame and fault
might light on the Duke of Savoy, the Cardinal sent both once and again to him,
to summon him to join his Army with the Kings, and to keep those promises
which he had made to the King at Suze, intending by this to take away all just
occasions of complaint from his Person, Cause and Army.

Politic Observation.
HOw Eminent or great soever the discretion and Judgment of a Commander is, yet
he ought to take advice and Counsel in such occasions. And this cannot be any
prejudice to the reputation of his Judgment, for that Solomon the Wisest King
of the whole World says, that stability rests upon Counsel; as if he would
have said, that no resolution carries more certainty with it, then that which
is grounded upon the advice and direction of other men's Judgments and opinions.
The Excess of Courage does sometimes blind the souls of such as are full of
Honor and Gallantries, and there are not more Victories obtained by Armies,
then by good directions and advises. It is to be doubted, that those
resolutions which are not well anvil'd and canvassed by deliberation, will be
thwarted by some misfortune in their Execution, when as a sound discussing of
them, many times secures them from any attempt that Fortune can make upon them.
It suffices not to have taken good advice in the beginning, because commonly
none is so bad as that which never changes: So that a man cannot be too long
in deliberating the doing of a thing, which he would fain bring to pass,
provided he do not let slip the opportunity of putting it in Execution.

The Motives which invited the Duke of Savoy, to cast himself into the Emperor
and Spaniards party.
BEfore I proceed any farther, I am obliged to appeal unto all men, even those
who have the least sparks of Justice is them, to condemn that envious Quill
which makes open profession, and endeavors with Calumny to sully, if it were
possible, the Glory and Splendour of the Cardinal, whilst truth does not furnish
him with any one subject of that nature to work upon. It is said by him; the
Calumniator I mean, that the Duke of Savoy had never with drawn himself from
the Kings Interests, had not the Cardinal (being misinformed of his Person and
proceedings) despised, and in effect forced him to cast himself upon the
Spanish party, much contrary to his own will and inclination. But what? Was the
continual and daily sending to him Persons of the best rank and quality of the
Army, with all imaginable proffers of Peace, a despising of him? Were those
many Conferences with the Prince of Piedmont, and those extraordinary
Civilities done to him, which would have wrought upon the most savage
disposition, a despising of him? Was the Passing by of a thousand tricks and
delays for a whole Months time, in which the whole Army had like to have been
ruined by him, and yet not to fall out with him, a despising of him? Was the
sending of the Siour de Servient, the very day before the absolute breach, to
desire him with all earnestness not to engage his Majesty's Arms in this
extremity, only for having once refused to see him, a despising of him* Was the
delivery of so great a quantity of wheat at Nice, and the Permission of
carrying as much as he pleased out of Bresse, Burgogn and Dauphine: a despising
or deceiving him? Was the having paid before hand for the wheat and
provisions, a despising and deceiving him? Was the having passed his promise to
him, for the according to him the Valley of Tizery, and the Bridge of Gresin a
despising and disesteeming of him? Was the proffering to him, of what Soldiers
he pleased, to go for Genoa, and to make good his pretensions there a despising
him? Was the deferring to enter upon his Territories for 3 Weeks, or more,
though he had given just cause for it as soon as ever the Cardinal came to
Lions, a despising or deceiving him? There need no more then barely to open
ones eyes, and a man shall soon behold the falseness of this Calumny, which
this unworthy Pen sets down, under the vail of his usual disguisements, but
without the least truth or proof at all.

Politic Observation.
MAlice is like a Serpent, which turns the fairest Flowers into the ugliest
Poisons, and verifies the truth of that ancient saying; Honor is the Mother of
Calumny. There are no actions how just and honorable soever, which it will
not attempt to bespatter with some base unworthy mis-representation. No
Innocence can be secure from it is Violences; It cannot more aptly be compared,
then to those looking glasses which never represent the true Ideas of the face:
It makes molehils appear mountains; It fretteth and vexes at virtue it self,
and will raise its Batteries to demolish it, and though it come to be convinced
of their Innocence whom it persecuteth, yet it thinks willfulness and
obstinacy in its wickedness, to be more honorable then virtuous repentance.
The Philosophers have given a good Character of it, when they liken it to a
black and thick cloud, which hinders and obscures the light and exercises of
Reason. Hence it comes to pass, that as all Bodies represent themselves to our
sight for others, and quite contrary peradventure to what they are, if looked
upon through clouds and in disorders, so the most commendable and worthiest
Actions will appear and pass for low and unmanly, if considered through the
Perspectives of Malice and hatred, and revera it makes lies and Impostures
pass for Realities and Current truths. High and generous Souls are unconcerned
at the backbitings of Envy, and do not cease to continue virtuous,
notwithstanding all her detractions. They know, that not only Malice but Envy
too has always endeavored to defame the greatest Personages, and ablest
Ministers of State, and that good men cannot believe any of their false
Commentaries, without doing an injury to themselves, that this Monster is
easilest overcome by scorn; And that the Integrity of their undertaking is
their Bulwark, and like the Sun dissipateth and dispelleth all those clouds and
storms which would obfuscate and diminish their Splendor, and in fine makes
them Triumph and Glory over the Malice of their Enemies.

Prosecution of the History.
AFter this resolution, the Cardinal appointed a place where there were two
Fords, which he had given notice of about the 17 or 18 of March, for a
Rendezvous to the whole Army, where he might draw into Batalia a good part of
the Army, and likewise gave order for the planting of six pieces of Cannon in
two Batteries, in places very proper for it upon the Rivers side, by which
means, the Forces of Savoy which had seized the passes, were compelled to
retire, whilst the Horse marched over the Fort in Squadrons, and took the
field, giving the foot Liberty of marching over in file, upon Boats prepared
for that purpose. And thus he made it apparent by this Excellent disposure and
order, that his Conduct was as much to be esteemed in Execution as in Counsel.

Politic Observation.
THE Passing of an Army over a River, is a Theater where the Conduct of a
General is more taken notice of then upon any other occasion, because a whole
Army not being able to march a breast, but only file by file, and by little and
little, it is no difficult matter for their Enemies to cut them off as fast as
they come on, unless good order be taken to prevent it. So Timoleon defied the
Carthaginans in Sicilie, upon passing the River Crimesus. The most proper order
that can be in such occasions is, first to choose the Fords, so that the Horse
may march over by Squadron, to make way for the foot, which cannot pass, but
upon Boats, and that in small numbers, that thereby they may rallie and bring
themselves into Order, whilst they stand the first shock of their enemies. A
Squadron of choice Horse is most proper to bear the first brunt upon such
occasions, it being a hard matter to break or disorder men, who are stout and
lusty, well ranked and locked as it were one within the other. Indeed nothing can
so much conduce to the passing of an Army over a Ford or River, as a good
Battery of Cannon, which forces the Enemy to retire from their violence and
fury, and gives them leave and issure to pass with more ease, and to put
themselves in Batalia before they come to any fight at all.

The Siege of Pignerol.
THere could not any thing be thought on, which could mend the care and order
of the Cardinal in his affair; The Army indeed had not the Honor to encounter
the Duke of Savoy's Forces, they being re^ired with him to Thurin, and not
daring to attend the first charge of the French Valor, which nothing is able
to withstand; so the Army passed the ^oria, without any trouble, and quartered
at Rivol, where the Duke of Savoy has a house of Pleasure, which the Cardinal
preserved with a great deal of care and respect, and the Country people were
treated with much kindness, and the Army contented to be served with such
provisions as were brought from Suze. Then began the Duke to declare himself
openly, and did many Acts of Hostility; amongst the rest, he seized upon all
the French in his Territories, not so much as excepting the Merchants and
Religious Orders. An Act very strange, against both the Laws of Traffic and
Piety. The Cardinal he did the same* seeing it was no time to hope for any
thing by fair means. The Glory of his Majesty, the Honor of France* and his
own reputation, engaged him to pursue his resolutions with his Arms, of
reducing the Duke to Reason. It was then concluded on in a secret Counsel
between himself and the Marshals of France, that the Army should sit down
before Pignerol, and make themselves Masters of it. Stratagems do many times
entitle men to great advantages; So that the Cardinal with more ease to take in
Pignerol upon a surprise, made as if he would march directly to beleaguer
Thurin if self: Accordingly the Cannon and Army began to bend toward it, which
the Duke of Savoy perceiving, presently dispatched orders to withdraw those
Forces from Pignerol, which he had that morning clapped in there. The Marshal of
Crequy advanced directly to Pignerol, with a 1000 Horse, 6000 foot, and some
Cannon, and upon the 20 of March about Sun set, lay down before the Place,
leaving the rest of the Army, to engage any party that might attempt the
relieving it upon the 21 about 4 in the morning the Cardinal came up, with the
Marshals of Crequy, La Force and Schomberg, and they so belabored themselves,
that about 10 the next morning, there were 3 piece of Cannon mounted upon the
very Ditch, ready to make a Breach.

Politic Observation.
STratagems have been much used and commended by great Commanders, skill and
craft do many times as much as force and strength, and are so much the more to
be esteemed, because they shed less blood. This Prudence has no certain rules
to be learnt by, but must be acquired by it self. It Is true, we are made
capable of it by nature, but it is formed and confirmed by use and Experience.
So Sci^io that valiant Commander, who being desirous to take in a strong hold
in Africa which was well provided by the Carthaginians, made as if he had other
designs, and caused his Army to march another way; by this means he surprised
Haribal who drawing forth all his Garrison, to pursue him with the more
strength, left the place undefended, and gave Scipio an advantage of facing
about, and sending a party under the Conduct of Massanissa, to surprise and
make himself Master of it, which he effected with a handful of men, the
inhabitants not having strength enough to defend themselves.

The Reducing Pignerol under the Kings Obedience.
THus stood the State of Affairs in Pignerol* they saw their Town besieged, and
found the Cardinal did summon them to render, if they would not hazard the
force of his Maj^sties Army, which had reason to treat them with more rigor,
then indeed they afterward did; they found the Canon ready to make a breach,
by the Prudent Conduct of the Cardinal, and a resolute Army of men, who seemed
to wish for nothing more then to be brought on to the breach, that they might
carry the place by assault. The Presence of the Cardinal redoubled their fear,
and they had learnt that his Majesty's Army under his command, had vanquished
and overcome all enemies for the last six years, in which the King had done him
the honor to commit it to his care; that particularly the last year* he did
only appear upon the top of the Alps, and that was enough to force the
Spaniards to raise their Siege of Cazal. Upon the 22 of March they sent seven
Deputies to make an honorable surrender, and after they had obtained such
conditions as they desired, their lives and goods saved, their Privileges and
Franchises preserved to them, they yielded themselves the same day with much
joy and content, to his Majesty's obedience, and the same time the French army
marched and took possession of the Town.

Politic Observation.
HE that commands an Army, ought to think himself very happy, if his first
attempt have good success with it. Just as in the Orbs of the Heavens, the
Primum mobile gives motion to all the rest, so if the first enterprise end
advantagiously, it has so great an influence on the spirits of the vanquished,
that they are more then half staggered to give way for their second overthrow.
Fortune does most commonly adopt ends to their beginnings; and as the Fountain
head does much contribute to the cleernesse and purity of those Waters which
flow from it, so the first good success is a happy Omen of a prosperous issue,
even to the very end of the War. Tacitus says, they are the first chances
which beget and breed either courage or cowardice in the hearts of the
Soldiers. Orators in their pleadings use to place in the Front their strongest
reasons and arguments, knowing that by it, they do so arrest and commit a force
upon the minds of their Auditors, that when they have but once inclined and
persuaded them by those their prime and principal motions and inductions, the
rest appear too much the more plausible and effective. A General ought to
employ his very best forces in the assaults of his first siege, or in his first
engagement of Battle, and rest confident that his first Action will give a
great stroke in the success of the rest of the War. Thus Charles the Eighth
came into Tuscany* by the Road of Pontremole, and being near Serezzanella,
which was in his way, seated on a most impregnable Rock, he resolved to take
it, that he might give a reputation and credit to his Army, that the World
might conceive an opinion that there was not any thing which could withstand
the courages and resolution of his Soldiers and Commanders; in a short while
he carried it, and by it gained so great an esteem and wonder, that his enemies
were astonished at the report of it.

The bringing of the Citadel of Pignerol under the Kings Subjection.
AFter the Town of Pignerol was yielded, the Count Urban Lescalanga who was
Governor, retired into the Citadel with 800 Soldiers, but the Cardinal
pursued him to his Trenches, and raised works so quickly, that upon our
Ladydaies Eve, one of the Bastions of the Castle was entered, the
circumvallation finished, and the Camp so strongly fortified with Lines of
Communication, Redoubts, and Forts, that all the strength of the Emperor,
Spaniard, and Duke of Savoy joined together, could not bring them any releef;
so that they had much rather render themselves upon such honorable conditions
as were accorded them, then expect that rigor of the Kings army, which was
impossible for them to avoid; and accordingly surrender they did upon our
Lady Day, a day which has ever been fortunate for France in their Italian
expeditions, for on that day they won the Battles of Cerssolles and Ravennes.

Politic Observation.
IT must be confessed that the reputation of a General of an army, gives a
great stroke either in Sieges or other Incounters. Their very name is a
Thunderbolt, which strikes amazement into the whole world; they are
accustomed, as by their trade to vanquish; and those whom they do at any time
besiege, give themselves for lost as soon as ever they see them appear before
their Walls, and resolve to set open their Gates to them, having no other hopes
but of being forced with dishonor. I am of opinion with that ancient Author,
who says, that great Captains carry good fortune along with them, and cannot
blame Caesar, who forbad such as were with him to be afraid, only because they
were in his Company. C^riolanus made it apparent to the Romans, when he was
banished by them, and retired himself to the Volsians, who made him General of
their Army, which he led up directly to the Walls of Rome, to revenge the
injury they had done him, and there overcame them, though they had not long
before beaten and triumphed over the Volsians; and this made Titus Livy to say,
the Commonwealth of Rome has gained as much reputation and glory by their
Commanders, as by their multitude of Soldiers. Credit is to a General, the
same as it is to a Merchant, and it has been often seen, that by it little
Armies have defeated very great ones; that is it which keeps Confederates
close to their promises, which renders the Soldiers courageous, which removes
all obstructions, opens all Passages; which does facilitate the ways for
Provisions; and finally, which does attempt many things with good success,
which otherwise would appear to be impossibilities.

The Passages from France to Piedmont were open after the reducing of certain
Towns of the Duke of Savoy.
DUring the Siege of Pignerol, the Cardinal gave order for the besieging the
Fort of Perousa, which held out but a small time; and thereupon sent the
Marshal of Sc^omberg, with a Regiment of foot, and 22 Troops of Horse, to seize
upon the Town of Briqueras, which as soon yielded it self. The same day he
followed on his designed way, and formed a foundation for a Fort, which was
finished with extraordinary diligence, that he might thereby make himself
master of many Valleys, which adjoined to the Mountains of Dauphine, and secure
himself of a safe Pass, which struck such a terror into the inhabitants of
the Valleys of St. Lucerz, Augroaque, and St. Martin, that they forthwith
rendered themselves under the Kings Obedience, and went to take the Oath of
Allegiance to the Cardinal accordingly. There was one only Fort remained,
called Mirebourg, lying at the foot of the Valley of Lucern, which was besieged
and soon taken; by which means the Passages between Piedmont and France were
open, clear and safe, not only for the Army to march without danger; but for
the conveying of Recruits, Provisions of Victuals, and Moneys, and other
necessaries for the Army, as often as need should require.

Politic Observation.
THere is not any one thing which a General ought to have a more especial care
in, then that he leave no Place behind him, which may afterward trouble or
endanger him. Charlemaign gained a very great deal of honor amongst other our
Kings by his Arms; and withal he was much blamed when he passed into Spain,
for not making himself Master of those places which he passed by in the
Mountains. It cannot be denied, but he deserved that blame, considering the
consequences which followed it, for that the greatest part of his Forces were
cut in pieces, upon their return, and all the Baggage rifled by the
Mountainers. Caesar in his Commentaries upon the War with the Gauls, holds it
for one of the greatest maxims in the Art of War, that marching through a
strange Country, one ought to secure himself of all such places which are in
his way, and that it was a great joy and satisfaction to him being there making
War, to find those of Therovanne voluntarily proffering to render themselves
after some little resistance, because willingly he would not leave an enemy
behind him. One of the greatest oversights which Charles the Eighth committed in
his voyage into Italy, was his relying upon the Duke of Milan's promise,
instead of making himself master of such places as were needful for his safe
Passage. The Duke being in league with other Princes, appeared in the head of
the Passage of Tar, to obstruct and hinder his further proceeding; and this
Prince returned not into France, but by the Battle of Fornone, where he ran
very great dangers and hazards. But if in their return they o not engage them,
yet two hundred Musketeers in a Fort behind them, will so gall those that come
to bring Recruits, that the whole Army may be much annoyed by it.

The Mutiny in Dijon.
VVHilest the Cardinal was atchieving these glorious exploits, the King was
advancing toward Lion, and marching by Fountainbleau, his Majesty received
intelligence of a great sedition, which had happened at Dyon on the 28 of
February, by the mutiny of a Company of Vineyard Dressers, who had the
boldness to pillage and rifle some of the chief Officers houses. They which
blowed the fire of this sedition, informed the people, that the establishing
the Elections in Borgogne, was to no other intent or purpose, then in
conclusion to settle the taxes, and other impositions, though in reality his
Majesty's intentions, were only to rectify and redress the ordinary
contributions, which were made by all the Provinces. The insolences of
Mutineers hurrieth them on to the greater extremities, by how much Magistrates
are more remiss or negligent in confronting and punishing their first emotions
and rebellions. His Majesty presently dispatched Monsieur de Bellegarde,
Governor of that Province, who had a great power and influence upon the
affections of the people, not only in respect of his Office, but in relation
to the great love and repute he had particularly got a long time amongst them.
He quickly allayed and quieted all things; and not long after, his Majesty
going to Lion, would pass through it, to take course for a better order in
future, forcing those great multitudes of Vineyard-keepers to pack away, and
settling new Magistrates and Officers, who should be diligent to keep the people
in their due obedience not forgetting to give a charge to the Parliament, that
some of the principal Mutineers and Assistants of those destructions and spoils
should be punished, and thereby be made examples of his Justice, and their own
follies.

Politic Observation.
NOthing does more alarm the common people, then the noise of new impositions:
they think it is to take away their lives, at least to make them insupportable,
if you do but diminish a little of their subsistence, which is the reason, that
the poorest of all are most prompt and ready for sedition, they being desirous
and greedy of novelties; and as Tacitus in his Annals has observed, they have
more to get then to lose, by such revolts and turmoils. Every one indeed ought
to pity their poverty, but the obedience which is due to Magistrates, and the
recessity of contributing to the public charge, renders them culpable without
excuse. Those who lead them on, and incite them to their mutinies, ought most
principally to be punished, for that they are the Broachers and Authors of all
the mischief. Thucydides speaking of the resolution which was taken by the
Athenians, to put to death all those of Mytilene who were able to bear Arms,
and to keep the rest in slavery, by reason of the Rebellions which had been
raised amongst them, says* Justice does not tie up a man from punishing the
heads and principals only. It is not at such a time proper for a Sovereign to
make his Clemency appear, which is one of the best Rays in his Crown. He ought
so to pardon offenses, that he do not by it give way to, or allow of that
liberty which the people assume to themselves, who will be quickly quelled, if
their Ringleaders be but punished. To pardon all were an excessive liberty, and
would breed a like licentiousness, and to chastise the most culpable, is an
effect of Prudent Justice. Impunity authoriseth licentiousness, and seems to
give them leave to run into the same lapses, and (...) too much rigor and
severity, is enough to cast a Nation upon desperate resolutions and
extremities. It is a good way of reducing them to their due obedience, by
sending some grave personage amongst them, as T. Livy has observed, whom they
hold in some esteem and respect; because Reputation, and a good belief, is as
the Soul of all other Reasons; for that very cause it was, as the same Author
reports it, that the Romans sent T. M. Torquatus, unto Sardigna, when they were
upon the point of giving up themselves to the Carthaginian Protection. The
quick and timely dispatch of such person, is of great consequence too, for that
Rebellion are like flames, which do increase every day more then other, if
there be not great care to extinguish them in the beginnings.

The Monsieurs return to France.
THe King went to Troys, and there rested some time as well to satisfy the
resolution which he had taken with the Cardinal of seeing his brother (who
after the conclusion of the accommodation; about the end of the year last past,
which we have already spoken of, retired to Nancy* and testifying to him his
hearty affections, by all ways of lively demonstrations, and of which there
could be no just cause of suspicion, seeing his Majesty had so frankly both
pardoned him, and augmented his Pensions, (...) we have already declared. The
Monsieur arrived there the 18. of April, and in h^s Company (besides his own
retinue) came diverse Princes and Lords, who were th^^ at the Court, and had
been sent by his Majesty two Leagues out of the Town to me^^ him. He alighted
at the Queen Mothers lodgings, and the King stood expecting of him in the
Court, and received him with so great a testimony of joy and friendship, that
the Monsieur attempting to bend one of his knees to the ground, his Majesty
would not in the least permit or give way to it, but embraced him so long and
ardently, that one could not but conclude his Majesty loved him as his second
self, and very passionate he was to find that they were united in their
thoughts, in their wishes, in their wills, in their designs, and even in their
very recreations; so that their faces seemed to be as it were glewed together.
The Court was filled with joy, and these endearments continued all the while
that the King continued at Tr^y^^ so that there was great reason to hope, that
nothing would be ever able to separate (...) make a breach between them, had
not those who had rendered themselves masters of the Monsieurs inclinations and
humor, rallied all their endeavors and artifices to confound and destroy it,
thinking perhaps they should become the more considerable, by keeping them at a
greater distance, and raise more advantages to themselves by their divisions.

Politic Observation.
NAture has implanted certain roots of friendship in the Blood, which does bud
and spring forth upon any meeting, after a little breach or falling out;
provided that hatred have not altogether seized upon the Spirit. The Branches
of Trees are not so easily rejoyned in their natural places, whilst as yet
time has not strengthened them upon the Gardners binding of them up; as the
minds of persons to whom God has allotted the same Parents, are reunited into
that love and affection which is natural to them, if a Series of years has not
as yet confirmed them in their hatred and dis-respect of each other. And in
this the power of Nature is very much observed, and the truth of their opinion
made good, who say, that nature with our births does infuse and inspire into
us, affections and inclinations to love those objects, which she does oblige us
to seek after. And as the Creator of the World has imprinted in light bodies a
certain disposition of mounting upwards, and to others which are heavy, an
inclination which forces them by nature to tend toward the Center of the
earth; so has she likewise planted in man a certain affection for those of his
Affinity, as well as for those objects which are proper for him, so that he can
neither check his eyes, or curb his heart, but he shall find some sentiments of
love in his spirit; hence it comes to pass, as we see, that kindred love, and
that tenderly, one another upon their first meeting, though they had not known
one another before; this procedure making it apparent that their affection
began not to be so much in their spirits, as to entertain by the presence its
object; for that they had not differed to love, but only because they had not
seen one another before.

The King commits the Government of the Army in Champagne, and of Paris, to
the Monsieur.
THat the King might the more oblige the Monsieur to preserve himself in his
duty, not only of respect but of friendship, he was not barely contented to
have given him those large testimonies of his hearty affection, but sent to him
two Commissions, the one for the commanding of the Army in Champagne, the other
to govern not only the City of Paris, but the adjacent Provinces in his
Majesty's absence, whose affairs called him out of the Kingdom.

Politic Observation.
IT is great wisdom in a King to preserve and increase as much as in him lies,
the friendship of the Princes of the blood, it being most certain, that a good
intelligence and correspondence with them, is as advantageous to the State, as
a breach with them is unfortunate and ominous. And as their greatest
inclination is to command, so one cannot more oblige them, then by giving them
employment. But one ought to be well assured and careful of their truth and
fidelity, and that the steadfastness of their minds be not to be shaken by the
dangerous suggestions of such as are about them, who are always sure of
endeavoring to render themselves agreeable, that they may instill into them
more Ambition then they ought to have, and induce them to revolt with the Army,
and those powers which are entrusted under their command. Isocrates did well
advise Nicocles, never to prefer those of his blood to employments, until he
was extremely well assured of them; for that the desire of rule does so much
the more charm the kindred of a Prince, by how much they are nearer related
unto him, as T. Livy very well observes. Blood has no tie so strong, which
ambition does not oftentimes break, when it finds it self with Arms in its
hand. They ought to be so much the less entrusted, by how much they have less
true affection or friendship, as Plutarch has verified by many examples in the
life of Demetrius. If a King be obliged for any just reason to confide his
Armies into the hands of any Prince of the Blond, I imagine he must follow the
Prudence of Tiberius, who when he sent Germanicus to command his Army into
Syria, he recalled Creticus Syllanus from the Government of that Province, who
was an intimate friend to Germanicus, fearing lest their intelligence and
correspondence might lend a helping hand to advance him into the power of
Sovereignty; and placed in his room Cneus Piso, whose violent humor would make
him oppose any designs of his, if they should be contrary to the duty of his
Office. In a word a King ought (to such a person) to associate some one, whose
valor and fidelity may be able to counterpoise or balance any enterprises,
which he may attempt.

The King came to Lion, then to Grenoble, where the Cardinal came to meet him.
THe King passed by Dijon, that he might there give such orders as we have
already said, and thence came to Lion, but rested there a very little while,
for the great desire he had to be at Grenoble, where he had directed the
Cardinal to meet him, as soon as the Passages of Italy were open. The Cardinal
was passionately desirous to be near his Majesty, to pay him his usual
services, and to ease him of the care and trouble of his estate, and his
Majesty was no less impatient to see the Cardinal as he testified by his
extraordinary care and caresses, with which he honored him at his arrival, and
which were proofs not only of the affection, but of the extreme tenderness
which he had for him.

Politic Observation.
THe Passion of Love produces the same effects in the Souls of great Kings, as
it does in those of private persons. It is that which carries their minds so
naturally toward those whom they honor with their favors, that they take a
singular delight to see them always near them. Alexander could not be without
the sight of Hephestion. And it is most sure, that the greatest successes which
Princes have, be it in War, be it in Peace, are but lame, and do nothing near
so much affect their minds with joy, if they have not near them some persons,
with whom they use to discourse with freedom and familiarity. And what greater
satisfaction or content can there be to a Prince, then the Prudence of a
courageous and faithful Minister, who he assuredly knows to have no Passion so
great as that which tends to his honor and glory? What an honor is it to have
near him a person to whom his Majesty may lay open his bosom, and entrust with
his grandest secrets without the least suspicion, or doubt of his fidelity?
What a great satisfaction and content is it to have by one, so noble a Genius
whose discourses disburthen his cares, whose councels facilitate his greatest
State-difficulties; whose vigilance secures him from dangers, and whose courage
conducts him to a happy success in all his enterprises?

The happy succeess of the Treaty of Peace by the Cardinal Mazarini, between
the King and Duke of Savoy.
THe King no sooner arrived at Grenoble, but Mazarini was ready to make
propositions of Peace to his Majesty. The Duke, who till then had been deaf to
all overtures, how reasonable soever, as well as the Marquess Spinola, caused
word to be sent to his Majesty, that if his Majesty would be pleased to restore
him Pignerol, he would accord to any Articles which should seem just. The King
who desired nothing more then Peace, provided it were honorable and
advantageous to his Allies, received the message with much joy; and thought
fit, that the Marshal of Crequy, the Sieur of Chasteauneus de Bullion and
Bauttillier should assemble with the Cardinals Bagni and Mazarini, to prepare
such Articles as might be for the contentment of all parties; however he would
not be obliged to quit his design of prosecuting the War, until the Treaty was
entirely concluded and resolved on: for his Majesty knew of what importance the
restitution of Pignerol was, without which, they did not so much as name or
speak of any accommodation.

Politic Observation.
SEeing Peace, when it is certain, is to be preferred before a doubtful
victory; that being in the hand of a Prince, but this subject to the Laws of
Fortune, it is not prudence to refuse it in Treaties, said Hannibal to Scipio
in T. Livy. But Thucydides teaches us in his History, that a Prince, who would
treat with his Enemy should not cease to prosecute the War, in such manner, as
if there were no hope of an agreement; otherwise great Inconveniences might
follow, adding: Thus did the Lacedaemonians, when they treated a Peace with the
Atb^nians; and Peace is then soonest made, when both sides appear in the field
with their Swords in their hands, and an equal power following them, for if
either has the least advantage, he will be the more peremptory, and demand the
harder conditions in his Treaties, as Caesar has observed in his History of
civil Wars.

The taking of Chambery from the Duke of Savoy.
HOwever the King assembled his Counsel, to take advice whether it were not
propper, to prosecute the Victories of his Army, and to make himself Master of
all Savoy, and so secure himself more and more, of the Passes. Many offered to
his Majesty's consideration, that the Duke of Savoy and Marquis Spinola, would
never hearken to any Peace, but by necessity, and to regain Pignerol, having
until that time refused to do it, but upon dishonorable terms for his Majesty;
That there was little reason to trust him; as to that of the Duke of Mantua,
for whose sake the War was begun, or to believe that the Peace might be of some
continuance. And on the contrary; there were good grounds to apprehend, that
they would not conclude a Peace, in that weak condition, to which they were
then reduced, but only that they might bring to pass their Intentions upon
the Duke of Mantua, so that the King should still keep Pignerol, which would
give him a free entrance into Italy, that his Majesty might with more ease take
in Montferrat, as occasion should serve. That Princes not having any Juster
titles to those places, which they possess, then the conquest of them in a just
War, his Majesty should not acquit that which makes him so considerable in and
to Italy, being by it able to march into it, when and as often as he pleased,
and to set bounds to the Spanish Ambition, who would find work enough to do, so
long as his Majesty continued Master of it; that it would serve to Curb the
Duke of Savoy, who did nothing but commence and create every year new broils
and troubles. In fine that it was absolutely needful to enter upon Savoy,
because the Duke would infallibly besiege those places which had been taken, if
his Army were not other ways diverted; and in case he should not besiege them,
his forces would be coasting of it from one end to the other of Savoy, and
endanger the Passages, at least disturb them, which were of necessity to be
preserved; for that Spinola had risen to besiege Cazal, at the same time that
the Cardinal marched toward Grenoble. Could there be more just or important
considerations? did they not deserve to be regarded and looked after? Could any
one with reason say that the Peace was in the Cardinals power, when the Duke of
Savoy would not conclude it, without the surrender of Pignerol? the Importance
of which Place was so great as shall be anon discoursed more at large. Indeed
such things might take with Women (whom the noise of a Cannon terrifies) to
juduce them to deliver up a place of such concernment into the hands of the
Spaniards and Duke of Savoy, who had made it evident, no trust could be reposed
in him. But certainly it would not at all move a great Minister, whose
discretion was incomparable, and who was so far from being terrified into any
thing, that he struck a terror into all the World, having Reason and Justice
on his side. Would the Treaty which should be now concluded with them, be of
any longer durance, then that of the last year, which they broke without any
fear or wit? Will a wise man trust one who has deceived him, and broke his
word in that very same affair? And this Calumniator (who cares not what he
writes whilst he endeavors to detract from the Cardinals glory,) can he lay
the blame on the Cardinal, for the continuation of the War? Caz^l would be no
more the Duke of Mantua's, if the Peace had been concluded with the delivery of
Pignerol. Thus the King who knew better then any of his Counsel, the Importance
of these reasons, was not at all moved at it, but resolved to depart 2 days
after to set upon Savoy, and accordingly upon the 13 of May he advanced,
without delay, together with the Marshals of Crequy, Bassompierre and
Chastillon, giving the command of the vantguard of his Army to the Marshal
Crequy, with order to march before Chambery, which was put in execution, with
so much diligence, that the 14 of May the approaches were made; the suburbs
reduced without resistance, and the Town summoned to deliver. After they had
obtained by Composition of his Majesty, the same Articles which were granted
them by the late King when it was taken in the year 1600. they opened their
Gates to his Majesty upon the 18 of May, into which his Majesty then made his
Entrance.

Politic Observation.
When an Army marches into a Country to make War, the assaulting of the
principal Town, is a business of no small importance; The taking of that,
terrifies all the rest, and strikes such a fear into them, that if sometimes
forces them to deliver up themselves without fighting. Cen^mon Captain of the
Lacedomonians, did so, when he laid siege to Strato, the chief Town of the
Country, upon his first entrance; And Thucydides who relates the History,
commends that Act of his, as being conformable to Military Prudence. So
Hannibal, having mastered Car^ia, the Prime Town of the Olleades, all the rest
rendered themselves Tributaries to the Carthaginians. The loss of a Commander
is oftentimes the loss of an Army, and the taking of a head Town or of a
Fortress of concernment, seldom happens but the rest follow. But there ought
to be great care had that he come not short of his enterprise for then it would
happen to be quite contrary; and for this reason it is advantageous to use such
diligence, that the Inhabitants may be taken unprovided, and when they least
think of it, assaulting the Enemy before he comes to meet us, or that he
attempt ought upon any thing which belongs to us. The Emperor Oath is blamed
in Tacitus, for that having designed to go into France and fight his Enemy
Vite^ius, he used too much delay, for that in effect his long stay gave
opportunity of time to Gallus and Spurma to pass over the Mountains, and seize
upon the River Po, so impeding the march of his Forces; which were by that
means forced to quit their enterprise: Perchance it might so have happened to
his Majesty's Amy, if he had rested at Grenoble, upon those propositions of
Peace, which were made to him by Spinol^ and the Duke of Savoy, which were to
no other intent then to recover Pig^^rol, or to amuse him and gain time. There
is nothing so slight in a War, which a little time does not often render of
great consequence; a Moment of time does work great effects in most
enterprises, and the least retardment does eftsoon bring with it extreme
inconveniences and losses.

The taking of Annesy and Romilly by the Kings Forces.
THE King departed from Chambery on the 22 of May, and ordered the Marshal of
Chastillon, who had that week commanded the avantguard of the Army, to advance
toward A^^sy, which rendered it self without any great resistance, as soon as
the Garrison of the Castle (in which a Brother of the Bishop of Genoua
commanded) saw the Cannon appear; whence it came to pass that his Majesty, to
lose no time, being assisted with the Marshal of Bassompierre, led the Body of
his Army to Romilly, a place strongly situated, and which they had began to
fortify; particularly the Castle, where there were seven or 800 Soldiers, who
made show as if they would defend themselves. But this resistance did but add
new heat to his Majesty's courage, who was very glad to find it so, that he
might gain the more reputation. He advanced in person toward the Town with his
Army, and took the trouble upon himself to put them into Battalia, in the plain
which was out of Cannon shot; This struck such a dread into the Townsmen and
Governor of the Place, who had never seen his Majesty so bestir himself, that
they could not but imagine he would have taken all that pains for their sakes,
without punishing them with rigor in the conclusion; so they presently
dispatched Deputies to the King, to beg 3 days time, that they might consider
and confer what they should do, but his Majesty replied, that he would quarter
in the Town that very day, so they then presently surrendered, knowing it to be
Rashness, to resist a Prince so courageous, and one who knew so well to conduct
his Army.

Politic Observation.
DElay, which a man grants to an Enemy, is frequently of such consequence,
that a good or bad success does depend on it: One days time gives the
besieged leave to make such trenches, as will not be regained in a whole month,
Henry the second, for having attended thus but a very little, was forced to
raise the siege of Perpignan; and if Pyrrhus had assaulted Sparta, the same
night that he sat down before it, he had then taken it without difficulty,
which he could not the next day: Memorable is that example of Peter de Medicis,
recorded by Guiccardine, who stayed only one or two hours, to let the rain
pass, and so came too late to Florence, and found that his Enemies had but one
hours notice of his arrival, which gave them time enough to Arm themselves to
resist him, and in fine they did hinder and prevent his entrance, which
otherwise he had gained, had it not been for that little stop. It is as much
folly to give time to a man's Enemies to fortify themselves, as it is
discretion and advantageous to take them unprovided, and before they have time
to prepare themselves for a defense.

The taking of diverse other Castles.
THE Castles of Clermont, of Meyrac, of Allinge and diverse others thereabouts,
rendered themselves upon the first summons, and all the way was open and free
from Chambery to Geneve and Pont de Gresin, so that his Majesty went directly
by the Tarente, where Prince Thomas was entrenched with about 9 or 1000 men, in
a place very advantageous, and where a few men might stop a very great Army;
but he no sooner saw the Kings Forces appear, but he sounded a retreat
withdrawing himself from place to place from the Kings Army, which followed
him, until he had past the ^^ount St. Bernard, he not so much as offering to
make any resistance, which he might easily have done, the Passages being very
narrow and strait.

Politic Observation.
HE who has at any time considered upon Mountains, the impetuous course of a
Torrent, which running along the plain, ^nters with such a violence into a
Valley that it carries away all the harvest, roots up the trees, turns topsie
turvie the houses of the Villagers, forces the Country people to clime the
tops of Trees, drowneth all the Cattle and in a word commits a thousand ruins,
has a most perfect view of what passed in the Tarente, upon the coming in of
his Majesty's Army: where ever he came, they did all things whatever to obey
his commands, the most advantageous Stations were quite abandoned by the
Soldiers, whom their own very fear had routed, all the Towns deserted; and
particularly in the City of Constance, there was not one man to be found, to
fight withal.

The King makes himself Master of all Savoy.
AFter his Majesty had made himself Master of this Vallie, he designed a Fort
with 4 Bastions and certain Redouts at the foot of a Mountain, which cut off
all communication Between Piedmont and Savoy, and hindered the march of any
Forces, which would pass into it: It was guarded by 5 or 6000 men, whom he
lest there, so that there was no other avenue for to be taken, but that of
Morienne, which would be shut up by the taking of Charbonniers. Accordingly his
Majesty commanded the Marshal de Crequy to go and besiege it, and the Marquis
de Vignoles at the self same time to commence the siege of Montmelian, which
was as soon executed as commanded: So that his Majesty being at St. Pierre D'
Albiguy, the Cardinal showed him in his Tent, that which never any Prince had
the Honor to behold at one time; Three several Sieges that of Montmelian, that
of Charbonniers and that of Laville, from all which he might see the smoke of
his Cannons. Charbonniers and Laville were quickly taken, and Montmelian was so
blocked up, that it was impossible to relieve it with any it provision of men
or victuals. Thus his Majesty was Master of Savoy, so that the Duke himself
could not make his entrance in to it by any way to regain it, all the Passages
being shut up.

Politic Observation.
SUch victories as these, being founded upon the invincible generosity of the
King, assisted with the incomparable prudence of the Cardinal, cannot be
sufficiently admired. Whence it comes, that leaving the usual method of this
History, I shall turn the Politic Observations into Praises. Is it not to be
concluded, that there is nothing which equalizeth his Courage and good Fortune;
both which conspire in emulation of one another, to render him the most
Illustrious and most Glorious Monarque of he whole Universe? Does not truth
oblige us to acknowledge, that he is both the greatest and wisest Captain, that
every yet was, and that the Rays of h^s Valor do obscure the light of those
brave Commanders, whom Antiquity d^d so much admire? In the Ages which shall
succeed us, his victories will be proposed as an Example to all who shall weyld
the Scepter. The Generousness of his Actions shall be as a looking Glass, and
a School to all such as would follow his tracts. The Reputation of his Arms and
so many graces, and admirable virtues wherewith Heaven endued him; had much
contributed to the conquest of all those Countries, which justly belong to him,
if the misfortunes of this Kingdom, and those who are of nearest relation to
it, had not obstructed and opposed it. There was not any one Enemy, who durst
present himself before him with his Arms but soon carried away the Marks of his
Valor: And it seems that those have in particular had no other advantage,
admit it were in the siege of a Place, where a hundred might beat a 1000, or
where the quantities of their Forces did much exceed his Majesty Numbers. But
to add new Rays to his Glory, never durst they stay to expect him, and they
placed their safety in the swiftness of their feet, and a shameful flight.

The King marches toward Lion at the persuasion of the Queen Mother.
THough the happy successes of his Majesty's Arms seemed to banish all cause of
fear, yet as Women are naturally timorous; The Queen Mother was troubled with
much impatiency, that his Majesty should engage himself any farther in the
War; particularly against the Spaniard; partly for the natural inclination she
had for Spain. by her birth, which was every day apparent by her conduct,
whilst she had the management of affairs; as also because she every day
fancied to her self, that she did see Forrainers enter into France with their
Swords in their hands, burning and killing all, and turning the State
topsie-turvie. These Panique fears made her earnestly desire to see the King,
and because the ways were difficult for one of her sex to pass, she
dispatched one to his Majesty beseeching him with all earnestness that she
might have the honor to see him. The King who took a most particular care, to
render her all respects and compliances, which might be agreeable to her,
presently departed from the Camp at St. Pierre, to give her this satisfaction,
though for the good of his own affairs, and for his health's sake, it had been
more proper to have deferred it to a more seasonable time. It cannot be
imagined how many artifices the Queen Mother employed to stay him, at Lions;
without considering the news which came from the Army, how that many of the
Soldiers, believing the King would not return any more, had disbanded the very
same time, that they perceived his Majesty went from thence; and by this means,
did put the success of affairs in hazard, for that the Companies were
diminished to nothing.

Politic Observation.
WOmen are capable of ruining the most important affairs in a State, if they
have but power to execute their passions. History is pregnant with examples,
which verify the many evils they have caused, whilst the Government of
Kingdoms has been in their hands. Fear, which is natural to their sex, takes
them off from approving the Wars, be they never so just, be they never so
necessary, for the glory and advancement of the State. Their Conduct is founded
more upon Passion then Judgment, and they look not into any Reasons, caring not
so they may arrive to the end of their designs, and not at all reflecting on
the consequences which attend it. There is not any blast of wind or flames,
like the Passion of a Woman, especially when she is filled with hatred, as the
Queen Mother was, who would have been very glad to have seen the Cardinal
perish in this design, and which she hoped to see, if his Majesty did but
leave him there alone. The Resistance which they find against their wills,
serves to augment their hear, and the very contradition converts their designs
and desires into fury, whence an Ancient very wisely said, that Women's Counsel
is not to be made use of in Public affairs, but as Medicines, to which a man
has recourse in extreme necessity, and when all other means fail.

The Queen Mother continues her anger against the Cardinal.
THE King had too much knowledge and experience to be moved by all the
Instances made to him; so that he departed three days after, to return to St.
John de Morienne. But the Queen Mother was aggrieved thereat, so much the more
sensible, by how much she had earnestly desired to stay him near her. And the
Lord Keeper, who omitted no occasion to exasperate her mind against the
Cardinal, raised thence great advantages to infuse into her Spirit new
resentments of hatred and anger against him. The displeasure which he conceived
in his particular to see the War was carried directly against the Spaniard,
whom he had always openly favored, raised up new inventions in his mind, to
stir up the anger of this great Princess, entertaining her in all those
thoughts which might serve to reinflame her. The opinion which he had of his
own judgment, and of his own thoughts (which he adored as so many revelations)
with held him from stooping to the Cardinals prudent conduct; Though discretion
and the acknowledgment, which he was obliged to show of that high Honor to
which he had raised him, should have persuaded him, that he had strong Reasons,
importing the good and glory of the Estate, which carried him on to continue
the War.

Politic Observation.
IT is very dangerous for a Statesman, who has any share in the Government of
affairs under the conduct of the Chief Minister, to be too much wedded to his
own opinions: All the Orbs follow the motion of the Primum Mobile, and as we
should soon see the World revolve into it is first Chaos, if they should clash,
so can there follow nothing but confusion in Kingdoms, when the inferior
Ministers would carry on affairs by ways contrary to those of the Chief. He
wants Judgment who does not accomodate himself to the principal Genius, which
has the ordering of all affairs, and deserves as much blame, as Fabius
Maximus, who almost overthrew the Commonwealth of Rome, by opposing himself
with too much violence against Scipios expedition into Affrique. It is good to
conform ones self to the opinion of those who guide the Stern, and though it be
permitted us to give some Place to our own thoughts, nevertheless it never
ought to arrive to that height, as to hinder us from following their
resolutions, or paying them our respects and endeavors. It is true, the
Prudence of a Statesman is too remiss, who makes himself indifferent to all;
he ought to resemble a skilful musician, who sometimes sets up one string, and
lets down the others. But however, if he depend upon another, he is obliged to
follow rather his then his own Judgment, not forgetting that his degree is
in^eriour, and that in diversity of opinions, submission, and to know to how to
yield, are Marks of a wel-tempered soul, and that the most generous spirits are
the most universal, and the readiest disposed to all that another would have.
This condiscending not being an effect of debility, but of Respect; whereas
obstinacy and perverseness in maintaining ones opinion, is a dangerous sickness
of the mind, and more proper to Pedants then to persons of affairs.

The establishment of the The yearly r^nt paid by the Officers of Justice to
the King.
Droict Annuel.
THe care which the Cardinal had of Foreign affairs, never took off his
thoughts from the concernments within the Kingdom. The late King Henry the
Great havi^g hatched grand designs for the glor^ of Fr^nce, had occasions for
moneys, and thought it necessary to establish the Droict Annuel. Hence he
raised great sums, but prejudicial to the people, because it gave way to all
Officers of Justice, and of the Treasury to keep the free disposal of their
Offices, they paying every ^e^r a certain Tax to the A Treas^ry ^o calle^ from
the Casualty of the ^ncomes.
Parties Casuelles, and the liberty to continue the Sale of Offices, which were
introduced since the time of Francis the first, who finding himself obliged to
make a Virtue of Necessity, was constrained to create many Officers, which were
continued from the time of Henry the second, who created the Sieges Presidiaux,
and many other Officers, which have remained even to this present. The
Cardinal, who had no other end (in the Honor which the King had done him, to
continue him in the conduct of the most important affairs of the Kingdom* them
the Reformation and re-establishment of the State, did not fail at the end of
the foregoing year to represent to his Majesty, that it was not only important,
but almost necessary, to take away that power of Sale, and consequently, to
suppress the Troict Annuel; upon which it has it is principal dependence. And
his Majesty did so much the more approve of his resolution; because he found
nothing in the Cardinals Counsels, which was not as admirable as profitable to
France.

Politic Observation.
THE Sale of Offices is one of the greatest mischiefs in a State. Ambition
never fa^ls to raise them to an excessive price, which causes, that all the
Honors of the Kingdom serve rather for a recompense of riches, then of
virtue. It takes away from Kings the power of choosing Officers, which are the
Organs, whereby Justice is distributed to their subjects; it casts the greatest
Courages into despair, when they find themselves reduced to Poverty, see others
occupy the place of virtue, and that the most glorious Actions, to which they
could aspire, shall not be able to raise them out of the dust. Is not that it,
which gives subsistence to such a number of Officers, who-instead of serving do
but oppress the people? Is not that it; which hinders the suppression of a
great number, and reducing of them to a smaller, which might be the hundredth
part, of what now are, and yet sufficient for the Kings service, and the good
of the people? With how many pensions does it overcharge the Kings exchequer,
and the sum which is employed in their pay, is it not immense? But this Sale of
Offices is not only a charge to the Public, since particular persons suffer
extremely much by it. The hopes they conceive of the continuation of the Droict
Annuel, incourageth them to buy their Offices at so high a rate, that the very
richest are beggard by it. If they continue any long time in their Offices the
expenses to which they are tied, to live with some Splendor, undoes them, and
their Children are so far from drawing any advantage from it, that they are
commonly left, if not in absolute poverty, yet in much want. Many are
constrained to sell them off during their lives, for the accommodation of their
families, and to divide the money among their Children, and it is as much as
any, if he be none of the richest can do, to maintain one of his Children in
the succession of his Offices, leaving all the rest in a necessity of living
below their qualities.

The suppression of the Droict Annuel in regard of the Officers of Justice,
re-established by the King.
THese just considerations being represented to the King, by the Prudence of
the Cardinal, induced his Majesty ever since the beginning of the year, to
suppress the Droict Annuel, in relation to the judicature, which are more
considerable then the rest, that so by little and little, death might
extinguish a great part of the Offices, and take away the venality without any
great prejudice to the Officers themselves. For he had resolved to allow the
Survivances to those who had long lived in their charges with Honor. Or if
they were taken away by death, to grant their Offices to such of their Children
as should be found capable, or in case they left none able to manage them, to
cause that such as should succeed, should allow some recompense unto them; thus
restoring to the State by little and little the accomplishment of its
perfection. But these Officers, made so great instance to his Majesty for the
Continuation of the Droict Annuel, being therein like the sick, who flatter
themselves in their diseases, and will not apprehend the danger to which they
expose themselves, that he was obliged to continue it for 9 years longer, but
burdened with such extraordinary charges, that they would find difficulty to
pay them, whereby they might enjoy the favor granted to them by the
Declaration made in June, and be staggered another time to desire the
continuation of it. The King would not absolutely discontent the Body of
Officers, who do at this day constitute the greatest part of his Kingdom; But
his Prudence sound it fit, so to burden this condition; that the greatest part
should renounce the benefit which he accorded them, to free themselves from the
charges. Besides the immense expense of the War, did incline him to this
resolution for his supply; Necessity obliging to do that, which otherwise he
would not do.

Politic Observation.
IT is with men, as with the sick: We must not administer neither to one or
the other the remedies proper to their disease; without regard to the disposition
of their humor; because they may sometimes be so stirred, in the
discontentments which they receive, that their sickness would rather increase,
then receive any abatement. The most commendable Counsels, which are given upon
the General consideration of affairs, become oftentimes hurtful, by reason of
some circumstance which may happen; The most that can be done in such
occasions, is to put the business into such a state, that that which is needful
to be done, suffer but a simple delay; conserving still the liberty of
executing counsels in a more favorable time. It has been often seen, that
States have been cast into extremity and sedition, by attempting any
unreasonable reformation. It is not of small importance to content the Officers,
when they are so numerous as they are in France. They are they who keep people
in obedience, who have power to enforce obedience to the Laws. They are the
Directers of the civil Government in all Towns, and by Consequence, the
commotions which might be stirred up in their breasts by any extraordinary
discontent, though taken up upon a false ground, would be as dangerous as a
violent heat, which does seize upon the Heart, the Liver, or any other vital
parts.

The Kings return from St. John de Morienne into France.
A Little while after his Majesty's arrival at St, John de Morienne, he was
seized on by 2 or 3 fits of a Fever, which gave occasion to the Cardinal to
doubt, lest his Majesty might fall into some more dangerous sickness. And as
one never ought to hazard the Person of a King, who is the Soul of his State;
the heart which distributeth the Spirits of life by the Arteries unto all
parts; the Liver which gives nourishment to all, and the principal of all
others good fortune, so the Cardinal entreated his Majesty, with so many
instances to retire himself from that abode (which was near hand infected all
over with the pestilence) and return to Lion, where he would find a good air,
and ease from those great Cares, which the War had engaged him, to take upon
himself: that at last he did accordingly resolve to return, and arrived there
about the beginning of August. The Cardinal in the mean time could not think of
quitting the Army so soon, foreseeing that should he have gone with his
Majesty, the Enemy would have taken a great advantage of it, and that also the
Soldiers, (of whom a great number had been destroyed by the plague) would
quickly lose their Courage, persuading themselves, that Montferrat would be
abandoned after his departure. He was sufficiently informed that the Lord
keeper Marillac, had such an influence upon the Queen Mothers soul, that he had
perverted that affection wherewith she had other times honored him, into a
mortal hatred, and that this old imbroyler, whom the Combination had heretofore
taught, to extract of Quintessence from the very Spirits, had no other design,
then to employ all his power, which such a Mother might have over so good a
Son, as the King was, for to ruin him in the honor of his good opinion and
favor, and to raise himself if it were possible upon this ruin of his
Fortunes, even to the highst degree of the Administration. However he had
testimonies too infallible of the Kings bounty, which he could not distrust,
for that his Majesty was better informed of his faithfulness, then any other
person whatsoever. The same passion which he had for the glory of the King, and
the good of France, which stayed him at the Siege of Rochel, whilst the King
went to Paris, and which carried him to Privas, and Languedoc, to reduce the
rest of the Hugenots Villages into that fidelity and obedience which they owed
to his Majesty, whilst at the same time he knew that the same Lord keeper, and
those of his Cabal, did then lay the first foundations of his disgrace in the
Queen Mothers Spirit, made him now resolve to remain in Morienne though full of
the Plague, to preserve if it were possible the Army in such a condition, that
they might march to Cazal, and to keep up the courage of the Soldiers.

Politic Observation.
THE greatest testimony of fidelity which Minister can give, is to renounce his
own Interests, for the glory of his Master. One cannot doubt but that he was
obliged to hazard his Fortunes for his service, seeing that he gave it him, but
not his blond and life too. However as there are no stronger or more natural
inclinations, then those which carry a man to love that which concerns him,
so he could not give more certain proofs of the true passion which he had for
his Prince, the to prefer the Glory of his Crown, of his Power, before all the
advantages which he has received from Fortune. But as this is the best
Touchstone by which one can judge of the sincerity of his Affections; so one
is obliged to esteem him so much the more after the showing of such a proof:
for this true affection is a rare thing in the Courts of Kings. Every one
sacrifices to his own Interests: Greatness is honored with so much esteem,
that no one but stoops to it, and abandoneth all things to attain it. Whatever
obligation there is to love Kings, yet they are the men, who have the fewest
true friends, and if their service bring the least prejudice to any man's
Fortunes, they will soon find themselves deserted. They are ordinarily loved as
the Sun, with which one is glad to be enlightened, so long as his light and
influences are favorable, but shuts too the Doors and Windows, not so much as
to see him, if his heat (as in Summer) does but a little incommodate or trouble
one.

The Marshal de Marillac would not let the Army march out of Champagne toward
Italy.
THE Marshal de Marillac was so far from this kind of fidelity and Passion for
the Kings service, that on the contrary, though his Majesty, sent diverse
express commands to him, to march with the Army which he commanded in
Champagne into Italy, he sought out continual delays, that he might excuse it;
That Ambition which possessed his Soul would not permit him to let others partake
with him in the charge of General, which he had alone to himself in that
Province, and the great gains which he drew from the Quarters and Soldiers. He
would have made the whole World believe, that the Emperor would make an inroad
into France, as soon as he should draw off from the Frontiers and after he had
sent diverse times that he would march the next day, he would presently dispatch
another post after him, to send new excuses, but very frivolous, for his longer
delay. The passion which he had for his own Interests, hindered him from
considerating (that besides the obligation which he had to obey the King) it
had been resolved upon in the Counsel of War to relieve Cazal, upon the
supposition that the passage was open, and in order to those commands which
were sent to him; and that his defect in following those orders which were
given to him, did put all affairs into confusion by his perverseness. He
reflected not on any thing of all this, until about the 9 or 10 of Aug. though
he could very easily, (and as by command he ought) have been at Suze the
beginning of J^ly. So Cazal had infallibly been relieved the beginning of
August, 20000 Frenchmens lives had been saved, who dyed that Autumn in
Piedmont, and there had been no necessity of making a Cessation at Cazal, which
nothing but the success could render excusable.

Politic Observation.
THE soul of the ambitious is so charmed with his own Interests, that having no
other end then his greatness, he cannot resolve to do any thing which may tend
to the diminution of it, be it never so little. This humor is so lofty, that he
esteems himself unhappy if he have not all: and as he does regard nothing but
to render himself considerable, he is not only dangerous to be chosen for a
friend, but to be confided on in the conduct of public affairs. Ambition
teaches him to become disloyal, and there are not any Laws which it does not
make slight, not excepting those of Religion it self; he establishes the place
of his repose upon the highest pitch of Fortune, and as he has heard it
reported, that all things tend naturally to the Center with violence, so he
aspires to that with such ardency, that he does not fear to make the very
disorders of public affairs, to be the steps by which he will raise himself.
Whereas a well regulated mind looks after the greatnesses of Fortune, only by
the ways of Honor and Merit.

Artifices of the Lord Keeper, and of the Marshal de Marillac his Brother.
AT last the courage and fidelity of the Cardinal could no longer oppose the
violence of the Plague and other diseases, which had consumed two thirds of the
Soldiers: So it was the more needful to raise new forces or rather to form the
body of a new Army; for that Cazal began to be close pressed upon by the
Spaniard. The Cardinal found his presence was very necessary in France, to
dispatch such forces over the Hills, and to take order for the sending of
moneys, and victuals, both which were for the most part raised by his credit;
All which began to be scarce by the unworthy Artifices of the Lord Treasurer
and his Brother, and those of his Cabal. He found himself obliged to return, to
the King at Lion. Where it was a very great satisfaction to him, to find his
Majesty in sy good health, after the apprehensions which he had, lest those
fits of a Fever might have ended in some more dangerous sickness; but one
cannot imagine how sensibly he was troubled, to find the Queen Mothers Spirit
so extremely exasperated against him, though the King indeed undertook his
protection upon all occasions. He believed that the Lord Keeper who had
ravished from him the good will of his Mistress, was able to re-estate him in
it again, and though it be very difficult to pay honor and respect to a
person, who cannot be called other then a Monster of Ingratitude, yet he went
several times to wayt upon him, and endeavored by all sorts of kindnesses and
good Offices, to draw him to acknowledge the service which he owed, and the
great obligations which were due to him. Now although Honor and good Actions
break even rocks, and are the most powerful means which a man can employ to
move the mind, yet Ambition, which had taken up the possession of this
turbulent man, so hindered him, that he could not address himself to any
thing, but a constrained dissimulation, which under the appearance of a
counterfeited compliance, concealed that fire, which could never be
extinguished after the Combination, and which then consumed him in so blind a
passion, that he preferred the Interests of Spain before those of his own
Country, and did a thousand things unworthy of his quality. The Honor and
favors which the Cardinal did him, could not, as I said, quench that seditious
fire, which instead of being put out, lay raked up under the Cinders of a
dissembled and counterfeited Soul. Insomuch that the Soul of this makebate,
could not rest, but continued and kept up those Cabals near the Queen Mother,
not only blowing up her passion that it might not entinguish, but sometimes
casting Oil upon it, but with such dexterousnesse, that there were not any,
but such as were very near this great Princess, which could ever perceive it.

Politic Observation.
A Man may easily hide his natural inclinations, and sometimes he may deminish
them, but it is almost impossible totally to extinguish them. Judgment may
oppose it is utmost to the violence of Nature, but it is ordinarily seen, that
at la^t being weary of the Combat, nature reassumes it self, and becomes more
violent. Happy he, says an Ancient, whose birth inclines him to lean toward
virtue. And it is most true, that there needs as much constraint to re-estate a
man in good habits, who is borne with wicked ones, as to make a tree strait
which has had time to grow bigg and crooked. Repel nature as much as the will;
says another, it will however have it is course. And as he who is in the
midst of a Torrent, is sometimes forced to suffer himself to be carried by
the Current of the waters, so that soul which nature has made to be borne
accompanied with evil habits, has a World of trouble to overcome and Master
them. Who ever attempts to overcome them, ladeth himself with a Burden; under
which he may sink down sooner or later, if he be not very vigilant, especially
if he be in employments, which sooth his inclinations; For although Nature may
have lain in a slumber a long time, yet at last opportunity revives it, his
thoughts themselves seizing upon him, and giving new vigor to his
inclinations, There is not any thing so joyful to us, as to embrace those
objects, to which nature does addict us, and the wills carry us insensibly to
them.

A fight wherein the French were worsted by the Spaniards.
FOrtune (like the Sun, never at high noon, but soon after sets,) was not
contented after so many glorious victories, obtained in Savoy and Piedmont, to
afflict his Majesty, with the sickness in his Army, but would add to it the
trouble of causing him to see the loss of the Duke of Mantua's Chief Town.
Those preparations of War, which were made in the beginning of the year with so
much prudence, had not so happy a success as was expected. Colalte assisted by
a confident of the Duke of Savoy, and by Panigaole in the behalf of Spinola
being encouraged by the Spaniards, was not wanting to urge the Emperor, for the
obtaining of some new Troops, and to assure him of the taking of Mantua before
the end of the Summer, which being granted he appeared in the head of a strong
Army, which had given him the means of attempting any thing he would in Italy,
had he not met with the Venetians Army in front of him; who though they had not
the Glory to overcome him, had however the power to impede the course of his
designs. It was not long before these two Armies met at Villebone, but the
Venetians not being disciplined to War, gave ground, so that only the French,
the Corses and Capelets continued the fight, their courage carrying them on, to
resolve to perish in that encounter, in which the smalnesse of the number, to
which they were reduced, did not give them any hopes of overcoming; only they
would not loose their reputation by a shameful flight; so the most part were
taken, killed, or wounded, so much did the heat of their courages engage them:
They had doubtless had a happier success, had they been seconded by the
Venetians though never so few; who not being accustomed to fight, were dazzled
with the brightness of the Arms, and affrighted with the noise of the musket
shot.

Politic Observation.
THere is nothing more dangerous to a State, then the want of well disciplined
Troops: War is an Art to be learned, as other Arts are, and they whose courages
are not fixed by experience, are commonly seized upon by some fears in their
first encounters. The Romans quickly found their Empire, rent and divided
between their Enemies, after their Peace had disaccustomed their Soldiers from
flights. Their wisest Politicians thought themselves very unfortunate, when
they had no more Enemies to keep their Troops in Breath, and looked upon the
taking of Carthage, (which from time to time kept them in Action) as a greater
misfortune to them, then the loss of some great Country. That which renders
France so redoutable, is the happiness it has, in the Cardinals being Chief
Minister of his Majesty's will and pleasure, whose Arm is still provided, and
store of Troops abroad, who want not any manner of employment. That which gives
so great a facility to the invation of Italy, is their want of disciplined
Troops; for those which it furnishes to the House of Austria, do most of them
perish in foreign Countries. I cannot but much wonder, that Machiavile, did so
much forget himself, in this point of Prudence, as to aver, That it was
dangerous to accustom a people to War: For though their courages be
prejudicial in civil Wars, yet they are necessary to oppose themselves, against
the incursion of Forrainers. And a Sage Politician, that he might avoid the
inconveniences of civil Wars, followed this example, which the Cardinal has
given to all Princes, and which preserved France, in the happiness, of a long
Peace, by keeping Troops still on foot, who were still ready to suppress any
insurrections which might arise, and not suffering them, to be vanting in other
Countries and amongst our Neighbors.

The taking of Mantua by the Imperialists.
PResently after the Imperialists, were become Masters of the field they
resolved to attaque Mantua either by surprise or an orderly siege and they
address't themselves with so much the more readiness to execute their design,
because they knew, that a great number of the Soldiers in Garrison there, were
much discreased, in several losses which they received upon diverse assaults,
and that the Plague had killed above 25000 in 3 months. Aldringuer and Galas,
looked out all those Places, where they might make an assault, which was the
easier for them to do, they having good intelligence in Mantua, by the means of
Guastale, who pretended to the Dutche before the Duke of Mantua, as we have
declared about the latter end of the last year. They understood, that it might
be surprised upon the Bourg side, and St. George's Bridge, by a Trench which
was upon the Lakes side, where no great Guard was kept, for that the Place was
thought to be ^naccessible, and few there were who durst attempt it, because of
two Trenches made upon the Bridge, and certain chains, reaching to the Gate and
the new Tower, so that no boat could pass there, for at least half a mile
downwards. However there they resolved to surprise it, by means of certain
Soldiers who were clapped in there, upon the design of assaulting the Town in
several places, at the same time, that they should enter. This enterprise was
accordingly executed under favor of the night about the 18 of Italy, an hour
before day with so much violence and courage, that all the resistance which the
Duke of Mantua and the Marshal d' Estree, could make, (and they did all that
could be expected from valiant men, on that occasion) was to no purpose, and
could not defend them from being compelled, to render themselves upon
composition, after they had behaved themselves stoutly in every place, that was
capable of defense.

Politic Observation.
THere are hardly any Towns which are not liable to surprises. Breda a place
extremely strong, was surprised by Prince Maurice, by making use of a Boatman,
who using to carry Turf into the Castle, filled his Boat with armed Soldiers,
covered both above and beneath with Turfs, who by this means entered upon the
Castle, and made themselves Masters, both of it and the Town, being seconded by
Troops and Companies who expected to be let in. Watchtendone, upon the River of
Niers, was surprised by a Bark full of straw; in which Mattheo Dulchan and 13
others were concealed, and one Soldier, who used to guide in the straw, who
being known to the Sentinel desired him to lend him his hand, to help him out,
and so drew him into the Water, giving opportunity to the rest to land
undiscovered, to seize on the Corpse du Guard and to kill the Soldiers on the
Bridge, where they let in Henry de Bergue, who was near at hand to second them
with 400 men. Thus one might produce many the like examples, it being difficult
for a Town to be so fortified on all sides, that it cannot be surprised in some
place or other.

The Causes of the taking of Mantua.
THE loss of Mantua, is principaly attributed to three causes. The first was
Guastale, who gave Intelligence to the Imperialists, from within so that they
were not only well informed, of that Avenue which was inaccessible to men, who
were not acquainted with the condition and quality of the place, and what
courses they ought to take to arrive there, by the-Inhabitants themselves, but
were also seconded by some of the Inhabitants, after they were once entered. The
Venetians bore another part of the Blame, by reason of the long delays which
they used in revictualling of Mantua, for the last convoy which they sent,
could not enter, the Imperialists having stopped up the Avenues; as also for
that they defferred the raising of their Troops, it being certain, that had
they made their levies and advanced at the beginning of the year, they might
have taken all Imperial Garrisons and cut them in pieces, whereas they stayed
until the new German Army came, and their Soldiers being al unskilful and not
trained up the Wars, it was not difficult for the Imperialists to defeat them,
to make themselves Masters of the field, and to take in all the little holds
thereabouts. The Duke of Mantua is somewhat blamed too, for not being careful
enough, to reinforce his Garrison with fresh supplies, at the same times that
the sickness decreased them, whatever instances the Marshal d' Estree used to
him from the King to that effect. The neglect whereof, was the cause, that the
Enemies found not men enough in the Town, to oppose their fury or beat them
off; which doubtless might have been done, had there been barely a thousand
men in it.

Politic Observation.
IT is too great an excess of bounty, and very hurtful, to a new Prince, who
takes possession of the Estate by some extraordinary change, which may clash
with the minds of the people, to permit those to live in liberty under him, who
have pretended to the same Government, and may peradventure, hinder him in the
enjoyment of it; To do so, were to leave fire amongst straw, which will soon
raise great flames, and he may be very sure, his Country will not long continue
without troubles. The rules of Tyranny, oblige him to put such a one to death,
and declare to us, that to take away his State and not his life, were a cruel
pity: But not regarding those, the Laws of Justice, which permit him to
restrain him of his liberty, exempt him from all blame, for that his possession
being just; he is obliged to make use of all his Authority, to preserve his
State, by all warrantable means, and ways whatever. Besides when there is a
Question of setting an Army on foot, he ought not to be a little careful of
preventing his Enemies, and their designs. We have already declared how
necessary and profitable celerity, and a dexterous dispatch is in warfare, and
no one can doubt but that it is a great piece of Prudence, to fall upon our
Enemies before they have assembled their forces to assault us. For besides the
infallibleness of a good success; the Victory does mightly augment the courage
of the Soldiers, and the custom of overcoming, is one of the greatest
advantages which can be thought upon in all enterprises, which are afterward
to be attempted. Above all, the keeping of necessary Soldiers in a Town, which
the Enemies have either invested, or made their approaches unto must not be
neglected, for such a deficiency, were to put their Arms for a prey and to
render their being taken infallible. There is no need of a surprisal, for in
such assaults as are made, the Enemy not finding any to resist them, do as it
were seize upon it. The slighting which we make of our Enemies, in neglecting
to fortefie our selves against them, exposes us to the danger of receiving a
far greater loss, and in consequence the shame to be overcome by them, which
is almost inevitable.

Cazal assaulted by the Marquis of Spinola.
THE Cardinal had too much Prudence and Generosity, not to secure Cazal against
such an accident, though exposed to a far greater danger. But for the better
understanding of his Conduct, it will be good to look back upon the beginning
of the Siege. After the taking of Pignoral, both the Cardinal and Spinola had
the same designs of quitting Piedmont, the one that he might join with the King
at Grenoble, and accompany him in the Conquest of Savoy, the the other to lay
siege to Cazal and to recover if possible the honor he had there lost, the
precedent year when he drew off at the same time, that he had the news of the
Kings arrival at Suze, without abiding that his Majesty's Army might approach
his nearer then six great days march. He was provoked in point of Honor in
the design, his courage inflamed his passion and the shame he had to find the
glory, which he had got by so many victories, blasted with this disgrace, gave
him an extreme impatiency, to repair that fault which occasioned it. He
resolved either to perish or carry the place, not being able to survive the
loss of his Honor; and in prosecution thereof, there was no Stratageme or
force omitted, which might render him Master of it. Never was place so
vigorously assaulted, as never more stoutly defended: Few days passed without
fresh assaults or sallies: Nothing which the Cannon could do, was left
unassayed, almost continually; the Place was undermined on every side,
wild-fires were made use of in such abundance that the Town had been sundry
times burned to Ashes, had then not taken a very great care to hinder the
effect of them. In a word, the discontent which accompanied his Courage,
suffered him not to forget any invention that the art of War or Passion could
suggest, to overcome.

Politic Observation.
SHame is a venomous root, from whence we sometimes see excellent effects
produced; and it cannot better be compared, then to certain plants, which we
observe in Nature whose roots are deadly, and whose leaves on the contrary,
proper to cure many diseases. Is it not that, which has often excited the
courages of the greatest Commanders, to that height, that perceiving Victory to
incline to their Enemies, they have precipitated themselves, into the fight and
goared their Weapons and their hands in the Blood of their Enemies, by which
they have engaged their own party to make new endeavor, and fortune has
thereupon accorded them that glory which they were upon the very point of
loosing? Have we not seen the like amongst Soldiers, who after they behaved
themselves ill one day, have presently after appeared like so many Lions, in
the pursuit of their Enemies, and so have defended themselves from that
disgrace, with which they had been branded? The shame which the Persians had,
as Justin reports, to see their wifes come toward them, with their Coats trust
up, made them face about and charge the Enemy before whence they fled. And T.
Livie writes how that the Roman Consul Agrippa, did commonly use to throw some
of Ensigns, among the midst of his Enemies to the end the shame, the
Soldiers should have had to loose them might oblige them to redouble their
courages and regain them. Both the Greek and Roman Histories are fall of such
like examples* needless to the rehearsed: The shame that Caesar had, seeing the
the Image of Alexander, who had won so many remarkable victories, as soon as
ever age had made him fit to bear Arms, so touched him that afterward, he
never ceased bending his mind to generous actions, which have eternized his
glory.

A Treaty to renew the Alliance with Holland.
NOw for the perserving of this place, notwithstanding Spinola's extraordinary
passion to take it, two things were necessary. First, to hinder the Spaniards
from having such numbers of men, as they would have desired; Secondly, that the
Kings Army might want nothing, but be recruited from time to time, by the
supply of new Troops in the place of those whom the plague had wasted. The
Cardinal had foreseen and provided for the first, before he parted from Paris,
giving such exercise to the Spaniards in the Low Countries that they had much a
do to furnish themselves, with the Troops there requisite, without diverting
them to new enterprises, especially seeing the King of Swede, of whom we shall
speak hereafter, began to give them employment in Germany. The Cardinal having
discovered about the end of the Precedent year, that the Sparniards were upon
the design of offering great advantages to the Hollanders, to bring them to a
truce, whereby to have means to draw Troops out of the Low Countries to send
into Italy, acquainted the King how much this truce was prejudicial to the rest
of Europe, giving way to the Spaniards to maintain themselves in the injust
user patation of the States, of many Princes of Germany, as well as of the Duke
of Mantua's. The King apprehended that danger, and his Majesty thereupon
empowered Monsieur de Bangy his Ambassador in Holland to renew with them the
ancient Treaties of alliance, upon condition, that they might not for some
years come to any truce with their Enemies. That power was given him from the
month of December, of the Precedent year 1629. and yet as affairs of that
nature, are not so readily determined, the Treaty was not signed till the month
of June of the Present year; The Cardinal thus preventing by his unparralel'd
Prudence, the most crafty subtilities of the Spaniard.

Politic Observation.
AS it is glorious for a Minister to prevent the force of the Enemies by a
contrary force, as we have said, so is it very honorable to prevent the
effects of their Prudence by an opposite Prudence. He ought to be like a good
Pilate, who have attained great experince at Sea, can discover a Tempest before
it comes, and prepears all that is necessary to resist it: or I will compear
him to a wise Physician, who preserves those he takes into his care not only
from sickness, but even from the danger of falling-sick, and to say the truth
therein consists one of the highest points of Politic wisdom; and I have
always esteemed that one of the greatest services, he can render that Governes
a State, is to prevent by his Prudence; the craft from which the Enemy pretends
to draw advantage, to avoid his undermining by a Counter-mine, and by his good
conduct, to slight all the works of his industry: Prudence without doubt
acquires great glory, when it surmounts force. Thucydides in his History
prefers its victories before all others; Prudence it self, which ought to be so
much more honored as it cuts the evil in the root; and preserves an Army often
times from running the hazard of a combat, weaken in such sort the Forces of
an Enemy, that he has not the boldness to dare an encounter; as the Cardinal
has made appear in several occasions.

The Kings gives the command of his Army to the Duke de Montmorancy, Marquis d'
Effiat, and the Marshal de la Force.
IT was requisite besides that to send new Troops to the Kings Army, the
Marshall de Marillac having showed himself obstinate till then, not to follow
his Majesty's commands in leading the Army of Champaigne into Italy, the
Cardinal thought to go himself to make them pass the Mountains, and take the
reins into his own hand. But the great Cabals he found at Court, which were
capable not only to hinder the relief of Cazal, but to overthrow the whole
State, if not dissipated, constrained him to stay at Lions with his Majesty,
who thought fit to send in his place the Duke of Montmorancy the Marquis of
Effiat, and the Marshal of la Force. Those great Captains commanded the Army
every one his week by turns, with such Order, that notwithstanding the Marquis
of Effiat was above the two others, one commanded the Vanguard one week, the
other the Battalia, the third the Rear-Guard, and he who commanded the Battalia
gave during his week, all the general Orders necessary for the conduct of the
Army. The principal consideration which induced the Cardinal to propose this
expedient to the King, of committing the command of his Army to many Generals,
was the necessity of Council, and the great need which he saw there was of the
advice of many persons of great understanding, and experience in those affairs
which should happen. Now it was impossible to send them thither without
command, by reason that being persons of great quality, they would hardly be
under command in the Kings absence, if they might not have Governed in their
turn; Not that he was ignorant that the multitude of Generals often stirs up
envy among them, and consequently, is cause of great confusion in an Army, but
his incomparable Prudence, who could find remedies for the most desperate
maladies of the State, wanted not inventions to hinder those inconveniences;
and this same, to make them command the Army in their turn in the Vanguard,
Battalia, and Rear-Guard, was an excellent one, by reason that making them all
participate of the same glory, they had no occasion to envy one another.

Politic Observation.
AS there is no person goes under the notion of being excellent in any
profession whatsoever, if he does not show some effects which are not common,
so a Minister of State shall never pass with the reputation of being endued
with an extraordinary Prudence, if there be nothing singular in his conduct;
And he does not set up a new Order, both in Peace and in War, which is
evidently advantageous to the Public. The ordinary rules of War admit but of
one General to command an Army, because the Commonalty know not the ways of
conserving a good intelligence amongst diverse, to whom the charge of them is
committed. But this here was found to be so much the more profitable, as the
Counsel of several persons, whose judgment and experience being as eminent as
there qualities, is advantageous upon all occasions. Who knows not that a
happy success does as often depend upon good Counsel, as upon the quantities,
and indeed the courages of Soldiers? But who is more capable of giving and
resting steadfastly upon good resolutions then several great Captains, the least
of which is able to command an Army? One only person of this temper is worth
six Regiments, and that expedient which happens not in the thoughts of one,
falls into those of another; and if one miss to discover any Stratagem of the
Enemy, another does not, if one foreseeth any danger, the other finds out a
necessary remedy to prevent it. It is difficult to find in any one man all the
qualities necessary for the General of an Army, but whoever joins three
together, supplies that defect, provided he keep them from dissension: one
perchance excels in stoutnesse, and being blinded with it, is by consequence
fitter for execution then Counsel; another is more dexterous in the Prudence of
his Counsels, and to invent necessary expedients, but being of a colder
constitution, is less proper to be made use of when there is occasion of a
sudden execution; and another happily may have an admirable address, and a
winning carriage to retain the Soldiers in their Discipline, and to make them
live in good order; so that joining these great persons in commission together,
and giving them the same commands in the Army, not leaving any ground of
jealousy, or cause of confusion, there cannot follow any other then a glorious
success.

The Prosecution of the History.
EXperience has made it appear a truth amongst these three great Captains, who
advanced the Kings Arms to so high a pitch of glory in Italy, that the
Spaniards and Germans will not easily resolve to give them a new occasion of
encounter. The first encounter that they had with the Enemy, was upon passing
the Bridge of Villane, where the Duke of Savoy and the Prince of Piedmont came
with 6000 foot and 200 Horse and made a most furious assault upon some Troops
which remained to pass over; But the success was so disadvantageous,
notwithstanding the great inequality of the Forces, that all the Enemies Army
was either put to flight, or cut in pieces. The two Princes that led them,
sweating (as was afterward heard) that they never saw any fight so well. In
Prosecution of this victory, they ma^ched directly to Saluces, with design to
take it, and to make use of it, in the room of Pignerol, whence the plague did
hinder the drawing out of any necessary commodities. The Marshal de la Force,
whose week it was, commanded his Son with 500 Horse, to go summon the Town with
all sorts of civility to surrender, thinking it proper so to deal with them,
that he might get the good will of the people of whom he intended to make use,
in the design which he had to raise a Magazine there. Those of the Town could
not imagine the Kings Army to be so near, so that they desired leave to send
their Deputies to treat with the Generals, which was granted to them, and
accordingly they were conducted where they then were: But upon their return,
500 choice men were clap't into it, discharging both at them and ours too, with
such insolence, that the Generals being informed of it, advanced with the Army.
Many who made the first approches, were slain and wounded: But the courages of
others, who saw them in his condition, could not endure to suffer the Kings
Army to receive such an affront, without a ready help and assistance; so they
used such diligence in planting the Cannon, that they were mounted within
twenty paces of the Walls, and ready to make a breach, within two or three
hours, after their arrival. Whence it happened, that the Inhabitants, being
astonished, presently rendered themselves, and the Castle had not the hardiness
to hold out above 24 hours, though there were 500 men in it, whom they would
not receive but in the quality of Prisoners of War, to qualify by their fear,
the heat of the rashness which they had used. It is true, that the most part of
them were quickly freed from this fear, being in a Bravery that day sent to the
Duke of Savoy, with this message, that seeing he wanted men, they had sent him
some, and only kept Balbian, who was Commander in chief of the five hundred
men, and some of the principal Officers, who were carried to the Castle of
Dauphine.

Politic Observation.
Rashness is much to be blamed in sieges, as courage is to be commended, it is
base for such as find themselves in a place of defense, to render at the first
summons, and not to sell it at the price of the lives and bloods of some of the
besiegers; but it is imprudent so to do, if the strength of the besiegers, or
weakness of the place, make them despair of keeping it. It is handsome for
them before they yield to testify by some generous action, that it is not out
of cowardice that they surrender; but it is not commendable for them to provoke
the anger of their enemies, which if they should draw upon themselves, it were
an excess of heat, which were hurtful upon such an occasion, as well as in
all other enterprises, and subject to turn into Ice, after its first heats are
over, and produces nothing but confusion, in those whom it possesses. The
Laws of Prudence in War, oblige those who are in an apparent weak condition, to
stoop under the Arms of their enemies, at least not to provoke them with
outrages, those of Justice giving leave to the victorious, to chastize the
insolency of them who do otherwise. I have always much esteemed of (...). Livy
his opinion, who says that temerity besides its inconsiderateness, does
ordinarily punish it self by unfortunate successes. True Courage is founded
upon strength, which gives hope of overcomming. It is not only animated with
passion, which serves for a spur to quicken it, but with judgment, which
makes one scorn those forces and designs which are formed against it. Now
although this rashness be more pardonable then a shameful cowardice, yet it
has always passed in the judgment of the wise, and persons of Conduct for a
fault full of consideration.

The taking of Veillare, by the Marshal de Schomberg.
THe Marshal de Schomberg had order, at the same time, to march over the
Mountains with 8 or 10000 men to recruit the Army; so that passing by Veillare;
he resolved to assault it, and in eight days he became Master of the Town and
Castle; which struck such a terror into the Duke of Savoy, that he began to
think of putting an end to these affairs by sweetness; acknowledging that the
first Victories which the King and the Cardinal had obtained in commanding his
Majesty's Army, had given the Soldiers so great a Courage, that there was
nothing able to oppose it self to their violence.

Politic Observation.
IT is with Victories as with Torrents when the way is once open, and the
passage free for the Waters, they overturn whatever they meet with, and there
is nothing found which can resist their violence; so the first Victories of an
Army do so stagger their enemies courages, that it is afterward easy for them
to vanquish all that present themselves before them. True it is, those are the
absolute effects of a true Valor, whereas those second ones, are rather to be
attributed to their reputation. The first advantages infuse fear into their
enemies, which if they once apprehend, they are almost half overcome before
hand. Soldiers are ordinarily more affected with what they fear, then with
what they hope; and they do many times leave and forsake the field* not because
they have lost the Battle but because they believe that it is lost; in fine, an
Army fights with so much the more courage, and assured hopes of overcomming, by
their being flesht with Victory, whereas the the other defend themselves faintly
because they expect to be vanquished in prosecution of the forepast victories
obtained against them. And if any small loss happen to them, be it never so
^ittle* all the Towns abandon them, and submit to the Conquerors party. Thus
after the defeat of Antiochus his Army, all the Towns of Asia sent their Key to
the Consul who led the Roman Army, to bring them under obedience as Titus Livy
has observed* And so after the loss of the Lacedaemonians Army, all their
Towns rendered themselves in two or three days to the Romans, as the same T.
Livy has recorded. And Diodorus Siculus tells us, that upon the getting of one
Victory by those of Thebes, under the Conduct of Epamino^^as against the
Lacedaemonians, they became Masters of all Greece, so available and powerful
are the first advantages which are gotten in Wars, that they give a continuance
of happy successes, to all following enterprises.

The Death of the Duke of Savoy.
THis taking of Saluces, together with the other Victories, which were obtained
at Veillane, and the taking those other little places thereabouts, struck such
a terror into the enemies, that they abandoned the Fort of St. Pierre, and all
the Valley, excepting only the Castle of Bresol, which was taken the day
following: But that which was most strange was, the Duke of Savoy conceived so
sensible a displeasure at it, that it deprived him of this life, in a few
days, after fortune had taken away from him, the greatest part of his Estates.
Grief has made evident in this Prince, what experience has showed us in
diverse other persons, that it is able to dry up the radical moisture, to
extinguish by little and little the natural heat, and to strike its poison even
to the heart, and at last to kill outright. As the necessity of death is not
to be avoided, so the Law which has imposed it, admits not of any exception.
Death does alike exercise its power over Princes, and poor people, delighting
to make them once equals, after they have lived in an extraordinary difference.
It is as natural, as our births, and as agreeable with man's nature, as it is
with the Sun to set; and as it is natural, so it cannot be bad; for that nature
makes nothing which is evil: Besides why should any one think it evil, seeing
our departure out of this World, is followed with fewer afflictions then our
coming in? There is nothing in it of suffering, but the inquietudes which
trouble the mind, and the grief which the body indures before the separation of
the Soul: Wherefore I esteem the quickest to be the happiest, so it come with
Gods grace, for that it has less pain with it.

Politic Observation.
THat which I esteem to be most desirable by Grandees in that particular is
(after the well disposal of the Soul) to die, before the miseries of this World
make them desire death. That Prince is to be pitied, whom death has spared
only that he might undergo the disgraces of Fortune, and be dispoiled of his
Estates. If he be ordained by the Divine Providence to endure such
displeasures, it were however much sweeter for him to die in a Battle with
Honor, then in his Bed with shame. He who dies in a skirmish of War, wounded
with any turbulent commotion in the heat of a Combat, does hard^y feel his
wound; for whilst death it self guides him out of the World by the Gate of
Honor, it makes him leave it with the le^^e regret. But true it is the
sickness of the body caused by the griefs of the mind, which pulls the Soul
away with violence, in these disasters of Fortune, do not ordinarily convey it
forth but with great Convulsions.

The Prince of Piedmont, takes the Government of the Army, after the Duke of
Savoy's death.
THe Duke of Savoy being dead, the Prince of Piedmont who had always commanded
part of the Army, took the whole charge of it upon himself; and one may say, he
had none of the best good luck in it: For the Kings Army prosecuting the point
of their victory, went to seize upon Vil^e Franchie, and Pan^all^er; and
afterward the Bridge of Carignan, which gave them full liberty to pass the
Po, and march up to Cazal: It is true, they found much resistance, but so that
it was advantageous for them, being only an augmentation of their Glory. The
choicest of the enemies Army, as well Spaniards and Germans, as of the Duke of
Savoy, were entrenched and fortified so advantagiously, under a Half Moon which
they had raised, that Arg^ncour who was sent to discover them, informed the
Council of War, that it was impossible to carry it, but by time: However the
Kings Army fell upon them with such violence, that they entered the Half Moon
unawares, and the top of the Bridge, in despite of all the resistance which
was made, the chief of the Spaniards, being all either taken prisoners, wounded
or killed upon the place. Now although this new Duke had no greater inclination
to the Kings Interest then his Father; yet the displeasure which he found in so
many cross incounters, so opened his eyes; that he began to imagine that Peace
would be more for his Interests then War, though he did dissemble it. He was
more and more strengthened in that resolution, by the many reasons which were
represented to him by some means or other: amongst others, these were the most
considerable (that his Majesty's Army was not likely to be hindered from getting
to Cazal, seeing they had not as yet met with any resistance; that if it were
relieved without him, and the War continued on against him, he would
inevitably, he would inevitably find the Kings Army fall in upon the rest of
his Territories, that it was a joy to the Spaniards to engage him in the War,
they not having lost any thing in Italy and that they should but lose the hopes
of Victory, of Cazal were relieved; whereas he would find himself quite
despoiled; that he did but deceive himself, to believe that the Spaniards would
raze the Castle of Cazal (if they should take it) for which they had used so
many endeavors, and been at so great a charge, only that they might make
themselves stronger in Italy: That the Duke of Mantua would grant to him some
part of Montferrat, to which he made pretensions, and that he ought to rest
satisfied therewith, it being as much as he could expect from the Spaniards, if
they should become Masters of Cazal: That in fine, he had more reason to
suspect the neighborhood of the Spaniards, then of the Duke of Mantua, seeing
they were but too potent in Italy already, in relation to the design (of which
they had oftentimes given testimonies) of making themselves absolute Masters of
it. All these reasons were very considerable, and did so work with the Duke of
Savoy (though he could not as yet declare himself) that he did not so eagerly
prosecute the enterprise he was engaged in, wherein he could not meet with any
thing but his ruin; and it was perceived, that from that time he had not such
frequent intelligence with the Spaniards as formerly he had used to have.

Politic Observation.
THere is not any motive which does so strongly unite and divide Princes, as
Interest. They quickly break a League, when they cease to believe that it is
for their advantage. It is long since, T. Livy says, common good is the bond
and knot of Treaties; each one regards not but his own advantage, and cares not
for that of another, so it do but accord with his own. All their common
enterprises are built on this Foundation, which if once it begin to decay, you
may see all their designs come to nothing. Grandees have neither friend nor
foe, but in relation to the good or evil which attends it. But what is there of
strangeness in it, seeing all the Elements of the whole Universe are as it
were tied together and united with invisible Chains, which quickly fall into
division, if any one attempt any thing upon another.

A Cessation of Arms between his Majesty and the Spanish Army, by the mediation
of Mazarini.
THe Treaty of Peace was now upon breaking up, yet Mazarini continued to
negotiate daily both of one side and the other. At last about the fifth of August
he proposed a Truce to the Generals of the Army with such conditions, that at
first dash were not all liked, viz. They were to deliver the Town and Castle of
Cazal into Spinola's hands for a certain time (still keeping the Citadel) and
this was to give the Spaniards some satisfaction, who as yet had not got any
advantage in Italy; and that which made Spinola the more wilful was, he had
seen in a Letter, how that his Master the King of Spain, was in a great anger
with him, for that his Army had not made any progress at all; so it was
thought fit to grant this favor for Spinola's honor, and the Arms of Spain,
but upon assured confidence that the Treaty would produce a good Peace. However
this did but excite the spirit and courage of the French, whose impatience was
such, that it would have carried them on to the relief of Cazal by plain force.
A proposition of so extraordinary a consequence could not suddenly be resolved
on; but a Cessation of Arms for three days was concluded, and that seconded
for three days more. Shortly after there came Letters from the Sieur......
which made them give Cazal for lost; so that Mazarini coming again about the
beginning of September to renew the propositions of the Truce, was more
favorably received then formerly. The General assembled the principal Officers
of the Army, to deliberate upon it, and eight of nine that were there, having
approved of it, they were received, and the Cessation resolved on until the 15
of October, with condition, that his Majesty's Army, might Quarter any where on
the other side the Poe, and take for their money any victuals or provisions
necessary for them: That the Town and Castle of Cazal, should be put into
Spinola's possession, upon promise that he should restore it, if the Citadel
were relieved by the 30. of October; and however that the Kings Army might have
free intercourse with the Citadel; and that if the Citadel were not relieved
before the thirtieth day of October, it should then be delivered up to the said
Marquess, and that the Spaniards should be obliged to make necessary provisions
of victuals in Cazal, until the said thirtieth day of October.

Politic Observation.
A Treaty is the ordinary beginning of Peace, whoever begins to treat on
condition to surcease for some time all Acts of Hostility, has a great
inclination to make an agreement. The only endeavoring of a Treaty does
ordinarily testify, that the fire which inflamed the War is now extinguishing,
and the pleasantness which is found in a Truce, is a certain Charm, which does
insensibly allure one to a final accommodation, as Plutarch has demonstrated
in the life of Nicias, speaking of the Truce which was made between the
Athenians and the Lacedaemonians; so that he who would make a good
accommodation, considering the uncertain success of War, ought never to refuse
a Treaty, provided it be upon honorable terms. So much the rather ought he so
to do, for that those very actions by which he proposes to obtain a Victory,
may end in a shameful flight; in Treaties one ought not always to look
forsuch advantageous conditions; but each side must yield and give away a
little of that which is their own. Thus did Pericles (one of the wifest:
Ministers of State amongst the Ancients) make no difficulty, to grant the
Treaty which was made between the Athenians, and those of Sparta, that the
Athenians should every year send them two Talents, though they did in some sort
pay dear enough for them, as Plutarch observes in the life of Pericles. So
Lewis the Eleventh, whose Prudence is much commended in our Histories, easily
accorded to the Treaty made with Edward King of England for nine years, paying
him yearly 50000 Ducats of Gold, which the English vainly called Tribute; but
were in effect a Pension, and was accordingly so termed by the French. It is
true it cannot be paid with any great deal of honor; but it was however
commendable by the Laws of Prudent Policy, because sent the English out of
France, who had they joined their Forces with Charles of Bourgogne, might have
much endangered it. In fine, safety is to be bought in any eminent danger, and
it is at any time advantageous enough to hinder an enemy from obtaining a
victory, and to get time to render ones self stronger for the next fight.

Prosecution of the History.
THis Truce was much condemned by many, and by the Cardinal himself too, who
was just upon the point of persuading his Majesty to make a Declaration, by
which he should dis-own those who had signed it, and with express command to
his Army to advance: The Gallantry of his Courage, which knows not what it is
to give ground, could not endure that the Town and Castle of Cazal should be
delivered up into Spinola's hands; and it is not to be doubted, that had his
Majesty been there, it had never been assented to at all. But however, take the
reasons upon which it was so resolved, which I do the more willingly set down,
to excuse those who undertook it: The first and principle was, the Duke of
Savoy was much inclined and promised, to join himself with the Kings Army, if
the Spaniards did not agree to those conditions which had formerly been
ascertained with Spinola. Mazarini passed his word, that the Duke of Savoy
should write a Letter about it to the Duchess of Savoy; of which the Generals
of the Army should have a copy for their discharge; so that agreeing in this
manner with the Duke of Savoy; the Spaniards were obliged to conclude the
Peace; and if not the Duke of Savoy was engaged to join his with the Kings
Forces, to relieve Cazal. There was nothing to fear in respect of Cazal, but on
the contrary, the delivery of it was certain; and most true it is, without that
the Generals had never resolved upon that particular. And the extreme
necessities, to which Cazal was reduced, as Monsieur de Thoyras sent word,
caused them to doubt, lest that in few days (and before the Army could come
up) the inhabitants who were wearied out, with suffering of inconveniences for
three years together, some of them who were gained by the Spanish party, should
force the Garrison to surrender, which could not be suffered without great
dishonor to the Kings Army. Besides the Marquess de Breze, had order from the
Generals to go to Cazal, under pretense of finishing the Treaty however, not to
execute it, until he had conferred with the Sieur de Thoyras, and understood
whether or no he could hold out, till the relief came, without danger, and then
to assure him, that in case he could, the^ would bring up the Army forthwith,
and not conclude the Treaty. In short the Treaty was not executed, until it was
understood that neither he nor any one else would undertake to warrant the
success.

To be short, it was thought necessary to refresh the Army, and to give them
more scope, they being much afflicted with the sickness, and to relieve Cazal,
they were of necessity to march 30 leagues through an Enemies Country, with a
small proportion of victuals, and without any retreating place at all.

Politic Observation.
A Man may say thus much in the behalf of those, who were Authors of this
Truce, that whoever pretends to make a long and durable Peace, ought not to
refuse some satisfaction to his enemies; who in case they be forced to conclude
with dishonor and confusion presently break out again, as soon as they find
themselves in a Condition of taking their revenge. Such was the opinion of
Archidamus, when he would have persuaded the Lacedaemonians, to make a Peace
with the Thebans, upon the relation of Isocrates. And indeed it is impossible
to make a good and firm establishment of a Peace, if one side has all the
advantages, and the other be driven into desperation. And as nothing does so much
excite courage, as the loss of honor, so it ingageth them to new attempts,
without any hopes of reducing them to a second Peace. If one has not Forces
infinitely above theirs, and be not absolutely assured of the victory.
Necessity it self when a man find that he suffers with shame and discredit,
makes one of them worth four; and forces him who before fled, to face about
with fury. It snatcheth away all fears, and there is not any thing which it
does not persuade and lead him to. The Events of War are uncertain, and it is
in fights, as in other affairs of the World; sometimes he who negotiateth
finds himself reduced in certain conjunctures, to put himself upon an eminent
hazard of losing all, to gain all the advantage to himself; so he who in a
combat would carry away all the glory by a high hand, does often see it reaped
by his enemies, for that he attempted to reduce them to too great an extremity.

The King falls very sick, and disposes of his State Affairs.
DUring the Treaty, God Almighty (who has not made Princes of any other
temper, then other men) permitted the King to fall into a violent disease, the
issue whereof being uncertain, put the affairs of the Kingdom into a strange
confusion. But as all the sicknesses wherewith he does afflict men, are not to
destroy them, (his love always guiding and conducting the order of humane
affairs) so he would not deprive France of a King, who was so necessary for
them, nor the Church of her eldest son, who fought for her Liberty. He restored
him his health, and employed the sickness, to let him know, that he was liable
to the Laws of humane frailty, as well as the least of his subjects. He gave
him this occasion to make known that virtue and extraordinary Piety, wherewith
he had invested his Soul. His Courage evidenced to all the World that he did
not fear death, but considered it as an easy passage from the miseries of this
life, to the eternal happinesses of Heaven; his thoughts were not fixed upon
any thing, but how to render his Soul worthy of the divine mercy which he did
hope to obtain. The only regret which he testified, was, not the leaving his
Crown, but the having committed offenses, which humane weakness cannot avoid,
and for which he desired pardon of God, which (all bathed in his tears) he
begged those who were present to assist him in.

Politic Observation.
KIngs are not exempted by the luster of their Crowns from the necessities
either of sickness or death. If their Birth and Scepter have advanced them,
sickness and death render them equal. The greatest part of adversities do not
spare them at all during their lives. But it should rather seem on the
contrary, that the greatness of their birth, has obliged them to undergo the
greater afflictions: The divine Prudence having so ordained it, to let them
know they are but men. The valiant Alexander bewitched with his Conquests,
suffered himself to be persuaded by his flatterers, that he was of the Race of
the Gods; and he was not undeceived of this presumptuous opinion until he was
wounded, and saw the blood run down from his wound. There is indeed nothing
more ordinary with great men then to forget themselves amidst those
extraordinary respects which are paid to them. God has left them subject to
the same afflictions with the rest of men, which serve as so many calls to
advertise them, that their Felicity is not on earth, and that their Kingdom is
but a place of exile, where God has left them liable to the same
inconveniences. That true greatness does not so much consist in the power to do
whatsoever one would, as in the will to do what one ought. That it is blindness
to measure their power by the licentiousness of satisfying their Passions, and
that the greatest Princes in subjecting all things, have first subjected
themselves to reason; showing in all their actions, that though they could do
any thing, yet they would attempt nothing, but what were fit and worthy of Gods
Lieutenant; that greatness does not acquit them from well-doing; but on the
contrary, as it has furnished them with more opportunities, so more is
expected from them; that their surest Revenue is the good and love of their
people, and that they ought not so much to fear to suffer evil, as to do evil.

The gentleness of the Cardinal toward his Enemies.
THe Kings sickness produced several occasions, by which the Cardinal
perceived, but with great grief, the extremity of the hatred which the Queen
Mother had conceived against him, which made him redouble his care, to do all
things which might render him agreeable to his spirit. There was no one quality
or thing able to beget good will in the hearts of men, with which he did not
study to furnish himself, that he might render himself deserving of the honor
of his Majesty's good favor. Good Offices make a man acceptable, and it cannot
be related with how much Passion he embraced his Majesty's Interests. We
usually love them, that love our relations, and the Cardinal had so great a
desire to pleasure his Majesty, that forgetting all the injuries which he had
received from the Marshal de Marillac, he got ten thousand Crowns to be
presented to him, and a Command given him, equal with that of the Marshals of
Force and Schomberg, to go to the relief of Cazal.

It is impossible to hinder our wills from loving them who love us, it being
very true, that there is no stronger charm to oblige others to love us, then
our first loving them. Now there is not any person can better testify (them
the Queen Mother her self, and those who were near her, both at Lion and in her
return to Paris) how much zeal and affection the Cardinal vowed, protested and
showed to her in a thousand actions which concerned her service. Great
submissions reclaim the most brutish natures. Now nothing could be added to
those which the Cardinal made to his Majesty at Lion, and in the same journey
to Paris, when he begged his pardon in behalf of his most just intentions, as
if they had been most grievous offenses; and in such a manner as was able to
allay the fury of a Lion. Was it needful to employ so many cares, to use so
much industry, to make him be beloved who was the chiefest of men, and the most
amiable? Those eminent qualities wherewith the Creator of the Universe has
enriched him, as a Masterpiece of his Power, and which he formed but once in
six ages, and so many glorious exploits, which have immortalized his honor,
are not these I say such efficacious charms, that it is impossible to see him
and not to love him? It is true, that they were sufficient to have wrought upon
any spirit, which had not been cemented in its Passion for above two vears
together. And though it were so, he for his part did never forget any of those
things which are imagined to be capable of re-estating himself in her good
thoughts. The ordinary discourse with which he entertained her was, that he
could never do enough to recover that place (which he had heretofore had the
honor to possess) in her good opinion; and to confess and acknowledge to
her, those great favors for which he was still engaged to her; though indeed,
and by the strict Laws of Equity, they were procured and bestowed upon him, as
so many just recompenses of his services, or to engage him to do others of more
importance, as the effects of a pure liberallity. But after all, either these
endeavors, these cares, these services, these respects, or these submissions,
could mitigate that sharpness which had taken possession of her spirit. They
wrought for some time so much upon her reason, that she kept all fair, and
seemed not to be displeased, but as soon as she was arrived at Paris, her
Passion revived, and to that height, that she removed out of her family, Madam
de Combal^t, and Monsieur de la Me^lleray and in prosecution her passion
carried her to commit and act unheard of violences upon the Kings disposition,
to induce him to destroy this incomparable Minister, without whose Prudence
France it self had been destroyed.

Politic Observation.
AS Women do not ordinarily love men, though the most amiable, with or by
reason, the only instinct of their passion making a deeper impression in their
souls, then the merit or worth of those whom they address themselves to love;
so there is no reason which is able to root out any hatred, which they shall
once conceive. They easily pass from one extremity to another upon those Wings
of Inconstancy which nature has given them with their births, and the
changeableness of their humor is easily known by the pride which they take to
hate such persons against whom they have once taken any impression, and of
which there is not any hopes to cure them by any lawful ways. The strongest
reasons of truth, pass in their opinions for Artifices, and the most humble
submissions, do not at all touch their high minds, and the greatest in stances,
make them the greater Rebels. They being of the same humor with fortune, who
does ordinarily bestow her favors upon those who least seek after them.

The constancy of the Cardinal against those who would remove him out of the
Kings Favor.
IT cannot be denied, but that the Cardinal was affected with such apparent
grief on this occasion, as cannot be imagined, and as it is not generosity but
a poorness of spirit, to a show an insensibleness on such occasions; so in the
Cardinals face one might see all the lively marks of displeasure. It was not
the apprehension of losing his fortune that did touch him, for he had learnt by
a long experience, that the greatest happiness of this life is not confined to
the greatest honors, and that those who govern an Estate, are like the
Celestial Bodies, which receive much honor from the earth, but have no rest at
all; so that he had most readily renounced all, according as he supplicated his
Majesty, if his Majesty would have thought it fit, who too too well knew of
what concernment he was to his State. It could not be, that he did suspect his
Majesty's goodness or constancy, to whom he knew his fidelity, was better
known then to all the rest of France, and of whose affection he had so many
daily testimonies, that he could not but without great blame have him in any
doubt at all. But as Innocence cannot without trouble pass for guilty; so the
vice of ingratitude with which the Queen Mother did strive to sully his glory,
made it so much the more insupportable, by how much less he had deserved it.
He was not to learn that the power of Grandees was potent enough to insinuate
into the peoples minds, their particular thoughts for infallible truths, and
that she might in France, and to posterity, make him pass for an ungrateful
servant of those favors which she had conferred upon him. It was for this,
that he could not imagine (no more then he Kings loyal servants) that (after he
had given canse to the whole World to admire him) the Artifices of some
seditious spirits, would be able to counterpoise his glory.

Ingratitude is a deficiency of that acknowledgement which one ought to have
for good Offices, so that who so confesses himself to be indebted, cannot be
accused. But surely he cannot be called ungrateful, who has no greater
desires then of paying eternal service to those from whom he has received
obligations, and who has no more apparent grief, then to see the malice of his
enemies able to remove him from the opportunities of so doing But what
appearence can there be of casting this infamous quality in his teeth who has
paid all imaginable services to his very enemies, only that he might make'
them Mediators of his Reconciliation, which would enable him to employ the rest
of his life, to serve her who had obliged him? Can he be called ungrateful,
who would lose the first place of Honor in a State, to preserve that which he
had formerly possessed in the good opinion of his Benefact^ix, seeing he could
not make a more perfect demonstration of his acknowledgement? And now cannot
the whole Court bear witness, that all this was but one part of the care which
the Cardinal took to recover some part of the honor of the Queen-Mothers good
opinion?

He whom she made his principle accuser, never durst disavow it in his
writings. But not wel^ knowing how to describe his ingratitude, he would fain
make him pass for ungrateful, because he did not adhere to, and follow all
the Queen Mothers sentiments in State affairs; as if a Minister could with
Justice prefer the opinion of such a person as she was, before the Kings
service! And as if the condiscendence which he should make to the Queen Mothers
will, would not be one of the greatest defects in a person of his Trust! It is
true that her birth, might oblige him to extraordinary services, but they never
ought to run counter to the fidelity due to his Master, which commands him to
pass by no occasion of preserving or augmenting his glory. He is obliged to
know what is due by way of recognition to those who favor him, and what is due
by Justice to the King his Master, and never to prefer the acknowledgement of
of particular kindnesses, before the Interest of the State, which is entrusted
to his conduct. He would perchance have him pass for ungrateful, because he did
not discover some important secrets to the Queen Mother, which was only in
matters contrary to her opinion; as if secrecy were not the soul of counsel,
as if to reveal a thing were not evidently to obstruct the execution of a
Design. The sagest Politicians have said, He is the wisest King, who after he
has caused diverse expedients to be proposed, communicates his resolution of
what shall be done, but only to a few persons.

Politic Observation.
HAtred, which has no just foundation, is so inconsiderate, that it proposes
Chimeras for very plausible, nay strong reasons, without regarding that they
will not be credited but by such spirits as she has got the possession of,
when Truth does not furnish it with solid reasons, it attempteth to make
pretenses pass for current lawful causes. There are no sorts of wickednesses,
which are not powerful enough to entertain the minds of women, especially when
they believe that the subject they work upon would set bounds to their
Authority, and hinder them in their Governing according to their own Fancies.
The greediness of absolute command hurries them with a greater impetuosity to
revenge, then any other cause whatsoever, without this consideration, that God
has not created their Sex for Government: and experience has evidenced it
upon many occasions, that they are very unfit for that purpose. But as Ambition
is a blind Passion, we do many times see great obstacles opposed to their
Powers, when they think to increase their Authorities, and the greatest props
of their Grandeur ruined, whilst they use their greatest endeavors to render
themselves more absolute.

The great Qualities of the Cardinal.
ALL the Artifices of the Queen mother made no other Impression upon his
Majesty, then to carry him to recollect and reiterate in his mind the Fidelity
of the Cardinals services, the great affection wherewith he had behaved
himself, in all occasions where his Majesty's glory was concerned, the good
success which accompanied his Conduct of his Armies, the Incomparable Prudence
wherewith he was endued, with which he did penetrate into what was to come, and
foresaw effects in their Causes, and accordingly prepared Remedies before they
happened, the indefatigable vigilance which made him so intent both day and on
the affairs of State, that though he gave Orders in the greatest, yet he never
forgot the least, and that prodigious promptitude, which produced effects, from
resolution in Counsel, before one knew whether it were resolved on or no: These
were those just considerations which the King recalled into his mind, to
oppugn the diverse Artifices of the Cardinals enemies; and one may say, they
did so fix his Majesty against those violences with which they would as it were
shake him, that to the end he might evade those perpetual instances which the
Queen Mother hourly made to him, he resolved to go to pass away some days at
Verfilles. In effect, that was the cause of the King's going from Paris, and
the Queen Mother could get no other satisfaction from his Majesty, then that of
Respect and hearty affection by his taking leave of her.

Politic Observation.
THe King well knew, that the disgraces of a grand Minister are as
dis-advantagious to a State, as his services have been profitable, and that in
it a Prince receives as much blame, as he had once gotten glory in drawing him
near to Person. An excellent Workman never uses to throw away his Instruments
wherewith he is accustomed to make rare pieces of his Art; and a King does much
recede from a great Conduct, if he does drive from the Government of his
State Affairs, such a Minister whose admirable Genius is the principal
instrument of his glory. Undoubtedly the Counter-blow of such a stroke, might
rebound against his Authority. He ought to know, that it is easy to blame
those who govern, and to lament their Conduct, and that many more find it very
perfect and complete, seeing it does not give them leave to do whatever they
would in their own particular, and that the Estate of Public Affairs ought not
to be judged by those of their own houses. There need no more but to consult
with experience, to evince, that it is very difficult to find a great Genius,
on whose Prudence they may confidently rely; for that two or three whole ages
do hardly bring forth one only such. How many Kings have been constrained to
leave both their Courages and States as unusefull, for that their Country
produced none such in their times? He who is so happy, as to meet with one,
ought to preserve him with as much care, as the most assured foundation of his
Kingdoms happiness: How frequent are the misfortunes which happen in Battles,
for the only loss of an expert great Captain.

And how many confusions arrive to States by the loss of one grand Minister,
his only conservation, is of greater importance then that. I will not say of
Towns, but of whole Provinces; for he is not only capable of regaining them,
but conquering new ones; whereas the loss of him is irrepairable, for that
hardly many ages produce one that does resemble him.

Why the King went from Paris, and caused the Lord Keeper of the Broad-Seal,
and his Brother the Marshal de Marillac, to be Arrested.
THe King went from Paris, only to give himself more liberty to negotiate in
his important affairs, and to withdraw himself from those importunities, not to
say violences of the Queen Mother. In whose presence, the respect which he had
for her, hindered him from doing any thing which might displease her. His
Majesty knew, that it was necessary for the good of his Estate, to chastise
those contrivers of Intreagues; and on the other side, he cemented himself in
an unalterable resolution (which being an effect of his own only Prudence,
acquired him so much the more Glory) never to part from the Cardinal. Now it
was often seen, that these Cabals had no other beginning, then from the Lord
Keeper, and the Marshal de Marillac, therefore his Majesty took away the Seal
from the former, as the Arms of a mad man which he had employed to do evil,
causing him to be carried to Lysieux, and sent Orders to the Marshal de la
Force and Schomberg, to arrest the the other, and send him Prisoner to the Castle
of St. Menehoud. What reason was there to suffer any longer the insolence of
these two ambitious humors, who had been so audacious to commit such offenses,
between the King and Queen Mother, and to breed a division between their
Majesty's, which keeps them at a disla^^e to this very day? Was it possible to
suffer their unbridled Ambition, which made them aspire to the Government of
the State, by the destruction of him who had established it, in so sublime a
pitch of Glory, that it is not only more honored, but more feared too by
strangers? Again, could it be that the Ingratitude of these two Brothers,
should not pull down as it were by force the Kings Justice, to dash them as
with a Thunderbolt, and to punish their devices, which they used with the
Queen Mother, to carry her on to the ruining of him, by whose Counsel his
Majesty had raised them to the highest degrees of their profession, winking at
their unworthy actions, which had heretofore rendered them culpable, and by
which they made their first attempts? His Majesty knew in how many occasions
the Cardinal had favored them, the great gifts which he had obtained of him
for them, and how that in some affairs he had become their Protector, when in
their conduct there was just reason to complain of them: And on the other side,
when he reflected on the extremity of their ingratitude, he could no longer
permit, that one of them should be any more employed in affairs, or that the
other should remain unpunished for those many Crimes, of which he had often
been accused. So that it was but reasonable to destroy these ungrateful
wretches, who would have ruined the Genius of France, by accusing him of
Ingratitude. It is an ordinary effect of the Divine Justice, to cause those
evils to fall upon them, which they would pull down upon him, and to permit
that they become really culpable of those crimes, which they would falsely lay
to his charge.

Politic Observation.
THere is no injury so unpardonable as ingratitude, which renders men so much
the more blameworthy, for that they are impeached by good Offices. An infamous
life has three steps, first to forget kindness; secondly, not to recompense
them; the third, to render evil for good. The first is, the effect of a great
neglect: The second, may sometimes proceed from a want of ability. But the
third, can proceed from no other cause but a black deformed malice. So though
the first cannot be excused, yet it may be born with. The second, was in so
great detestation by the Egyptians, that they caused such as they found
culpable, to be proclaimed by the City-Crier, to the end, that no one might
afterward do them any kindness, thinking it very reasonable that he should
lose all his friends who had not been careful to retaliate like for like to
him who had obliged him. But the third, has always been had in so great an
abomination by all men, that they thought only death was fit to expiate it,
that the earth might quickly rot such an execrable creature as it had brought.
An ungrateful man is worse then a Traitor, a Traitor being only to blame, for
having fallen back from those promises which he was tied to by his Parole. But
an ungrateful person is not only deficient to what he was obliged to perform
by promise, but by the obligations and favors which he had received. At least,
the most moderate of men, could never endure it, seeing they are like those
vapors, which the Sun having exhaled from the earth, do endeavor to obscure
his splendor. They deserve to be punished, especially when their treacheries
are prejudicial to the good of a State, as here they were when they attempted
this destruction, who next to the King, was the greatest prop and support of
the Kingdoms Felicity. Is not the attempting to destroy such a Minister, who
is the first instrumental cause, by which he has arrived to so high an
accrument of glory, as striking at the very person of the King himself? I
should much blame that Minister, who would endeavor and make use of his power
to obtain a Remission for such a Crime. There are some injuries which it is
noble to pardon, and there are others, amongst which I rank this for which the
Public Interest requires vengeance. Mercy is not contrary to Justice, but
Justice is governed by Mercy, which serves for^ts guide. Too great Lenity
breeds too great Licentiousness, and makes both the Prince and Laws to be
little esteemed of. It is more noble in a King to pardon, then to execute the
rigor of Justice; but it must be to such persons, whose Imprudence may not
augment their licentiousness of doing evil, and whose Crimes arise rather from
their weakness, then from black detestable Villainy.

A Treatise of Peace between the Emperor and Duke of Mantua.
DUring his Majesty's sickness, and their beginning of these Intreagues, the
affairs of Cazal were finished upon the Treaty aforesaid. The Duke of Savoy,
Mazarini and Colalte received news from Germany, that the Sieur de Leon, who
was employed by his Majesty for a Peace to the Emperor had concluded a Treaty;
and shourtly after the Sieur of St. Estienne brought it to Generals, with
Letters from the Sieur de Leons, and an express promise from the Emperor,
that he would install the Duke of Mantua in his Duchy and Marquisate of
Montferrat, with consent that the Town, Castle, and Citadel of Cazal should be
delivered into his hands.

This was as much as could be desired for the foundation, but the circumstances
how to do it, were difficult, it being agreed by the Treaty, that the Emperor
would invest the said Duke, only within six weeks, and that fifteen days,
after he would withdraw his Arms out of Mantua, and the King of Spain his from
Cazal, and other places of Montferrat. This did much trouble the Generals,
because this Article did much oblige them to remain in Italy two months longer
with the Army, before the Spaniards would leave Cazal; which stay they could
hardly make, because the Plague was very rife in the Army, and they had
victuals but for certain days; these two reasons would infallibly force them to
break up, before half the time were elapsed: which should they have done, the
Spaniards might with ease become Masters of Cazal, who had not subscribed to
it, with their usual designs, because they had liberty to hold the advantage
they had got, whenever the Treaty should be brought. These just considerations
were debated by the Generals, who believed his Majesty would never ratify it,
so they resolved not to regard it, but to march with the Army with all speed
before Cazal. The Spaniards being informed of this resolution were so much
surprised by their apprehensions of the first stock of the French, who at the
first onset, fight like Lions. They presently sent back Mazarini, who had
brought them the news, to assure them that they would observe the Treaty of
Peace, and that to put it in execution, they were content to permit the
importation of a whole years provisions into the Citadel of Cazal. But the
Generals having once heard that they began to be in fear, concluded, especially
the Marshal of Schomberg, that they should presently advance to Cazal, thinking
that their appearance only, would force the Spaniards to quit the Siege
forthwith, without staying till the end of the two months, which was accorded
by the Treaty.

Politic Observation.
IT is very difficult to Treat a Peace, which may have an assured end, in a
place far distant from Armies, whilst they are enemies. Great distance makes
many things be unknown, in point of particular Circumstances, and of the
present State of the Armies, which do many times hinder the execution of what
is resolved on. It is with those who transact affairs at a great distance, as
with Astrologers, who do contemplate here below the Stars of Heaven, perceiving
only that which is most apparent in them, without being able to observe many
particular Qualities. So those see nothing but the Lump of business, and are
most commonly to seek in the particular and present disposition of affairs,
without the exact knowledge of all which, nothing can be certainly resolved on,
which shall surely be put in execution. It is good to sound at a distance the
inclination of him, with whom a man does treat; but when it once comes to
resolve on particular Proposals a man ought to know every particular passage;
if that be omitted, there does most commonly happen some one thing or another,
which does hinder the observation of it.

The King sends an Ambassador to the Diet of Ratisbonne.
THe Cardinal knew it full well, when he proposed to the King, to send the
Sieur de Lion, to the Diet at Ratisbonne, where the Treaty was concluded: And
on the contrary, he knew that in great affairs, something must be hazarded, and
that this Negotiation would always serve to discover the Emperors designs, as
well as many others the Princes of Germany, who desired protection from his
Majesty's Arms. That if a Treaty were made which were impossible to execute, it
would however serve for an induction to make a better, because it prepared
their minds, and did hinder the advancing of such Troops, as the Emperor was
sending into Italy.

Politic Observation.
A Prudent Minister, never proposes one only end in his Actions, but imitating
as much as in him lies, the series of the Divine Providence, aspires to many
things at the same time, that he may not do any thing which is vain, or to no
purpose; His Eye is not always fixed where his mind is; so, though he be not
sure of effecting what he says, yet he is still ready to execute what he
thinks: He is acquainted with all the Turnings which lead to the Conclusion of
his Design, and with all Trap-doors to carry him to his wished for end,
without giving to the world any just cause but of esteem and admiration. This
being one of the sublimest points of prudent Policy, by which he never goes
less then his Word. It is true, this kind of Prudence is not proper but for a
grand Genius, and such as are of extraordinary fine and subtle spirits: But
who so is endued therewith, may well vaunt, that he has an assured means to
prevent several inconveniences, and to give a happy issue to diverse affairs,
without which it were impossible to accomplish either the one or the other.
After all, he ought to be vigilant and careful, that his Prudence be
accompanied with Fidelity, that he may be exempt from all blame, and that will
render his conduct as it were Invincible, and will acquire him more respect
then without; so that no one being able to penetrate into the moity of his
Designs, they will however trace him in many places, where he is not, but will
never find him in any, where he is not prepared to defend himself.

The French Army Embattel in view of Cazal.
THis being resolved, the Marshal of Scomberg (whose turn it was to command the
Army) advanced with all diligence, and on October. 26. came within sight of
Cazal. He placed them in Battalia on the other side the Brook Gattola, and after
public Prayers (which are usually made on such occasions) marched directly
against the Enemy, whom they found entrenched in a circumvallation of six miles
about and well finished, but which served only to augment the glory of the
French Army.

Politic Observation.
THe King had observed in the Beginning of the War with Savoy, (notwithstanding
the fair Proposals of Peace which Mazarini had made) that it is great Prudence
in a General (though to hearken to them, yet) not to forbear the carrying on of
the War, and to show all sort of Couragiousness and Hardship; following herein
the counsel of Archidamus in Isocrates, who ever made most honorable
conditions by this means. As it is Action which sets off an Orator, and makes
him more powerful to perswade^ as Demosthenes answered one who questioned him
concerning the perfection of Eloquence, so it is Action too which does most
powerfully persuade an Enemy to make a Peace. It is not reasonable for a
General to lie still without action any long time together; the only time to do
is after a Parley, and such action it is which acquires him the glory of being
esteemed Valiant. The only showing of a good mind to be in Action, and putting
an Army into Battalia, does strike fear into an Enemy: He ought in a long
Treaty to show that his Courage makes him despise any danger; and as he
proposes nothing but to vanquish, so he fears nothing but not to overcome.
He ought not to have any apprehensions of the Inconstancies of Fortune, but to
hope, that his Courage may enforce her to be favorable. It is good that his
Prudence should carry him to take time for deliberation, but that done, his
Courage ought to furnish him with wings to advance his design with the
greatest celerity and promptness, seeing he shall never have any good progress
who spends too much time in considering of hazards; and that many have
oftentimes turned their affairs, by taking too much time for Consultations. It
is an act of Judgment to begin with coldness, but to prosecute with heat and
ardour, when things are once brought to the point of being put in execution:
The fearful are most ordinarily overcome. War is a thing which acquires Glory
from the most difficult enterprises, and those Battles wherein the greatest
dangers are, do render a man the more honorable.

Cardinal Mazarini accomodateth the Affairs of Cazal with dexterity, between
the King and the Spaniard.
AS soon as ever the Army approached within six hundred paces of the Spanish
Trenches, Mazarini came galloping out and finding the Marshal de Schomberg,
told him, that the Spaniards had accepted of certain Propositions which he had
made to them, and that he doubted not but he would likewise consent to them,
for the good of the Peace: They were to surrender the Town and Castle of Cazal,
which were depositated in their custody; They were to march out of Montferrat;
but instead of delivering them into Monsieur du Maynes hands (to whom they
might have surrendered them, until his Father had received the Investiture of
the Duchy) they would deposite them with an Imperial Commissary, who should
transmit them over to Monsieur du Main, or to such as he should appoint, on
November 23. upon which day the Investiture was promised. They consented (for
the greater security of the Treaty) that the Imperial Commissary should carry
none but his own Train into Cazal, and that he should not meddle with any
thing, but only to give the Word. The Propositions were taken into deliberation
by the Marshals de la Force, de Schomberg, and de Marillac, who considering
that the King designed nothing more then the re-establishment of Monsieur de
Mantua in his Estates, and the settling the Peace of Italy, did consent to them,
seeing they had the advantage to make them first lay down their Arms, who had
first taken them up: An advantage which is no little one, as Thucydides
testifies in his History. In prosecution whereof they prevented the Army from
advancing and breaking in upon the Trenches, though it were with great
difficulty, the Courage of the French not being able to endure that the
Spaniards should make the^^ take the pains to come so far, and not give them a
memento. Soon after the Spaniards marched out of the Town and Castle, the
French out of the Citadel, and the Imperial Commissary entered in their place.

Politic Observation.
IT is not without great reason that God has called himself in the Mosaic
Law, The lord of Hosts, seeing he holds in his hand the Courages of those who
conduct them; as he himself thinks fit, he gives them Peace or War; and when
they think that they are upon the very point of fighting, then it is that he
compels them to lay down their Arms; to teach them, that it is his gift, and
that it is not in the power of all humane wisdom, if he himself does not lend a
helping hand to it. His Providence guides things to their ends by means, which
to appearance are contrary to it: But his Power is always Master, and it is in
vain for us to endeavor or labor to resist him. It is worth looking on the
Sun in a storm, and to behold the Air cut with lightning and thunder, the
Clouds cleft asunder, the impetuousness of the Winds and Thunder calmed, the
Air cleared, and in a while, all that dissipated which hindered the shining of
his rays: But how much better is it to behold the Sun of Justice (who
over-ruleth Hosts) to make the force of his power to appear, just when Battles
are joining, to cover the earth with dead Bodies, to die the Fields and Rivers
with blood, to obscure the Sky with the smoke of Cannons and Muskets, and to
fill the Air with lamentable Cries, and then to allay their rage, to cause
their Arms to drop out of their hands, to fill their souls with gentleness, and
in a word, to give a happy Peace? After such an affair, seeing all things fall
out contrary to our expectations, may not one conclude that God laughs at our
Designs, and that his just Power overrules the Order and Conduct of all humane
Affairs.

The re-victualling of Cazal.
AFter all this, the Spaniards whose arrogant humor could not well away with
the disorder they were now put to, had much ado to march out of Montferrat, and
they did not only delay the time, by pretending that their Ammunitions of War
and Victuals could not so soon be drawn off, but began to take up new Quarters
about Cazal, which the French (when they retired) had left. This made the
Generals resolve to dispatch three Regiments of French to Cazal, under the
Marshall de Marillac, and accordingly it was effected. The Marshall gave an
account to the Imperial Commissary of the Reasons which occasioned his return,
and that he pretended not to stay longer in Cazal, then till the Spaniards and
Germans should withdraw from Montferrat, at which the Commissary could find no
exceptions, it being reasonable that both should march off at the same time.

Some of the Enemies were so much netled at this, that the Generals having
divided the Army in two parts, one Division marching by the Coast of Livorn and
Byanzay, they were advised to follow them with intention to fall upon them.
This breach of Faith did more affright then hurt them: They ranged themselves
into Battalia, and so stood one whole day expecting when they would come on. In
the mean time there were six thousand Quarters of Wheat clapped into Cazal, and
the French marched off at the same time that the Spaniards and Germans went out
of Montferrat, etc. Thus the War ceased for that year, though the Treaty were
not as yet absolutely concluded on.

Politic Observation.
IT were great rashness in a General, after a Victory, or the taking in of any
Place, so to despise his Enemy, as to let his Forces be in disorder, or to give
them any opportunity to regain what they had lost. The Anger which an Enemy is
possessed with after he is either beaten, or forced from his Siege, should
induce him still to be ready for a fight, his enemy waiting only for an
advantage to take his revenge. If they be once beaten out of one quarter of
their Trenches, they should be so looked after, that they do not enter in at
another part; they should never be thought to have left a Country, so long as
there remains but one place which may make any resistance, not so much as a
Castle which may quickly be fortified, or the Gate of a Town, which one may
suppose to be secure by a Treaty, ought to be left unregarded: Desperation does
sometimes re-double an Enemies courage, and even when an Enemy is absolutely
routed, there ought to be a strict watch kept, seeing a broken Army does often
rally, and rush in upon the Conquerors, and do them so much the greater
mischief, by their not being prepared to make defense.

The King of Swede enters into Germany.
WHilst the King carried his Arms into Italy, for the just defense of Monsieur
de Mantua's Interest, several Princes of Germany, and amongst the rest, the
Dukes of Pomerania and Mecklebourg, the Marquis of Brandenburgh, and diverse
Commonwealths, oppressed by the House of Austria, imagining that the King of
Swede's Nobleness would defend them from this violence, called him in to their
assistance. They sent sundry Deputies to him, to engage him with all
earnestness to assist them; whom they found so much the more inclined to it, in
regard he thought himself justly offended with the Emperor for his unworthy
dealing with him, for he had caused his Letters to be broken open, his
Characters deciphered and interpreted, imprisoned his Subjects, trading upon
the Baltique Sea, after he had taken away their Merchandises, prohibited the
Commerce, though it were a natural right, and free to all the World, had by
several means hindered the conclusion of that Peace which had been treated on
with Poland; had sent whole Companies under his own Colors into Prussiia, to
fight against the Swedish Army, to destroy him under pretense of assisting the
King of Poland, had in a worse then barbarous manner refused the Ambassadors,
whom he had sent to him to treat a Peace; and had openly and underhand spoiled
and deprived his kindred and Allies of their States, so that some of them were
even brought to Beggary, without being able to get any reason or satisfaction
to their just complaints. These are the true causes which stirred up his
Courage, not able to suffer such injuries; and which at last made him imbark on
the Sea a most puissant Army. About July he came before the Island of Rugen,
which he made himself Master of in a few days, notwithstanding those great
oppositions which he met with; thence he went to Stralzund, a Hans Town, seated
upon the Baltique Sea, in the Duchy of Pomerania, which he had taken into his
protection, in the year, 1628, and there he landed: The Imperialists had kept
the Town close blocked up until March, and did still belabour it with all Acts
of Hostility, though they were constrained to raise the Siege, after the loss
of above twenty thousand men; but they quickly drew off for altogether, not
thinking it possible to resist him in a field, who had so easily taken in the
Forts of the Island Rugen.

Politic Observation.
THere are four principal causes which make Kings to march out of their own
Country, Ambition which has no limits, makes them impatient of being confined
within those of their own States, and desirous to enlarge them at their
neighbors expenses. The natural inconveniences too of their own Country, may
draw them out to seek a better, where they might live with more ease, as our
first French, the Vandals and Goths did Some flatter themselves in the belief,
that there is not at this day any lawful Prince at all, whose Estate had any
other beginning, and that Kings have no juster Titles, then by Conquests with
their Swords. Lastly, they go forth to revenge those injuries which are done
them, it being allowable to repel Force with Force, and to decide their
differences in the field by that power which God has given to them. They quit
their Countries to assist their Allies, it being not only necessary for a
Prince who aims at an extraordinary pitch of Glory not to injure any person,
but also to defend and protect those who are joined with him by interest,
alliance or kindred.

The Assembly at Ratisbonne.
ABout the same time, there was held an assembly at Ratisbonne, and the King of
Swede understood, that it was then and there resolved to make a strong
resistance against the Justice of his Arms, and that the Emperor had contrived
a design (wherein, though he was much mistaken) to force him out of Germany,
and to make him perish in the Baltique Sea, not vouchsafing to treat a Peace
upon those Proposals which had been sent to him only for restoring the States
and Liberties to those Princes and Republiques, from whom he had ravished them.
Resistance heightens and augments Courage, and this made the Swedish King march
up into the Country, and resolve upon great designs, which we have seen him
bring to pass: But first he had recourse to such Kings and States with whom he
was in League. About September he writ to the King, desiring him by that
ancient Alliance which had been between the Kings of France and Swede with
mutual promises, not only to preserve friendship between one another; but also
when occasion should serve, reciprocally to assist one another, to employ the
power of his Arms and Authority, to defend that cause which he had then
undertaken; in prosecution of which he had passed the Sea, and all in the
behalf of those who were tied to him by kindred, and allied to the Crown of
France. The King, whose courage could not endure that any wrong should be
offered to his Allies, received this request so much the more favorable, in
respect it were as glorious a thing in him, to contribute to their
establishment; and accordingly, he gave the most advantageous answer to his
Ambassadors that could be expected. However the Cardinal offered one thing to
his Majesty's consideration, that it would be needful to take care for the
maintaining of Religion, in preserving of States, and to engage the King of
Sweden not to commit outrages against it, where he found it settled. His Majesty
took time to deliberate and resolve on the Articles of their Treaty, which
being concluded and assigned about the beginning of the year following, I shall
then reassume my discourse of it, in its due order.

Politic Observation.
HAsty rashness in resolving upon grant affairs, is as dangerous, as a nimble
executing of them is advantageous; Prudence ought to guide both one and
the other. And whatever Justice appear above-board in designs, yet they are
subject to have but ill successes, if not commenced with mature deliberation.
Though the wise man resolve to do such a thing which he knows to be just, yet
he will take time to deliberate on the means. And as the interest of Religion
is very considerable, so the Cardinal would not act any thing until that were
secured: Whereas on the contrary, rash, hasty persons, do greedily run unto the
end which they have once concluded; but never examine the ways which conduce to
attain to it; thus they do many times find themselves so at a loss, and
entangled in the executing their designs, that they at last find no door to
walk out at with honor, and so leave off with shame and confusion. Hence it
is, that Demosthenes in his first Oration against Philip says, They who
counsel with great have, are not the greatest Counselors, those Stomachs
which make a quick digestion, do not concoct so good a Chil^^s, as those whose
heat is moderate, as Physicians tell us; and true it is, those spirits which
make their resolution with most heat and promptness, do commonly came lamely of
at last cast.

The King honors the Sieur de Montmorancy and Thoyras, with the Staff of
Marshal of France.
SHortly after his Majesty came to Paris, well knowing that rewards of honor,
are not only due to those who have deserved them, but withal useful to
encourage others to follow their example. He resolved to honor the Sieurs de
Montmorancy and Thoyras with the Staffs of Marshal of France, as a mark of
Valor which the former had showed in the War of Piedmont; and which the second
had showed to all Italy, during the Siege of Cazal. They being persons of great
esteem, every one commended his Majesty's choice which he had made, in raising
them to that eminent degree of honor. But the Rebellion of the one, and the
evil Government of the other, did shortly after sully part of that glory which
they had merited, they showing by their Procedures that valor and prudence do
not always meet in the same subject.

Politic Observation.
THe rewarding of services is so necessary for the good of a State, that when
it is once laid by, the practice of virtue is neglected, especially if it be
not distinguished by marks of honor. There are but a few of the same mind with
the Philosopher, who said he never expected other fruit from his good deeds,
then the contentment to have done them, and that he thought himself very happy
to receive that testimony from his Conscience, which she gave to him. It is
true, a truly noble man, does not so much regard the Recompense, as the Action
of Virtue which render him deserving; but it cannot be denied, that those marks
of honor do make lively, and excite resolutions to noble actions. The wisest
Philosophers have said, that the two supporters, upon which all the motions of
a State depend, are reward and punishment, without which, there were no doubt
but that great disorders would soon follow, and virtue become totally neglected.

The King Honors the Sieur de Servient, with the Office of Secretary.
THe King who was not to seek in any thing which concerned the good of his
State, would now make another proof of the knowledge he had of that Prudent
maxim. One of the places of Secretary of State, being vacant by the death of
the Sieur de Beauclere, his Majesty recollected in his mind, the services of
the Sieur de Servient; the Prudence wherewith he treated in Piedmont and Savoy;
the fidelity wherewith he had guided himself in those Treaties, wherein he had
been employed since the beginning of the War. The intelligence of Foreign
affairs, which had made him happy and considerable in several encounters. The
good order which he kept in the Army, whilst he was super-intendent of
Justice; and the eloquence which he had testified in his younger days, in
several Charges. Now that so many good qualities might not be let lie without
honor, and so many noble actions without reward; his Majesty as I said,
thought fit to impose the Charge on him, of having a care concerning the
Affairs of War, making it evident by his judicious choice, how exactly well his
Prudence knew to make use of persons, according to the particular
qualifications of their minds.

The quality and good parts of a Secretary of State.
THe Charge of Secretary, being as it is one of the most important of the
Kingdom It is needful, that the Person with whom it is entrusted, should be
endued with qualities accordingly. He should have Experience to manage both at
home and abroad, the affairs in which he is employed. He should be well
acquainted with the particular humors of Princes, strangers, and Grandees of
the Kingdom, as also of their several interests and pretensions. Eloquence in
discourse is necessary for him, because the King intrusts his Pen with him, to
write to all Monarchs, Princes, Parliaments, and Estates, and generally to
people of all sorts: For it is not enough, barely to let them understand the
will of his King, but he should do it in fit and proper terms for a King, that
is, with Majesty, and the Elegance of a Masculine generous style, without any
thing of bombast or affectedness. I know nothing so absurd, as to make a King
speak beneath his Majesty. As for that which concerns Eloquence, though to
write Letters in the name of some barbarous King, which are not so exactly
digested, may be tolerared; yet it would be extremely found fault with in
France, where neatness has made her Throne, and does particularly inhabit,
and where our Kings have nothing, but what is eminent and of the best. The very
name of Secretary of Estate does sufficiently show how much Fidelity and
Secrecy are required in him; he ought principally to be blessed with these two
qualities, because should he discover such things as are entrusted with him,
there could not but great inconvenience follow it.

The King pardons the Duke of Vendosm.
AFter that the King had evidenced in the course of this year an invincible
courage, to reduce his enemies under the Law, an admirable Prudence in the good
Orders both of Peace and War: A constancy not to be shaken in resisting the
Artifices of seditious spirits: A Justice full of Courage to assist his Allies;
and in a word, all other virtues which are proper ornaments for a Kings Crown;
he would conclude all with an action of Clemency, in pardoning the Monsieur de
Vendosm, after some assurances of his repentance, and fidelity for the future,
in relation to those Crimes, for which he had been till then kept Prisoner in
the Boys de Vinc^nnes, and gave him liberty but on condition to go pass away
sometime out of the Court and Kingdom.

Politic Observation.
IT is an act becoming the greatness of a Prince, to pardon the faults of
Grandees, when there are no longer any apprehensions of danger to the State,
and when they are washed out by an humble repentance. The most generous are
still the most merciful, and they esteem it as honorable to forget an injury,
as to remember a kindness. That Emperor was highly commended by all
Antiquities, who being to sign a Warrant of Condemnation, wished he had never
learnt to write. And Solomon who has left to all Kings a perfect example of
Wisdom, says it is the glory of a man to pass by offenses. However a King
ought to be mindful, that he do not too soon recall into his Court, a Prince
or Grandee, who may be provoked by that Justice which has been passed upon
him, least the opportunity of revenge which he may meet with in affairs, do
carry him insensibly to a relapse. Opportunity is a charm which ingageth men
ere they think of it. The least disgusts which they shall receive, will revive
their old grudges, and it is impossible for a great person to conserve any Love
for a King, from whom he imagines he has received some harsh usage, and once
not loving him, he is above half disposed to raise embroils whenever occasion
shall serve. It is very difficult to join close together that which has been
once broken asunder, and a reconciliation in point of friendship is not
stronger, then the glue which joins cracked vessels, which are easily broken
asunder by a small blow. An imaginary wrong or a small displeasure, should not
make a reconciled Prince fall back again, when he is replaced in his first
station of affairs. They who imagine that just punishments are soon forgotten,
do much deceive themselves. It is as much as a Stoic would say that he had
forgot injuries; but Princes are far enough of from such maxims, so that the
safest remedy for all their evils, is a removal from the Court, that no meeting
with any, who are used to engage people in Intreagues, they will be (as it
were) forced to keep within their limits, when as peradventure their passions
would make them fly out again.

ANNO 1631.
IT is much more pleasant to behold the Heavens twinkling with a thousand
several stars, or shining with the glorious light of the Sun, which rejoiceth
the earth with its splendor, then to look on it full of Prodigies, flashed with
lightnings, full laden with Clouds, shaken with Tempests, and covered with the
Vail of an obscure night: Just thus, without all peradventure, was it much more
agreeable to consider France in the splendor of her Victories, which she
obtained in the foregoing years, in the enjoyment of a happy quiet* caused by
the submission of the Grandees of the State, and by uniting of all the people,
all things being established in excellent order under the Conduct of so wise a
King, and every one living with Peace in his own profession, then to
contemplate her full of factions, troubled with Combinations, and threatened
with a general dissolution, by those intelligences which the chief persons of
the Kingdom held with strangers: But as the Laws of History oblige me to write
them impartially both in one relation and the other, so I look upon my self as
compelled to give an account of those turbulencies, wherewith she has been
assaulted, that by those glorious actions of the King, and those Prudent
Counsels of the Cardinals, the way of securing and warranting an estate from
those dangers, whereunto it is commonly exposed by civil Wars may be learned.
Though the Queen Mother had reason to have rested satisfied, knowing her self
to be the happiest, as well as the greatest Princess upon earth, yet she could
nor live contented, after the Cabal which had beleagured her Soul, had once
persuaded her, that she was obliged to ruin the Cardinal. She did near upon
the matter equally divide the honor with the King. All the French did
endeavor in emulation of one another, to testify by their respects and
obediences, the sweetness which did shine in all her actions: The Revenues
which she enjoyed were greater then those of three Queen Dowagers of France all
together: There was no charge or expense, which she was not able to go through
with, witness that magnificent structure of Luxenbourg, which contends with
the Louvre, and is the most accomplished piece of all that ever any of our
Kings have attempted, She could not deny but that she enjoyed upon the matter
an absolute Authority in the State. The King permitted her to take upon her
self as much as she could wish in the administration of affairs. He resolved
upon no one thing of importance in his Counsel, but upon her advice. When
necessity enforced the King from Paris, and that she would remain there, he
still left the government in her hands, and also ordered that Ambassadors
should attend upon her, to communicate foreign affairs to her, and to receive
from her mouth resolutions thereupon. Was not this to possess all that is
glorious and noble in a Government? Was not this indeed to enjoy her self with
more pleasure then the King, seeing she was exempted (in what she pleased) from
those great troubles which accompany the Conduct of Affairs, and from those
embroils which are frequent in Wars and Voyages, all which the King was obliged
to under-go; but she tied to nothing but what she pleased her self, excepting
those affairs only, which related to the good of the Kingdom. Last of all, that
Cabal factious as it was, being so much favored by her what did it, but abuse
her bounty, to serve the Passions of some particular persons? Did it not so
trouble her repose by sinister impressions, which were infused into he^
concerning the Government, and by those suspicions which were instilled into
her against the Cardinal, by her eagerness and desire to intermeddle in
affairs with greater power; insomuch, that the good order established in the
State, wrought no other effect in her mind, then to make her doubt that the
most glorious victories of his Majesty, instead of transporting her with joy,
would fill her Soul with Fears, and that Forraigners would invade his Country.
Thus the most sublime Acts of the Cardinal, which struck both terror and
admiration into strangers, were no otherwise considered by her, then as so many
tricks and deceits. Whence it happened, that instead of acknowledging his
Majesty's bounty, and the respects which he showed her, she repayed his
kindnesses with complaints, and instead of enjoying quiet and content, which
she had reason to embrace, her life was filled only with vexatious inquietudes.

Politic Observation.
GReat personages, though raised up a little above other men, yet are neither
more happy or contented. If they suffer themselves to be transported with
Passions, it is with them, as with the Sea, which being of a vast
circumference, is no whit the less subject to the agitations of the Winds; so
they being raised a little above others, are not the less subject to be vexed
with inquietudes. Though they possess more then enough wherewith to content
themselves; yet they giving themselves the liberty of desiring still more,
rather out of a humor then a necessity, are never in quiet or repose, but give
us just reasons to believe, that although Fortune has denied Crowns to poor
men, yet nature has made them happier in requital of it by giving them minds
desirous of less. That shining flame which we may behold at the end of a
Torch, dwells not there, but by the force of that matter which feeds it, and
is continually raising it self toward the Heavens, as disdaining the place
where it then is, desiring, as it were, to get up into the Concave of the Moon;
so grand persons, though clothed with such splendor as makes them shine in
the eyes of all other men, cannot rest with quietness of mind in that authority
from whence they receive it; but their aspiring souls carries them still
onwards to new designs of raising themselves above all things. They can never
be contented with the command over men, unless they can also command their
Passions which nature has created in them as in other men. Without this, all
their glory serves only to stir up in them violent desires to get still more:
Whereas on the contrary, he who has circumscribed his will with reason, has
added this happiness to his greatness, that he will be exempted from the
troubles of the World.

The Queen Mothers hatred, against the Cardinal.
THe desire of destroying the Cardinal, was the chief cause of the Queen
Mothers discontents, and no one can imagine with what impatiency she designed
it. Her most faithful servants were astonished at it, considering that
meekness was the quality which every one saw to shine with so much splendor
in her whole deportment: So that her Majesty cannot be accused with that
violence; but to set the saddle on the right horse, it ought to be imputed to
certain imbroiling spirits, who had engaged her in it, before she was aware of
it: Whoever has had the honor to be often near her Majesty cannot but
conclude so, and they who have had never so little knowledge of the Intreagues
of those times, cannot be ignorant that her Majesty did openly drive on at a
meeting at Dupes, the design of ruining the Cardinal to that extreme and utmost
verge, after she was counseled to it by the enemies of that great Minister
for, two chief reasons. The one was, they concluded that the King could not, in
fine, deny the abandoning of him, if her Majesty should continue to urge him to
it, with fresh and continued instances. A Mother having but too too attractive
powers over a son to draw him to her own desires; especially such a son so full
of respect and observance as the King was. The second, because in case the
Cardinal should get the better of them, he would then sit on their skirts, for
those seditious Assemblies which they had contrived against the Kings service,
and against his own particular Interests, which if it should so fall out,
'twere better for them to drive on their first design to the very utmost.

Intreagues of the Ladies near the Queen Mother.
THe Ministers of Spain, who had great interest in the ruining of the Cardinal,
did endeavor with their utmost the heat of these flames to which infamous
intent, they employed several Ladies who were near the Queen Mother; but
especially, three great Princesses, to whom her particular favors gave most
free access, viz. the Princess of Conti, the Dutchesses of Elbaeuf and d'
Ornano: Several other great persons of the Court were of the same party; some
of them not so much caring for the good success of any public affairs, but
only for their own particular interests, which they thought would be much
bettered by this means, if it should hit accordingly: Others found themselves
engaged in the Faction, by their Love which obliged them to serve the Passions
of some of the Ladies: Others suffered themselves to be led into it by their
extravagant humors, which carries some capricious minds, to the never-liking
of any thing in the public Government: Had the Queen Mother been of a more
malicious and fiery nature she might have been safe and free from their
invenomed artifices; but they wrought upon her, made advantages of her good
nature, and such were the chief Agents, to whom she had done the honor, to
give a more particular part of her gracious favors; besides, in all their
actions, they only pretended a Passion to preserve her Majesty in her power and
authority, the only absolute charm to bewitch the Souls of great Personages.
They had at last so fortified her, that it was impossible, in a manner, for any
others to whom she discoursed but little of her designs, to dis-abuse her. They
were never out of her Majesty's sight; and if, by chance, one of them was
obliged to go forth, another stepped in, as if it were, on purpose to prevent any
of her loyal servants to dis-deceive her, or with design of picking an occasion
to entertain her in such discourses, as might tend to the increasing of her
Passion. They made her believe that the credit which the King gave to those
sage Counsels of the Cardinal, were an authority so great that she was as it
were forced to be jealous at it. They excited her upon the score of honor,
that she was bound to let all Christendom see that the power which she had in
the State was not so slight, that her will should become less considerable by
the opposition of a Favorite. Neither did they omit to suggest to her the
re-establishment of Monsieur de Mantua, as a crime, who was now upon the point
of being restored to his Estates, as if the Interests of that Prince so
important to the Glory of the King and his Crown, ought not to have been
preferred before the hatred which she had conceived against him.

Posterity will have much ado, to believe that they could drive things to
that point, of informing her Majesty with suspicions of the Fidelity of this
grand Minister, and of making her believe, that he designed to raise himself
into the Royal Throne, upon the ruin of her children, instead of representing
to her, that he sacrificed his life, his goods, and his honor to their glory,
upon any occasion which did present it self. If her Majesty had not been
acquainted with any secret of affairs, they presently told it her by way of
complaint and accusation of the Cardinal, as if it had been absolutely
necessary to have given her account of every thing, whilst she was engaged in
those Contrivances and Assemblies, where strangers too had a good stroke, who
might make use of it to the Kings disadvantage. In her Majesty's presence they
could never wonder enough, that he should suffer the King to propose to
Monsieur, the marrying the Princess Mary; whereas they should have told her, it
was with design to stay him in the Court But that was no part of their
intention: And is it not yet more strange that they made the real i^deavours
which the Cardinal obliged her in, to pass for disguises and falsities, even to
the persuading her, that he only desired to set himself upright with her, that
he might take his own advantage, and find an occasion of removing her, as
Monsieur de ^uy^es had done, well knowing, that the bare belief of that one
thing would more and more fix her in the design of destroying him? These are
the discourses wherewith those of the Cabal did ordinarily entertain her, or to
speak more properly, the Charms wherewith they enchanted her Soul, so that
perverting the genuine sweetness of her disposition, they rendered her
incapable of any reconciliation, and immovable in the design of ruining him,
whose Prudence was the greatest prop and stay of her Grandeur, and whose signal
services done to France, had raised it to that eminent point of glory.

Politic Observation.
THere is hardly any one thing which they who are near great Princesses, may
not in time persuade them to, when they have once gotten a little credit with
them, and that they will but use those Artifices to obtain it, which the
corruption of the Court soon teaches. The first and chief thing they labor,
is to insinuate into their minds, that they are very passionately affected for
their services and interests, and that they have no other designs, but what
contribute to their glory; this they do, as well knowing affection to be a
reason able to persuade Ladies to any thing. Their next care is never to
incense them either by words or deeds. They flatter all their faults, even to a
commendation of them, which makes the word incurable. And though there he
noting more free then love and hatred, yet they profess openly they neither
love noe hate any but whom they do. They serve them with a seeming heat and
earnestness upon all occasions, but are in effect like Curtesans who wish to
those whom they love, all that is good, excepting Prudence and Judgment. Is it
not easily observed, that if any one displease them, they are the first who
speak ill of him? They had much rather deceive them, then hazard their anger by
telling truth. And thus by their Compliances and a thousand services, which are
powerful attracts upon the minds of that Sex, they make themselves beloved,
and acquire a great part of their Trust and Confidence: This once done, how
many artifices do they then find out to surprise them? No one can so easily
deceive us, as he who has once possessed our minds, with a belief that he
loves us: The bare affection which we repay him, gives him advantage enough in
that he is not mistrusted. The honor which they have to be ordinarily near
her, gives them no little advantage, seeing it furnishes them with
opportunities and occasions of saying whatever they have a mind to; they never
hazard any thing, for that they have liberty to speak that at another time
freely, which peradventure they then cannot without danger. Insomuch, that if
they would make any one be hated, it is a most easy thing for them to bring it
to pass. First, they attempt to make them mistrusted, with great caution, they
speak ill of them; but so, as it may seem to have proceeded from an affection
which they have for their service; and this commonly makes their advices be
well received; and having once discovered an inclination to receive these first
preparatories, they are not to seek in re-criminating them with new charges;
and by little and little they insinuate a belief of their being evil, which
renders them hated: And all this, with such a meekness of mind, but so full of
dissimulations (of which, the Court is the most perfect School) that great
Princesses can so much the less easily defend themselves from them; in regard
the most part of those who come near them, do hardly ever tell them any truth
at all.

The Cardinal indeavoureth to restore himself into the Queen-Mothers good
Favor.
AS there never yet was any Soul more grateful or more respectfull then the
Cardinal, so it cannot be expressed with what grief he endured the
Queen-Mothers anger, and to how many submissions he stooped, that he might
recover her good favor. Shortly after St. Martins day, she used her very
utmost power over the Kings inclinations to destroy him, insomuch that she
would not endure to see him. But he having resolved it to be his greatest
Felicity, next that of serving his Majesty, to render all testimonies of his
fidelity, and of that great Passion which he had for her Glory, pretermitted no
invention to get the honor of seeing her. Sometimes he would address himself
to Father Suffren the guide of her Conscience, and beg him with signs of
extraordinary grief, that he would zealously use his utmost power to procure
him that satisfaction, and to re-estate her mind in her first kindnesses to
him, which some of her Confidents had now diverted. The Good Father did it so
much the more readily, perceiving that this bitterness of the Queen Mother, did
set the whole Court into Factions, that it did divide the State, raised
combinations and fomented parties against the King himself, he represented to
her, that God commanded her to moderate her hatred, and to behold him with
respect, who had done such eminent services for the King her son but it was to
little purpose, for he could not at all discover any disposition in her,
tending to follow his advices. The Cardinal accepted with much affection those
offers of the Cardinal Bagny his Holinesses Nuntio, a Prelat, not less
recommendable for the greatness of his Soul, then that of his dignity to
attempt and endeavor with her upon the same score: There could not be any
thing added to that great care and prudence which he used to allay her Passion;
at last he obtained this advantage, that she condiscended to see him, and to
promise him she would forget what was past. The meeting was at Luxenburg
Palace, where the King was present: But she discovering by her eyes, her words
and actions, that there was nothing but apparencies in her reconcilement, he
was necessitated to make use of a more potent cause for the obtaining of that,
which neither the Piety of Father Suffren, nor the Quality or Merit of Cardinal
Bagny could attain to. The King took the pains upon himself, to speak to her
once and again with great earnestness, conjuring her to him whom she was
equally obliged to as himself, to acknowledge him for her most faithful
Servitor, and for a Minister capable of executing several great designs, of
which he had already laid the groundwork. He beseeched her to reassume her
former familiarities with the Cardinals, to assist at Councels where, of late,
she would no more appear, and his Majesty pressed her so vigorously that she
could not deny him, which his Majesty had been sensible of two or three several
times. It is true, some have been bold to say, that they who nourished her mind
with this sharpness advised her to stoop in this particular to his Majesty's
will, that he might gain a greater power over his Soul, and that she might gain
a greater power over his Soul, and the she might find out new occasions fit to
destroy the Cardinal: But for my own part, I can never believe that her
goodness could credit them in this point: I shall only say this much, indeed
the Passion which she conceived against him, was so violent, that she could not
long forbear, so much did his very sight torment her, and that in effect this
meeting was a recommencing of it.

The Marshal de Schomberg interposeth.
THe Marshal de Schomberg. whom she had heretofore much honored with her
Counsels; being returned from Piedmont, imagined that he might perchance work
somewhat upon her mind; he resolved accordingly to assault her, with all kinds
of reasons, and so evidently to demonstrate to her the wrong she did her self,
that he would force her by the consideration of her own interests, to give up
her self though she would not do it, either for the Love or Respect which she
owed the King. He knew belike that interest was the breach by which all great
Personages are taken. He beseeched her first to consider the great benefits
which she received by his Counsels; and that whilst she had followed them, she
was become the most glorious Princess of the World; whereas now she was in a
maze, by having adhered to the advices of hers and his enemies. It is true,
Madam, would he sometimes say, he ever persuaded you cordially to love the
King, to have no other then his interests, and to be inseparably united with
him; for that he well knew, all your greatness and quiet depended upon it,
whereas they who now advise you, put other imaginations into your Majesty's
head; but she would not yet see to what pitch of extremity they had then
brought her. He entreated her to open her eyes, and to recollect with a
difference she found in the effects, and made her apprehend and confess, that
she could wish for nothing which she might not make her self sure of, if he did
but continue in a strict union with his Majesty and the Cardinal. That if she
desired any authority from the King, he had beseeched her to assist in the
Councels, only to give her all kind of respects and distinctions, and had in a
manner divided his power with her. That if she desired Gratifications the
Cardinal had never been backward to pay them unto her. The great zeal which he
had to serve her, did even transport him to tell her, that her separating her
self as she did from the King, would force the King to withdraw himself from
her; which if it should so happen, she would lose all her power and the people
themselves would no longer pay her their usual respects.

These reasons were so potent and considerable, that there was nothing could be
alleged against them and the Queen Mother had accordingly believed them; but
that some factious spirits about her, persuaded her that she should add to her
authority and greatness if she could make herself Mistress of this one affair,
and thus they easily re-inflamed that fire, which the other had taken a great
deal of pains to extinguish, though in never so little a manner. In fine, she
became inflexible, and those unworthy miscreants brought her to that pass,
that she refused his Majesty, when he entreated her to pardon the Cardinal,
which she was so much the more obliged to have done, he never having really
offended her at all.

Politic Observation.
NOthing is more easily effected, then to infuse violences into the minds of
great men, when they are once persuaded it is necessary for the preservation of
their Authority. There is not any thing but only power which advances them,
above other men, and they are easily led by it, to ruin every one whom them,
conceive to hurt them. But above all, women are most subject to this fault, in
regard they are weaker and more wedded to their Passions then men are. The
natural levity of that Sex makes them pass with little ado, from the
extremity of love to that of hatred, not being able to keep a medium: It is
enough to engage them not to do a thing, if you do but earnestly entreat them
to do it; especially, if they be but a little provoked to anger. Such
entreaties as are made to them when so affected, cause them to pass from that
of Anger to Fury, and when they cannot dis-allow of the thing which is
entreated of them, yet it is enough to deny it, if they love not the person who
desires it. Rigor has a greater Empire in their Wills then Submission. And
they whose Souls seem to be more heightened then others, are so much the more to
be feared, they having more mettle then conduct; it is impossible ever to root
out of them any jealousies which they have once conceived, and their humors
are so fixed in suspicions that it is almost impossible to defend ones self
from them by lawful means. If the beauty of their countenances, give them an
almost absolute dominion over the minds of men, yet the weakness of their Sex
does subject them under the commands of all and every Passion, especially that
of hatred; from which it is impossible for them to dis engage themselves, after
they have once given it admittance into their breasts.

Although I look upon all Queens, as exempted from the major part of their
qualities, by reason of the particular assistance, which they receive from God,
who considers them as his own Images here beneath; yet it is very rare to
find any, who are not liable to that violence which is inseparable from their
Government. And this is one of the reasons upon which Aristotle groundeth that
saying in h^^ Politiques, that they are not proper to govern States. In regard
Clemency is known to be one of their chiefest Pillars. It is also most assured,
that such as are born with a more generous temper then others, are the more to
be scared; for being unable to direct with Prudence, they fortify themselves
with rigor, and become inflexible toward those, of whom they have conceived
the least suspicion.

Monsieur the Kings Brother disapproveth of the Queen-Mothers Intreagues.
MOnsieur Brother to the King was not ignorant that the Queen Mother was in the
quality of a subject, as well as in that of Mother to his Majesty; and that
therefore she was bound to obey him in every thing, which absolutely concerned
the good of his Kingdom, so that he could not approve of her opposing his will
and pleasure, neither was he backward of testifying his dislike of it to the
King. The discourse which he made of it did give no little satisfaction to his
Majesty, who was resolved not to let pass any opportunity which might conduce
to the firm establishing of him in his due respects, especially seeing Monsieur
himself had confirmed him in it, by his protesting to the Cardinal, that he
loved him as a person whom he thought necessary for the good of the State. Yet
we know that the favorites of great Personages, do sometimes pervert their
best inclinations, and are the common instruments made use of to divert them
from their duries; therefore the King concluded it very fit to make sure of
Coigneux, le Sieur de Puy-laurence and Monsigot, whom Mansieur principally
confided in; he knew there was no chain which could tie the major part of such
people stronglier then good Offices; and accordingly, he resolved not to wave
or let slip any time to advance them, and to hold them off from being gained by
such as were already engaged in any Faction. His Majesty caused three hundred
thousand Livres to be given to Monsieur de Puy-laurence, that he might buy the
Duchy of Anville: He granted to Coigneux an Office of President au Mortier of
the Parliament of Paris with hopes of a Cardinals Cap, which his Majesty had
also writ for to the Pope Monsignot had fifty thousand Livres for his share,
and each of them received these gifts with such handsome actions and expressions
of thanks, that they made a thousand protestations of preserving and continuing
their Master, in a strict intelligence and obedience to his Majesty's will and
pleasure.

Politic Observation.
IT is very important for a Kings service to make sure of those in whom the
Princes of the blood do most confide. It is the only means to keep them within
compass, and they are only able so to dispose them, for that they do make such
impressions upon their spirits as shall carry them when and where they please
to incline them. Princes commonly are notwithstanding the greatness of their
Souls, which they receive with their birth, more addicted to their pleasures
then their affairs; whence it happens, that they do not give themselves time
enough to examine of what qualities any things are, or whether fit to be
engaged in or not, but remit the particular care of that to those whom they
confide in, and are contented when things come to be acted, if they do but hear
them tell them they are good, and they had rather suffer some disorders in
their houses, then lose a quarter of an hours passe-time. These are they who
share the government with Princes, whiles they impose on them the burden, and
so divide the honor of commanding, thinking on nothing but delights, and
supposing that as their births has created them the chief in the State; so
Fortune cannot but be propitious to them, for the obtaining of whatsoever is
necessary to give them a continual subsistence. It is for this reason it cannot
be doubted, that it were necessary to keep their Favorites obliged very
strongly to the Kings service, and to be dependent upon his Majesty's will and
pleasure, that they may be made use of as occasion shall present themselves for
the good of the State. In Spain none are allowed to the Kings Brothers, but
such as are belonging to the Kings themselves, which are changed too very
often; lest a long continuance in their service, might in time beget too strong
a confidence and draw them off from the first ties of their obedience. For this
reason it is, that there ought no great deliberation to be had for the removal
of such from them, who are experimentally known to engage them, in affairs
prejudicial to the good of the State; for the great compliance in permitting
them a longer continuance near them, will soon produce very dangerous effects.
Their removal peradventure may seem harsh to Princes; but it is better they
should be displeased, then the whole State be endangered. It is a great good
fortune for a Minister, never to be put upon such a rock; and therefore it is,
that he will endeavor to work upon them by good offices, which are the most
powerful means to oblige men and tie them very strictly, the chains wherewith
they are fettered, being so pleasant and agreeable to them. Interest, is that
which does most efficaciously more them: And indeed, it is in a manner
impossible to gain them by other means, then by making provision for their
advancement. There is no design which they will not approve of, always
provided that they have but satisfaction in their own particulars. They
persuade their Masters to rest contented, if they themselves are once
satisfied. The most part of affairs of the world, are like those Pictures
wherein you shall behold different Figures and shapes, according to the diverse
positions and scituations of them who look upon them. They never represent any
thing to their Masters, but on that side which they best like, and thus they
can as easily retain him in quiet. There ought to be care had, that all which
is intended for them be not done at once. Ambition still increases, and those
benefits which are done to a favorite, do but whet his appetite for the
receiving of others Therefore it is, that one should always reserve something
to keep them in breath by the expectations of greater benefits to come.

The Queen Mothers Resolution to win Monsieur.
THe Declaration which Monsieur made to the King of his resentment, struck a
great astonishment into the Queen Mother, she having beforehand placed all her
confidence in him, as also chosen him for the chief instrument of her designs.
They had persuaded her, that could she but engage him in her interests, she
might soon find men enough to uphold them, and such as would put themselves
into the field in Arms to carry on her designs to their very utmost, and yet
her natural goodness was so great to oblige her, to preserve Monsieur constant
and faithful to the Kings interests: But this factious seditious Cabal, which
inverted her strongest inclinations, made her mislike those procedures, and
carried her on even to reproach him; for that after she had so particularly
cherished him, he should take so little care for her concerns. It is true, it
was heretofore verily believed in the first years of her Regency (though I
think without just grounds) that she was more affectionate and tender toward
Monsieur, then toward the King, and that she might well cast her eyes upon
him, as many others of her quality have done, to make use of him for the
upholding of such designs, as she might have, to which the King might not be so
favorable: But it must be confessed, that she governed her self so prudently,
by those sage Councels which were given to her after her first going off from
the Court, that no one could discover any thing in her behavior but real
intentions to preserve her children in a good intelligence with one another,
and never to attempt any thing which was not conformable to the Kings Will;
insomuch; that this prudent Conduct of hers, gained her a great esteem with the
people, who being desirous of nothing more then peace, they regarded her
Majesty with extraordinary affections, as her who was the greatest advancement
of public tranquillity, by her preserving the bond of union between her
children. Though now she gave them just cause to change their good opinions of
her, by her frequent entertainments of Monsieur and his chiefest Officers, in
that design, which all men knew she had to gain him to her party, whatever it
cost, that he might become instrumental for her in the resolution which she had
taken to destroy the Cardinal.

Politic Observation.
IT is very usual with Mothers to love their youngest better then their eldest
children, and to rely upon them, to be maintained in the greater authority. It
should seem it is with Children, as with fruits, the newest are still most
agreeable, so it frequently comes to pass, that the youngest are pleasures and
diversions to their Parents, when as they who are older, shake off the yoke of
obedience, and follow the inclinations of unbridled youth; but most especially
so it is, when as mothers are become Widows, and have lost that protection of
their husbands which kept their children within their bounds, that they do cast
themselves upon the interest of the younger ones, whom they look on as the
supporters of their old age, and as those who must uphold their Authority
against the eldest, whom they look upon very often, as men do upon Creditors
who come to take away their goods from them; withal, they are dependent upon
them in several respects, because by the deaths of their Fathers, they are
become the heads of their Families; and this dependency upon them is
insupportable. If this be ordinary in private Families, how much more is it in
those of Kings? History is pregnant with relations of such Queens as have
advanced their youngest children to the Government, in prejudice of their
brother. Ptolomeus Phiseus, gave at his wifes persuasions, the Crown of Egypt
to his youngest son; and to go no further then France it self, Lewis the
Debonnair, did not he prefer at his Wifes entreaty, Charles the Bauld, before
Lothair who was the eldest? Did not Constance wife of Robert, seeing her
husband intended after the death of his eldest son, to Crown Henry her second
son King, oppose it, in her earnest desires that he would prefer Robert her
third son, whom she loved most entirely? And when she saw she could not arrive
to the end of her design, did she not embroyl all things, even whilst the King
yet lived; but much more after his death, by fomenting the divisions between
her children, that she her self might have the more Authority? This occasioned
a most sad Civil War, to the great damage of the Kingdom and that good King,
both in the declining of his age and Kingdom, when as he expected repose and
tranquillity in his family, especially after he had suffered (upon his first
coming to the Crown) so great afflictions by reason of the misfortunes of his
first marriages, and their dissolutions which afterward happened; for the
remedying whereof, the godly Abbot of Fleury Abbey was employed. Not to seek for
examples far from us, is not that of Katharine de Medicis very certain, it
being yet fresh in the memory of man, for she was ever know to favor some of
her children against other some? Was she not likewise suspected to have hastened
the death of her eldest, that she might make way to raise the Duke of Anjou to
the Crown? And was she not seen after he was attained to the Government, to
enter into the Combination against him, because he did not rely enough upon
her for the the Government of affairs? It is so frequent in history, that we
shall need no other proofs for it; it may safely be said, that it has always
been a very dangerous matter for States, that it has caused many Civil Wars
which have near hand brought whole Kingdoms to an absolute ruin. For that the
particular affection of a Mother, raising jealousies between her children,
hurrieth them into all extremities whatsoever, they divide the Grandees into
Factions, then they appear all in Arms, and nothing escapes ruin; in fine,
they are forced to quench the fire of their private quarrels, in the blood of
their people.

She gains his Favorites.
IT was both difficult and suspicious for the Queen Mother so often to
discourse with Monsieur so it must needs be to draw him off from that
resolution which he had taken of adhering to the Kings Interests: They who kept
up her soul in those discontentments, advised her to make use of those
Favorites whom he did most of all trust in: This counsel was as judicious as
it was wicked, because it was hard to shake the mind of this Prince, who
received with his Birth the seeds of obedience which is due to the King, and
which had also been cultivated by those Signieurs who had had the charge of his
education. It was altogether impossible to overcome his Inclination, unless by
the means of them who were never from him, who knew his humor, and by what
devices they might work upon him. Virtue which has taken deep root in a good
nature, is not plucked out but with great labor; it will be needful to assail
it by strong means; and none but such in whom he has confidence and trust can
bring it about. The business them was to gain his Favorites, who were three,
Coigneux, the Sieur de Puy-Laureus, and Monsigot: But it would do the work if
Coigneux only could be gained, for that Puy-Laureus had but a little before
received a strong Obligation from him; for having removed Bois-dennemay, who
partaked with him in the honor of his masters good affections, and so would
not offer to be against it; and as for Monsigot, he was so much his creature
too, that he had no other motion then that of Puy-Laureus. There were great
endeavors used to get him, and a favorable opportunity was soon found; for he
being possessed with an absolute unbridled desire to have the Cardinals hat,
which the King had given him some hopes of, it happened that the Pope deferred
his Promotion for a few months, which he was upon the very point of granting:
Some of them cast it into his head that this delay was a trick put upon him by
the Cardinal; so that he, as a man bewitched to his own ambitious Interests,
swallowed it, and conceived so great a fury against him, that he resolved to be
revenged on him whatever it cost him; insomuch that he told a friend of his,
who endeavored to open his eyes, That he was freed from his hopes of a
Cardinals Hat, but that within six weeks time they should be glad to send it to
him with a witness. It was his usual saying, that a Son of France is always
considerable, if he be in a condition to make himself be pitied. And this
maxim was the true ground of those hopes which he conceived, That if Monsieur
should depart from the Court in discontent, he would be pitied by all people;
That the Princes, Governors of Provinces and Places, and the chief Lords of
the Kingdom would come to him, and bring Forces for his assistance, and give
him such means to raise and make a war, by which he would die that Cap in the
blood of the people, which had not been granted to him according to his desires
and expectation. The true cause of its delay was this, The Italians would not
give way that the Pope should grant him that favor, unless they might be
acquainted with the reason of it, it being contrary to the Bull of Sixtus v.
which prohibited the bestowing the Hat on men who had been twice married, as he
had been; and thereupon all the Interest of Spain had much ado to promote the
Duke of Lerma to the Cardinalship. As for Coigneux, he was much more moved by
the hopes which they gave him of stepping into the Cardinals place as soon as
ever he was ruined; and he flattered himself so much the more willingly into
this Belief, because having caused his Nativity to be cast during the Kings
sickness, he had been told of great advantages of Fortune which should befall
unto him. The splendor of this pretended Ministry did so dazzle his eyes, that
he lost his reason at the first motion of it, and was absolutely fixed in the
resolution of giving himself to the Queen Mother, and to persuade Monsieur to
whatever she pleased: That he might give her a sure testimony of it, he had
the boldness to oppose the Kings will, when his Majesty desired to engage
Monsieur a little more strictly to the Court, by granting him that satisfaction
which he had so long wished for, of marrying him to the Princess Mary. The
Queen Mother who could not endure this match, assured Coigneux, that he would
do her a most particular kindness to divert Monsieur from it; who forthwith
used all the Artifices which the malice of his soul could suggest to him, to
break it off, insomuch that he beseeched his Majesty that he would not oblige
him to marry so suddenly, Coigneux became so insolently proud of this prank,
that Monsieur being at Chantilly, he vaunted (speaking to some one who was not
at all engaged to him) that he had hindered the Match, and that it would never
be concluded. Its true, the words were no sooner out of his mouth, but he
repented them, fearing, and with great reason, lest the King would come to be
informed of his insolency, and chastise him for it. In fine, Fear was joined
to his Ambition: From thence forward, those two furious Passions wrought so
mightily upon his inconsiderate Spirit, that he was at no quiet until he
wrought Monsieur to leave the Court. There was no essay which he left
unattempted to shake that resolution of Monsieurs, which he stuck close to, of
not forsaking the King: He found means to renew in his mind fresh sentiments of
revenge against the Cardinal, by remembering him of the Imprisonment and death
of the Grand Prior, and of the Marshal d' Ornano, and the execution of Chalais:
He often put him in mind of the Obligation which lay upon him to undertake the
Queen-Mothers quarrel, who had always tenderly loved him: But finding that
none of these devices wrought any effect he attempted to possess him with fear,
which shakes the greatest Courages: He made him believe that the King had been
informed of his relapsing into the Queen-Mothers Interests, and was by the
Cardinal's advice resolved to send him Prisoner to the Boys de Vincennes. Then
it was that without more ado he absolutely concluded to leave the Court with
all speed, not having the power to recollect (as it was to be wished) that this
Favorite led him away, only that he might obtain that Honor by force, of
which his small worth made him very undeserving.

Politic Observation.
I Have formerly said, It were requisite that the Favorites of Princes should
be nearly tied to the Kings Interests, that they might be carried to whatever
his Majesty should desire of them; and now I shall add, that it is not less
then necessary, to prevent their troubling of the State; for that the most part
of such Civil wars have happened by their means: But there are great obstructions
and difficulties in the encompassing it, seeing that it is not sometimes in the
power of the greatest Ministers to retain them in their duties, whatever
advantages are prepared for them. And as eating does but excite the hungers of
starved stomachs, so those Riches which are given to them, do but make them
more ambitious of other, and greater. It is the humor which does possess most
Princes Favorites, and is the cause which does often engage their Masters in
great Broyls. The most violent storms which turn all things up-side-down, are
formed only out of Clouds drawn up by the Planets into the highest Region of
the Air; and the greatest Revolts which have troubled the quiet of the people,
and ruined whole Kingdoms, have proceeded from those suggestions which Princes
Favorites (the Stars of the State) have raised in their minds, from whence
they often get nothing but mud and dirt. Has not the last age made it evident
here in France, in the time of Henry the third, when as the Duke d' Alencon had
not gone out of the Court, but by the persuasions of B^ssi and Semier, and some
others his Favorites, who were troubled to see the government of Affairs in
the hands of some who would not give them leave to do what they pleased? And if
we look back a little more, shall we not find that Lewis the eleventh, whilst
he was Daulphine, had not withdrawn himself the first time from Charles the
seventh his Brother, but by the advices of Chaumont and Boucicaut, and their
Partisans who could not enoure to see that his Niece the fair Agnes and
Villiquier, should have so absolute a Power? Our own times have furnished us
with examples enough to prove this truth, which are so well known to all men,
that I need not trouble them or my self to relate them. I shall only add this;
that as Goldsmiths have a certain strong water to separate Gold from Silver,
though incorporated by the Fire, that they seem to be the same Body: So the
Favorites of Princes have certain Arts, which the malice of the Court teaches
them, the power of which is so great, that when they please, they will divide a
Mother from her children, a Brother from a Brother, and generally all whom
Nature or Friendship had joined together, in so strict a league, that one would
have reasonably imagined nothing could have been able to have made a separation.

Monsieur's resolution to leave the Court.
When Coignenx had once persuaded Monsieur by his subtle devices to leave the
Court, he gave him no respite, until he had put it in execution. That his
departure might be with the more noise, which might serve for a Beacon to put
the whole Kingdom in an uprore; he found a trick to persuade him, that it would
be an act of courage in him, to go quarrel with the Cardinal in his own house,
before he went off, and to declare to him, that he would be no more his friend,
but that he would take the Queen-Mothers part against him. Accordingly Monsieur
went to him, and told him so: But the Cardinal who knew such things could not
proceed from his goodness, which rendered him not only the least evildoer, but
indeed, the most obliging Prince of the world, answered him with nothing but
respects and civilities. As Soon as Monsieur went from him, he got into his
^oach, and went directly to Orleans, without taking leave of the King. The
Queen Mother seeming to be surpised at it, presently sent notice of it to the
King, then at hunting; who was much troubled at it; though he could expect
little good from the base dispositions of Monsieur's servants, of all whom his
Majesty had been fully informed, though he could not imagine they would have
carried things to such extremities considering the great gratifications he had
bestowed on them, and those several protestations of inviolable fidelity which
they had but so lately made unto him. When his Majesty returned from hunting,
he alighted at the Cardinal's, and gave him such singular testimonies of his
favor, that they were able to obliterate any apprehensions of Monsieur's
proceedings: His Majesty promised he would protect him with and against all,
and commanded him to be the more confident of it, in regard he was bound in
honor to preserve him, from whom he had received such signal services. That if
any did him an injury it was his Majesty whom they did offend, and he would so
take it, as done to himself. From thence the King went to find out the
Queen Mother, to whom he could not dissemble how much Monsieur's departure did
displease him, and the just ground he had to suspect that she had a hand in the
counselling him to it, of which for the present she endeavored to clear her
self, though shortly after it was found to be but too true, by that strict
intelligence which was between them, and by those letters which they writ to
the King, having one and the same sense and expression, As also by Monsieur's
own discourses to the Ladies at Orleans, when they asked of him the reasons of
his so sudden return; not that the Queen Mother was ever satisfied with
Monsieur, or he with her, but that there was a means found out to persuade
them, that if they would but closely unite themselves, they would be the better
able to drive on their own Designs, and induce the King to ruin the Cardinal,
the only thing which they desired.

Politic Observation.
THough the Ringleaders in a State be of different humors and inclinations,
and though they be much divided by the emulation which they bear to one
another, yet they do easily reunite, that they may (if possible) increase
their own Powers, by destroying that of their King. Experience shows us, that
fire can naturally incorporate most different metals, as Gold and Iron; The
fire of Ambition is no less able to unite the minds of Grandees, when it is
once proposed to trouble the Kingdom. One has not obtained the Pension or Boon
which he desired; another could not get his kinsman into a Benefice as he
attempted, and another thinks he deserves to have a greater hand then he has,
in the government of affairs, or could not procure the Office which he aspired
to; and these are those several discontents which they have received, in the
diversity of their designs, and which run them up to that pass, that they
become unsatisfied with the King, or his principal Minister, not at all
considering, that there are several other concerns, besides theirs in
particular, which oblige by necessity, that those things be granted to others,
which they would so fain procure to themselves. This general discontent is
enough to unite them together, and to engage them in that one design of a
revolt: They know there are two ways to attain to greatness, Prudence and
Power, when they once perceive that all the devices of their Will, or to speak
more properly, all their Deceipts, are not able to raise their greatness to
that pass which they desire, they presently fly to the latter, imagining in
themselves they might get more by it, then by the former. They cannot be
ignorant how that many of their Predecessors have be shipwrack'd on the very
same score, by which they pretend to raise great advantages to themselves: and
as the minds of most men abound rather with hopes then fears, so they fancy to
themselves, that Fortune will be more favorable to them then others; and upon
this account it is, that they do often associate themselves together, not with
intent of putting State affairs into a better posture, as they pretend, but to
advance (what in them lies) their own private Families and Interests at the
cost and charges of the Public. I shall liken them to the first qualities,
which not holding themselves in a good correspondency, for the preservation of
the subject whereof they are composed, do unanimously conspire and contrive the
ruin of it; for in the same manner do they instead of keeping up and
maintaining the State by their Prudence and Authority, of which it is their
honor to be chief supporters, they employ them to divide and ruin the people,
forcing the Prince to contribute to the means which are necessary to oppose
their violences.

The Queen Mother rejoices at Monsieur's Departure.
AFter Monsieur's departure, the Queen Mother became more resolute in her
eagerness against the Cardinal, and believed that his going away would be very
advantageous to her. They who flattered her, and blew the Coals of her Passion,
persuaded her, that half the Kingdom would quickly be up in Arms, and proffer
their assistances to Monsieur, in whatever he would employ them: That several
Towns would revolt; That Monsieur's discontent alone, if once known abroad,
would raise a war on every side, and that amidst this confusion, the King would
think himself very happy, could he but prevent the ruin of his Kingdom, by
submitting to that of the Cardinal: She withdrew her self from being at any
counsels, to which she had but lately before used to go, and seemed less
solicitous in dissembling her discontents. What pity was it to see a Kingdom
exposed to so imminent a danger of being totally subverted by Civil wars, and
all to destroy him, who for eight years together employed his whole time (both
day and night) to settle it in its former glory? What Injustice was it to repay
the Cardinal's services with such Ingratitude? What a confusion was it to see a
Mother and a Brother revolt against their King, and all to satisfy the Hatred
and Ambition of their Ministers? The King endured it with the greater
displeasure, because he understood that Foreigners had sowed these Tares under
hopes of kindling a fire, which should constrain him to withdraw his Forces
from Italy, abandon ^he assisting of his Allies or at least to submit to
shameful conditions of Peace, for which purpose they were just upon meeting in
Piedmont. His Majesty was not to seek in the knowledge, that Queens are not
exempted from punishment, when they contrive troubles in the State, that is, if
the quality of Mother did exact the respects of a Son from him, that of a King
did oblige her not to prefer any consideration before that of the good of his
State; and in conclusion, that he ought to use all di^igent means to break off
the intelligence which she held with Monsieur, and those who nourished his mind
with discontents: There was no more certain way, then to assign her some Town
to live in, a little distant from the Court, to disperse here and there those,
who abusing her goodness, did foment the fire of dissension in her soul, and to
place near her, some one endued with Discretion and Power, that she might not
in future attempt any thing against the good of the State. The Respect
wherewith the King did always honor her was such, that he could never resolve
to use any violent remedies, but at the very last cast, after he had tried all
others; to which end he resolved rather to leave her, then that she should
leave him, and accordingly he removed to Compeigne, imagining that the
sharpness of the season would invite her to continue at Paris after his
departure, and that in this small separation, she could not any longer divide
the Court into Parties, as then she had done. There were likewise other devices
found to draw off some of the most factious from about her, that their absense
might afford some opportunities of calming her spirit. It were to have been
wished, that she had rather (according to his Majesty's pleasure) resolved to
have lived in quiet at her Palace of Luxenburgh, whilst his Majesty was out of
Paris, then to have followed the Court, where her presence countenanced the
Faction which she had there contrived. Indeed the King verily imagined she
would the sooner resolve so to do, because she had declared she would
intermeddle no more in any affairs, neither appear at any Counsels, so much did
the Cardinal's presence afflict her; whereas she (instead of comporting her
self to this fair and sweet way) was guided by the persuasions of those who
ruled her spirit, and who induced her to resolve to carry on her anger to the
utmost extremity, and to follow the King every where, assuring her, that at
last the people would all rise, and that from thence she might undoubtedly find
some expedient to persuade his Majesty to consent to the Cardinal's Banishment
or Ruin. This procedure of hers did absolutely entrench upon his authority, as
if he could not have commanded her to quit the Court, and it served only to
provoke the Kings anger, and to force him to deal more rigorously with her then
otherwise he desired to have done.

Politic Observation.
HOpe is that Root which does long nourish the Thought of Revenge, and without
which the most generous persons lose their Courages, and fall into despair,
instead of prosecuting their designs. No one has so well described the
qualities of that which is without reason, as the Ancient who said, it is the
dream of those who are awake, and whose minds are mastered with this Passion.
To speak truly, just as Dreams fill the mind with Chimera's, which have no
other being then in our Fancies, so an ill-grounded hope fills our Courages
with illusions and imaginary contentments, by representing such things which
are absolutely beyond our reach, as if they were subject to our wills and
desires; it flatters our thoughts with a vain belief, that there is not any
impediment possibly to be met with in our enterprises, which we shall not be
able to surmount; and though at the very instant a storm be over our heads, yet
it assures us that it will not last long, but that a calm will soon follow. If
we are to begin a war, it makes us see an Army already in the Field, which
nothing can resist. If any enterprise threaten us with miscarriage, it
persuades us, that we shall soon see some alteration in affairs, setting
before our eyes the examples of many, who have been raised out of great
misfortunes, to greater glories and honors. Thus it is, this same Hope which
fortifieth the most dejected Courages, animates the most astonished men with
new souls, and recruits the resolutions of them who were even languishing. Have
we not seen it serve for an Anchor to the most miserable, to keep them firm in
all Tempests, when they have been upon the point of being overwhelmed, and for
a North Pole, to guide them to their desired Haven? Hope is that which
preserves necessary vigor for the executing of hazardous designs; our own
Wishes never last so long as Hope does; for we soon disclaim our Designs, if we
once believe they will not take effect. It has always been known for the
Mother of Valor, and for a vital Spirit, which animateth the heart to great
attempts. The charms of Hope are very powerful, but they are also dangerous,
and much like the Egg of an Aspick, which is very pleasant to look on, by
reason of that diversity of colors wherewith Nature has been pleased to paint
it, but within it is full of deadly poison, of which time brings forth a most
venomous serpent: For if in Enterprises there be nothing so dangerous as a mis
grounded Hope, yet the pleasure wherewith it entertains our minds in matters of
Revenge, is very dear to us, and makes us pay high Interest for it. It is the
miserable man's Treasure, and sometimes too it is an addition to his miseries.
It is not enough that a hope be conformable to our desires, but it ought to be
laid by when it is grounded upon the assistances of some persons who are easily
to be ruined, or upon an Insurrection of a people who every day change their
resolutions, whom a little fear disarms, and who this day love him, whom but a
little before they could not endure at all.

The King entreats the Queen Mother to desist from her Intreagues.
THough the inflexible stubbornness of the Queen Mother was able to provoke the
most patient Courages, yet the goodness of the King could not be overcome by
it. Whilst she was at Compeigne, whither she followed his Majesty, he still
made new attempts to surmount her resistance. He was not backward to let her
daily see (by his frequent conjuring her, and that with a great tenderness of
heart, which did evidently convince to her, that he neither wanted Respect or
Affection for her) that she would much oblige him, if she would but recede from
the evil advices of those who lived about her, and who only desired a
separation between them, for their own Hatreds, or private Interests. He
proffered to her to set the Marillacs at liberty, if her content depended upon
it, though otherwise they had deserved to be punished; and indeed he valued
nothing in respect of her affections. He often beseeched her to love the
Cardinal for his sake, and made her see, that she was obliged to it, seeing she
knew better then any one, how beneficial he was to the State, and that he had
always faithfully served him. He was not deficient to let her perceive, That
the grief which this great Minister had to find himself in her disfavour, was a
most pregnant testimony of the affection which he had for her service; and that
he did sufficiently oblige himself to an eternal fidelity, by those public
acknowledgements of the Favors which he confessed to have received from her
goodness; and that all her eagerness against him, could not obliterate the
remembrance of them; and at last (that he might pretermit nothing which might
move her) he caused new persuasions to be made to her, by the Sieur de
Chasteauneu'f, Lord Keeper of the Seal, and by the Marshall de Schombergh,
that she would be assistant at Counsels, and recede from those underhand
Intelligences which she might have with Monsieur. But they could procure no
other answer, then that she was weary of meddling with affairs, and that she
would not have any more to do in the Counsels, testifying apparently by this
answer, that positive resolution which she had taken, of following the wicked
Designs of those who had engaged her; so that after all these endeavors, the
King was only touched with uncomfortable grief, that he could work no more upon
her; but his sorrow was accompanied with this satisfaction, that he had omitted
nothing which might properly conduce to the obtaining of his Design.

Politic Observation.
AS there is nothing which causes greater misfortunes in a Kingdom then
Divisions of Princes of the Blood, so there is no greater care ought to be had,
then for prevention of such differences. Physicians have always hopes of life,
whilst the noble vital parts are uncorrupted, but they once tainted, they look
for nothing but death: and the greatest Politicians have been of opinion, that
no very great misfortune could happen to a State, whilst the Princes of the
Blood (who are like the vital parts) live in that decorum and obedience which
is due to the King. But on the contrary, they begin to fear and distrust, if
once they see them falling back, and dividing Parties into Factions, against
their King's Authority: But more especially, because their disorder is attended
with confusion at home, and gives great advantages to strangers abroad. Other
heads of Revolts are easily wrought upon, by satisfying their own private
interests. But it is a hard matter to unite those of the same Blood, after a
defiance shall have once seized on their minds. From hence it is, that Micipsa
in Salust says, the greatest force of a Kingdom does not so much consist in
Arms, or in the richness of Treasuries, as in the good intelligence of the
chief Nobles, which can neither be subdued by Arms, nor corrupted by Moneys,
but especially in the friendship of Brothers, whose Blood ought to render their
union indissolvable. The Kingdom of Cyprus had not been ruined, as Justin
relates it, but only by the dissentions of two brothers. The whole East, had
not been subjected to the Roman yoke, but by the mis-understandings of those
Princes who ruled in those Countries. And no other misfortune made way for
Pompey to make him Master of Judea, then the contention of Hircanus and
Aristobulus, who in envy of one another pretended to possess the Crown. Philip
well knew, of what consequence love between brothers was, when as beholding the
small kindness between his sons Porseus and Demetrius, he so often commanded
them to love one another; representing to them, that Eumenes and Attalus at the
beginning were so small, that they were ashamed to be called Kings, and could
never have raised themselves so high, but by their mutual and reciprocal
affections, as Plutarch reports it in the life of Demetrius. Not to look
after far fetched examples, what did ever bring France to so deplorable a
condition, as the reiterated divisions between our Kings, the Dukes of
Bourgogne and Orleans? Did it not reduce it to an eminent peril of Shipwreck,
and expose it for a prey to Forraigners, who were only chastized by an
extraordinary providence of Heave, which took a particular care for the
preservation of this Monarchy, when it was just upon the point of being ruined?
Undoubtedly, a State is easily vanquished, when divided by those of the Kings
own house and family, disorders soon follow thick and threefold: The people
following their example shake off obedience; every one fisheth in the troubled
Waters; the poor are oppressed by the Soldiers; the rich have much ado to
enjoy their Estates; Governors lose their Sovereigns good wills, and do no
longer stick to their interests, unless upon their own private account; and in
conclusion, foreign enemies make what advantages they please out of it.

The Reasons of the Queen-Mothers Removal.
THings being at this pass, was there any reason to defer the redressing of
them? what color could there be after so many persuasions, instances and
entreaties to leave the Queen Mother in the Court both animated and
discontented, where she countenanced a Faction, kept a close correspondence
with Monsieur against the King, and divided the State? Had it not been an
absolute defect of all sort of Prudence to have endured her keeping up of
Combinations without the Kingdom, of which we have seen but too many sad
consequences? To have permitted her party, openly to slander the King and his
Government, to stir up the people to sedition, to solicit strangers to make
war upon the King, under pretense that they had married her children? Had it
not been an extreme baseness, any longer to have dissembled the knowledge of
that Faction, which would impose a necessity of driving away his most
serviceable and confident Ministers, and only because they forsooth could not
procure from them whatever they desired? Had it not been an absolute loss of
common sense, to have allowed their abrogating that respect which is due to
their Sovereign, as God Almighties own Image? Could any one, and not be of this
Cabal, wink at their endeavors to draw off his Majesty's most faithful
servants, from that duty which they owe unto him? Should one have expected
until the English or Spaniard had brought their Armies into France, to assist
the revolt, or until the Princes who were of this party, should have beaten up
their drums and sounded their Trumpets, for to lead their Soldiers into the
field to have ruined the whole Kingdom with fire and sword? To have done so,
had been the most perfect piece of folly that had ever yet been heard of. Yet
for all this was the King much troubled that he was forced to do such things as
would displease the Queen Mother, as to remove her, though after he had
endeavored all meek and fair means, which her Abettors had rendered in vain,
though she had laid off al natural thoughts such as a Mother ought to have for
a Son, and a Subject for a King, and though she had, to her very utmost,
stirred up both the French and Forraigners to trouble the quiet of the Kingdom.
But at last the King began to consider that the business would grow worse and
worse, if convenient order were not taken to prevent it, that he was bound to
prefer public before private interests, as those of an incensed Mother (and if
it be proper to use the expression) of a Mother revolted against him, which
were things not to be considered at all; according to the judgment of one of
the Queen-mothers Grand-mothers, who amongst those instructions which she gave
her son told him, that he ought to prefer without any distinction the safety of
the Commonweal, before that of any particular or private persons. Withal, his
Majesty was not ignorant that as God does ever prepose Universal before
Individual benefits; so Kings who bear his Image, and are his Vicegerents on
earth ought to do the same; That if the Father Almighty did expose his son, who
was one and the same with himself, to the rage of the Jews, he could not then
be blamed for removing his Mother a few days from the Court, yet continuing to
her all Honor, Officers, Goods, Liberty and Power, that she could desire, and
this for the necessary good of the State, to the conservation of which God had
so obliged him, that he ought to prefer nothing before it. The King thought
with himself, that those great Honors and Lands which he had bestowed on her,
and that almost absolute Authority, which he had always entrusted with her,
whilst she continued in her affection for his Majesty and the public good,
would hold him excused from any condemnation, and would sufficiently evince to
all the World that he had not made use of so violent a remedy, but by
compulsion and constraint of those her Partisans, and by the extremities into
which they hurried her; so that judging within himself, that he ought no longer
to defer his resolution, he at last proposed it to his Counsel.

Politic Observation.
WHen Eagerness has laid such deep roots in the mind of Princes of the Blood
Royal, that they cannot be eradicated by any possibility, it will then be
absolutely necessary to prevent their forming into Factions, which usually
arise from such beginnings. There will unavoidably great changes soon follow in
a Kingdom, where partialities have any sway amongst them. The very least
disorder which can happen between the Heavens, is capable of reducing the
Universe into its first Chaos, and the dissentions of those who are nearest
related to the King, are able to bring a whole State into Confusion, to tie up
the hands of Sovereign Authority, and to expose all as a prey to Forraigners.
The opinion which is held that it is proper to nourish several parties and
bandyings amongst Grandees, whereby to make them less able to resist their
Kings Will, ought not to be understood of Leagues and Combinations to be headed
by those of the royal Family, which may attempt to impose a necessity on the
King, to do what even they shall think fit; for such a division would lead a
Kingdom into utter ruin, and undermine the most solid foundations of Monarchy.
It is no whit less inconvenient to let Princes alone in any bad intelligence,
for their over great union has produced sad effects; it always ought to be
limited by the respects and obediences which they ow their King, for admitting
it to be otherwise, their Factions being like impetuous winds, the popularity
which is gentle and calm (like the Sea) would receive their impressions with
ease, become furiously enraged, run into all disorders, and put a State into
desperate hazards. On such occasion no persons ought to be respected. As the
very greatest are not exempted from those punishments which the Laws have
enacted for the Factious; so their enterprises ought to be cut off and
destroyed the sooner by reason they are more to be feared then others, on the
score of the power which they have to work upon the minds of people. It is
true, ^^e means which conduce to it are very dangerous, and on such occasions
it is, that a great Minister of State ought to testify his zeal and
generosity, by taking the power out of their hands who abuse it, as Arms from a
mad man. It is necessary to resolve upon one of these three things, so to
reconcile them that they may rest in a true ^riendship, which is almost
impossible, at least very difficult amongst Grandees who are once offended with
one another. And this way ought not to be chosen but after a long time of
consideration, that the assurance of it may be of some continuance. The second
is more rigorous, and withal more certain, which is to take off the lives of
the Factious; to which however I should not advise but in case of extremity,
and after all other means have taken no effect, by reason of the respect which
is due to the Royal Family. I esteem the third and last to be most ag^eeable,
which is to banish them and take away from them the means of doing any more
harm. They who are so dealt with, cannot with Justice complain of it, seeing
they have deserved it. It is unreasonable to suffer such persons to remain in a
Court, who make open profession of comptrolling their Kings Actions, of blaming
his Conduct, of setting limits to his Authority, of raising Wars and revolts in
his State. Princes though of the Blood Royal, are not exempted from Obedience
and Subjection to the Laws of the Kingdom. It belongs not to them to give
Orders for the government of affairs, That Prerogative is inseparable from the
Crown, and they who would design the assuming such a power to themselves* by
other ways then those of his Authority, deserve to be catechized as Rebels. Do
we not all know, that, that which heretofore brought this State into the danger
of falling into the Spaniards hands, was the too great condescension of Henry
the third, toward Monsieur de Guise, who was but a stranger Prince too?
Certainly, France had not been exposed to those extreme misfortunes which it
has suffered, had he but had the good luck to have held his hands from those
enterprises.

The resolution of the Council for the Removal of the Queen Mother.
ALthough the Cardinal did very well know the reasonableness, nay the
necessity of seconding his Majesty's inclinations to the Queen-Mothers removal;
yet such was his modesty, and so prevalent over his own discretion and
interest, that instead of so doing, he on the contrary, rendered his often
entreaties to his Majesty, that he would be pleased to give him leave to
withdraw himself from the Court. He represented to him, how that peradventure
the Queen Mother might thereby be appeased, and induced to leave the State in
peace and quiet; and that for his own part, he should willingly suffer himself
to be thrown into the Sea to save the Vessel, provided only, that his Majesty
would preserve him in his affections, and not remove him out of any dislike
either of his Fidelity or Services. Nor did he this, as being ignorant of the
obligation which lay upon him, by reason of the place he held in affairs, of
truly acquainting him with every thing which concerned the good of his State;
but only that he might let his Majesty perceive how little he regarded private
concernments in this occasion. Nor that he did not much esteem the honor which
his Majesty did him, by intrusting him in the first place of the
Administration; but only because the respect which he did bear to the Queen
mother, surmounted the consideration of his own greatness. Not that he wanted
heart in his persecutions and afflictions; for it was well known, the greater
resistances he encountered in the Cabals and intreagues of the Court, did so
much the more whet his Courage and Resolution; insomuch, that they could not at
all move much less shake him; but only because the greatest courages are most
temperate; it being sometimes more generous to destroy then preserve ones self.
In short, not that he wanted affection for his Majesty's service, seeing
nothing could more sensibly have touched him, then to have been deprived by his
removal, of the means and opportunities to serve and defend him from the unjust
attempts of those who perverted by their wickednesses, the minds both of the
Queen Mother and Monsieur; but only that he could never with a good will be
withdrawn from doing her all service, who had the honor to be mother unto his
Master. How really was his advice any whit necessary to persuade his Majesty to
remove her. Her own Actions bespake her unto his Majesty, and showed him in
words at length, that it was not fit she should any longer continue at Court,
until that time and truth had opened her eyes. These were the true reasons
which induced the Cardinal to desire his Majesty's permission to withdraw
himself. But his Majesty who well knew how great a loss such a man might prove
unto his State, seeing many Ages did hardly produce his Equal, and how that he
had made the same use of him, that God does of the Sun, that is, to dissipate
all those storms which might arise, not only refused to grant his request; but
on the contrary, weighing the great services he did him, the remarkable
advantages which France had enjoyed since his promotion to the Administration,
as also the condition in which affairs now were, in respect of the disorders
and confusion into which the Queen Mother endeavored to bring them. And
lastly, comparing the present state of things with what they were, upon his
first entrance into the management of them* he no longer deliberated on this
particular, but absolutely resolved to desire the Queen Mother to pass some
time away from the Court. All the Ministers of State were of the same opinion,
unwilling belike, to fall into the sin of Treason against their King, to render
an unjust respect to the Queen Mother, every of them considering, that she had
no just ground to complain either of his Majesty, or them; but only of those
who had engaged her in such wicked designs, as made her longer stay at Court
incompatible with the good of France.

Politic Observation.
AS the end of all Government is the good of the State; so all Kings are
obliged especially to have a regard unto that, as being the Center, unto which
all their Actions should tend, and to avoid all such things as would divert
them, out of that way. In vain do they attempt or begin any great or glorious
enterprises, if any by-respect to those of their Blood, or the consideration of
their own pleasure be able to put a stop to their progress: The Interests of
Grandees have ever been prejudicial to the public; and if a King would
establish any Law to be observed in his Kingdom, he ought however still to
prefer the good of Subjects in it. One Prince of the Blood will perchance
demand Peace, at a time when War is more proper; and if to satisfy him in
particular, he shall lay down his Arms, he does an action unbeseem^ng a Royal
Prudence: Another will desire, that he would discountenance such a Minister,
whose Councels are however of great advantage to him; and doubtless, if he do
it to satisfy his humor, he should commit an injustice against his own State.
And what reason, I pray, can there be alleged, why a King should upon the
Capricchio of any Grandee whatever, either make a dishonorable Peace which may
render him dis-esteemed amongst strangers; or remove from him any Minister, who
like a good and Propitious Planet, does by his influences cause his state to
flourish, establish a good Order amongst his people, and render his Power
considerable amongst his Neighbors? Who can think it any strange thing, if he
prefer the good of his Kingdom before their private humors, seeing his very
own interests ought not to stand in competition with it? No King does ever
merit the title of Just, if he does not tread under foot all his own pleasures
and delights, for the good and glory of his Crown. He ought to remember that
his Kingdom is not so much established for him, as he is for his Kingdom; and
consequently, that the good of his people ought to be dearer to him then any
other consideration whatever. Now, if he thus ought to prefer the public
before his own private good, who can blame him, if he do the like (in relation)
to the particular satisfaction of any of his own Family? The very contenting of
a Father ought not to be considered in this case, and who so does any thing in
detriment of the Public good, to show his Duty unto his Father, rendereth
himself culpable of a great injustice. The Authority of Parents extends no
farther then the house, and in case they attempt to enlarge their bounds, he is
not bound to observe them. Are not Kings the lively Images of God? If so, what
more reasonable Rule can they propose to follow in their Government then his
Conduct? Now as God does every day permit a thousand particular subjects to
suffer and perish, nay, not exempting Kings themselves, though of never so
great use to their States, and all this for the preservation of the world in
good order; So cannot any one think it unjust, that they should prefer the good
of their State before all other considerations whatever. And who is so
ignorant as not to know, that Public good is the subject of all universal
Causes? The Sun, Moon, and Stars are perpetually sending down their lights and
influences here beneath amongst us, because they are necessary and conducing to
the universal good, notwithstanding some particular and private Subjects may
suffer and be endamaged by it. Now Kings are in the number of Universal Causes;
whence it follows, that they are obliged by the Laws of Justice, still to
regard the Common good; which if they do not, they will inevitably find great
inconveniences fall upon them.

The King after he had given Order to Arrest the Queen Mother, returns to
Paris.
THat course which the King took in this particular, was of all others the most
moderate. Not that he was ignorant of those Ties which obliged him to deal more
severely with the Qeen-Mother; but his own goodness, and the sweetness of the
Cardinal's Counsels, would not permit him to treat her after any other manner.
Indeed if the course he took were so moderate, the execution of it was no less
respectful and civil; insomuch that the Queen Mother had not any just reason to
complain of it, The King was at that time at Comp^igne, and gave out, that he
would on the morrow go to hunt, and accordingly commanded every thing to be put
in order very betimes. He sent for the Marshall d' Estree, and privately told
him, that he should keep near to him, to serve him, as occasion should require,
as also to command such Forces as he left in Compeigne, purposely to prevent
any uproar which the Qeen-Mothers Officers might chance to raise, and likewise
to hinder any concourse of Soldiers in the Countries near adjoining, and to
keep that Town in its obedience. The King made himself ready for the Hunting,
and before he went forth, called the Sieur d^ la Ville-aux Cleres, and
commanded him to go tell the Queen Mother, that he went without taking his
leave of her, because the respect and tenderderness which he had for her, did
hinder him from making a request unto her by word of mouth, which she could not
receive but with some displeasure, though it were much conducing to the good of
his State; which was this, That she would go to the Castle of Moulins (a place
which she her self had made choice of for her abode, after the late King's
decease) and there spend some time, companyed with all those of her Household,
with all sort of Liberty, enjoying all their goods and Revenues at any time
granted to them, and with all Honor due unto her Majesty; To which effect he
gave her the Government de Bour^onnois: And then he called for the Father
Suffren, and gave him likewise order to acquaint the Qeen-Mother as soon as she
did awake, that it was not without regret that he went away without bidding her
Adieu, but that she should not be troubled at it, his Majesty having left the
Sieur de la Ville-Aux Cleres, to inform her of his intentions. This was the
Order, which was observed, and after the King was gone forth of Compeigne,
Father Suffren was the first that carried her the news of it; a person who had
been an eyewitness of those many endeavors and cares the King had used to
allay her spirit, and who might thereupon relate those things unto her which
had been entrusted with him, that she might not have any just cause to complain
against his Majesty. Not long after the Marshall d' Estree sent unto her, to
know if she would be pleased to see him, which she thought fit, and presently
told him, she did now perceive that she must be this second time a Prisoner:
But he having assured her, that he was not left there to restrain her of her
liberty, but rather on the contrary to serve her, and to receive the honor of
her commands, she became a little more appeased; and about evening, the Sieur
de la Ville-Aux-Cleres, came to request her, that she would go pass away some
time at her Castle of Moulins, with such conditions as he was commanded to
relate unto her: and in the mean time the King having ended his sport, went to
lie at Verbrie.

Politic Observation.
QUeens are not at all exempted from those Laws which oblige the punishing of
such as attempt against the King's Authority. Nothing is of greater concern to
their Interest, than the Public good and quiet. And indeed History does
furnish us with frequent examples of their Removals from Court, and being
subjected to other punishments, when either their own ill deportment, or the
Public good has required it. None but Kings themselves are above the Laws;
and seeing their Majesty's (both Wifes and Mothers) have with the qualities of
Queens, that of Subjects, they are not privileged from those rewards which are
ordained by the Laws. Helen wife of Menelaus returning to Sparta, upon the
ruin of Troy, was soon banished for having occasioned so many misfortunes. The
Emperor Honorius returned Placida back unto Constantinople, she being
suspected of holding correspondence with his enemies. Irene the wife of
Constantine the fifth, was condemned to perpetual banishment by Nic^phorus, her
Sons Successor. Martina wife of the Emperor Heraclius, was forced to undergo
the like sentence by Decree of the Senate, for having put to death her Son in
law Constan^ine the younger. Our own History has plenty of the like examples,
Lewis the twelfth removed his Wife from the Court, and divorced her, upon
suspicion of her loyalty. Charles the seventh sent his Mother Isabel of Baviers
unto Bloys, and thence unto Tours, to hinder the growth of those wicked
contrivances, which were hatched by some certain discontented ones, under her
name; he likewise seized on her Jewels and Money, by the Constable d' Armagnac,
and committed her to the guard of three men, without whose leave she could not
speak with any one whatever; in which condition she continued, until the Duke
of Burgogne came to relieve her. The satisfaction of one only person is of so
little consideration if compared with the good of many millions committed to
the care of a King, and for which he must be one day accountable before him who
has only constituted him over them, that he might watch for their good: There
is not any obligation great enough, or consideration just enough, to excuse a
King from preventing the beginning, or stopping the progress of any evil which
seems to threaten his people. This Rule is so general, that it admits of no
exceptions. Besides, if a King (as doubtless he is) be obliged to lay down his
own life for his Subjects good, how much more reason has he (a fortiori) to
prefer it before any other respect whatever? The late Queen Catharina de
Medicis said, and that with great judgment, A King ought to have the same
Jealousy of his Authority, as a Husband is obliged to have of his wife.

The chief Leaders of this Cabal secured.
AT the same time that the King departed from Compeigne, and had requested the
Queen to pass away some time from the Court, there were Orders given out for
the securing of the Principal Authors of this Cabal. Those Ladies who were
interested in it, were commanded to withdraw themselves. The Marshal d'
Bassompierre L' Albe de Foix, and Doctor Vautier were sent to the Bastille,
where they received not any violence at all. The Princess de Conty, the
Duchess d' Elbaeuf, d' Ornano, and Desdiquieres, were commanded to retire to
their own houses. The Princes, Governors, and other Lords then absent from the
Court, were so fairly dealt withal, that there was only course taken, that
they might hold no further correspondence with the Queen Mother, by having an
eye upon their actions and telling them, that they would force his Majesty to
punish them; in case they did not surcease their Intreagues and Factions. What
greater moderation could possibly have been used, and what greater Clemency
could there have been showed toward those Factious persons, who had sowed
discord in his Majesty's family, held intelligence with strangers, attempted to
raise civil Wars in the Kingdom, who had openly found fault with his Majesty's
Government, traduced his most glorious and just actions, and who were come to
that pass of insolency, that they would compel his Majesty to destroy him whom
he cherished as the worthiest instrument of his Glory: But had they been
continued near the Queen Mother where they might have gone on in their
agitations, what would they not have done, and to what extremities would they
not have been transported?

Notwithstanding all this, she complained aloud, that all those in whom she
could put any confidence were taken from her; and earnest entreaties she made,
that Vautier might be restored to her as a person whom she pretended necessary
for her health: which was denied, he being one of the prime firebrarnds of the
whole faction, and one who instead of pacifying her Majesty's spirit (as the
Cardinal had but lately obliged him, by promising him very great advantages if
he did effect it) had added fuel to the fire, and aggravated the violence of
her Passion; but that she might not have any just cause to complain, she was
offered to take her choice of above a hundred Doctors of Physic, in and about
Paris, most of them much more able then him.

Politic Observation.
IT is not reasonable to suffer them who are factiously inclined to rove at
their own liberty, seeing Prisons are only made to restrain them who abuse it
against the Public good. In vain have the Laws ordained this means to stop the
progress of their malice, if they be not put in execution. What color can
there be, not to confine them who are troublers of the peoples quiet? It is
hard to secure all; who have had their hands in a Faction; and indeed it were
not peradventure fit so to do; but however, the Ringleaders must and ought to
be restrained. It is very dangerous to wink at them, lest the people apprehend
too much mildness; and besides the favor which is showed to them, and serves
only to give them time so to settle and contrive their designs, that
afterward it will be to little purpose to oppose them. Mucianus Vitell us was
much commended in the days of old, for having commanded his own son to be put
to death that he might quench the flames of a War in its Cradle. The Duke of
Alencon having conspired against Charles the seventh, in the year 1474 was, not
only imprisoned but condemned to death. And the Duke of Bourgogne supplicating
to obtain favor in his behalf, by alleging that he was of the Blood Royal and
that his Ancestors had done great services to the Crown, was answered by the
King, that as for being of the Blood Royal, he was not the less worthy of
punishment, seeing he was the more obliged to have been loyal to it; and as for
those services which his Predecessors had done, they ought not to be regarded
in relation to him, seeing he had not followed their good example. Charles the
Fifth, not only shortened the liberty, but the life too of a Gentleman who had
dictated a Letter to those of Gaund, in which they entreated Francis the first
to assist them against him. Philip the second, King of Spain, stood not in
expectation until his son had completed that Faction which he had designed
against him, and the State, but not sparing his own blood, he presently clapped
him up in prison upon his first notice and assurance of his resolutions.
Charles the Ninth, did not pardon the Duke of Alencon his own Brother, no more
then he did the King of Navar; for upon his first knowledge of their
Intreagues, he sent them both unto the Boys de Vincennes. Did not Henry the
Third, after conference with his Nobles at Bloys, threaten the late Henry the
Grand, and the Prince de Conde, in case they did not conform themselves to
those resolutions which had been concluded for the good of Religion and the
State? Neither had France ever been so much spoiled by those Wars, had Monsieur
de Guise been imprisoned, as soon as ever his wicked designs had been
discovered.

The Queen Mother her self did the same thing; for during her Regency, she
imprisoned Monsieur the Prince upon suspicion, lest he might attempt something
against her Authority.

L' Marshall d' Estree, addresseth himself to execute his Majesty's pleasure
against the Queen Mother.
DUring the Queen-mothers abode at Campeign, the Marshal d' Estree was very
careful to show her all manner of respect, according to the command given him
by the King. He went constantly to receive the word from her, he sent to know
what course she would be pleased to take concerning the Keys of the City, and
whether she would have them brought to her. All the Officers of her Family,
prosecuted their charges without any disturbance; she her self went abroad when
and where she pleased, unaccompanied with any, who could but seem to restrain
her liberty; neither did he ever discourse to her in any other dialect, but to
beseech her from his Majesty, that she would be pleased to go to her house of
Moulins, which her self had made choice of since her Widdow-hood; he assured
her she should not have any guards about her: Insomuch, that really she could
not have any just cause to complain: And in fine, she condiscended to go to
Moulins. Not long after, some of her Faction being at liberty, reflecting on
the neernesse of Paris, and how advantageous it might be to their designs in
regard it was the Center, where all the intelligence of the Kingdom was
brought, and where all their Contrivances might be managed with the greater
security and secrecy, advised her to change that resolution, and persuaded her
to continue at Compeign, although her self had not long before said, that she
could not possible live there. The King knew that the Neighborhood of Paris
war of a dangerous consequence, for those very reasons which made them aim at
it, so that he refused to give way to her longer stay thereabouts, but offered
her the choice of any other town in the heart of the Kingdom; she pitched upon
Nevers, and the King had no sooner approved of it, but she presently changed
her mind, pretending she had not any money for the journey; thereupon she was
promised a supply, and that she should not want for any thing, so she pretended
a great preparation of Galleys to transport her out of France, which was only
an invention suggested to her by those who only continued it as a delay: The
King proffered the Government of Anjou unto her together with the City and
Castle Angiers, in case she would go thither: To all these Proposals she
discovered nothing but a resolute stubbornness against the Kings Will, having
forgot, belike, that she was his Subject as well as his Mother, and not at all
regarding those instances so often represented from his Majesty, that she would
depart from Compeign, so that her disobedience against his Authority was not
the only offense, but her delays in that City, being so passionately and
stiffly by her desired, bred the greater jealousy and suspicion of her.

Politic Obeservation.
OBstinacy is a fault, the more dangerous amongst great persons, in regard
their example may serve for a Spring to give motion unto the people, and their
resisting their Kings Will, causes great evils in a State. That perverseness
of not being ruled by reason and their Sovereigns Authority, serves only to
engage them in great disorders, which instead of advancing, ruineth their
Interests, and shipwracks all their adherents. For the King must be obeyed, and
that by the very greatest of his own Blood and Family. Better it is for them to
bend then break, to turn to any hand rather then go straight on to their ruin
and confusion. The certainty of Prudence does not consist in a determinative
will, of absolutely doing this or that thing, but in a resolution of
prosecuting with zeal whatever reason does dictate to be advantageous or
proper; when it follows that whenever Prudence discovers any notable
disadvantage likely to attend that which formerly had been concluded necessary
and profitable, she presently with-draws her self. An irrevocable resolution
cannot be commendable but in Angels, who piercing into the truth of things in
an instant, and knowing all the Qualities or Accidents, which can render them
either good or evil, may, ^^hout fear of being mistaken, remain firm in their
first decrees. But so it is not with a humane Soul, which oftentimes coming to
learn, that those Subjects by him thought profitable are dangerous, is then
obliged to reject them with the same earnestness as he did before prosecute
them. That ignorance in which we are all born does oblige the most powerful
men, to follow the Counsels of the wise, even against their own opions, which
renders them more inclinable to accommodation then others. Hence it is not any
inconstancy to change in any evil designs, neither then when any unseen
misfortune comes to be discovered; but it usually happens to us in the
confusion of affairs, as when we are sick, we are most eagerly desirous of
those things, which are quite contrary to our recovery.

The Discontents of Monsieur's Creatures.
AMongst the many other complaints made by them who abused the Queen-mothers
Name and Seal in their Letters, this was one of the chiefest, that she had not
been removed from the Court, but only because she would not hold a fair
correspondence with the Cardinal. But is not this like the complaining of the
sick, who being fallen into some shameful disease by their own faults, will by
no means accuse themselves, but endeavor to impute it to some other cause more
likely to justify themselves? Truly the Cardinal was no more the cause of the
Queen-mothers Removal, then Virtue is the cause, that Sin betaking it self to
all wickedness, out of the hatred it bears to goodness, should by that means
come to be aliened from God, who withdraws himself from it. It cannot indeed be
denied; but that the King before her left he at Compeigne, did once and again
charm her to love the Cardinal; and it were not amiss if the true motives
which induced him so to do, were here laid down. The good of his State was
chiefly in his intentions, and the necessity of withdrawing her from those
Factions which would engage the Kingdom in Revolts, and all this to compel him,
to deliver up this grand Minister, in case they could not effect it by the
daily instances which they persuaded her to make unto his Majesty. This indeed
is the true reason which forced his Majesty to part with her as himself
testifies in his Letter to the Governors of the Provinces, where true it is,
mention is made of her refusal to love the Cardinal, but it is likewise said,
that the hatred which she bare to him, transported her to attempt things
contrary to the good of his State, and the public quiet, insomuch that he
could no longer permit her stay at Court. But who can impute her removal to the
Cardinal, when it is well known how careful and solicitous he was to appease
that anger which she expressed against him, which he did so effectually as to
renounce his own interest and Fortune, and to sue for his own discharge from
the Court with that earnestness, that his stay there may justly be said to be
only in order to his Majesty's Will and satisfaction, who expressly commanded
it, and to acquit himself of the Obligation which he had to acknowledge, by the
continuation of his services, of the honor which he did him; the King still
protesting as great a resolution to preserve him as the Queen Mother did
eagerness to destroy him.

But lastly, who can deny that a design tending to ruin (whatever it cost)
one of the chiefest pillars of the State, and him whom the King himself had
often professed to be the principal Author of his good, is not a crime Laesae
Majestatis? Were it not such in any one, to attempt the destruction of any the
strongest places on the Frontites, or rather to invade any the fairest Towns of
France? Had not experience then made it evident, that the Cardinal was of
greater use and concern for the good of France, then many Citadels, and diverse
of the best Towns in the Kingdom? He would easily have retrived them all, if so
be any Invasion of our Enemies should have forced them from us, but it was not
to be hoped ever to find a Minister qualified as he was, who was a greater
Protection to France, then all the Citadels put together, and who by his
Industry had made the King master of a great number of Towns and Cities.

Politic Observation.
IT was not without reason that Theodosius the younger, and Justinian, inserted
in their Books, as likewise Leon the first, and Constantine in their Politicis
and Basilicis, that Law made by the Emperor Arcadius, whereby they who had
engaged themselves in any Faction tending to ruin the chief Ministers of a
Sovereign, were guilty Laesae Majestatis. And for this very reason, If any one
in England be convicted of having contrived (though but in his thoughts) the
downfall of any Counselor of State, though he had not executed it, yet such is
the Law there, that he lose his life as guilty de laesae Majestatis, against
the King; as it was in the case of Somerset, Uncle to Edward the sixth, and
Protector of the Kingdom, for only having designed in his thoughts to put the
Duke of Northumberland to death, who likewise governed the Kingdom of England
under the same young King. The Laws of Swedeland are so respectful of them,
that it is death only to speak ill of them. Salvian de Marseille says, That
the enormity of Injuries ought to be weighed by the quality of them on whom
they reflect; whence it follows (says he) that those injuries done to a
chief Minister of State, who represents the Person of his Prince, are to be
reputed as done against the Prince himself. Thou have commitied an offense
(says Quintilian) but because it is against the Magistrate, thou art therefore
guilty of Treason. Whence it was that Verterius (as Plutarch observes, was
condemned to die, he having been defective in his respects to a Tribune, whose
place is much inferior to that of a chief Minister This was the sense which
Antiquity had of those offenses committed against public persons, and thus
were they punished who so offended. And who can deny these their Laws and
Customs to be very reasonable and just, seeing chief Ministers are like the
noblest parts of the Sovereign, as is declared in the Law of Arcadius? And if
the Prince be the head of his State, they are then the Members and Instruments
by which he governs. And thus has another said, Our Savior is the Head of
the Church* the Church are his Body, and the Prelates are his chief members.
They are Stars clothed by their Princes with part of their own splendor, that
they may the better guide the people by their Influences; they are the lively
Images in which they cause the footsteps of their Authority to shine forth.
Whence it is, that if a man be guilty de Laesae Majestatis, for only offending
by any dis-respect his Princes Image or Picture, made only of Brass, Stone, or
the like; surely he is much more guilty who dis^respecteth his living Image, in
whom the most lively stamps of his Royal Authority are engraved, who is the
Organ by which he delivers his Will unto the People, and indeed the principal
Instrument of his Glory. And if it be needful to reinforce this with any
stronger reason, That is the crime de Laesae Majestatis which offends the
Sovereign, or which interfereth with the greatness of his State.

And what? Is not this to attempt upon the greatness of his State, when a Cabal
shall be contrived and fomented for the ruin of a Minister, who by the conduct
of his Masters Arms, and his own Prudence, has extended his limits, has
rendered him terrible to all other Nations, has vanquished all his Kings
enemies, and reduced them to an impossibility of attempting any new thing
against his Masters authority, who has extinguished all those Factions which
troubled the public quiet, who daily augmenteth the Revenue of the Exchequer,
has established Peace in the Kingdom, and in a word, next unto his Majesty, is
the greatest prop and supporter of its greatness? Cicero says, That he who
raises a Sedition against the Public Peace, does diminish the Majesty of the
Empire. There are three sorts of High Treasons. The first is absolutely against
the Princes person The second against the Respect due to him. And the third
against the Grandeur and Safety of his State and Kingdom. Now it were to be
purposely blind, not to rank under this third degree, all those Factions which
contrive the ruin of any Ministers of State, they being so much contrary to
the good of the State; neither were it unreasonable to range them under the
first, as in England, seeing Ministers carry their Masters Image instamped on
their Foreheads.

Prosecution of the Subject.
THe Marshall d' Estree, whose Discretion has been often experimented in the
many affairs in which he had been employed, used his utmost endeavors to
induce the Queen Mother to yield unto his Majesty's Will and Pleasure. The
Marquis de Saint Chaumont came diverse times to her from his Majesty, to assure
her, that he could no longer permit her stay at Compeigne: All which produced
nothing but new heart-burnings in her mind, and great lamentations at her
Imprisonment, which in its self was but imaginary, seeing she had not any
Guards upon her, disposed of the keys of the City, and went abroad wherever
she pleased. This procedure of hers could not but provoke his Majesty, neither
indeed could it be longer endured in a State, where Obedience is the Foundation
of Government; so his Majesty resolved to dispatch unto her the Marshall de
Schomberg, and the Sieur de Roissi, who were known to be both prudent and
respectful; to the end they might deal clearly with her, tel^ her the truth,
which till then had been forborne, and discourse at length unto her the
disorders of her carriage (of which his Majesty till that time seemed not to
take any notice) notwithstanding the show which she made of her innocence.
Accordingly they dealt ingeniously with her, represented to her, that the King
was well informed of those many Cabals contrived against his Authority and
Glory, that he likewise knew Monsieur's departure first from the Court, and
then out of the Kingdom, was an effect of her only Counsel; Lastly, that there
was not any one in the Kingdom, how great soever, who could pretend to a Right
of imposing a Law on his Majesty for the choice of his Ministers; and that his
Majesty could not but think it extremely strange, that she, above all others in
particular, should so press him to destroy the Cardinal, seeing she knew better
then the whole Nation, that there was not any person in the Kingdom, who had
done, or was more able to do service to the State, then he: To be short, that
she had no such great reason to complain, that she was forced to live removed
from the King, there being not any Law in holy Writ, which require children
always to live with their Mothers, especially when they are of age to dispose
of their own good; but that its found written in diverse places which command
Kings to be obeyed as God's Lieutenants upon earth; that his Majesty had just
reason to be offended, he having so often sent to her to withdraw her self from
Compeigne, and she having as often slighted it; nor could she pretend any
excuse for her so doing, seeing his Majesty had offered her the choice of any
other place to dwell in; that they were obliged to tell her, that this her
disobedience was not to be endured in a well ordered State, neither that it
were just for his Majesty to put up this resistance of hers; that it was the
ready way to force him to use her with more rigor: and Monsieur de Schomberg
did not stick to tell her, that it had been his own advice to remove her from
the Court, so prejudicial was her presence to his Majesty's service. These
discourses so full of Truth and Prudence, should have opened her eyes, and
discovered his Majesty's goodness unto her, who was satisfied only with a short
removal of her, for such reasons as have formerly Imprisoned, nay condemned
diverse great Princes to death: whereas her mind was so charmed by their devices
who had engaged her in this Cabal, that instead of disabusing her, they only
added extremities to the excess of her choler.

Politic Reflection.
ALthough great men should more especially be informed with ^he truth of
things, seeing their affairs which depend on it, are of greater importance then
others, yet however the most part of them do not much love her, she seldom
comes within their Courts but naked; and if perchance she appear in their
presence, they turn about from her, as if they could not endure to see her.
They desire things should be related to them as they would have them, not as
they really are. It is very dangerous to find fault with any of their Actions,
which they undertake in confidence, that they are well-beseeming their
greatness: If any one presume to debate their Designs, by discovering the naked
Truth to them, he will presently be esteemed but an ill servant for his pains:
whence it is, that the most part of their attendants unwilling to run the
hazard of displeasing them, do not discourse to them of any their affairs, but
so as they think may be acceptable to them; they find by the daily experience
of others, both past and present, that this compliance of theirs is the most
assured supporter of their Fortunes, and a far greater prop to them then Truth
her self. Those Princes who are of this humor, never well counseled, there
being but a few who would willingly for their sakes renounce their Fortunes*
especially seeing by telling truth they should get nothing. Such counsels as
thwart their Passions, are either esteemed extravagant, or as proceeding from a
naughty servant. They are for the most part like that unjust Judge who demanded
of our Savior what Truth was, but would not stay to be informed. Great and
many are the inconveniences which by this means happen to them: for those
specious appearances of Truth with which they are deluded, are like to those
Lamps set out on the tops of Rocks by Pirates, which instead of a Harbor
entice the vessels to their shipwreck, whereby they make a prey of their goods.
An Ancient Author says, That the greatest pleasure of the mind consists in
the knowledge of Truth. But it ought to be understood of a soul free from
Passion; and which only prosecuteth the Laws of Justice. And the Rule of the
Wise says, Happy is the Prince who is so disposed, and who knows how to
esteem those who counsel him freely, without disguising the Truth, for they,
and only they, are the real supporters of his State and greatness.

Prosecution of the History.
THis behavior of the Queen-Mother's seemed incredible, considering the
goodness which she had hitherto made apparent in her conduct, neither indeed
could she possibly have fallen into such disorders, had she not been lead into
them, by those very persons in whom she most confided. Such and so great was
their wickedness, that wanting sufficient reasons and inducements to entice her
to their own bends, they sought for some amongst the Stars, and were so bold as
to cast the King's Nativity, and foretold her, that by the Position of the
Heavenly Signs, his Majesty could not long live; which being so, the Laws of
Prudence obliged her to side with Monsieur; that she ought in reason to look on
him as the Rising Sun, who would shortly sit at the Helm, and whose favorable
influences would be necessary for the upholding of her greatness. This
foundation being thus laid, it was no hard matter to persuade her in her
Passion, that she need not much regard the Cardinal, for the King once ceasing
to be, he would of consequence lie at their mercy. These were the vain wicked
imaginations of certain malicious extravagant persons, which they went rather
to Hell then Heaven, to learn out for the feeding of others ambitious humors,
and to continue by this device the pensions which they procured from her
Majesty. It is strange that any man should ground a belief upon such like
predictions, yet it is a Rock upon which many Grandees have been ruined. By
this means was Lentulus Sura drawn into Cataline's conspiracy; And by this
means did the late Queen Catharine de Medicis engage her self in several
affairs prejudicial to her childrens and her own Interests. Thus indeed did the
ancient Pagans in all their great enterprises, on which they durst not think
without the Predictions of their Augurs, and other Priests, though in truth it
was without any reason or good foundation.

Politic Observation.
THat knowledge which we have during this life, has enough to do, if it can
but penetrate into the depth of things present, to extend and stretch it unto
things to come, is not only useless, but dangerous* I shall willingly for my
part subscribe to the opinions of Plato, Aristotle, and Seneca, all who have
absolutely rejected the Art of Divination, and held that the Predictions of
Astrologers are vain and idle. The Chaldeans (as most probably may be
conjectured) were the first who discovered the use of Horoscopes, but happy had
been their ignorance had they known nothing of it. It is very commendable in us
to foresee by Prudence that which may befall us, but it is a foppery to ground
the event of our undertakings upon the motion of the Stars. The Devils have
sometimes foretold by the frivolous ordinary rules of Astrology, what shall
happen, but most men have attributed the truth of their predictions, not so
much to the strength of those Rules, as unto Chance; or as others will have it,
unto their care to effect these things by them foretold. To desire to know what
shall hereafter happen, is to search into that which belongs only unto God; and
it is equally rash to predict, as it is vain to pry into the knowledge of it.
Notwithstanding all this, there are such as do suffer themselves to be led away
into this error, and that upon two different occasions. Some, that they may
avoid those misfortunes which they fear; but it is commonly seen, that they who
would fain shun the Rock, do run upon the Shelve. Others, that they may attain
unto those goods for which they hope; but to them it likewise happens, that
crediting too much the good fortune promised them by the Stars, they come to
run into disasters; if perchance they meet not that amongst the Stars which
they desire, presently they slight the Art; but if they do meet with any thing
correspondent to their minds, it so flatters their passions, that they are
blind, and engage themselves over and over, in such enterprises, as do at last
bring them to their ruins. There need no other reason to evince the ignorance
of Astrologers then this one, that they are so little knowing of what shall
befall themselves in particular; for they know not how to prevent any thing,
neither indeed need there more, then barely to examine with Prudence the Rules
upon which they ground their conjectures, and it will then soon be discovered
that they are Impostors, and that their knowledge is mere ignorance.

Prosecution of the Subject.
NOtwithstanding that there was as much clemency in his Majesty's, as obstinacy
in the Queens procedure, yet did she not forbear to lament, and accuse him of
cruelty. His Majesty being then no longer able to endure those complaints which
she made to all the Princes of Christendom, especially at her Imprisonment, and
being equally desirous to stop her mouth, by withdrawing those forces which
happened to be then near her (not upon the score of guarding her, but for other
reasons as has heretofore been declared) and likewise knowing that it would be
a hard matter for her to cause Compiegne to revolt, or to raise any Soldiers
thereabouts, the principal of the Cabal being either imprisoned or affrighted,
did at last resolve to disperse them into other places. The only thing feared
was, lest she should cast her self into the Spaniards hands. His Majesty to
make sure of her, as to that particular, first sent to her by the Marshal d'
Estree, that he would readily satisfy her, by withdrawing all those forces
then in Garrison at Compiegne; provided she would engage her self not to stir
out of the Kingdom. She thereupon passed her word once and again, not to go out
of the Kingdom, and the Forces were accordingly drawn off; only his Majesty
left part of them, some certain leagues from thence, to prevent the assembling
of any soldiers.

The Queen-mothers departure out of France.
THis excess of his Majesty's goodness, should have wrought upon her, but she
instead of acknowledging it for such, abused it, and that she might add to his
troubles went out of the Kingdom. For the facilitating and private management
of this design, she gave his Majesty to understand by the Marshal de Estree,
and the Marquis de Saint Chaumont* that she would withdraw her self from
Compiegne, to such other Town as he should appoint, might she but have the
honor to see him The King over-joyed at this her Proposal, offered to meet
her, either at her house of Monceaux or Mantes, or such other places as she
pleased upon the Roads of Angiers, Bloys, or Moulins. The King pleased himself
for some certain time, in this hope, believing it might be a means to regain
Monsieur, but in the interim, the Queen mother negotiated her retreat with the
Infanta in Flanders, and found means to prevail with the Marquis de Vardes to
deliver up Capelle into her hands, of which he was then Governor. The Request
which she made unto the Infanta was no long time unanswered; for the Spaniards
who aimed at nothing more then to foment divisions in the Nation, whereby they
might prevent the assisting of any of our Allies, when they invaded them,
quickly persuaded her Highness, to assure her of a good reception; that she
should be entertained in her Territories with all honor and respect, and that
she would make such provisions, as she should not want any thing she could
desire; this answer once received, she stood no longer in deliberating on her
retreit; but providing every thing necessary for her person, she departed from
Compiegne with Madam de Tresnay, and one woman of her Chamber. The same day she
came to Capelle, but could not get in (the King having sent thither the Sieur
de Vardes the Father, upon suspicion of the Son) and from thence she went to
Avennes, which is the first Town in Haynault, bordering on France. By this she
made it apparent to the whole World, that she was not only a Prisoner, but that
she did wed her self to her passion, by giving her self up to the enemies of
France

Politic Observation.
TO give way to Passion, and let it overruled our reason is very dangerous, so
are the consequences which attend it, especially in matters of great
concernment. God has ordained reason to govern in Man's Soul* as in a Throne,
that she might guide all his Actions. He has appointed reason to be the rule
of his motions, as the little fish which marches before the Whale, to lead him
through the Waters, lest his unweildinesse should carry him against the Rocks.
We are all bound to follow the dictates of Reason; but of all others, Princes
are most concerned so to do; for if once they shut their eyes to reason, and
suffer themselves to be transported by the violence of their Passion, what do
they but open a Gate to Usher in disorders and confusions into their States.
This violence may well be li^ened to that of a Torrent, which rooteth up Trees,
teareth up Rocks, and overthrows whatever it meets; for just thus is it, when
reason is once extinguished, the judgment is then spoiled, and Prudence is of
no more use, then feathers to a Bird caught in Lime. Is not this the thing
which has destroyed most, if not all Kingdoms, which has trodden Crowns
under foot, which has excited people to revolt, and Cities to mutiny, which
has profaned sacred places, abused Altars, and whatever is most reverenced by
mankind? How many have there been seen, who in their fury have not cared to
lose themselves, provided they might ruin them in that Precipice which
themselves could not avoid? It is great wisdom to suppress anger, and to
stifle it in the Cradle, for by permission and toleration it grows to be
headstrong. Violence by giving way to it, becomes invincible, insomuch that in
time it will be difficult, nay impossible to overcome it; it is like Lightning,
which once broke out from the Cloud which restrained it, is not by any means to
be again reduced.

The Queen-mothers entrance into Bruxels.
THe Queen mother was no sooner come into the Infantas Territories, but the
Baron de Creve-Coeur received her, in the Town of Avennes, as Governor of
Haynault. She then gave notice of her arrival unto the Infanta, by the Baron de
Guaypre, and her Highness presently dispatched the Marquis d' Ayetone, to offer
unto her Majesty all the Power and Authority which she had in the Low Countries
and to beseech her absolutely to dispose of it. Don Philip Albert de Valesques,
Captain of her Highness Lifeguard, came at the same time with his Company to
serve her, as Guards from Avennes, she went to Mons, where the Prince d'
Espinoy put the Townsmen all in Arms, to receive her with the greater
splendor. Thither came the Infanta to meet her, who entertained her with all
imaginable respects, and confirmed to her the Proposals which she had made of
delivering her power in the Low Countries, into her Majesty's hands. Two days
being thus spent, they went both together to Bruxels, where she was received
with the same honor, as if she had been King of Spain. She was entertained
with all the satisfaction and diversions that could be imagined. It cannot be
expressed, with what honor the Spanish Nobility did attend her; but we may
conceive, that their designs were far different from those of the Infanta, who
good Princess, had in her whole life time testified a great deal of goodness,
sincerity, and holiness it self, so that what she did cannot be ascribed but to
her civility, and the particular kindness which she had, both for the
Queen Mother and France. Whereas, the Spaniards had other ends in it. They knew
that Women are bewitched wish Honor, and by this means did they endeavor to
engage her more and more to them, that they might make use of her to ruin the
Cardinal, whose Prudence alone held their Noses to the Grind-stone, more then
an Army of a hundred thousand men.

Politic Observation.
IT is great discretion in Kings to receive with honor such Princes, who
discontented with their own Countries, come to make addresses to them. The
qualities of their birth make them venerable, in what condition soever, though
they were vanquished, yet ought they to be treated with respect. E^nones King
of the Adorses is highly applauded by Tacitus, for his courteous entertaining
of Mithridates King of Bosphorus, when his evil fortune forced him, though his
enemy, to ^^st himself into his hands. And if the quality of stranger Princes,
be an obligation on Kings to receive them with respect, amidst the misfortunes
in which they are sometimes involved, yet Prudence does much more advise, nay
require it; for the honor done to them, is a Tie which does engage them to
wish well to their Countries, upon the score of the good usage and kindness
which was there showed them. Besides, and which is not a little considerable,
it is a most infallible way to foment and exasperate divisions in those
Countries, from whence they retire. They may at any time be placed in the head
of an Army to go raise a War there, and yet not break with their King. A thing
of great concernment to the Spaniards, whose Countries being separated from one
another, cannot well be preserved in obedience, but by their setting on foot
dissentions and wars amongst their neighbors, as has been observed by one of
themselves who has treated of the Politic secrets by them used. A wise Prince
is never sorry at any partiality in his neighboring Countries. He knows that
he is by that means safe from them, and that whilst they are engaged in Wars,
he many have leave and leisure to execute his own designs, and oftentimes to
make great advantages by it.

The Infanta dispatcheth the Sieur de Carondelet to the King, to negotiate the
Queen-mothers accommodation.
SHortly after the Queen-mothers abode at Bruxels, and about the month of
August, the Infanta desirous of Peace, sent the Sieur de Caro del^t Doyen of
Cambray, her extraordinary Ambassador unto the King then at Monceaux, for to
assure his Majesty that she had not received her into her Country, but ou^ of
the affection and respect* which she was bound to pay unto her; that she had
not for her part any thought of making any advantage against France, but would
contribute her utmost endeavors to the tranquillity thereof. The King, who was
not naturally inclined to war, but when it was necessary, in order to the
establishment of Peace in his Dominions, would have easily been induced to an
accord, had he not been certainly informed that those about the Queen Mother,
and the Spaniards procured this Embassy, only the better to conceal the
designs they had against the Public Peace of his Kingdom; Nevertheless as
Kings are politiquely obliged to dissemble their actions, and to acknowledge
apparent civilities by apparent testimonies, the Cardinal by his appointment
received him with all possible demonstrations of honor and kindness, to
flatter his vain ambition, and to render him at least seemingly serviceable to
France, knowing he had in charge to make diverse agreeable Propositions: He made
diverse journies betwixt the Court and Bruxels, and was always received and
entertained at his return with honor and magnificence; and when he took his
last leave, was presented with a Cross of Diamonds worth two thousand Crowns:
But his frequent Voyages made him to be more swayed with imaginary conceits,
then prudence in his undertaking; and that after he had wasted the estate by
Birth and Fortune derived to him, he would have been glad to have gotten others
from the bounty of his Majesty.

Politic Observation.
ALthough one Prince may have received some unkindness from another, yet ought
he not however to be deficient in receiving his Ambassadors with civility and
honor. Civility is a virtue which ought to be used every where. Alexander
whose example is the more considerable, seeing he was always esteemed for
generous, used it even to excess, and that toward his very enemies. He ought
to hold a correspondence with others, though he has neither reason to love
them, nor to think that he is beloved by them: It will not become him to seem
as if he would be revenged, but effectually to punish him who has provoked
him; whereas at is discretion to entertain him with Civilities, for the easier
surprising of him; the highest testimonies of friendship which he shall render
to him, being the best devices he can use, to give him no cause of jealousy,
which may induce him to stand upon his guard. One of the Ancient Sages said. A
Prince never ought to receive the kindnesses of others, but with distrust.
Pompey was decived by the pretenses of peace, and Lepidus by an apparent
Friendship, as Tacitus has observed. In general it may be said, that
Civilities are like a winding lane, which lead by a Trap door into any designed
place whatever. They are always seasonable, and although they are not always
accompanied with frankness, yet are they nevertheless agreeable to the
Receiver, and advantageous to the Giver. The Wise man sometimes seems to be
highly satisfied, though he be inwardly displeased; which he does, that he may
the better take his time, and show his anger to the purpose; for by dissembling
his discontent with his enemies, he is the more enabled to do them a
displeasure; neither ought he to show his Teeth, but when he is in a condition
to bite. But more especially ought he not to receive Ambassadors sent to him,
but with Honor and respect, seeing their Quality has always made them pass
for venerable, in consideration of the person whom they represent: Neither is
the Honor done them cast away, for it serves to take off from their Master's
distrust, who may thereby be enticed to take less care in his affairs, then
otherwise he would; withal, it keeps his Neighbors in suspense, and hinders
them from associating themselves with him; for most Princes are apt to divide
upon the least noise of War.

The King sends the Cardinal de la Valette unto Monsieur then at Orleans.
HAving related the causes of the Queen-Mothers discontent, and the manner of
her retreat, it will not be amiss to speak something of Monsieur's affairs, of
his Majesty's and the Cardinal's endeavors to bring him back to the Court, and
of the ill Counsel which engaged him to raise a War, and at last to withdraw
himself out of the Kingdom. Upon his Majesty's return from Compeigne, where he
had left the Queen Mother, he resolved not to omit any opportunity which might
be conducing to reconcile him unto him, and to withdraw him from the
Queen-Mothers intreagues, and having thought nothing could be more proper to
allay his Spirits, which had been a little exasperated, then to marry him, his
Majesty dispatched the Cardinal de la Valette to him, then at Orleans, to
assure him, that there was not any security or satisfaction which should be
denied him, in case he would return as he was desired; more particularly, that
he would very willingly yield to his marriage with the Princess Maria, which
heretofore had been importunately entreated. This Procedure was a sufficient
testimony of the King's affection, seeing he could not marry himself, without
engaging his Majesty's Interests in it, and that his Authority could not but
receive some prejudice, in case he should have any children: Yet some ill
Counselors then near him, stopped his eyes, that he might not see it. The
Cardinal de la Valette proposed it to him, and gave him all imaginable
assurances of the King's affection: But he found him in a thousand jealousies,
which Coigneux and others had instilled into him, on purpose to decline him
from his Majesty's Interests, and to make themselves the more considerable with
him: For his own part, he was well enough inclined to do whatever could be
required of him, but those creatures of his had gotten such a hand over him, by
their tricks and devices, that in a minute they unravelled whatever the
Cardinal de la Valette had with much ado wrought to any perfection. They
represented to him the Queen Mother's Interest and persuaded him that he was
engaged in Honor to assist her in those persecutions into which the Cardinal
had brought her (which were Chimeras only) and that it were a great dishonor
for him, to forsake her, she having cast her self (as it were) into his Arms:
witha^ they terrified him with panique fears, and protested to him, that they
would not assure him of his liberty, if once he came within the Cardinal's
reach; as if the King's Arms had not been long enough to have secured him,
whilst he was at Orleans, had he been so inclined; and as if the King's word
had not been an assurance ample enough: Was not that only proposal of the
Marriage a certain demonstration that the King had not any intent of
imprisoning him, unless in the fetters of Love, which he thought a tie strong
enough to continue him near unto him? But this too they persuaded him, was a
Lure to draw him to into the ginns provided for him; insomuch that it was
impossible to bring him back, or to persuade him to have any confidence in his
Majesty. Thus did those Creatures of his triumph over his goodness, sacrifice
his glory to their own Interests, and raise themselves to that pitch of
Insolence, that they would build their own Fortunes upon the despisal of the
Royal Authority.

Politic Observation.
AS a Wise and Loyal Counselor is the cause of a thousand good successes, so a
bad one serves only to engage his Prince in the extremity of misfortunes.
Princes ought especially to beware of such who make their own private interest
their main business; for from such they cannot expect any thing but
dis-service, and they are obliged to remove such from the Court; seeing they
themselves do but seldom take the pains to examine and discuss such affairs as
are presented to them, whence by the advices of such men, they come to be
oftentimes engaged in very dangerous designs. Happy are those Princes whose
Ministers chief ends, are their Masters glory; and this is his Majesty's
present happiness; for they being neither passionate nor partial in their
advices, do always adhere unto that which is most honorable: whereas they who
have other Interests, or are prepossessed either with Fear or Ambition, do ever
and anon infallibly fall on that side, by which they hoped to secure themselves
from the storm, or raise their own Families. Princes in their necessities have
the more reason to complain, they then having most need of good advice:
Faithful Counselors being hard to be met with in Courts; there is the place
where Interest holds the chief Seat of its Empire, where it is more regarded
then Kings themselves; for the most part of their Attendants do serve them only
for the love of it: Love and Loyalty are seldom admitted into those places, it
being usual to sue for a Princes favor, not so much to love him the more, as
for the better effecting of ones own designs. Hence it is that the major part
of their Followers give them such advices, as they think to be most conformable
to their inclinations not such as are according to the Rules of Prudence or
Justice, and by this means they hope to acquire more favor, then if they had
told the truth: Not that they are ignorant of what is good Counsel, but they
think it unprofitably bestowed, unless it contribute to increase their
Fortunes. Now the best resolution on which they can fix in this misfortune
which inevitably will fall upon them, is, not to adhere unto Cleobulus his
opinion, who (as Plutarch observes) said, That a wise Prince never ought to
believe all which his most intimate familiars advise him: for that were to
ceprive them of a very great advantage, when they are faithful and able; but
that they should well examine the qualities and sufficiencies of them whom they
advise withal, and then likewise to follow their counsels; not because they
proceed from them, but because after a due deliberation, they are esteemed good
and reasonable.

Prosecution of the Subject.
FOr this reason it was that the King pressed Monsi^ur by the Cardinal de la
Valette, to discharge himself of those evil Counselors which were then near
him; being very well assured, that this once done, his inclinations would be no
longer so violent, and that he would with ease be disposed to seek the good of
France. Coign^ux seemed to agree to it, and the Sieur de Chaudebonne, who came
from Monsieur unto his Majesty, then at Estampes, assured him that he was
totally disposed to it. But his Majesty having replied to him, that this was
his only way to raise his Masters affairs unto a height of good fortune, he
made it apparent, that his overtures were only words, and that he was yet
blinded with those fond hopes which he had grounded on the last years State
Almanacks, made by his means during the King's late sickness. He was very
vigilant and industrious that Monsieur might make sure of Monsieur de
Bellegard, Governor of Burgogne, that he might might have the disposal of the
strong places in that Province, as himself informed the King by the Sieur de
Bouoarre about the end of February. The King likewise understood from other
parts, that he had lifted diverse of the Nobility under Monsieur's name, in
Normandy, Languedoc, and Limosin, and that Fueillade, and others of the Sieur
de Puy-laureus his kindred, did raise forces as freely as if they had had the
King's Commissions. There was brought a letter unto his Majesty, written by his
direction from la Ferte, Lieutenant of Monsieur's Gens d'Armes, unto his
Companions, that they should come to Melun near Orleans, though it ought not to
be done without his order. Every one knows that he had persuaded Monsieur to
write unto the Sieur de Thoiras, to entice him from the Court, and to draw him
to himself. The Letter having been brought by himself unto the King, the
design in which this rash indiscreet Minister had engaged Monsieur, of seizing
on the passages upon the River Loyr, and of victualling Orleans, was every
where known; His correspondencies with Spain and Lorrain were public; His
confederates in Provence and Dauphine were discovered, so that it was easy to
judge he had not the least thought of withdrawing himself, but designed to
frame the Body of an Army, and so raise a war. And most true it is, That in
case the Nobility who were expected above fifteen days before his Majesty
departed from Paris, had come, or if those who were employed in levying of
Forces had brought them according to the time appointed, he would not have made
use of them to march out of the Kingdom, but much rather to have settled himself
in such a condition within, that he might not be subject to that Law which the
King of Right ought to impose on all his Subjects. He little considered how
easily his Majesty had reduced the whole party of the Hugonots, how he had set
bounds unto the Spanish Ambition, how that he had put the English to a shameful
flight, in that very place which they had designed for a Theater of their own
glory, and that he would but laugh at their attempts, which were so repleat
with rashness.

Politic Observation.
IT is not sufficient in a Prince, who would attain glory, that he be not
apprehensive of any dangers in war, or that he show himself to be more desirous
of honor, then fearing any misfortune, unless he consider before he take the
field, what strength he has; from what friends he can presume to have
assistance, of what force his enemies are, and whether he have Provisions
enough for his own subsistence. He ought to measure his Courage by his Forces,
and not to attempt any thing above his Power, or against Reason. It is
courageous to stop the eyes at all hazards in the execution of a Design, but
it is discretion first to discuss all the inconveniences which may arrive, lest
he engage himself in his own ruin. Who so does otherwise, cannot escape
falling into one of these two extremities, either he must fall with his
attempt, or be compelled to a shameful composition, after a discovery of his
own weakness and discredit. Beside, that rashness is full of inconsideration,
it is ordinary attended with misfortunes. They who give up themselves to it,
are for the most part reduced to a necessity of quitting their designs, with as
little advantage, as they used consideration in their attempts. The vain hopes
wherewith it feeds them, makes them at first all fire; but their flame
evaporateth into Ice, by their want of subsistence; It is blind, and fore-sees
not neither dangers, nor any accident which may happen; whence it follows,
that it is very unsafe, nay pernicious, to be guided by its Counsels, and that
experience tells us, it seldom keeps any of its promises. The History of
Cambyses King of Persia, related by Herodotus, may serve to exemplify it; he
designed to make a war upon the Macrobeans in Aethiopia; to which end he sent
Ambassadors to their King, who might under pretense of carrying him presents,
epsy the force and strength of the Kingdom; but the King smelling their
design, commanded them to return, and tell their Master, he could not be just*
who would invade a Country not belonging to him. Cambyses receiving this
answer, became so enflamed with anger, that he presently advanced his Army
toward Aethiopia, without making provisions necessary for so long and great an
expedition; insomuch that before he had marched one quarter of his way, his
Army was forced to eat Horses; and not long after his Soldiers eat one
another, himself being forced to return into his own Country, after a great
loss of his Soldiers, and to his perpetual dishonor, by reason of his
rashness.

The King goes to Orleans; With the true Motives of his journey.
THe King well acquainted with all these contrivances, thought fit to go in his
own person, that he might dissipate the storm: he well knew that the presence
of a King is like that of the Sun, which soon dispelleth all those thick clouds
which attempt to obscure his light. About the beginning of March he set forward
toward Estampes, and thence to Orlean, as Monsieur had resolved His Majesty
did verily believe, that coming to discourse with him, it wou^d be no hard
matter to efface those evil impressions which his creatures had infused into
him; that however the expected levies would not dare to come near Orleans,
whilst he was there; and that peradventure he might engage him in the match
which had been proposed, by laying down before him the many advantages which
might from thence arise.

These were the true motives of his Majesty's journey, which they who were
about Monsieur endeavored to obstruct, by sending the Sieur de Chaud^bonne,
unto him with a Letter, which they had persuaded Monsieur to write; in which he
made protestations of obedience, and beseeched his Majesty not to give credit
unto such reports as were spread abroad to his disadvantage. But however, the
King who knew that no time ought to be lost in matters of revolt, did not
forbear to prosecute his journey. He was no sooner come unto Estampes, but he
received intelligence, that Monsieur was departed from Orleans toward
Bourgogne: His attendants had persuaded him to ground his departure, upon
pretense of his Majesty's coming, and gave out that he only came thither to
make sure of Monsieurs person. A report without foundation, for his Majestly
had been acquainted, at the least fifteen days before that time, by the Sieur
de Bellegar^e, how that Monsieur had told him, he would shortly go into
Bourgogne, and that before his Majesty had designed his journey unto Orleans.
It cannot be expressed, how sensibly the King was troubled at Monsieurs
departure. But it had been effeminate only to bewail amidst their present
misfortunes, and take no care for the future; the King advanced with all
diligence unto the same Province, that he might keep the Towns in obedience,
and pursued him so closely, that he had not the time to make himself Master of
any place, which doubtless he would have done, had he not been followed at
hand by some or other, who might prevent his designs. Before the end of March,
the King came to Dijon; and having secured the Town and Castle, gave order to
the Sieur de la Grange Mestre de Camp, to march with his Regiment into
Bellegarde, which place Monsieur had left behind him; he sent the Regiment de
Piedmont into Auxerre, and St. Jean de Lone; he left three hundred horse in
garrison on the Frontiers, in such places as were most requisite, to secure
Bourgogne from any incursions, and the Sieur de Hauterine to command them, as
Marshal de Camp Monsieur's Ministers did every where give out, that he had not
forsaken the Kingdom, but only to secure himself from them who pursued him, but
it was without truth: His Agents indeed having designed under his name to
fortify themselves in that frontier of the Kingdom, his Majesty was obliged to
follow them at hand, to prevent their effecting what they had contrived it
being of great consequence, not to lose any time in such occasions; his longer
delay could but have given them leave to second their own with foreign forces
which as was well known they had negotiated: But if he would not have left the
Kingdom, why did he not condescend to those fair proposals made to him, both at
Orleans and Auxerre: The King was ready to embrace him, and to give him fresh
testimonies of that affection which he had always born to him; but his not
assenting to them, forced his Majesty to pursue him, that he might divert the
storm, which seemed to threaten not only Bourgogne but France it self.

Politic Observation.
IT is a great misfortune to a Kingdom, when a Faction is once fomented within
its bosom; but that once being so, it were a great imprudence in the King of
that Country, go give time and opportunity to the heads of the Conspirators, to
draw their forces together, wherewith they might carry on a War against him. He
ought to be before hand with them, and not to stay until revolted Princes are
in a condition to put their designs in execution. He must not indeed be too
credulous in believing all reports, nor take the field upon the first news of a
Revolt; but being once well informed and assured, he ought no longer to delay.
Thus Alexander the Great, made not the least stop, that he might prevent the
rising of his enemies in Greece, and he came so suddenly upon them with his
Army, that himself brought the first news of his coming. It was his usual
saying, that a quick dispatch in preventing an enemy, is the thing which
obtains great advantages against him; for this reason it was, that Apelles
painted him with lightning in his hand, which has a motion so swift that how
little soever it be, yet it reduces every thing to ashes. Grandees when once
revolted want neither courage nor power provided they have but time to raise
their Forces. They have for the most part, persons of knowledge and valor near
them, who are capable of settling their affairs in a good equipage, if they have
but leisure to effect it. For this cause, is a King obliged to go in person,
and encounter them whereby he may break the neck of their Rebellion. A small
matter will sometimes suffice to set all right again; the Kings presence is a
terror to Rebels, and takes away their courages who are not yet come up, that
they have but little will to engage themselves; and in case they return not to
their obedience by fair means, he is then in a capacity to compel them by
force, seeing they cannot be in a condition to defend themselves. Henry the
third, committed a great oversight by withdrawing himself from Paris, at the
mutiny of the Barricadoes; for a Kings obedience diminishes the respect due to
him, imboldneth the Ringleaders of a faction, and animateth the fury of the
people. Bajazet the second did not thus, in the rebellion of his son Selim the
first, but showed such an undanted courage that he could never be persuaded to
withdraw himself, although the Janissaries of his Guard were corrupted; and so
behaved himself, that what with Iris presence, and what with the gravity of his
words, they became ashamed to forsake him, or commit the treason they had
resolved against him. Charles the fifth did the same thing in reducing the City
of Gaunt; for being in Spain upon the first report of their revolt, he took
^et, and came in great have unto Flanders, where he easily checked their
rebellion, and punished the chief contrivers thereof.

Monsieur arriveth at Bezancon, from whence he writes unto the King.
MOnsieur being arrived at Bezancon, Boigneux was much afflicted and displeased
that he had so poorly played his Cards, having not so much as time to draw his
forces together, so that he had recourse to his usual devices, and persuaded
him to send a Letter unto his Majesty, wherein he should lay before him the
pretenses which he alleged for his departure. The Letter was framed by himself
with a little assistance; but so imprudently was it contrived, that there
needed no more to condemn him guilty of high Treason. It was full of injurious
language against the King, and seemed to call him a Prince without judgment;
neither had he any other pretexts for his departure out of the Kingdom, but
only the Queen-Mothers imprisonment at Compeigne, a Chimaera only, and the
necessity of saving himself without, having no security within the Kingdom; a
reason altogether inconsiderable, seeing he was offered any assurance
whatsoever: and his third was the Cardinals ill conduct, whom he could no
longer endure, so dangerous he was unto the Kingdom; which last himself would
have confessed to be ridiculous, had he but reflected how effectually he had
served the King at Re, in reducing of the H^gonot Cities, in the relieving of
Cazal, in the taking of Savoy and Piedmont, and diverse other expeditions, which
have much added to the honor and glory of the whole Nation. These were the
weak pretenses which Coigneux made use of, to hide Monsieur's imprudence and
rashness, in going ^orth of the Kingdom. But such insolency being
insupportable, and the Letter brought by the Sieur de Brianson unto his
Majesty, then on hunting near Baign^ux where not one of his Council had
followed him, he commanded the Lieutenant of his Guards to seize on him, and
from thence carry him unto the Castle of Dijon, that he might teach others to
beware of bringing any more letters unto him, which were not conformable to the
respect due unto him: The King likewise considering how that Princes are
commonly unfortunate in seeing their best actions discommended by their
Subjects, instead of being honored, as so many mysteries, whose causes are to
them unknown, published a Declaration in the Parliament of Dijon, wherein he
set forth the true causes of Monsieur's departure, both from Orleans, and then
out of the Kingdom, as likewise of his journey into Burgogne, which are the
very same formerly intimated; only adding this one, that his Majesty was the
more obliged to march into that Province, in respect they had engaged the Sieur
de Bellegarde in their party, and had particularly prevailed with him, to send
the Sieur Damase unto him, then at Aux^rre, to contradict the news he had
formerly sent unto the King by the Sieur de B^^carre, of Monsieur's Designs to
retire into Burgogne; for he had then discovered all their intentions, and
their pretenses were esteemed as ridiculous. It was not indeed only to manifest
his own actions, that his Majesty made the said Declaration, but likewise to
proclaim the Conte de Moret, the Dukes of Elboeuf, Bell^garde, and Rouannes,
the President Coigneux, the Sieur de Puy-laurens, Monsigot, and the P^re de
Chanteloupe, guilty of high Treason, every of them having been accessory unto
Monsieur's departure; it being his Majesty's further pleasure, that they should
accordingly be proceeded against, in case they should not within one month
make their addresses to obtain his pardon for their offenses; impowering all
Governors and Officers to fall upon any who should attempt to levy any
Soldiers without his Commission and Authority.

Politic Observation.
IN vain were the Laws for punishment of Treason made, if they be not executed
upon them who persever in their offenses. Mercy is indeed one of the best
Qualities in a King but it brings Kingdoms into disorder and disobedience,
unless it be sometimes accompanied with severity. Impunity does embolden the
head of a Faction to persist in his designs; when violence scapes scot-free,
the public Peace runs a hazard; and when a King testifies unto them an excess
of Bounty or Mercy, he only reduces himself to the extremity of being
afterward disabled to correct the^r insolences when he most desires it. To
permit a party of factious persons to save themselves by flight, at least
without declaring them to be what indeed they are, were to be injurious unto
the State, and guilty (in some kind) of cruelty: The least severity inflicted
upon such men (after their Designs are once perceived) does extinguish the
remaining flame, whereas conniving at them, adds fewe^ to their fire; in vain
it is to hope by fair means to reduce them unto their duties: the ablest
Politicians have thought it an improper way to work upon them, seeing it makes
not any impression in the minds of Grandees, who are incapable of true
Friendship, and that the means to stop the Career of their designs, is by Force
and Fear.

Not that I would advise a Prince to drive them into desperation, by being over
severe; for that were equally dangerous, and has been found to have carried
them on to extremities; but so ought he to manage his business, that he strike
them with Fear, and make them apprehensive of his Justice. Men are more easily
subjugated unto such as have made themselves terrible, then to such who only
endeavor to be beloved; and they will sooner break the bonds of Love, then of
Fear: Benefits work less upon their Natures then Punishments. If the rewarding
of services be so necessary for the encouragement of Faithful and Loyal
servants, surely chastisement is as needful to impede the progress of such as
are factiously bent, by striking them with Fear. To be merciful alone, is to
want one hand, and not to let them feel the rigours of Justice, who cannot be
kept within the limits of their duties by clemency, were to endanger the loss
of the Supreme Authority.

The Debate in the Parliament of Paris, upon the Declaration against the Rebels.
THe Crime which they who abused Monsieur's name did commit by their boldness
in writing so outrageous a letter unto the King, was but too to great, yet as
one error makes way for another, so they did not sit still there, but seconded
it by making of parties in the Parliament of Paris, to obstruct the
ratification of the Declaration published at Dijon. His Majesty had sent the
said Declaration to the Parliament of Paris as conceiving it to concern his
reputation, to make known the Truth of those passages, not only in Burgogne,
but through the whole Kingdom. Now Cogneux, together with diverse others of that
Cabal, having gained some principal members of this Court, by informing them
with all things, though quite contrary to the truth, had engaged them so far in
their designs, that they publicly exclaimed against it as violent, for such
reasons as had been sent unto them, which were as frivolous as false. They had
raised such a confusion in that honorable Company, surprising them with false
informations and untruths, that it was debated whether the Declaration should
be ratified or not; whereas they ought to have remembered, that such
Declarations as regard the Government of State, are sent unto them only to be
registered, proclaimed, and observed by his Majesty's Subjects, and most
commonly they are not acquainted with the true reasons which induced his
Majesty to make them. The debate was so hot and great, that their opinions
being equally divided, the Declaration remained unconfirm'd, and unproclaim'd.
Whereupon the King being upon his return to Paris, was forced (that he might
not let such a disorder pass unpunished) to command the Parliament unto the
^ouvre, with order that they should come on foot, as guilty, and in a posture
to receive that rebuke which they had incurred, whereby he might give them to
know, that to discuss State affairs, did not concern them at all; that he only
sent this, and other Declarations of the like nature unto them, to be
proclaimed, enrolled, and caused to be observed by his Majesty's subjects, and
that they ought to have been more readily disposed to have passed this
Declaration in particular, there being a very great difference between a bare
Commission to form an Indictment against any one, and to adjudge it, and
between a Declaration published by his Majesty for the information of his
Subjects, concerning those persons against whom he complains, with what reasons
he has so to do, and for what causes it is that they are guilty of high
Treason; for that in a Declaration his Majesty assigns them a certain time,
within which they may obtain his pardon, if they have recourse unto his Grace;
and moreover, for that after all this, not any formalities are omitted, which
are necessary in the process of Criminals before their Condemnation. This was
effected in the Louvre, the King sitting in his Counsel, and the whole body of
the Parliament being on their knees before him, where after that the Lord
Keeper of the Seals had in his Majesty's name given them to know, that it was
not in their jurisdiction to determine concerning any Declarations of State,
which should be sent unto them; the King with his own hands tore the sentence
of Upon the equal Division of their Members debate, they Registered that
Division as a Sentence.
Division, which was Registered as a Record, and commanded that the Order of his
Conncel, whereby it was declared void, should be entered in its places, with
prohibitions of intermeddling for the future in debating Declarations of the
like nature: And lastly, for the punishing the fault of the whole Body in some
particular Members, the Presidents Gayon, Battillon, and the Sieur Lesne
Counselor, were commanded, by Order from his Majesty to withdraw themselves
for some time from Paris, and suspended from executing their Functions, in
regard they had discoursed too freely, and without respect concerning his
Majesty's proceeding, and the Government of the State; which notwithstanding
his Majesty's goodness was such, that lasted not long, for they were soon
after recalled and restored unto the Parliament, and to the discharge of the
Offices of which their integrity and merit had made them very deserving, and
from which they had been restrained not without the grief of all wise men, who
were sorry to see that they had blemished their reputations, by a zeal too rash
and inconsiderate.

Politic Observation.
PArliaments are no less bound by the Laws of Prudence then those of Justice,
not to separate themselves from the King in State Affairs. I say, they are
obliged to it by Justice, for for them to judge of such affairs, were to assume
a Power which belongs not to them; their first creation was by Kings, and that
only to do Justice unto the people, as the President de la Vaquiere told the
Duke of Orleans Chancellor, who in his Masters behalf moved the Parliament
that they would press his Majesty to come to Paris, and make use of their
advice in certain weighty matters. The self-same answer did the same Parliament
make unto Louys de Bourbon, after his taking of Orleans, and sending his
Declaration unto them. Francis the first, prohibited them from intermedling in
affairs of that nature, in the proceedings commenced against the Chancelly du
Prat; and after him Charles the ninth did as much in prosecution of the Arrest
which had been issued out for the summoning the Prince, of the Blood, and Peers
of France, to consult concerning such complaints, as tended to the good both of
King and State. Thus, his Majesty having empowered and entrusted them, with the
hand of his Justice, that they might only preserve his Subjects right each to
other, they may not intermeddle in any other business without particular Order
from his Majesty, who can only confer that Authority upon them. But how can
they with any reason, dissent from his Majesty in State affairs, especially in
this particular of Declarations, which are sent unto them to be proclaimed,
when as they are not acquainted with the many circumstances which induced them,
without the cognizance of which, it is impossible to make any true Judgment?
Were not this to determine things without judging of them, as also to do it
without lawful power so to do? But if they complain of their want of
Authority, the Stars might as well murmur against the Sun, for not imparting a
light unto them, as glorious as his own. They ought to recollect unto their
memories, that that Power which makes them considerable, is no more natural to
them then that of the Stars; that from the King it is, that they receive all
their Marks of Greatness, and Badges of Authority, and that from him alone all
those rays do proceed, which make them shine in the eye of the people.

And if Magistrates would but look a little nearer into themselves, they would
easily perceive that they have not any power but what is derived from their
Kings; it is from them that they hold their Authority, and which lasts no
longer then their Will and pleasure: Hence it is, that all Bodies corporate are
bound to take their confirmation from all new Kings who shall succeed to the
Crown, whereby they might learn, that as they were created for the good of
their Sovereign, so their subsistence depends merely upon his Will and Grace.
Peradventure they will pretend, that what they do is to conserve his Majesty's
Authority; but why do they not then consider, how they themselves abuse it by
resisting it; and that whilst they violate his Authority, their own flowing
from his, cannot remain entire and survive it. When as the Moon; jealous of the
Sun, attempts to obscure his Rays, and sets her self just before his face, she
depriveth us of his light; but we all know she loses her own likewise, and
that she receives her whole light from those Rays which she obscureth. As true
it is, that Magistrates who become jealous of their Princes Authority, which
alone has clothed them with luster, and made them to shine in the eye of
their fellow Subjects, and attempt to abridge their Majesty's of their Power
and Glory, cannot so do, without wounding themselves, and eclipsing their own
light.

Monsieur's Request to the Parliament, to Indict the Cardinal.
THe Cardinals ruin, was the main design at which all they who were with the
Queen Mother and Monsieur did drive; they verily believed, that in case they
could induce the Parliament to impeach him, that then his Majesty would begin
to have is Fidelity in suspicion, and to give credit unto those Crimes
wherewith he should be charged; but this was a resolution very inconsiderately
taken, seeing they could not be ignorant, that it lay not in the Parliaments
Power; and withal, seeing they could not but know, that his Majesty being
better acquainted with his integrity and services then any other person
whatever, would never permit that he should be entreated with such ingratitude.
However, in order to this design of theirs, they caused a request signed by
Monsieur, to be presented unto the Parliament, wherein he protested that the
persecutions which he had received from the Cardinal, had forced him to go out
of the Kingdom. He desired an instrument of his Protest, that the Declaration
made in the Parliament of Bourgogne, might not prejudice either himself nor his
Dependencies, and that he might be admitted as a Party against the Cardinal.
This Request indeed was one of the causes which engaged the Parliament in the
Declaration, of which we shall anon speak, and which made them culpable, in not
publishing that of his Majesty. But the King having commanded the Request to be
brought unto his Council, it was ordered by Arrest, that it should be
suppressed as contumelious, contrary to the good of his Service, the Peace of
his Subjects, the safety of his State, and as presented to that intent by those
who had induced Monsieur his Brother, to withdraw himself out of the Kingdom,
whereby they might escape the punishment of their Crimes, and traduce his
Majesty's chief Ministers, against whom no charge or complaint can or may be
given (although there were cause for it) but by way of humble Petition to his
Majesty's own person, who has the particular cognizance of their services and
proceedings. Besides, his Majesty not satisfied with this bare Arrest,
dispatched a large Declaration unto Fontainbleau, to let his Subject know, that
the evil Counsels which had been given unto Monsieur, had carried him out of
the Kingdom, as those given unto the Queen Mother had caused her removal from
the Court, and that the Cardinal could not in the least be taxed therewith,
including a most honorable mention of his Integrity and Sincerity, concluding
that his Majesty was well satisfied and assured by a long and continued
experience that the Cardinals chief ends and designs did only tend to advance
the glory of his Crown, and the good of his State; and lastly, conjuring his
Subjects and Successors still to preserve his memory in their minds: Thus was
this great Minister secured by his own sublime virtue, and his high services,
from the violences of a factious potent Party.

Politic Observation.
NEeds must that Minister be endued with an extraordinary Prudence and Wisdom,
who can preserve himself immovable in all the shocks which are raised to his
ruin. Low and mean souls are frequently constrained to stoop under the
violence of calumny, and to give way unto those storms which are falling upon
them; but great persons, like rocks, are not to be shaken, though in the
greatest turbulence of wind or weather. It is said, that of all Birds the Eagle
alone can soar above the Clouds, whereby he may secure himself from storms; and
upon this reason it is, that the ancient Heathens feigned Jupiter to have
committed the guard of his Thunder unto the Eagle. Now great men are like the
Eagle and they only can support themselves amidst all the storms and designs
which are raised and contrived for their ruin. These are those Suns whom the
clouds can only dusk for some small time, which once passed, they dissipate of
themselves, and become annihilated. All the attempts made against their
Fortunes, are but like so many blows in the Air, so ineffectual they are either
to hit or move them. The Prudence wherewith they are endued, affords them the
means to foresee all their enemies designs, as also to secure themselves, and
to command even Fortune her self to be favorable unto them; their innocence is
so great a Bulwark of their glory, that it gives Truth power to triumph over
Calumny. There needs nothing more to preserve them in their Masters affection,
then the services they do him, for those alone will easily make apparent, that
all the slanders spread abroad against them, are only inventions of some base
people, who would endeavor to destroy honest men of their reputation, whereby
they might be made useless amidst their disgrace, and that themselves might get
somewhat by their shipwreck; notwithstanding all which, they still persist in
the prosecution of those glorious designs which they have laid, and make it
daily evident, that souls which are truly great, do but laugh at those who
endeavor to injure them* and wipe off with their fingers such Vipers, without
receiving any hurt; neither will they be discouraged from continuing to act
what they have well begun. Their generousness is like and armed Soldier,
prepared to resist whatever shall oppose their Reputation. Their Fidelity is
like a Wall, impregnable against all Force and Artifice: Their Wisdom makes
them Masters of their Passions, neither will they suffer themselves to be
surprised by them, so that any advantage may be taken against them. Their
address dictates unto them to watch the time, when they may gain that from
their enemies which they design to obtain. Their Abilities are enough to
secure them from discredits and disgraces with their Prince, where it is
impossible for him to get their like: In a word, those excellent qualities of
theirs, do discover unto them their enemies contrivances, and renders them
Masters of their own Fortune, which is impossible to be ravished out of their
power.

The Queen-Mothers Request to the same effect.
THis Request was only the beginning of those Calumnies wherewith Monsieur's
Agents did endeavor to bespatter the Cardinals glory; for from that time
laying their heads together, with those of the Queen Mother, they never ceased
from inventing and spreading of defamatory Letters and Libels. The Queen Mother
too her self presented a Request unto the Parliament against him. But when they
perceived all their attempts were vain, either as to the ruining of him in his
Majesty's good opinion, or for the advancing of the Army which they had already
contrived in their conceptions, then their Anger turned into Fury, and they
resolved not to leave any thing unsaid which might bring his Reputation into
dis-esteem. They verily persuaded themselves, that at last some Neighbor
Prince would assist them with an Army, to maintain their Quarrel, or that they
might ra^e so great a hatred against him in the peoples minds, as they would
rise and take up Arms, so to force his Majesty to sacrifice him unto their
Fury. Indeed I should have concluded him very unfortunate, had his glory
depended upon their testimonies, and if the honor which he has merited by
laying out so much of his health, by drying up his blood, by watching day and
night over the Affairs of State, by giving up his Freedom* his very soul, his
words, his writings, and all his time unto his Kings service, and for the good
of France, by doing things even above admiration it self, should need their
approbation. But as the reward of Virtue is extracted from Virtue it self, and
as there are no Theaters where great men's actions appear with more pomp, then
in the testimony of their own proper Conscience, whereby Noble deeds glance out
rays of honor, like the beams of the Sun, so it was happy for him that they
chose this time to calumniate him, when he had newly accomplished such glorious
actions for his Majesty's service, as cannot easily be described in History. He
needed not have desired (as that Ancient did) to have a house so built, that
all the world might behold him, seeing the glory of his actions was of so great
advantage unto all Europe, that every one was taken up in contemplation of him
with admiration. I may safely add, that the malice wherewith they belied his
most just and sincere proceedings, did render all their accusations suspected.
And who knows not without more ado, that the usual course with them who would
embroyl a State, is to fall foul upon the Ministers of Government.

Politic Observation.
IT is commonly seen, that good services are rewarded with calumny: Envy is
one cause of this injustice, her eyes being offended with the splendor of any
noble actions; just as the Sun dazleth and decays eyes already sore and weak.
It is a passion which in some sort runs counter with Gods goodness, which draws
good out of evil; whereas this takes occasion to injure and would great
persons, even from those very actions which makes them most conspicuous; the
same relation which the shadow has to the Body, such has envy with virtue:
And as the highest mountains cast the greatest shadows, so the greatest persons
are most exposed unto envy and calumny: Private Interest is another cause, and
to say the Truth, is the first and chief; for that it begets envy. All they
who by their ambition pretend to have some part in the Government, do fancy
unto themselves, that Fortune has cast them so much the further from it, as it
has raised up them who now possess it: Now as for those who do not pretend
unto so much, but do yet aspire unto some higher quality then that in which
they are at present, they suppose they have reason enough to complain of the
Governors of State, when that which they expect is not cast upon them; the
discontent which hereupon they conceive, is not unlike those false
Prospectives, which represent things and objects unto the view, which neither
are, nor ever were; and thus indeed their judgment being overswayed by Passion,
becomes so depraved, that they apprehend things in their conduct, far different
from what they really are. I might add Ignorance amongst the causes which
produce ill reports against Ministers; there is nothing but the outside of
their actions to be seen, their intents and designs are secret and unknown, at
least of such as have any conduct; neither do they ever disclose their drift
and main end, whereby they may not give the enemies of the State opportunity to
prevent their being effected. Which being so, it cannot be denied but that the
small knowledge of their actions gives their enemy a great advantage to
exclaim upon them. They seldom have any thing to object against them, but what
seems to be defective, and they disguise things so artificially, that they make
white pass for black, and lies for current truth, being very wary that it fall
not into their consideration, how they have extraordinary intelligences, which
ought not, nay which cannot be dived into by vulgar judgments. But above all
the rest, they are assaulted by slanders, whenever the Grandees of a State are
bent upon mischief, they dare not openly to complain of their King, lest they
should too much discover themselves, and lest their railing might pull down
some vengeance upon them, which might prevent them from effecting their
intentions, but they address themselves to throw dirt in the face of the chief
Ministers, although in effect they strike at their Kings Withal, they are
commonly troubled at the ill-government of the State they distaste the power
and honor which the King confers upon them, and complain of the charge which
is imposed on the people. These are the subjects of all the Manifests, which
were ever made to provoke the people to rebellion. If we but look back on the
Passages our own times, or those before us, we shall always find that Factious
persons have been always discontented with the Ministers of State, and against
them have they ever made use of reviling slanders, as a most certain torch to
set the whole Kingdom in a Flame. Examples hereof are so frequent, that we need
not stay to recite them. Besides, it may be found in all History, that when by
the Prudent Conduct of any Ministers, they have been reduced to a disability of
being further troublesome to the State by War and open Force, yet have they
still persisted to disgorge the fury and rage which possessed them, upon their
papers, fraught with poison and lies.

Aspersions charged on the King, refuted.
IT was indeed somewhat strange that these Libellers should attempt to defame a
man, whom the ablest wits have recommended to be of as great a Soul as any
these many Ages: But it is incredible, that their malice should strike at the
Kings own person, endeavoring to represent him as incapable of Government. I
could willingly complain of all French men, who seeing such indignities done
unto their Sovereign, whom after so many years they had reason to know for the
most Just, most Valiant, most Generous, most Prudent, and most Merciful Prince
that ever swayed the Scepter of France; did not take up their Arms, to punish
those Libellers in other Countries, but that they may not undertake any War
without his Majesty's permission. What reason could be alleged, that he should
pass for a King without Conduct, who had vanquished the English in so many
encounters, taken Rochel, forced the Alps, twice relieved Cazal, suppressed his
Rebellious Subjects, bounded in the ambition of the house of Austria, settled
religion in diverse Provinces of his Kingdom, secured the Pope from the Spanish
oppression, gave peace and liberty unto Italy; by his Victories became the
Arbitrator of Christendom and whose Arms strangers did apprehend with fear and
terror? It cannot be said of him but that he was the most courag^ous in his
undertakings, the most Pious in his Conscience, the most Just toward his
Subjects, the most Daring in any dangers, the most Prudent in his Councels, and
the most deservedly to be admired for all his Actions, that ever yet reigned
over us. Have we not all seen, how his zeal and courage for Religion has
engaged him to expose his person, the most flourishing years of his time, his
Nobility, his Treasures, and in some kind to hazard his own State, and all to
abate the Insolences of the Church's enemies? It might indeed have been said,
that some other besides him, had achieved all those glorious Actions, which we
daily see before our eyes, provided any enterprise had been done without him:
Had he not in his own person ordered Battles, had he not personally appeared in
sundry dangers, and had he not been actually assisting at all his Counsels, to
resolve what orders were most proper to be followed? But the one is as visibly
apparent as the other; and he who would believe their aspersions must
necessarily be born among the Antipodes. All Europe was so sufficiently
convinced of his Majesty's rare and divine endowments, as not to suffer
themselves to be surprised by the calumnies and devices of such wicked
imposters; and all such as have had the honor to know, though but a little of
the Conduct of affairs, have had ground enough to admire those great lights of
Nature, and particular blessings of Heaven, wherewith his Majesty was stored;
by means of which, they who were of his Counsel, have seen him take such
expedients, as could not but be so many marks of an extraordinary Prudence.

Politic Observation.
IT is a misfortune for a King to be exposed unto slanders. Let a Princes
actions be never so glorious, yet Man is naturally so averse from Government
that he is hardly to be restrained from evil speaking against him who rules
over him, not excepting God himself, as may appear in the particular behavior
of the Israelites. But however it cannot be esteemed for other then a monstrous
ingratitude, thus basely to reward the great cares, which he undergoes for the
public good; neither can it be denied, but that such reviling, whereby the
reputation of his glory is endeavored to be eclipsed, ought to be severely
punished, and especially when it tends to raise troubles in the State. It is
much more just to honor the actions of a Sovereign with respect, then to
asperse them with blame, which cannot but be rash and inconsiderate, unless
accompanied with a most exact knowledge of all his designs; besides, those
Calumnies which are laid to their charge are so much the more dangerous, in
regard that admitting they do not drive men into a distrust of him, yet do they
undeniably dimini^h that confidence which his Subjects would repose in him.
That Lie which is reported with asseveration, does commonly leave some
impression in the mind behind it, though it beget not an absolute belief.
Reputation is a Treasure, which Kings cannot sufficiently esteem; this is it,
which makes them venerable, not that it adds to their virtues, but renders
their virtues more conspicuous; not that it gives perfection to their
abilities, but sets off their splendor, and this splendor is it which makes
men more obedient and subject to their Wills and Pleasures. Opinion governs the
whole World, and gives Princes themselves Authority in their very Thrones.
Experience has told us, that we are not apt to credit a truth, if reported by
a Liar; so likewise no one will easily subject himself to a Prince, who is
commonly reputed for incapable of Government; being once in dis-repute, he may
cease to hope either for obedience or respect; he loses with his honor, all
the Love which was formerly paid unto him, and fear will not long stay after
the loss of Love. Which being so, no one can doubt of the Justice, nay
absolute necessity of inflicting exemplary punishments on such as have the
boldness to offend their Sovereigns by their Calumnies. He who does not
chastize them, does expose himself to eminent dangers; for that men having once
heard him ill reported of, take the lie for a truth, if the Authors remain
unpunished; and thus consequently, he will fall into scorn, and run the hazard
of losing both person and estate: And as he who puts one injury, inco^rageth
others to do him more and greater; so it may well follow, that the same party
having first offended him by words, may take the boldness, next time, to do it
by deeds.

The King is careful to justify the Cardinal by his Letters and Declarations.
ALthough small aspersions raised against a Prince, ought not to be chastized
with too much severity, yet when they tend to the destruction of his Authority,
and the troubling o^ his State, the greatest rigor is but little enough. The
Emperor Theodosius, did one day upon the score of a fiction raised against
him, answered as became his Clemency, saying: If he who scandaleth his Prince
does it by way of Pastime, he should scorn it, if by ignorance or folly he
should pity him; if he did it out of Malice he should forgive him. Which is
only to understood of small injuries, such as are not prejudicial to the State;
and which indeed deserve rather a Princes Scorn then his Anger, whereas those
others deserve to be punished with severity. Whence it follows, that no one can
doubt but that these Libellers ought to undergo the rigours of Justice, their
absence having secured them, and his Majesty satisfying himself, only by
setting forth the nake sincerity of his Intentions, and the justice of his
Proceedings, in his Letters and Declarations. His Actions indeed were a defense
to themselves, being accompanied with so much honor and glory, that there was
not any aspersion but vanished at their presence. But it cannot be expressed
with what care his Majesty was affected in the Cardinal's behalf; how
solicitous he was to vindicate him; for he had not only not the least thoughts
of abandoning him to the malice of his Calumniators, but he rather undertook to
justify him to the life upon all occasions, in his Declarations and Letters
which he sent unto the Parliaments of Provinces, to the Queen Mother, and
Monsieur. He needed not any Mediator with his Majesty, for that he knows better
then any other person, the solidity of his Counsels, the Fidelity of his Zeal,
the Justice of his Intentions, the Generousness of his Courage, and the
Moderation of his Conduct. The greater reason therefore had his Majesty to
justify and vindicate him unto Strangers, in regard the major part of affairs
which are transacted in his Government, are only known to himself and his
Ministers, every one else seeing nothing but things in their effects. And true
it is, his Majesty omitted not any occasion of publishing his Fidelity and
Services, but did it in expressions and demonstrations of an extraordinary
esteem and affection.

Politic Observation.
KIngs are in some sort obliged to defend their Ministers from the assaults of
slanders; They owe this protection unto them, in remembrance of their Fidelity,
and that they may be the more affectionately engaged in their services, for
that they seldom attract the hatred of the Grandees upon themselves, but only
by their resisting of attempts made against their Master's Honor and
Authority. It is impossible for a Minister to serve his Prince as he ought, and
not to discontent the chief of the State; for he is often necessitated to curb
their ambition of advancing their own power, in detriment to that of the
Sovereign, and then all the envy falls on him, as if the whole Government were
in his hands; and unto his Counsels are all the denyals which they receive
attributed: Which being so, what Reason or Justice can a King have, to abandon
unto the mercy of envy, a loyalty, which (if not cherished) will soon
languish? Nothing does so much diminish the zeal which a Minister has for his
Masters service, as the discountenancing of him. The Prince that forsakes him
who has done him faithful service, is blind in his nearest Interests, and
besides the blot of Ingratitude wherewith he blemisheth his reputation, he
exposes himself unto manifest dangers, by permitting his ruin, who was the
greatest Supporter of his glory; which once admitted, he becomes like a City,
whose Fortifications are razed, and laid level with the ground. For this reason
it was that Artaxerxes seeing the Athenians banish Themistocles, who came and
cast himself into his Arms, said, he wished his enemies no greater evil, then
that they might continue to be carried away by their envy, to deprive
themselves of the Prudence and Valor of such like men. Now if Prudence and
Justice does oblige Kings not to remove able States men from their service,
upon the score of Report, so ought they likewise to be careful in defending
their Reputations, seeing they are only malign'd upon their accounts, and for
their fidelity unto their services. Who knows not that an ancient
Commonwealth would not admit of a good Law, if proposed by a suspicious person,
unless in had been first of all moved by one of an approved integrity? They who
were the Contrivers of this Design, were not to know how greatly the credit of
a minister does advance his Masters Interest, by causing him to be readily
obeyed by his Subjects, And experience has evinced it in a thousand
encounters, that all things run into disorder, where a Minister once loses his
Credit and Repute.

Prosecution of the Subject.
THere has been so much already said in answer to those aspersions laid in the
Cardinals way, that to say any more were needless in relation to his glory, but
it is not so in relation to the end and drift of this History; which is for the
Instruction of succeeding Kings and Statesmen, how they ought to govern
themselves; for Sovereigns may here learn how to carry themselves toward their
Ministers, by the King's behavior toward the Cardinal, wherein there was an
appearance of objection, though it was an effect of his Majesty's Prudence.
Amongst the many accusations laid to his charge, one of the chiefest was, that
he had obtained from his Majesty the Government of diverse strong and important
places of the Kingdom, and that other some he had procured for his friends. Now
these so considerable places were reduced unto Sea-Towns, Havre, and Brouage;
and that these places were the more to be regarded, they being in his keeping
at such a time, when as there were endeavors used to bring some Forraigners
into France, which could not be more commodiously effected then by Sea. The
Contrivers of this charge were not well versed in the History of late times,
wherein they might have learned, how that the Government of Havre and Diepe had
been united and incorporated into the Office of Admiral de France, by two
several Declarations of Henry the third. Neither were they better acquainted
with the passages of the present times, How that the Government of Brouage had
been conferred on him in exchange of Diepe, it being impossible to intend the
necessary affairs of Sea, without having some chief Seaport: Which being so,
What reason can he allege to quarrel at his Majesty's conferring those
Governments upon him?

As for those which, his Majesty entrusted with his Relations, I shall only
say, that they were not comparable with those favors which diverse other
Ministers have received from their Kings and Masters, though they never did the
Tithe of those services which he has. Annas de Montmorency was Marshall and
Constable of France, Grand Maistre, and Grand Chamberlain, and Governor of
Languedoc, whose eldest son was Marshall of France, and Governor of
Languedoc; his second, Colonel of Horse, Marshall of France, and Governor of
Languedoc, by Survivorship; and his third son Colonel General of the Swisses.
One of whose Nephews was a Cardinal, another Admiral of France, and a third
Colonel of Foot, and whose four Daughters were matched into four of the chief
Houses of France, viz. that of Thurenne, de la Trimonille, de Candale, and de
Vautadour, and whose power was such, that Francis the first commanded Henry the
Dauphine, afterward King, to obey him in the Armies which he governed. I could
likewise add, that there is not any thing in the Cardinals Family that may hold
comparison with that of Amboise, who flourished under Louis the eleventh,
Charles the eighth, and Louis the twelveth. Charles d' Amboise was Governor of
Champagne, and afterward of Burgogne, under Louis the eleventh, and six other
Brothers which he had, with many others of this Nephews, were all advanced by
him. By his favor Meri d' Amboise was created Grand Master of Rhodes, Jean was
made Bishop of Langres, Louis was made Bishop d' Alby, and Lieutenant for the
King in Languedoc and Guyenne Pierre was installed Bishop of Poictiers, Jacques
was made Bishop of Clermont, and Abbot of Cluny, Jean was preferred to be
Seignieur de Bussi, and Governor of Normandy; the three sons of his eldest
Brother, Louis Bishop of Alby, Archbishop of Rouen, and Cardinal, Grand
Maistre, Admiral and Marshall of France, Governor of Milan, and Lieutenant
of his Majesty's Armies in Italy; Guy Siegnieur de Revel, Captain of two
hundred Gentils-hommes d'armes, which was then a high preferment; Francis de
Clermont his Nephew, son of his Sister Catharina d' Amboise, Cardinal, and
R^nede Pry son of his Aunt Magdaleina d' Amboise, Bishop of Baye^x. Is there
any thing in the Cardinal's Family which may compare with this? But without
making of comparisons, it shall only suffice to say, this complaint was
ridiculous, seeing the Cardinal had at that time only two places which were of
any importance, and his Kindred as many; whereas some great Houses of France
had more. Besides what cause of Jealousy could there be seeing he was every
week twice or thrice at least with his Majesty, and still brought with him a
surrender of his Offices, it being in his Majesty's power not only to dispose
of his Charges, but of his Person likewise? He had indeed over and above the
Government of Bretagne, But how? Was it not at the earnest entreaties of those
of the Country, who considering themselves to be environed with Ports,
concluded that he could most effectually establish their Trade (by means of his
Superintendency upon the Sea) which had been much decayed during the late
Governors times, because of the frequent differences between them and the
Admirals of France, each of them pretending to command upon the Sea coast? That
which made these factious exclaim more loud then all the rest, was, because his
Majesty had discharged some Governors from their places, and committed them to
him. But what? Was not his Majesty's so doing a piece of great Discretion, when
he foresaw the ruin of the Kingdom by the little obedience of such Governors,
who having the possession of Towns and Places in their Families a long time
together, would hardly be persuaded they were beholding unto his Majesty for
continuing them unto them, but would presently fly out into Rebellion, upon the
first noise of any insurrection? Hereupon his Majesty resolved to punish them
according to their deserts, and deprived some of them of their Offices and
Governments, with intent of bestowing them on such persons, of whose fidelity
he was well assured, as upon those of the Cardinals Family, who were never seen
to intermeddle in any Cabal against his Majesty's service and who knowing the
honor of his Majesty's favor to be the only support of their Fortunes were
careful of not being engaged in such Designs, as might make them unworthy of
it. The advantage which this alteration brought with it, was soon after
apparent; for how would it have been if one had continued Governor of Breast,
if another had kept his Government of Brouage, and if Calais had not been
dispossessed of its Commander? would they not have served for so many Citadels
and Magazins to countenance all Revolts which they designed? And what I pray is
become of all those places which were entrusted with the Cardinal or his
Allies, Have they not continued in their Obedience to his Majesty, and those
who engaged the Queen Mother and Monsieur in their differences, could not
dispose of any of them according to their own desires? And that indeed was the
only and chief motive of their complaints.

Politic Observation.
NOthing gives greater tranquillity to a State, then the disposal of Governments
into the hands of such persons whose affection and fidelity are well known unto
their Prince. The experience which France has so often had, has been too sad
to be forgotten, seeing the most part of Civil wars, nay of Foreign too, had
not been broached, but by the defect of Governors, more solicitous of their
own Interests then of their Masters glory and service. Few are the Grandees who
are not discontented, if they have not Governments conferred upon them, nay, if
they have not some kind of assured settlement in their Commands, that their
Authorities may be greater. A King therefore is obliged to be the more
inquisitive, whether with their Gandeur they have loyalty and zeal for his
service, otherwise it were only to give them the means of combining one with
the other to raise Factions, and to diminish the Sovereign, by advancing their
own private power. Admit they be discontented, it is without cause; for no one
has any right to prescribe a Law to his Prince, how he shall choose such
persons as he is pleased to employ in his service. It is prudence not to regard
such discontents, they are inconsiderable, when the public Peace is in
question. A King cannot distribute his Governments with more discretion, then
by intrusting them with such persons whose loyalty is impregnable, and who he
is assured will never interest themselves with any party but his own, if any
Division should arise. Now of whom can he better be assured, then of such a
Minister, of whose fidelity he receives daily testimonies, and who, when he
sees him, brings with his Person all the Governments and Charges which have
been conferred upon him? As for those related to him, seeing they absolutely
depend upon him, and that their Power is as his own, dependant upon his
Majesty's good favor, they are equally obliged to be faithful. For this reason
it is, that the greatest Princes have not only not been backward to bestow the
chief Governments upon them, but have looked upon it as a thing very necessary
for their service. Touching the distribution of Governments, I add, That a King
is obliged, what he may, to displace those persons who have enjoyed their
Offices any long time, unless he be very well assured of their fidelity; they
are so used to hold them, when long continued, that the fear of losing them,
does oftentimes engage them in some Faction, which gives them hopes of a longer
continuance; Besides, when not received by his Majesty, but his Predecessors,
they are the sooner engaged in a Faction, because they think not themselves
beholden to him for them; Withal, in process of time they get so absolute a
Power, that sometimes it exceeds their Masters; it being usual, that long
command is accompanied with pride and insolence. Hence it is, that in the most
politic States their Governments were never but temporary. Rome lost her
Liberty by continuing her Magistrates too long in their Power; and Caesar could
never have mastered his own Country, but by acquiring too great a Power over
the soldiers by his long command.

The Cardinals Riches not to be envied;
NExt of all these factious spirits would have the Cardinal's possessing of his
Majesty's favors to pass for a great crime, although his free humor acquits
him to every one from the guilt of covetousness, and concludes him to be so
naturally generous, that he values not all the goods of the world, but only in
order to the well disposing of them. The place which he holds under his Majesty
in the State, necessitateth him to great expenses; and without them, sure it
is, that both he, and all those who are in the same employment, would fall into
dis-esteem, and that inevitably, unless they be accompanied with some
splendor, and extraordinary magnificence; else how should they cause his
Majesty to be obeyed? Those charges once defrayed, the rest he does employ in
good uses, to the poor, o^ some actions becoming his virtue and bounty. Ought
his moderate estate to be envied, who has done so great services for France?
We have in our times beheld a young Prince, whose name is fatal to this Crown,
enjoy more profits then he at four years old; we have seen a Treasurer of the
Exchequer buy himself out of a disaster, by giving the King two millions of
Livres, which was but a sixth part neither of his estate: We have know two
Jewellers enrich themselves with between four and five hundred thousand Crowns,
during the Queen-Mothers Regency Is it not then unjust to complain of those
favors which his Majesty has conferred upon him, and wherewith he has
always assisted his Majesty in the wars, when the moneys of the Exchequer
could not be brought in time enough? Is he as rich as the Prince of Kemberg,
the Emperor's Favorite at this day, who of a private Gentleman of Styria,
has gotten five hundred thousand Crown per annum in two Provinces, which his
Master gave him opportunity to effect, permitting him likewise ^o gather
Contributions from the Imperial and Hans-Towns, and causing his expenses to be
defrayed by his own Officers, which could not but exceed an hundred thousand
Crowns per annum? The most part of the Cardinals Revenues are in
Church Livings, which are no ways chargeable to the people, and ought the
less to be envied to him, in regard he has deserved them, and much more from
the Church by his services, and that he employs them for the relief of the
poor, with honor, not prodigality in his own Family. We shall not find that
his movables would amount to so much as those of the Cardinal d' Amboise did
at his death. To conclude, could his services be rewarded with money, his
actions have made it apparent he deserves much more. His chief end was only to
have the glory of serving his Master, neither did he regard such low
recompenses. He has often refused gifts which the King has proffered him, and
the greatest care he took for money, was to see his Majesty's Treasures well
ordered, when as before they were squandred away in frivolous gifts, and
superfluous expenses, little tending to his Majesty's glory: So that since his
coming to the management of affairs, there was less expended then before,
though there was a necessity of maintaining continual Armies both at home and
abroad.

Politic Observation.
RIches are the least rewards which Kings can bestow upon their Minister, for
that in themselves they are the least of all other goods. Can any one deny
Kings to be much indebted to their Ministers, seeing they are the most worthy
Instruments of their glory, and that by their endeavors it is that they effect
such exploits, as render their memories immortal? For how much are such riches
beneath such great services? They are Fortunes may-games, and only useful to
pass away the necessities of life; most commonly they bring more care then
pleasure with them, and are equally common with the greatest persons, and those
who never obliged the State by their services to reward them The Geese of the
Capitol were well fed at the expense of the Commonwealth, because by their
noise they discovered the surprisal which the French intended. A Dog that set
upon certain sacrilegious men, was maintained at the Public charge. An Horse
that carried his Master out of danger was for ever freed from labor: And shall
not a grand Minister after the rendering most signal services to his Master and
Country be rewarded with more then common advantages? I may add, that it is
necessary for a great King to confer great benefits upon a Minister whom he
has found faithful and courageous in those things which relate to his service,
whereby he may give him more authority and power to go through with all sorts
of enterprises tending to his glory. The greatest genius has occasion of them
to make himself potent in affairs, and without them his vigor will be feeble.
He is compelled to stifle a thousand noble exploits in his thoughts, for want
of means to bring them forth. It is well if he be endued with generous
inclinations; but if impotency assault him, it dis-incourageth him: Besides the
affairs of the world are so disposed, and man's thoughts so fixed, that all
yield and give place to riches. They may all, and do all amongst men, and we
see them acquire as much credit and authority to their owners, whereas they who
are destitute of them, are inconsiderable To wave these acknowledgements due to
Ministers, who is ignorant that Royal Majesty attracts no less glory from
liberality then justice? One of those perfections which render God most
worshipful to men* is his Bounty, that inexhaustible fountain of all good
things, which (like the Sun) disperseth his favors like so many rays upon the
earth, and is as beneficial as active. The gifts which Kings bestow, carry with
them as much credit as profit to the receivers; they bind the affections of
their servants, not by their worth, but as so many testimonies of good will,
the greatest Bond which ties them to their service. Liberality in a King is
properly termed magnificence, they being obliged to do great good, and nothing
is more beseeming their Majesty's, then bestowing great gifts. The perfection
of the work is an assured mark of perfection in the workman; whence certain it
is, that God acquired more glory when he created men and angels, the chief
workmanship of his hands, then when he made other creatures: Equally true it
is, that that which makes the riches of Kings more admired, is the establishing
of some great Families; and our Ancestors did not acquire greater glory of
being rich and ^iberal, then by the greatness of their Favorites Houses,
which remain as so many monuments of their magnificence.

Prosecution of the Subject.
IT is an ancient judicious saying, that as Roses grow upon Thorns, so truth is
ordinarily made to appear amongst the sharpest calumnies, for they that find
themselves concerned, are compelled to discover it for their own justification;
so those factious spirits who endeavoring to offend the Cardinal, abused the
goodness of the Queen Mother and Monsieur, makes me take notice of those
truths which their malice constrains me to publish. But as they did not with
only two accusations cease from their reproaches, we shall have occasion to
discover the rest of their falsities. They would have the World believe, that
this eminent Minister of State had so great a dominion over the Kings spirit,
that his Majesty gave an absolute credit to all he did, and was wholly moved by
his influences; and that all affairs depended on his Empire over him. But all
Europe knew sufficiently that his Prudence and Generosity equalled his justice;
and these seditious people, seemed like those that shoot against Heaven, and
see their Arrows fall back again at their feet. Nay, I am confident, they
themselves had not that opinion of his Majesty they being in their attendances
too near his person, to be ignorant how impossible it is to draw him to any
resolution without strong and pertinent reason, and that Heaven has so
enlightened his spirit, that he can discern the depths of the most great and
mysterious affairs: But they only publish these things for a pretext of their
mutiny, by the example of some in the last age, at Rouen and Valence. O strange
fury! to render that a weakness in the most puissant King of the World, which
is a true effect of his wisdom, when he saw in the Government of his estate
that no affair whatever presents it self, of which the Cardinal does not
foresee the end, consequences, and causes; that there is no inconveniency
which he does not remedy; no danger which he does not both prevent and secure;
that there is no difficulty which he finds not the means to compass, and that
he never proposed any enterprise, which he did not happily bring to pass. Why
then should not his Majesty follow his Counsels, seeing his spirit, is, as it
were, forced by the solidity of his reasons to apprve them.

Politic Observation.
AS a King cannot too much confide in a Minister, when he is thoroughly assured
of his prudence and fidelity; and if himself be of excellent parts, he will not
scruple it, it being an assured sign of judgment to conform a man's actions to
the counsel of wise men: so he ought to trust him the more cheerfully in
affairs of mean consequence, when the temper of his genius assures him that he
will acquit himself with honor; And that is unbeseeming a great Monarch, to
trouble himself with trivial matters. He who is not happy enough to have a
Minister thus able, is compelled to take the conduct upon his shoulders, but
surely he is much to be pityed; God having not put the Crown upon the Head of
Sovereigns, to entertain their minds with trivial affairs. Tiberius, one of the
greatest Monarchs that governed the Roman Empire, being retired for his
greater quiet, into the Isle of Cherre^, writ a Letter to the Senate; wherein,
as Tacitus observes, he complains that he was troubled with all sorts of
affairs, and gave them to understand that neither Aedile, nor Praetor, nor
Consul, should have any access unto him but in matters of great concernment.
Thus Themistocles, one of the greatest Statesmen of of his time said, as
Plutarch acquaints us, that as the Ship of Salavere (which may be likened to
the Bicentaure of Venice) never Launched out into the Sea, but for the
reception of Princes, or some extraordiniry occasion: So the Commonwealth of
Athens should not make use of him but in high and difficult matters. Now as for
matters of great consequence, it will be his advantage to be directed by his
Counsel, he having often made appear that his prudence is furnished with most
infallible means to bring them to an happy issue: The honor which herein he
does him, is so far from taking off from his own authority, that on the
contrary, it does rather raise his greatness, and advances his affairs to that
pitch which himself would most desire for his glory. It is dangerous
presumption in any Prince to be wilfully bent upon his own judgment; such an
one is in a Road that leads directly into ruin. The necessity of counsel is
not to be avoided; they ought to remember that God who is solicitous to keep
the greatest Monarks within the bounds of modesty and humility, has as well
subjected them to the necessity of Counsel, as the rest of men unto them. The
most Prudent are always the most stayed and it is generally agreed, that to be
wedded to ones own opinion contrary to the senses of great men, is an assured
mark of want of discretion, because every one is blind in his own affairs. I
may hereunto add, that this stayednesse is a bond which themselves impose upon
their own absolute power, whereby they are bond which themselves impose upon
their own absolute power, whereby they are preserved within the limits of their
duty, not suffering themselves to be transported by the impetuousnesse of their
passions. Nature has not formed Princes more then other men so perfect, that
they should always swim in the right stream, and never err, unless they have
some one who may serve them for a guide: The greatest Princes are most subject
to be singular in their own opinions, they having more authority; it being most
certain that a great power does easily transport the mind into licentiousness.
It is my opinion, that no greater harm can betide them, then to want some
person near them, whom they respect* and who may have the liberty of advising
them, as he shall find most expedient, whose advice they may follow with a
respectfull condiscention.

Prosecution of the Subject.
THese Factious persons were not backward to hit the Cardinal in the teeth with
the impositions charged upon the people, no^ that he was either the cause of
them, or that they were excessive; but because they knew that this complaint
was a fit Trumpet to raise sedition, and such as all they who had ever raised
any revolts in France, had made use of. True it is, they were charged with some
impositions, but besides that they were not excessive, they were absolutely
necessary. Never was there yet that time when the people d^d not apprehend
their burdens to be extreme. It is a burden to them to demand part of that
for the King, which they got not but with pain, nor do enjoy in any great
plenty. But it is without cause, for that the impositions were necessary, and
there was not any mis-government in the disposal of the treasures. Now that
those Impositions so much cried out upon, were unavoidable, cannot be doubted;
because those Wars and Designs began after his coming to the Administration:
In consideration whereof, those Charges imposed, where absolutely necessary.
They were engaged to allay the factious insolency of the Hugonots, to succor
Allies, to suppress the ambition of the house of Austria, who after the
invasion of our neighbors, would assuredly have made their attempts upon this
State.

This being so, who can deny them to have been necessary? which admitted, the
Impositions could be no less; and I may safely add that those very factious
spirits themselves were oftentimes the causes of raising the Taxes, by causing
more by half to be expended in the Wars of Piedmont, by the delays they gave
the Troops in detaining them so long; besides they forced his Majesty to keep
an Army a long time on foot, purposely that he might watch and prevent their
designs. Wars and Taxes do constantly march hand in hand, and the same pace;
poverty serving only to bring an Army into disorder; if it be a fault to make
the people contribute to the charge, it is much more blameworthy to see a
State laid open to their enemies. The peoples misery is an incommodity which is
soon outworn in a good Country, where a good Harvest puts them, in statu quo
prius; but it is not the same in the advanta^es* which the enemies of France
are permitted to have, there is need of a sufficient foundation to maintain the
charge of the War. I assure my self they question not these truths, but besides
that those expenses were absolutely necessary, do they not know what great
advantages they gave both to the King and Kingdom? The glory will remain for
ever, but the incommodity is already forgotten. What reason is there to
complain? I shall only make this answer, the Ministers had deprived the King
of that great honor which he now enjoys, had they been deficient in drawing
from the people those things which were necessary for the subsistence of Armies
during the Wars, and that it was a certain sign of their good conduct, to have
made such careful provisions. If the Impositions were thus necessary, the
money which did rise from them, was no less carefully expended during those
times of which they speak; in which it may be said, much was done with little
money. Can any one deny, that this incomparable Minister did not buy that glory
and those victories for the King, to the shame of his enemies, at an easier
rate then others have done, who have only used allaying Medicines to defer
those evils which afflict us from exasperating into extremities, but have still
left the enemies of France great advantages upon us? It must be confessed, that
some particular people have been charged over and above their proportion, but
neither the King nor his Ministers are therefore to be blamed; the Possessors,
and Raters were faulty, and deserved to be punished, because they oppressed the
weak, and let the able escape upon the sum of friendship.

Politic Observation.
JUstice and Prudence do equally oblige a Prince, to force a contribution from
his Subjects, toward the urgent necessities of the public. No one can doubt
whether any thing be more efficacious then a good Treasure to preserve a
Kingdom in order, be it in Peace or War. That Prince is easily surprised, whose
Exchequer is exhausted; for he that wants money, wants wherewith to levy men,
and he who is defective of men, is to be vanquished without difficulty. Now as
to matter of War, every one knows, that Moneys are its principal Nerves,
whereupon Suetonius Paulinus a Captain of great repute, said in the Emperor
Otho's Council, where the means of carrying on a War, were discussed; that in
public dissentions Money was more necessary then an Army. Has not Thucydides
recorded to us, how the chiefest arguments which Pericles used to induce the
Athenians to make War, was by convincing to them, that they were in a capacity
of so doing, because an Army would easily be supplied with all necessary
provisions, from that abundant Treasure, of which they were Masters? War is
undeniably a great Gulf which devoureth incredible sums: What imprudence
therefore were it for a Prince, who finding himself engaged in Wars, and the
Revenue of his Crown unable to furnish him with necessary conveniences, not to
compel his Subjects to contribute toward the public Concernments? Would he
not soon be reduced to the condition of Cleomenes; who according to Plutarch
were forced to a War, without moneys to support his Soldiery, was compelled to
fly into Egypt? If there be any thing of Prudence in it, there is as much of
Justice too. The common Axiom is, that every one may make use of his own; now
is it not, I pray, most certain that Kings may rightfully impose Contributions
upon their Subjects toward the defraying of public expenses? It is a right so
undubitable inherent to them, that the most able and sincere Divines, assure
us, that every one is in conscience bound to submit to it, they grounding
themselves upon that command which our Savior gave of paying unto Caesar, and
the example which himself showed. Herein consists the Sovereign power which
Kings have over their Subjects goods. I shall moreover add, that a Crown does
not only empower to impose Taxes, but does oblige Kings to require them, for
the preservation of its luster, and to demand them, as a debt due to the State,
as also that no Subject can reasonably complain of it, it being but just, that
particular and private persons should suffer some incommodity for the
preservation of the public good; and better it were a Nation were
impoverished, then a kingdom lost.

Prosecution of the Subject.
THose crimes wherewith the Cardinals honor was taxed were so frivolous, that
we need not any longer detain our selves upon them, especially seeing all wise
men knew them to be groundless. Easy it is to speak ill of the Governors of
a State, as the Queen mother her self once said, to some who complained of her
Agents* during her Regency. Every one takes the liberty to discommend their
Conduct, because Man is naturally an enemy to Government, and propense to judge
the worst of his Governors, whose actions indeed may appear in their true
Colors, but not the causes, inducements and circumstances of them, they remain
locked up in secret. Revilings are the rewards of their watchings, and let
their actions be never so advantageous to the public good, yet private
particular persons shall never be satisfied or pleased with them unless they
advance their private and particular Fortunes, as well as that of the public.
Never was yet Minister otherwise rewarded; and for this very reason, whatever
was said against the Cardinal, was regarded by wise men; but as the effect of a
furious faction, who could not meet their particular advancement in his
Conduct, which he little esteemed after he found their ends to be guided by
their interests, without consideration of the Kings Honor, so that it will be
needless longer to insist on this particular discourse.

Shortly after the Queen mothers and Monsieur's departure, the King unwilling
to hinder their Officers from going after them, was well informed that diverse
abusing that Liberty accorded unto them, did carry Letters under the notion of
Officers, and packets of correspondency, for the continuing many Intreagues
still on foot. Whereupon, his Majesty to suppress that disorder, ordained that
they should have fifteen days time to retire themselves either unto their
persons, or else to confine themselves unto their own houses, inhibiting any
one either to go or come (the time once expired) without his particular
license, under penalty of being declared disturbers of the public peace* of
being punished with confiscation of their Estates, and the ^osse of exemption
from payment of Tributes, which they then enjoyed; it being unreasonable that
under the intent of favoring some who did not abuse their liberty of going to
discharge their Offi^es, others might without com^trol foment and carry on the
divisions in the Kingdom, which cost so dear to extinguish,

Politic Observation.
IT is very dangerous to suffer in a Kingdom divided with factions, such
persons who have any particular dependence upon them who are the Authors of
those divisions, after themselves are retired out of the Kingdom, so to do,
were to leave fire in straw. Although ^ome may be mindful of their
obligations, in being more submisse to their Sovereign then to any other, yet
undo^btedly, many there will be, more affectionate to their own interest, who
will become spies to give intelligence and agents to draw others into their
opinions. It seems rigorous indeed that the innocent should suffer with the
nocent; but how prejudicial would it be to the Commonwealth, if not so? better
it were to preserve the public tranquillity severity, then to inda^ger it by
lenity. Never was there yet Law made for the public good, which was not
attended with some inconveniences to particular persons; and he who would make
Laws in which no particular man should be interessed, will but deceive himself
for want of penetrating into the consequences. The best course which can be
followed, is ever to prefer the universal before a particular good; remembering
that wise saying of Tacitus, that all exemplary acts have somewhat of evil in
them; but the injury they do particular men, will be abundantly recompensed by
the public advantage.

Prosecution of the History,
THus you have the several Intreagues and the strange attempts, which they who
abused the favors of the Queen Mother and Monsieur used, during this year,
contrary to their allegiance, the Kings Authority, and the tranquillity of the
Kingdom. You have likewise the courses which were taken to impede their
designs, which ended in the ruin of the Complotters. The Cardinal used such
care, address, and Prudence, that all their attempts were only like so many
impressions made upon the clouds, which vanish with the first breath of Wind:
they were like Bullets shot at random, like blows in the air, and like pictures
in the water, which the waves do as soon deface as designed. The Pilot seems
sufficiently employed during the Tempest, if he preserve his Vessel from the
violence of the Winds, and fury of the Waves, his presence and command being
necessary to guide all those who have any charge to the performance of their
Offices, and his prudence to encourage them to go through stitch with any thing
which conduces to his happy success; so it is hard to believe that a Minister
of State has not as much employment as humane wit can undergo, when he is
obliged to defend himself and the State too, from the violence of a faction
headed by the chief persons of the royal family, seeing he must necessarily
every day issue out a thousand several Orders, and hardly will any one believe
that he can be capable of any other thoughts, whiles he is agitated in such
furious Tempests: True it is, the highest pitch of glory that a Minister in
such encounters can attain to, is to avoid shipwreck. Experience has made it
evident that great Souls can pass further on, and that as the intelligences
though taken up in their contemplation and love of the Divinity, yet cease not
to be solicitous of things here below, or neglect the protection of Princes,
Kingdoms and particular persons; so likewise Heaven does sometimes produce
certain sublime wits endued with courage, address, and prudence enough to
undertake such encounters, a thousand other noble enterprises, besides the
conservation of the State. Has not all Europe found it so in the Cardinal, who
without showing any trouble at all the attempts this year made to embroil
France and destroy it, under which any other but himself would have sunk, not
only rendered them successelesse but reestablished the Duke of Mantua, and
defended the Princes of Germany, whom the House of Austria had almost swallowed
up? a thing which I cannot sufficiently admire, and of which I find my self
obliged to say something, that it may serve for instruction in the Government
of States.

Affairs of Germany.
I Will begin with the assistance of the German Princes, concluded with the
King of Sweden in January, at which time, these factious agents did their
utmost to destroy this great Minister. We have demonstrated in the precedent
year with how much justice the King of Sweden, entered Germany to defend the
liberty of some Princes oppressed by the House of Austria, who were allied unto
him, as also to this Crown, and who were not only driven out of their
Principalities, but also reduced to such extremity that they knew not how to
live. We have likewise seen, that he was the more readily induced to defend
them in regard himself had received some injuries from the Emperor;
particularly, when the Emperor caused his Letters sent unto the Prince of
Transylvania to be opened and falsely interpreted, when he sent the Duke of
Holsace with a great Army under his own Colors, to make War upon him in
Prusse, when he confiscated the Ships and Merchandises of the Swedes, formerly
landed in the Towns of Germany, when he not only refused audience to his
Ambassadors, and denied them answer, but commanded them upon pain of their
lives presently to depart the Empire; and when he refused by way of scorn, his
proffer of Peace, in confidence of destroying him, not thinking him able to
sustain the force of his Arms. The Cardinal knew, that a Prince received no
less glory from defending his Allies, then from curbing the Ambition of his
Neighbors, and therefore thought himself obliged to persuade his Majesty not
to forsake the King of Sweden and Princes of Germany, in so important an
occasion. He knew no War was more lawful then that which tends to the keeping
of confederate Princes in their Dominions, and to revenge any injuries offered
unto them: Hence it was, that having taken order for the interests of the
Catholic Religion in Germany, he persuaded his Majesty to conclude and sign
the Treaty of Alliance with the King of Sweden, the conditions whereof, had
been concluded about three or four months before. His Majesty engaged to
assist him with Men and Money, as he then did, and the King of Sweden expressly
engaged not to attempt any thing in prejudice of the Church in the Catholic
Towns, of which he might possibly become Master; our invincible Monarch not
thinking it enough to follow the generous sentiments of his justice, which led
him to secure those Princes from oppression, unless accompanied with those of
his Piety; so he could not resolve to assist an Heretic King, without
precaution for the interest of the Church, that those violences, which are the
usual effects of Arms, might not be attributed but to the disorders which do
necessarily follow the Camp.

Politic Observation.
THat War is just, says St. Ambrose, which is undertaken in defense of the
weak or the Allies of a State against those who oppress them: St. Augustine
teaches us, that those Arms are justifiable which are taken up to revenge
injuries. The defense of Confederates, is one of those actions which does most
of all set off a Kings glory, and raise it to the highest pitch of greatness.
Nothing does more assimilate them to the Divinity, then the stretching out of
their hands to support the weak, the protecting of whom is an act
well-beseeming their Majesty's. He who never ought to divide his Crown to any
one, ought however let his Arms be common to other Sovereigns for their
defense. They who do otherwise besides the blemishing of their glory with the
brand of ignorance, do withal render themselves undeserving to be assisted in
like necessities* There is not any Prince who is not a^med at in his turn, or
able always to subsist by his own force; many times they are necessitated to
stoop under the arms of an invader, for want of the assistance of their
confederates, who forsake them, as they were before forsaken by them. If a King
may with Justice defend the weak, and his confederates, doubtless he may as
justly employ his power to revenge an injury. God who has entrusted the
Scepter in the hand of Kings, has also obliged them not to permit that the
respect due to their Sovereign Majesty be violated by any other Prince, as well
as to maintain their Subjects within the bounds of their obedience. He has
given them a Sword to correct any indignities offered to their Crowns. There is
not any one above them, who is Arbitrator of their quarrels; they are legal
Judges of their own differences, and in this Independency God has given them
power to take up Arms to carve their own right. It is enough to justify their
War, if the Princes against whom they fight have given them occasion, and the
misfortunes which inevitably follow the disorder of Soldiers cannot be imputed
but unto him who first gave the occasion of taking the field. A Kingdom would
be very defective (as Aristotle observes) if the Sovereign had not Authority
to ch^stise with his Arms him who has injured him; in like manner (says he)
as the body of creatures is not perfect, if unable to repel those objects
which offend it: So an estate is not in that perfection which it ought to be;
if destitute of power to repay any injuries done against it.

The Justice of the Kings Alliance with the King of Swede.
THere is no doubt but the Alliance of the most christian King with him of
Swede, for the defense of their common confederates was very just, seeing the
War it self undertaken by the King of Swede was just, and that all Alliance
contracted for the support of a just War, is in it self justifiable: Yet there
was no device unassayed by the house of Austria, to induce the World to condemn
it. The first reason by them alleged in discredit thereof, was, that it was
undertaken in the defense of Heretic Princes; but what reason was there, so
long to have invaded the States of other Princes under the pretense of
Religion? After Charles the Fifth, had joined the Imperial Crown to his
Kingdoms of Spain and Italy, with the Provinces of the Low Countries; he
thought that having forces enough to re-conquer all those Countries, which
formerly belonged to the Roman Emperor, he might with justice attempt it; as
if Kingdoms were the division of force, and as if birth and succession of many
ages were not bars enough to stop ambition. Now as Germany is the Bulwark which
serves all he States of Europe to defend their liberty, as Henry the Second,
King of France, writ unto the Princes of the Empire in the year, 1552. he
resolved to overrun it, concluding that having once mastered it, he might with
ease invade France, England, and the rest of Italy. The Emperor who reigns at
present knew as well how important it was, seeing in his letters sent to Zuinga
chief Counselor to the King of Spain, he particularly names it the
foundation of the Authority of the House of Austria. Germany indeed does so
abound in men and riches, that it is alone able to entertain Armies, and those,
great ones, for ever; nay, to supply the very Indies in case of a defect. This
is the true ground of the War, and that which obliged the King of Swede to
assist it, although the Spaniards pretense was, the rooting out of Heresy. It
is long since, the great St. Leon, writ to the Emperor Theodosius, that men
palliate their Passions with Religion: but much more reasonably may it so be
said of the Austrian Princes (as Mariana has well observed in his History,
that being it which makes so great an impression upon the people. The World
sees by experience, how advantageous it was to them, when Ferdinand usurped
Navarre from his own Niece; they themselves have seen, that it wanted but
little of putting our Scepter into their hands, during the League. It is the
best title by which they hold part of both the Indies, where they have put to
death not only lawful Princes, but at least fifty Millions of people, with
such cruelty, that they have died the earth with blood, and made Heaven to
groan with horror, and well will they now make use of it to despoil the German
Princes of their estates. But who is ignorant of their injustice, seeing that
as the true Religion gives no right to Empires, so force cannot deprive him of
it, to whom it falls by succesion.

Politic Observation.
Heresy does no more dis-ingage Subjects from obedience to their Prince than
infidelity; but this being a point of Doctrine, peradventure some mean capacity
will make a scruple to believe it, if only proved by the verity of politic
maxims. I shall therefore back it by the belief which the Apostles-left in the
Primitive Church, which the Fathers taught in their Precepts and Examples, and
which the ancient Christians did most religiously observe amidst their greatest
persecutions. Did not the Apostles, St. Peter and Paul, write to the christians
in their Epistles, at what time Nero made the earth tremble with his cruelty
execrised upon them: Let every one be subject to the higher powers. For there
is not any Dominion which is not established by God, and those which now are,
are by his gift, Whoever rebelleth against them, opposeeth his Commandment, and
they who endeavor to shake off the yoke of their obedience, expose themselves
to damnation. A Prince is God's servant, it is not to no purpose that he holds
the sword; it is to make himself known for the Almighty's Officer: He ought to
be obeyed, not only because he can punish, but for Conscience sake; neither are
these the only exhortations left unto us upon this subject, their Epistles are
fraught with diverse others so frequent, that I need not recite them, le^t I
play the Divine, and forget the Historian. Who likewise knows not how all the
ancient Fathers of the Church would have sealed this Doctrine with their blood,
notwithstanding they lived under Atheistical and Pagan Princes, who were as so
many firebrands to Religion, and sworn Enemies to our Faith? S. Ignatitus writ
very earnestly to the people of Antioch, to persuade them to serve Justin^ the
Emperor, and gave all Pagan Princes to understand by a learned Apology* that
their hopes were in vain to force the faithful by the violence of their
torments to worship Idols and false gods, who in all other things would render
a full and entire subjection to their Emperors. Tertullian acknowledges none
but God above Kings, and confesses that their commands tie the soul with a
strong knot. Origin writing upon the Epistle to the Romans, though born under a
Pagan, says, there ought to be no difference in obedience due to Princes, of
what belief soever they be. God has advanced them above man, for reasons
unknown to us. I could easily add the restimony of others, but that I fear I
should act the part of a Divine. I will only add the exemplary loyalty of the
Primitive Christians, who without any sense of being hunted, beaten,
persecuted, imprisoned and burnt, did yet continue so constant, that the
horrible diversity and excess of torments, to which the fury o^ Tyrants did
daily expose them, could never make them do any thing repugnant to that
obedience they ought their Prince, no more then against the Faith they had
sworn to God. It were to be wished that the Spaniards would follow these
glorious Tracts, whereby the world might remain in Peace, and Princes might be
unmolested in the enjoyment of their estates; but their Designs being
different, no wonder if their faith be dissonant.

An Answer to the Spaniards who blame the Alliance between France and Sweden.
THe second reason which they allege in condemnation of the Alliance of France
with Swede, was, that it was contracted with an heretic King, an enemy of the
Church, and one who exercises great cruelties against the German Catholics:
But this scruple of Conscience which they pretended, aimed at nothing else but
to force our Arms out of our hands, that in effect they might the easilier
despoil the ancient A^^^es of this Crown, who are only able to curb their
Ambition. It is a very frivolous objection, and I do the more wonder at their
condemning the Alliances of Heretics, it being their practice time out of
mind, not only to admit them, but Infidels likewise into their confederacies Do
we not know how in the time of the Florentine Counsel, and of the Emperor
H^nry the second, who designed to make Spain Tributary to him, that King
Ferdinand contracted an alliance with the Moors, that he might by them be
assisted against the Emperor, against the Council against the Popes Leon the
ninth* and Victor the second, his enemies? Do we not know that they have
attempted all possible means to contract alliance with the Turk, and that they
have already effected it with the Persian, who is of the same Religion? Do we
not know that they are allied with the Indian King, who openly worshippeth the
Devil? Do we not know how Charles the f^^t ^eagued himself with the Lutherans,
that he might the better make war upon us, and that by the advice of the
Theologians, as Bannes rep^rteth it, who about the second of his Commentaries
says* It is no more inconvenient to make use of Infidels, then of Elephants
and Horses? Do we not likewise know how Aurelius King of Spain, who slew
Troila, leagued himself with the Moors and Saracens, and paid them yearly a
Tribute of an hundred Catholic children, as Mariana reports it? Do we not
know how Alphonsus sir-named the grand, leagued himself with the Moors, on
condition that he should deliver his Son Ordonius to be brought up amongst
them? They who have taken the pains to read their Histories, may meet with
diverse such examples. We are not ignorant of the ancient alliances which they
have had in Germany, the King of Denmark, the Dukes of Saxony, Brandenburgh,
and others, and which have been but lately renewed, though they are all
Protestants.

Now what reason can there be to blame alliances with Heretics? Were it not
to plead against their customs? And why should they alone assume this Liberty,
seeing they only object it to authorize their own ambitious Designs, and for
our parts we only design by it the preservation of our Allies in the lawful
possession of their estates? It is a right which our Kings will the hardlier
relinquish, seeing the holy Chair is so much concerned in it, who ought the
more be defended from the oppression of the House of Austria, because they have
too to much discovered their Design, of setting on foot their ancient Titles
to the Empire, for the recovering those lands which the Popes have heretofore
received from the bounty of our Kings. We are not ignorant how he contrives to
invade Italy, which after the reducing of ^ermany would easily be brought to
pass. Our Kings who have always undertaken the Churches Protection, as having
the honor to be her eldest Sons, cannot endure it; because after the temporal
is once subdued, they will soon be intermedling with the Spiritual, which would
produce an immediate Schism. This one, was the weightiest affair which has a
long time befallen the Church; and that alone consideration were enough to
vindicate the alliance with the Swede. If in process of time any disorders
have succeeded upon this Treaty, well may they be imputed unto the
proseperities, which had made a Prince become insolent, but not unto the
effects of his Majesty's alliance with him, who had no other design besides
the establishing of the German Princes. Religion was not interessed in the
least in the Articles of agreement, it having been expressly concluded between
them, that no alteration should be made in any of those places, of which his
Arms should make him Master. Those disorders which he committed against the
Church were accidental, like unto those medicines which weaken Nature, yet cure
the disease; in regard of which, no one ought to be deterred from assisting his
Allies: As the weakness caused by Physic ought not to fright us from
receiving it, because strength and health will the sooner return after it.

The King has already given satisfaction for some of those injuries suffered
by the German Church, and he will be glad to establish the rest, after the
ambitious madness of the House of Austria shall be somewhat more reasonable.
But admitting Wars could be unjust by reason of injuries done unto the Church,
how would the Spaniards save themselves? What could they said for themselves in
that expedition of theirs against Monsieur de Mantua, where the Lutherans by
them introduced, omitted no kind of Sacrilege which could be perpetrated
against the Church? This reason therefore cannot be right for their turn, it
will only serve to lay their own injustice before them, which is but too
notorious, from many other considerations. It cannot then be hence concluded,
whether a War be just or not^ There are moreover another sort of people
ignorant of affairs, who allege the King might have made a Catholic League,
which would have wrought the same effect. To which I answer, his Majesty would
have been very glad to have found it so; and the reason why it was not
effected, was, because it was never proposed. Some Religious persons indeed,
more Devout then Prudent, did make some overtures, but they were the more
suspected, because made by those who were Subjects to the House of Austria, and
such men who are una^quainted with the reaches of the Spanish Ministers, and
are as commonly deceived, as frequently disowned by them. These good Fathers
were but ill spokes-men, in matters of Propositions, being entrusted to say
nothing satisfactory, and sometimes what they say is contradicted; so that in
fine, themselves conclude themselves to have been deceived; which is all the
satisfaction to be had by them.

Politic Observation.
IT is an error to believe it unlawful for Princes to confederate themselves
with Heretics or Infidels, either for their own defense, or the preservation
of their Allies, in the possession of their just Rights; The contrary opinion
is frivolous in the judgment of the ablest Divines, though Spanish. The Law of
Nature does generally oblige all men to unite themselves for the defense of one
another, of what condition soever. Those who doubt it, would I send to the
School of creatures void of reason, who would make them ashamed of questioning
it. The Law of Grace does not destroy that of Nature: Hence it is that this
Obligation does still remain, and that those Alliances made by Kings with
Infidels or Heretics, when profitable or necessary, may not justly be blamed.
Do we not see in holy Writ, how the Patriarks, and the most Renowned Kings of
Judah have authorized this Doctrine by their example? Did not Abraham ally
himself with Abim^l^ch, both for himself and his Successors, as also with the
Canaanites? Did not Jacob league himself with Laban the Idolater? Were not the
Israelites allied with several Infidels, excepting only those with whom God
prohibited commerce? Was not Lot confederate with the King of Sodom, and did he
not go to war with him? The Macchabees (though zealous in the observance of
their Religion) did yet confederate themselves with the Lacedaemonians: God
himself was pleased that Solomon should join his Fleet with the King of Tyre's,
and so blessed their alliance, that they obtained vast riches by it; nay, he
was likewise well contented that the Temple should be built by the Tyrian
Infidels. To pass by these examples of Antiquity, let us descend to later
times, where seeking for proofs of this Truth* we find S. Paul recommending to
the Primitive Christians, to be at peace with all men, and not refusing his
proper de^ence from the violence which the Jews designed against him, by the
assistance two hundred Archers, and seventy Horsemen, all Infidels*

What can be objected against this Reason? It is permitted every one to make
alliance with all such as are comprised under the notion of Neighbors; and it
may not be doubted, for the Son of God has commanded us to love them as our
selves: The Infidels are positively comprehended under that Title, especially
when they are of advantage unto us; as Jesus Christ restifieth in the parable
of the Samaritane; and by consequence it only rests to be concluded, that
alliances with Infidels, and so with Heretics, are permitted to Princes, and
that they only ought to be circumspect in the use of that liberty, that they
abuse it not.

The Affairs of Italy.
THis is all I shall say concerning the alliance with the Swede for the good of
the German Princes: But who will not admire that at the very same time his
Majesty gave the Law to the affairs of Italy, for the settling them in peace? It
is good to see the Sun after a long storm, dispel that cloud whence the Tempest
arose, clear up the Air, command the Winds to be still, to gu^^d the mountains*
and make his Rays shine in our Eyes; but how much more pleasant is it to behold
the King (whom the glory of a generous and invincible courage makes to shine
among other Princes) allay that War wherewith Italy had been embroyled, for the
three years last past, compel the Forces to retire into their Countries,
establish the Liberty of commerce and re-estate Italy, Savoy, Piedmont, and the
Grisons in the enjoyment of an happy peace? Europ beheld all this about the end
or this year, at which time those embroyls which we shall shall shortly treat
of, were agitated in France, and which we come now to consider; for the more
orderly describing those things which happened. Before we come to the ground of
the Treaty of Peace, I think it proper to speak a little concerning the
inclinations of Princes affections to a general accommodation. The King having
learned about the end of the last year, by a dispatch from the Sieur de Leon,
in which his Majesty was informed how the Emperor was certainly resolved to be
at Peace, and to permit the investiture of the Duke of Mantua, in conformity to
the Treaty of Ratisbonne, commanded him to return to Vienna; and as^ure him,
that he would contribute his utmost to effect it, and that he would willingly
surrender to the Duke of Savoy, whatever he had gotten in his Dominions,
although in his just possession by the Laws of War; provided the investiture of
Mantua and Montferrat were confirmed, and restitution made of what had been
usurped from that Duke. His Majesty engaged himself in this War, only to
establish the Duke of Mantua in Peace; and consequently, would make no
difficulty to withdraw his forces from Italy; provided, that the Emperor, the
King of Spain, and Duke of Savoy did the like, relinquishing their designs,
which their ambitions had hatched upon that Princes esta^e. Whereupon, they
having resolved to leave him in quiet (though the Spaniards did not speak very
freely) the Cardinal bent his thoughts in finding out fit means for the
executing the Treaty of Ratisbonne, not that he was ignorant that the laws did
not oblige him relinquish all those advantages which the justice of Arms should
obtain, or to relinquish those places taken in Savoy and Piedmont, but he
easily condescended to suppress his own interest, that Europe might see the
sincerity of his designs, and how he had not entered upon Italy with intention
to invade any one, or to trouble the peace of Christendom, but only upon the
score of preserving his Ally in the just possession of his undoubted right.

Politic Observation.
Diverse are the considerations which oblige a Prince to give an end to a
foreign War. He ought to resolve to sit still, when he shall have obtained his
pretenses; for, as Thucydides says, it is unjust to prosecute a War against
him who is disposed to give satisfaction, and willingly submit to reason. No
War is just, but that which is necessary, and Sovereigns are permitted to end
that difference by force of Arms, which they perceive cannot otherwise be
concluded. He who continues a War after satisfaction offered by his enemy,
instead of glory acquireth hatred* One of those reasons which got the Emperor
Augustus so great an esteem of justice, was, That he never undertook a War,
unless compelled by some important reason. Xenophon says, that a wise Prince
forbeareth what ^e can to make War, though sometimes pressed unto it, and that
he is obliged to prefer Peace before War, where his honor the interest of his
State or Allies, are not totally concerned Only furious beasts make War to
satisfy the motions of their rage; but a wise Prince will easily be inclined
to quit his Arms, when those three grand causes do cease, which are the usual
occasions of War. The Philosophers say, the effect is no longer necessary when
the cause cease to act, which ought not only to be understood of the
efficient, but also of the final cause, it being reasonable to abstain from
such actions, when the end which first stirred us up does no longer engage us;
besides he is compelled, as it were, to make peace abroad, when any intestine
War calls him to look home. The discreet Physician gives the same counsel by
his example, when he is much more solicitous of those evils engendered within
the body, then those which only appear upon the skin. Civil Wars concern the
preservation of a State foreign Wars are only useful for glory or power. Now,
as that which is necessary is still to be preferred before that which is
profitable, he ought so much the sooner to recall such forces to remedy that
disorder which threatens him within, it being almost impossible to give order
at the same time both for one and the other; in fine, ^e ought to make peace,
after the obtaining those advantages which he could expect either from fortune
or his own conduct. The success of War is not always the same, and it is
difficult to make good fortune to last always. Victories do not always depend
upon Prudence, Fortune has her share in them. It is not to be avoided, but
that after a long Calm the Vessel should meet with a Storm, maugre the Prudence
or the Pilot; so likewise, it is impossible, that after diverse advantages
obtained in War, some misfortune should not happen. Hannibal was alike
courageous both in Afric and Italy, yet after his return to Carthage he was
no longer successful in his Arms. This is one of the reasons which has
induced the Sages to advise great Captains to withdraw upon their advantage,
lest they lose the glory which they had formerly obtained.

What it is that makes Cazal considerable to the Spaniards.
THis advice were fit for the Spaniard to follow, that he might stop himself in
the enjoyment of those great successes which fortune has bestowed upon them
under Ferdinand: Charles the Fifth, and Philip the Second, but their Ambition
will hardly give them leave so to do. They made it apparent in this particular,
where they showed themselves totally averse from Peace, unto which his Majesty
was so easily inclined, they testifying by their actions, that their chief
design, was to hinder the Duke of Mantua's peaceable enjoyment of his States.
They persuaded themselves that the Court being divided by those Tares which
they had sowed, and which they manured with such care in the minds of the
Queen Mother and Monsieur, France neither would nor could long sustain the War
in Italy; and withal, as they could not imagine but the Queen Mother would, in
fine, attain her will in the Cardinals destruction, they concluded that that
once effected Cazal would easily be reduced to their obedience, which his
discreet conduct kept safe from them. Montferrat, of which Cazal is the
strongest place, is a Country of small extent, yet of great importance to the
design, which they have a long time had upon Italy. Until this present they
have been forced to sit still in the out-bounds, Naples and Millan; and true it
is, this is one of the principal objects which hinders the conquest of the
rest, could they but once join their German with their Italian power; they
would soon be Masters of the whole, therefore have they endeavored it for so
many years, but without Cazal all their attempts are vain, that place alone
being a Bul-wark to block up the passage of any Troops which pass from Germany
to Millan. This is indeed, that which makes Cazal so considerable, the not
having whereof is the more important, in regard, their power is bounded in at
the Fort of Fuentes; which being so, they resolved to give their Ambassador in
Savoy full power to conclude any thing in his Master's behalf, an artifice full
of injustice, but which ceased not to be very proper for their design; for that
he not being party to the Treaty, it will still be free for him to break it, by
refusing to subscribe those Propositions which concerned his interest* However,
as Princes never want pretenses for the most unjust designs, they would not own
this Artifice, and the Cloak with which they covered it, was, that fighting
under the Emperors Colors, there was no need of any one to treat in their
behalfs, but after all their endeavors to prevent the execution of the Treaty
then concluded; they made it apparent that this reason of theirs was only a
pretense, and that their true design was to hinder the peace, that they might
make new attempts upon Cazal.

Politic Observation.
THat Ambition which is sometimes favored with good success, has much much
ado to relinquish its enterprises, though unjust. It is an error to think
Fortune is blind, because she distributeth her favors inconsiderately and
without forecast; for that God himself whose eyes are clearer then the Sun, is
the Author of whatever befalls mankind. Well may she be painted without eyes,
when as she does usually blind those whom she does at any time oblige with the
least extraordinary success. A Prince accustomed to conquer, proposes no law
in prosecution of his Will, though that right be inherent in God alone: Little
does he consider the condition which his birth has given him, and the passion
of growing great at his neighbors expense, does so transport him, that he
thinks he has right enough, if he have but power to conquer them; he flatters
himself in the belief, that those Monarchies which are this day held with most
justice, are grounded upon no other Titles then the swords of those that first
founded them. The desire of Dominion which transporteth him, renders him
careless of dying the earth with blood, if he may but subjugate more people to
himself, and of making the world groan under the violence of his arms, if he
may but get a new addition to his authority. It makes him forget that he is a
man, and consequently that he is subject to the Laws of Death, and equally
liable with the meanest Cottager, to render an account of his actions; that the
usurpation of another right, shuts the gates of heaven against him, and
that ambition it self is a punishment to those whom it possesses, augmenteth
their inquietudes with the increase of their powers. Who knows not that it is
not the greatness of Kingdoms which makes Kings greatly happy; that the desire
of conquest is accompanied with more pain and hazard then pleasure; that those
Princes who will subjugate all men, are hated by all men, and are oftentimes
reduced to a nonplus, just when they think to extend the bounds of their
Empire to the utmost; That it is no more just to usurp the power of a Sovereign
Prince, then to commit murder; That God who is the Judge of Kings, takes
pleasure to abase their insolence, and to cast them down when they think
themselves highest? To be short, the most sure and agreeable Dominion, is that
which has justice for its Basis.

That the Duke of Mantua's Right does not prejudice the Emperor.
THe Emperor had been disabused by the Sieur de Leon, of those ill impressions
which the Spanish Ministers had instilled into him, concerning those Forces
which the King had sent into Italy. He was informed with the true reasons which
engaged him to undertake the Duke of Mantua's protection, which was such as did
not at all prejudice the Rights of the Empire, seeing he had never any thoughts
of hindering that Prince form rendering to his Imperial Majesty all those devoirs
which could be expected by him: He was informed with the Duke of Mantua's
pretensions, who had no other crime then that of being a Frenchman, and
therefore odious to the Spaniards; to deprive whom of his lawful Succession,
were to commit an insupportable outrage, and to force the most Christian King
to protect him. At length his eyes were opened to discover the disguisments
wherewith the Spaniards had surprised him, to the end they might employ the
power of the Empire to carry on their ambitious designs in Italy; whereupon
from a Scholar, being made Master of the Affair, he resolved to put an end to
it; and accordingly sent unto the Baron de Galas a full power to conclude with
the Ambassadors of France, upon some means to execute the Treaty of Ratisbonne,
and to establish an happy peace in Italy, promising to invest the Duke of
Mantua in that which belonged unto him, his Majesty being readily disposed to
make a surrender to the Duke of Savoy. These are the true reasons which induced
the Emperor to this resolution, yet it cannot be denied but that necessity
compelled him to it, for the King of Swede had already made a great progress in
Germany, and done great exploits; so that had not the Emperor presently
recalled his Forces from Italy, he would soon have overrun the whole: He
likewise knew how the Christian King had made a Treaty of alliance with him,
for the defense of his Confederates, and that he must undoubtedly fall in that
war, if he did not unite his scattered forces to sustain the charge of two so
great Powers.

Politic Observation.
NOthing is more powerful to reduce Princes to reason than necessity, whose
Laws are more absolute then those of their Power; they know nothing but the
Divinity and that above them; sometimes it is a trouble to them to admit it,
especially when it thwarts their ambition, yet it cannot but be thought happy,
when it forces their arms out of their hands, and leads them to a fair
accommodation. The most discreet do the more willingly submit to its Laws, in
regard no one can be blamed for following that condition which necessity
imposes, a good excuse in the greatest faults; sometimes it is so favorable as
to lead them to victory, by obliging them to attempt it when they least
expected it; at other times it is content to settle them in peace, by a
reducing them to a disability of prosecuting war. In fine, they must subscribe
to its pleasure, for necessity it is which imposes the Law upon them, but
receives none from them, they being in this respect in the same condition with
meaner persons. Hence it was that ^hal^s being demanded what was the strangest
thing in nature, answered, Necessity, because it surpasses all things. Are not
Castles (in themselves impregnable) forced by necessity to surrender? What
says Quint^ Curtius. Necessity has a more absolute Empire in Arms, then
reason it self. Is there any Rhetoric which can persuade the mind more
efficaciously? There is no power which is not obliged to render it obedience.

Prosecution of the Subject.
WE now come to speak of the Dukes of Savoy and Mantua. Who can doubt of their
inclinations to Peace, when it was the only means to reestablish them in their
States? It is a trouble to behold the earth languishing under the rigours of a
tedious Winter, covered with Ice and Snow, and overspread with torrents of
waters; But it is much more troublesome to a Prince to see his S^ates in the
possession of others, his people oppressed by the burdens of War, his Towns
and Villages forsaken, hi^ Fields unmanured, and the Earth dyed with the blood
of the dead These were indeed the reasons which obliged Monsieur the Duke of
Mantua to entertain the Sieur Priaudy still near him, that he might propose
such overtures of peace to him as presented themselves to his thoughts, and
which induced the Duke of Savoy to send about the beginning of the year, the
Comte de Drouin to assure the King of his Respects and Affection, to contribute
his utmost to his Majesty's service. He well found that the Spaniards chief
design was to advance their affairs at his expenses; and that on the contrary,
his Majesty who has evermore fought rather for glory in the defense of his
Allies* then to usurp their estates, had not overrun Savoy and Piedmont until
he was necessitated to it by his denying assistance; whence it was that he no
longer doubted that it would more advance the recovery of his estates, to keep
a fair correspondence with France, then to follow the interests of Spain.

Politic Observation.
THere is not any condition more to be pityed, then that of a Prince despoiled
of his Estates. The impotency to which he is reduced is so much the more
insupportable* by how much the memory of his former Authority does constantly
present it self unto him; and his Poverty is the greater, in regard of his
former plenty. Such great ^alls do carry some shame with them, especially to
such who have been the Authors (in some sort) of their own miseries. We do not
hold them to be so much Philosophers, as to be content with what Fortune has
left, or that they would live in any other condition then their former; they
are likewise the more impatient of being restored to their estates, for that
they know Authority if once degraded, falls to ruin, if not quickly
re-instated. The Pilot who finds his Vessel beaten by the Tempest, his Masts
broken, his Sails rent, his Cordage torn, and his Ship leaky, bends all his
thoughts how to get into Port; and a Prince considering his places to be in the
hands of his enemies, his Revenue sequestered, his Country forraged, his
Subjects fugitives, and his Forces reduced to an impossibility of securing
themselves from a total ruin, is in perpetual trouble, until he finds himself
restored by a Treaty o^ Peace.

The Deputies of the Christian Princes for the Treaty of Peace.
THese are the inclinations about the beginning of this year, of the several
Princes who had taken part in the War of Italy, or the Interest of Monsieur de
Mantua. The Pope* who is the common Father, did not a little contribute to
bring things to this pass, both by the endeavors of his ordinary Nuncios, who
resided near them, and by the prudence of the Nuncio Panzirolo, who had always
continued in Piedmont, or thereabouts, endeavoring to extinguish the flame
when it was first of all breaking out. His Holiness was no less interessed in
the Peace then the rest, because in War the Church is neither heard nor obeyed,
nor indeed regarded, but as a Magistrate in a City troubled with dissentions,
and who in consideration of his Temporal estate could not be exempted from
those troubles which attend Armies, and upon whom the House of Austria had
designed, as well as upon the rest of Italy, as having been heretofore the most
noble part of the Roman Empire, and which their ambition tells them they have
right to recover, through the whole extent of it. Upon these just
considerations the Pope sent Mazarini to the King about the beginning of the
year, as to the best qualified, and most just Arbitrator of Christendom, whose
victorious Arms had acquired him a full power to settle Italy in peace at his
own pleasure. His Majesty did very well resent the entreaties made to him for
the contributing his endeavors to peace; whereupon the Marshall de Thoyras,
and the Sieur de Servient were shortly after chosen for this employment, worthy
of their abilities, to meet at Suze, a Town near Qu^rasque, where the Plague
had forced the Duke of Savoy to retire, and where all parties had concluded to
send their Deputies, to confer of some convenient means for executing the
Treaty of Ratisbonne. The Nuncio Panzirolo came in the first place to testify
by his diligence the ardour of zeal and charity which the Church has for the
^e^ling of Peace between Christian Princes. The Baron de Galas Captain and
Colonel General to the Emperor, came shortly after, with full power from his
Master, whom the progress of the King of Swede made impatient till he could see
his Imperial Forces at liberty, to return into Germany, whereby to give a check
to his proceedings; not considering that this earnestness of his gave others
advantages upon him: This obliged the Sieur de Servient to go directly thither,
without the Marshall de Thoyras, who was not as yet come, though he arrived
shortly after, to show that his Master had no less inclination to peace, then
courage in War, when the enemies of his Allies provoked him to it. The
President de Baines was appointed by the Duke of Savoy to assist at the
conference, and Guichardus Chancelour of Montferrat by the Duke of Mantua,
though he had given an absolute power to his Majesty's Ambassadors, to dispose
of his affairs as they should think fit. Cavac^ia was sent thither by the
Commonwealth of Venice, but it was only to reside near his Majesty's
Ambassadors, whom they looked upon as the chief Arbytrator of this affair, and
who took the same care of their Interest as themselves would have done, for
they assisted not at the Conference, no more then the Comte de la Rocque,
extraordinary Ambassador of Spain; for he had no power, as we have already
declared, and came thither only to hinder the accommodation. These were the
chief Deputies which had the charge of this important Treaty; amongst which (I
may safely say) that those of his most Christian Majesty evinced unto the Comte
de la Rocque, and Galas, that the French Nation are no less prudent in counsel,
then courageous in arms; that if they have more of fire then the Spaniards and
Germans, yet they have no less Phlegm to debate such Propositions as were made
to them; the vivacity of their soul penetrated into the depth of affairs, but
their prudence prevented them from saying any thing but what was necessary;
their solidity sustained the assaults of others, their prudence deluded those
artifices wherewith it was endeavored to surprise them, and their patience
surmounted the slowness of Galas, and the Comte de la Rocque, whom they made
despair of obtaining any thing but by reason. They came last to Querasque, and
at all meetings stayed till the last, to let the world see they were not in
haste, and that they desired no an end of the Treaty, but by the way of Honor,
and for their Master's advantage; They well knew that the Emperor's, the Dukes
of Savoy and Mantua's Deputies would press the Treaty home enough, by reason of
the ill condition of their Masters affairs, and from thence indeed they knew
how to draw diverse advantage.

Qualities necessary for an Ambassador.
PRinces though they are great, yet can they not negotiate their most important
affairs, in their own persons. Necessity compels them to employ some of their
Officers, and when they may negotiate in person any treaties with strangers
Prudence forbids them so to do; they should not only be unworthy of that
Mejesty wherewith they are accompanied, by employing themselves in the
resolution of a thousand difficulties which they will meet with; but also,
committing their authority to the contests which happen at all conferences; and
what is most considerable, is, that they have more liberty treating by their
Ambassadors to reject any Propositions dis-agreeable unto them, without being
obliged to declare their reasons: Withal, they have more time to weigh their
resolutions, either ratifying or rejecting them with their counsel, then when
they are in public Assemblies; they may likewise judge with more judgment,
because before the final conclusion they are informed of all the intentions of
the contrary party, which their Ambassadors present at the Treaty, cannot but
successively discover, although they are obliged to resolve on the Articles
upon mature deliberation. Treaties of Peace are the more important, seeing in
them is debated the restoring of the bond of human society to States, the life
of the Laws, Order, and Policy, and the plenty of all Prosperity, so that able
persons ought to be employed in them. The necessary qualities which he who is
employed on such occasions, ought to have, cannot be laid down in few words. I
shall content my self, to name some few which are the chiefest, and to say,
that above all things he ought to have a perfect knowledge of the affair which
he negotiates, as also of his Masters interests, of theirs with whom he treats,
and of their Allies, for otherwise he cannot avoid a surprisal. Next to this
chief quality, prudence ought to be as his eyes, to inform him what to resolve,
and what to evade, to foresee the consequences of those propositions which are
made, to countermine them who endeavor to blow him up to know how to choose
means proper to obtain that end which his Master proposes, and to wave those
reasons which are pressed upon him. This Prudence ought to be accompanied with a
certain stayednesse which may prevent him from running into a rash resolution;
he ought to be more phlegm^tick then choleric to check his hasty design, of
giving too quick a dispatch to his affairs. He ought let others wrangle,
without being moved from what he has solidly resolved, and to content himself
with answering moderately such objections as are made against him, without
receding from those fundamental propositions, upon which the main chance is to
be decided. Irresolution is a thing extremely dangerous in him, not only
because it gives great advantages to the opposite party, but because it allays
that vigor of spirit, with which his advice ought to be accompanied, and that
earnestness which he ought to have for his Masters service; not that I would
have his Prudence joined with so sublime a subtilty, unless he were endued
with all those extraordinary qualities which make a man eminent; for experience
has evinced unto us, that they who are only crafty, do commonly lose
themselves in their own thoughts, and follow such expedients which savor more
of Chimera's and Apparencies, then Truth or Solidity. Such ruin affairs, by
their Ambition to extract the quintessence of them, like those who have a long
time blowed to find the quintessence of Metals, and in the end have nothing
but wind for their pains. Secrecy is a quality the more needful in him,
because a design once discovered is of no more advantage them a Mine
contramined, and that nakedness does as ill become his Soul as his Body;
besides, as no one can keep a secret without dissimulation, he ought to have a
Soul strong enough, and well adjusted to disguise his designs, and to make show
to have other ends then those which he does pretend, though he ought not to
make use of it unless in matters of great importance, for the most part,
behaving himself with great freedom to beget the reputation of being sincere,
which will make his disguisements pass for the more current truths, by reason
he uses them so seldom. In fine, it were to be wished that he were powerful
in discourse, both for the well deducing of his reasons, as also to animate
them with that vigor which is necessary to get approbation, and which might
render them as effectual, as faintness renders them useless, when they are
therewith accompanied.

A Treaty of Peace at Querasque.
THe Deputies were no sooner arrived, but the conference began, yet not until
after the order of their sitting had been concluded. It was resolved that
Panzirolo should sit at the end of the Table, which in Italy is esteemed the
most honorable place, the Baron of Galas on his left hand, the Marshal de
Thoyras on his right hand, the Sieur de Servient beneath Galas, the President
de Banies over against him, and the Chancellor Guichardy, at the lower end
over against the Nuncio. At first indeed, and before the beginning of the
Assembly, there was some difference upon this score, because the Baron de
Galas, and the Comte de la Rocque, coming together to visit the Sieur de
Servient, the Comte de la Rocque took place of Galas; for afterward the
Marshal de Thoyras, and the Sieur de Servient, did likewise pretend to take
place of Galas, they being too much concerned in their Masers glory, to endure
that his Majesty should suffer any diminution, which must have been, if
representing his person they should have given place to him, of whom the
Spanish Ambassador took place. The Comte de la Rocque would take this
advantage of Galas, because he was only qualified as a Comissary, pretending
that Kings Ambassadors took place of the Emperors Comissaries, though not of
his Ambassadors. In fine, it was adjudged, that for this once, the Spanish
Ambassadors should give place to the Emperors Commissary, unless Galas would
likewise give place to the Most Christian Kings Ambassadors. To conclude, they
went publicly through the Town, the Comte de la Rocque being in a Coach
beneath Galas, and the Sieurs de Thoyras and Servient took place next after
him; their priorities being thus regulated they began to confer upon the means
for executing the Treaty of Peace, concluded the precedent year at Ratisbone,
in order to that which concerned Italy; for as to the rest, the Most Christian
King would never ratify it, his Ambassadors having gone beyond their
Commissions. There were two chief causes of difficulty, the first, in regard of
the eighteen thousand Crowns rent, accorded to the Duke of Savoy in Montferrat,
for which the Town of Trin was left him, and diverse other Lands and ancient
Demesnes, which did amount to that sum: The second was, about the manner of
restoring the places both of Mantua and Montferrat, as also Savoy and Piedmont;
the contests of either party were hot, and nothing concluded until the 6 day
of April, when it was resolved that the Duke of Savoy should content himself
with fifteen thousand crowns rent in Montferrat, valuing the Crown at eight
Florins, in consideration of the quality of those Towns and Lands which were
left unto him, which was concluded by the Assembly; as concerning the
restitution of places, it was concluded that the Forts newly built should be
demolished, that each party should withdraw his forces; and lastly, that the
places should be restored at the same time, and that for assurance of the
restitution, hostages should interchangeably be given, and all to be
conformable as much as could be unto the Treaty at Ratisbonne; nevertheless,
it being apprehended that those of the House of Austria would more readily
sacrifice three Hostages then relinquish the Grisons* seeing the possession of
them, would join their estates in Germany with those of Millan; it was
concluded by a secret Article, that the Towns of Suze and Avigliane, should be
delivered into the hands of the Swisses raised in the Cantons, allied with
France and Savoy, to be by them kept in his Highness of Savoy's name, until
such time as the Forts and Passages held by the Comte de Merodes in the Grisons
were left free with obligation of restoring them to the Marshal de Thoyras in
case the said Forts and Passages were not quitted: This general Treaty being
concluded, there were particular endeavors used to decide the differences
between the King and Duke of Savoy, for the establishment of an assured Peace
between their Subjects. It was not long unconcluded, because there was nothing
of difficulty in it, only the same conditions which had been agreed on the
foregoing year. These two Treaties being thus finished, were signed to a
general satisfaction of all, except Monsieur de Mantua, who was something
troubled to pay the charge, and the Comte de la Rocque, who would have
continued on the War upon any conditions whatever; all the rest, thinking that
Peace was now restored unto Italy, which for three years last past, had been
the Theater of Sorrow.

Politic Observation.
HAppy is the Prince, who after he has seen his Country desolate by horrid and
cruel Wars, can at last settle it in Peace. He will find this great Mistress of
Arts, to give being to all those exercises which had been interrupted and
neglected during the troubles. He will see Religion, upon which (as an Emperor
once said) depends all the good or bad fortune of States, to reassume its
former luster, which ^requent disorders had destroyed. He will soon see his
Towns deserted by the violence of the Soldiers, re-peopled and revived out of
their own ashes. He will see his Subjects discharge their Offices with pleasure
and live in abundance of tranquillity, traffic free, commerce open, voyages
secure, the earth loaded with rich harvest, all things restored to their first
splendor and order, the Laws and Statutes which before were dead put in
execution; justice established in her Throne, re-assuming her authority, and
terrifying such as before scorned her; in fine, his estate putting off its
mourning apparel, and clothing it self with magnificence, mirth, contentment,
and joy.

The second Treaty of Peace.
THe Articles of the general Treaty, had been concluded with so much Prudence
and Equity, that all those whose intentions were just, could not but rest
abundantly satisfied, though the Spaniards who only sought an opportunity to
embroil affairs, made the Emperor believe, that under that secret Article
diverse designs were comprised; insomuch that he writ to the Duke of Savoy
somewhat discontentedly, that Suze and Avigliane should be put into the
Swisse's power, and withal, refused to ratify the Treaty of Peace, though it
had been expressly concluded in that of Ratisbonne, that any other way might be
taken besides that of Hostages, if the Deputies who negotiated the Affairs of
Italy should so think fit. This difficulty was enough to have undone all, if
the Most Christian Kings Ministers had been tainted with the like design as the
Spaniards were; but their thoughts being altogether bent upon finding out some
assured means for the restitution of places on either party, they made no
difficulty to renew the conference in order thereunto. The Conference lasted
until the 19 of June, on which day the second Treaty was signed, by which all
the Articles of the former Treaty were confirmed, excepting only that of the
secret Article. The Baron de Galas obliged himself to invest Mantua and
Montferrat in Monsieur de Mantua within 25 days; or at least to deliver the
investiture unto the Sieur de Leon, or the Bishop of Mantua, both resident with
the Emperor: So that it should be expedited and consigned into their hands. He
likewise promised that the Emperors Forces should quit Italy; as for the rest,
it was concluded as in the first Treaty, that for the assurance of the
restitution of places, Hostages should be consigned on both parts, to wit, on
the Emperors part, the Signieurs Pi^olomini, Chisa, and Vileben; and on the
Kings part, the Sieurs de Tharanes, de Nerestan, and Aiguebonne who should be
deposed into the Popes hands, upon the 20. of August under promise from his
Holiness, not to deliver them until the execution of the Treaty, and not to
assume any Authority but as Depository: In prosecution whereof, the Sieurs de
Thoyras and de Servient, obliged themselves to restore unto the Duke of Savoy,
Brigueras, the same day that the Baron of Galas who delivered himself for
hostage, should quit the Forts, and the Passages of the Grisons, withal, that
Suse, and Avigliane, with the adjacent Forts should be restored to the Duke of
Savoy, as Porto, and Canetto to the Duke of Mantua; and that lastly, Pignerol
should be fortwith surrendered into the hands of the Duke of Savoy, the same day
that Galas should restore Mantua to its lawful Lord, that each party might be
Master of his own at one and the same time. This Treaty was signed both by one
and the other, the Emperor and the Most Christian King ratified it; The
Investiture of Mantua and Montferrat was expedited the second day of July; the
new^ of which being once arrived, the rest of the Articles were put in
execution; the Hostages were delivered to Cardinal Pallotta, appointed for that
purpose by the Pope, who received them; excepting what concerns the Forts, and
Country of the Valtoline, Grisons* and Comte de Chiauenne, with which his
Holiness would not intermeddle, the Inhabitants being Heretics, and not
acknowledging him; but in exchange, the Baron de Galas delivered himself as
Hostage unto Monsieur de Mantua, for performance of his promise. Brigueras,
with the other small places of Savoy, were delivered to the Marquis Ville, in
behalf of the Duke, and the same day the passages o^ the Grisons to their
lawful Lords; the places of Mantua, except Mantua it self, Porto and Canello to
the Marquis de Pomare for the Duke of Mantua, the fifteenth of September Suze
and Avigliane were restored to the Duke of Savoy, Porto and Canello to the Duke
Mantua, and on the twentieth of the same month the French quitted Pignerol*
and the German Mantua. Thus were all things remitted into the hands of their
proper Princes, and each one established in the possession of their own.
Cardinal Pall^tta who had received the Hostages in the Popes behalf, having
received notice thereof dismissed them; and this great storm which had troubled
all Europe, gave place to an happy peace; leaving his Majesty the glory of
having supported his Allies, in despite of the Emperor, the King of Spain, and
Monsieur de Savoy; and the Cardinal the honor of having equally vanquished
them both by Arms and Prudence.

Politic Observation.
IT is always necessary for the better assurance of the execution of Treaties
between Princes, that some security be given, especially where there is any
diffidence between them. Some have received places in deposite, as Charles the
eight going to N^ples did of sundry Italian Princes; others have contracted
Marriages, as the Historians of most Wars have recorded, and it is a custom as
ancient as common to give and take Hostages. It is very hard for those who have
been exasperated during the Wars, to believe interchangeable promises only,
especially when they are to be executed at diverse times, and in diverse places;
besides it will be easy for a Prince to deceive, if he will break his Word, To
allege some particular examples of Hostages; St Lewis having made a Treaty of
Peace with the Sultan of Babylon, offered for assurance of their agreement, the
Comtes de Po^ctiers and Anjou. Thus Charles King of Navarre, son in Law to King
John, having caused Charles d' Espaigne to be killed, who was Constable of
France, and extremely beloved of the King, would never return to the Court,
till his Majesty had delivered to him Lewis Compte d' Anjou his second son, for
hostage, whom he forthwith sent to his City d' Evreux, under his Brothers
custody: Thus the same K. John having been four years Prisoner in England, was
not set at liberty until he had paid his ransom in part, and given hostage for
the assurance of the rest, who were Lewis d' Anjou, and Jean Du^ de Berry his
children; Lewis Duke de Burgoigne, Peter Comte d' Al^^son, John brother to the
Comte d' Estampes, all Princes of the Blood: Guy brother to the Comte de Blois,
the Seignieurs de Montmorency, de Hangest, de St Venant, d' Andresel, de la
Roche-Guyon, and the Comtes de St Pol, de Coussii, de Brenni, de Harcourt, and
de grand Pre. This is so usual, that it will be needless to add any more.

The Spaniards intention to break the Peace of Querasque, followed by that of
Mire-Fleur.
ALthough all these places were restored, yet the Spaniards (whose Counsels are
engraven in brass for the perpetuating of them) could not resolve to withdraw
their Forces from Italy, or to send the Emperors into Germany; they stayed
them whiles they could in Milan, and thereabouts, pretending they should want
part of them in their Garrisons, and that they expected leave from the Legate
of Ferare, to transport the rest into Naples. Those whom the Duke de Feria had
promised to disband in July, were on foot in September, and this very delay
caused the restitution of places to be retarded; Besides, the King was
certainly informed, that the very morning after the expediting the Investiture,
they had found means to wrest an act from the Emperor, which they caused to be
published in the Imperial Chancery, by which it was nullified, in case the
Treaty of Ratisbon were not punctually executed; although concluded in express
terms, that it should be given without any limitation. Was not this testimony
enough of their intentions to break the Treaty, if they could but find any
favorable opportunity, seeing particularly that this Declaration was a
firebrand, for that it gave them the liberty of finding fault with some of the
Duxe of Mantua's actions, which themselves would interpret and judge to be
contrary to the Treaty. Neither was this the only Index of their minds, the
Comte de Merode who acted not but by order from Feria, committed all sorts of
violence in the Grisons, as if he would force the King by a just resentment to
make a breach; moreover, the Comte de la Roch letters having been taken by some
thieves from his Courrier, who were more careful of his money then papers, left
no cause of doubt to them who saw them, of their intentions to foment the
discontents of the Queen Mother and Monsieur, to such an height as should be
irreconcilable, that they might be revenged on France for those advantages
obtained against them. They likewise raised new Troops in Milan, as if they
would not have any ignorant of their designs; and lastly, they were extremely
urgent to force the Duke of Mantua to disband an inconsiderable number of
French from Casal and Mantua, whom he had desired to be left there for the
guard of those places, and which were hardly able to secure them from a
surprise, whereby he might be so disabled, that they might with ease overrun
his Country; which being so, and that no one can doubt of their Design of re
commencing the War the following year, what reason had his Majesty to leave
Italy without full assurance of Peace and Liberty, by other means then that of
a Treaty? Should he not have so done, he had thrown away his charges in vain,
and the lives of so many French to no purpose.

This was it which obliged the King to require new assurances in the behalf of
his Allies, and to inform the Duke of Savoy, that he himself was in no greater
assurance them others, considering how distrustful the Spaniards were of him,
and how much discontented with his late proceedings. On the other side, the
Cardinal represented to his Majesty, that Prudence obliged him not to abandon
Italy in this danger, and that it was needful for him to use his power with the
Duke of Savoy, to obtain some one of his places, which might afford a free
passage for his Armies into Italy, if occasion should draw them thither a third
time. His Majesty whose judgment is equally prudent as just, apprehended the
importance of this advice, so that soon after he sent Orders to the Sieur de
Servient, who was yet with the Duke of Savoy, to desire him to put Pignerol,
Suze, Avigliane, or Savillan into his Majesty's hands for some time, that he
might keep the Spaniards in aw, and prevent them from making new attempts. This
Proposition indeed was somewhat strange, but did not exasperate him as it
happened; for the Prudence which the Sieur de Servient used in that affair
obtained his demands to his Majesty's glory and the liberty of the Italian
Princes; he evinced unto the Duke of Savoy by so many demonstrations, the
designs which the Spaniards had to recommence the war, and the just reason he
in particular had to fear their growing powerful in Italy; which if once
effected, all he could hope for was the favor of Cyclops, when he found
himself obliged for the surety and defense of his estates. The Sieur de
Servient perceived that distrust which is natural to Princes, made him loath to
part with a place of importance, and to entrust it in the hands of a stranger,
but when he recollected to his memory that franknesse wherewith his Majesty had
so lately restored unto him the greatest part of his Dominions, and the open
profession which he made of establishing his glory, by the defense of his
Allies, he at last brought him to resolve upon the delivery of Pignerol until
such time as the Spaniard should make apparent that they intended to leave
Italy in peace. This Treaty was concluded and signed at Mire^leur upon the 19
of October, and presently put in execution. It cannot be apprehended how
unpleasant this news was to the Governor of Millan, and with what resentment
he complained in his Letters to the Duke of Savoy, and his Highness was not
wanting to return him an answer full of courage, how he had not done any thing
but what was lawful for any Prince, and that he was obliged to entrust this
place in the hands of his Christian Majesty sooner then any other, since his
bounty had restored him to those States, of which the War raised by others had
despoiled him.

Politic Observation.
THat Prince cannot be thought imprudent, who in making Peace foresees those
dangers of War which threaten him, and who for the preservation of his State in
an happy tranquillity, deposits some Town in the hands of a Monarch, whose power
can secure him from all misfortunes. He who assures himself of the protection
of a potent King, secures in it his Crown, and peace to his Subjects, strikes a
terror into his enemies, and makes them afraid of falling on him. These
advantages are far greater then those which he can possibly receive from any
place by him deposited; whence it is great prudence to prevent the storm, and
imitate the wise Pilot, who fearing a total shipwreck, throws part of his goods
into the Sea; ^e cannot but be commended who accommodateth his counsels to the
necessity of times, and he ought to think himself happy, if by the loss of one
Town he can secure the rest. It is advantage enough for a Prince (says
Augustus in Suetonius) to put himself into such a condition that no one can
offend him. One City indeed may increase his Revenue, but cannot so well
peradventure secure him from those violences whereunto he is exposed, as the
power of a great King with whom he intrusteth it. Ferdinand King of Naples, did
wisely, when he found himself without money, destitute of necessary Forces to
recover his estate (of which we French had despoiled him) in resolving to enter
into a league offensive and defensive with the Venetians, who made a scruple to
admit him, unless he would deliver them the Cities of Otrante, Bronduze, and
Trave with Monopoly, and Sulignan with condition that they should be restored
upon payment of 200000 Ducats, for their expenses in his occasion. Prudence
alone is capable to make known unto us without producing other examples, that
it is more discretion to quit a part to secure the rest, then by preserving it,
to endanger the loss of the whole.

When Pignerol was promised to the King by the Duke of Savoy.
PRinces actions are liable to diverse interpretations, because they are more
maturely considered then ordinary men's, and their drifts are more secret. This
Treaty of the Duke of Savoy, did set many heads on work, and diverse apprehended
it in terms quite different from the truth. He granted the City and Castle of
Pignerol to the King for six months only, and that for performance of his
promise, to give him free passage through his State, and to assist him with
Ammunition and Provision of all sorts, as much and as often as need should
require, for defense of his Allies in Italy. However diverse believed that he
had absolutely given this place to the King, and besides, that it had been so
concluded before ever the Marshal de Thoyras, and the Sieur de Servient
departed from Paris toward Querasque. It was said, that the Comte de Drouin had
passed his word in January, and then assured his Majesty that the place should
be delivered to him. But that being never declared they did rather guess then
know it, for knowledge is grounded upon reasons certain. All that can be said,
is that the Duke of Savoy did consent to remit Pignerol absolutely into his
Majesty's hands, for the conservation of the rest of his estate; in so doing,
he did very prudently, as we shall hereafter declare, had the King procured
this advantage to his Crown, it had been but just to recover an ancient
Demeasne, which had been lost by the condescension of his Predecessors, he had
raised a Trophy to his glory, obtained by his Arms in Italy; he had conserved
part of that which did justly belong unto him by the Laws of War; it fine, he
had secured all his Allies on the other side the Mountains, and curbed the
Spanish Ambition. These reasons were so full of Justice, that the greatest part
of the world was persuaded that the Duke of Savoy had absolutely given Pignerol
to the King; for what likelihood could there be that his Majesty should not
retain some part of his Victories? That he should expend at least fifty
millions in a War without reserving somewhat for recompense? That his Prudence
should not take some care for the preservation of his Allies, after the
experiment he had made of those difficulties in the Passages? And that he
should leave the Spaniards in full power to prosecute their Usurpations? There
could not be any reason for it, and he must have renounced his just and lawful
pretensions so to have done: On the other side, that which did most of all call
in question the truth of the Treaty, if indeed there were any thing was, that
it was always denied and dissembled in the conferences, and kept as a secret
till this present; nevertheless this secret cannot be denied but to have been
the effect of the Cardinal's Prudence, who well knows that the greatest
designs ought to be executed with the greatest secrecy, and that counterfeit
pretenses cannot but be commendable, provided they be advantageous and free
from injustice.

Politic Observation.
ALthough Dissimulation is commonly esteemed a vice amongst private persons yet
it is so much the more needful amongst great Princes, in regard their designs
ought to be kept more especially secret. The discreetest Princes never look
that way they design, and though they always effect their thoughts, yet they
seldom speak what they think; they who apply themselves to reading are more
fit to entertain good company than for high enterprises, seeing the Government
of a State is a Stage upon which the Actors oftentimes ought to change their
Masks and habits: They who can best of all cloak their designs are the most
ingenious, and do oftnest attain their ends; hence it is, that he who has any
thing to do with a crafty companion, has work enough to look about him. Who
knows not, that if all truth were necessarily to be told, nothing would
remain unknown, which if so, the highest enterprises would be successelesse, it
being most certain, that the discovery of an affair, is like an Alarm to
summon together the strongest oppositions? It is allowable to keep that a
secret which may be advantageous to our selves, or our friends, and cannot
injure any one. It is great Prudence not to discourse it with those whom a man
suspects, and absolutely to disown it to all others. Thus Lewis the Moor, Duke
of Millan, having made a Treaty with Charles the Eighth, to give him passage
into Italy, and to favor his designs did constantly deny it to the King of
Naples, the Pope, and Peter de Medicis, although the report of it was common,
and some signs of it almost indubitable: Whereupon, he denying it so
confidently, they remained a good while in suspense, without knowing what to
conclude. The denying of a design with asseveration, does insensibly leave some
doubt in the most determinate minds to believe it; and although the
protestations made to the contrary do not gain an absolute belief, yet do they
commonly delay obstructions which might be raised, and put off those
enterprises which would be set on foot to hinder them.

The Interdiction of the Court of Ayds of Paris.
VVHilest the Cardinal's incomparable Prudence was thus busied in these weighty
foreign affairs, there passed some others in the Kingdom which I cannot omit,
especially seeing his Genius which gives orders for all things, teaches by
his conduct diverse maxims, very necessary for all Ministers. The great
expen^es made the last four or five years in the Wars, having exhausted the
Treasure, and the factions of the Queen Mother and Monsieur breaking out, there
was a necessity of raising great sums to support diverse Armies at the same
time. This was that which forced the King to lay new Impositions upon his
Subjects, which he did with the greater regret in regard he had formerly by the
Cardinal's counsel, used some expedients to ease them; but necessity, whose
Empire is more absolute then that of Princes, forced his Majesty to defer them,
until such time as his affairs were settled in a sure Peace; neither did the
Chamber of Accounts make any scruple to confirm those Edicts which did
contribute thereunto when brought unto them, but it was not so with the
Messieurs of the Court of Aids of Paris. Mensieur le Comte having informed
them that he was going to their Chamber from the King to do as much, they fell
into such disorder that they all departed, thinking by this to disengage
themselves from their duty of confirming them, so that, Monsieur de Compte
coming thither found no body there. This their inconsiderateness could not be
without mis-prision of the royal Authority, and was looked upon as an example
the more dangerous, in regard Magistrates are like the Primum mobile, which
draw all the inferior Orbs after it; so their motion might be capable of making
the people mutiny and refuse succors which they owed the King, and which his
Majesty might lawfully demand from them to help discharge the necessities of
the State, as we have formerly said. Justice and Prudence did both require that
they should be made exemplary; they were suspended from the exercise of their
Offices, and a Commission issued out to some of the Messieurs, Masters of
Requests, and Counselors of the grand Council to do justice in their rooms,
and to determine those affairs which were depending before them. This continued
for some months to teach them against another time how they run into such
mis-prisions of his Majesty's will, which made them unworthy to sit upon the
Flower de Luces, seeing they had been so little affectionate in contributing to
the means necessary to preserve them in their beauty:

Politic Observation.
THere is no offense which Kings are more obliged to punish, then those which
are accompanied with dis-respect; for as he who is much respected does easily
retain his Subjects in their obedience, so being once fallen into disesteem his
commands are little regarded. The wisest Politicians have always thought
respect to be the greatest support of Authority. The luster of the Sun is that
which causes people to regard it with the more reverence; and the authority of
a Sovereign is that which does most of all oblige his subjects to pay him
respect and obedience, which if violated by disrespect, remains
inconsiderable; His Ordinances are laughed at, his Will not regarded, and
attempts are often made against him. I think for my part, that scorn is more
dangerous then hatred; for peradventure a King who is hated, may yet be feared,
and fear is of it self sufficient to keep subjects in obedience; but he who is
once fallen into dis-esteem, is neither hated nor feared; so that his affairs
will soon fall into extreme disorder. Hatred is a frequent cause of
Insurrections, but dis-respect is more effectually so, because it not only
causes the fear of offending to cease, but adds confidence to it. Now of all
disrespects, none is more dangerous then when Magistrates are guilty of it, by
withdrawing themselves from their Princes Will and Command. No one will easily
attempt against him whom he sees honored by his Magistrate; and on the
contrary, men will readily provoke him who is not regarded by them. Magistrates
are the more obliged to continue their respects unto Authority, because their
example is sufficient to hold the people in submission: They ought rather to
comply obediently with their Sovereigns, then by denying him to show an example
of Rebellion to his Subjects, their resistance tends only to raise an
irreparable disorder in affairs, and obliges the use of constraint for the
ratifying of such Edicts which presently make the people believe them to be
unjust. In fine, they are no less bound to render respect and obedience unto
him, then justice to his Subjects. They flatter themselves with a dangerous
vanity, if they believe themselves to have been instituted to bound in his
power, seeing it was only to supply his presence, and perform his will. All
their power vanishes at his presence, as that of the Stars when the Sun
appears; neither ought they to take notice of his Commands, further then he
gives them liberty. Now that liberty which he gives them, is by their humble
Remonstrances to represent their grievances, not absolutely to deny, and that
with disrespect, the execution of his commands; especially seeing the custom
of confirming of Edicts was not introduced by necessity, or for any dependence
which Kings have upon Sovereign Courts, but that they might be executed with
more submission, and to discharge them from those commands which the
importunity of Courtiers might wrest from their Majesty's, without regard of
Justice, or the good of the State.

The Treaty of Alliance between the King and Duke of Bavaria.
IT behoved the King so much the more to secure himself against the Emperors
Forces, in regard he did at this time seem to be discontented concerning the
Succors given to the German Princes, and the design of retaking Moy^nvic,
with other lands alienated from the Bishopric of Metz This induced the
Cardinal (whose eyes are always open to the interests of State to represent
unto the King, that it were necessary to make sure of those who might any ways
assist him in his enterprises against France, and that there being no other
persons from whom he could receive a greater support in his desire, then the
Duke of Bavier and the Elector of Tr^ves who have the principal Passes by which
he must come unto us, it would be very advantageous to contract an Alliance
with them, that they might hinder his Forces, or at least, that they might not
join theirs with his. The King apprehended this Counsel as an effect of his
innate Prudence, and this great Ministers foresight having already laid the
groundwork of these Alliances, his Majesty issued out Orders for the
prosecution of them. There was concluded by the Treaty that there should be a
sincere, good, and constant Friendship between them and an firm and strict
league offensive and defensive for eight years, in consideration whereof the
King bound himself to furnish him with nine thousand Foot, two thousand Horse,
Cannons and Ammunitions of War fit and necessary for the defense of him and his
Dominions, leaving it to the Electors choice to demand of his Majesty instead
of the nine thousand Foot, and the rest, such moneys as might defray the
charges. The Elector of Bavier did likewise engage himself to furnish his
Majesty with three thousand Foot, and one thousand Horse, and Ammunitions of
war necessary, for the defense of his Dominions, in case of an Invasion, with
liberty for his Majesty to demand instead of the Soldiers, so much money
sufficient to pay them* Besides they interchangeably promised not to b^a^ Arms
one against the other, directly or indirectly. Thus was France assured on that
quarter, and the taking of Moyenvic might be attempted without fear or h^zard,
the Emperor not being able to hinder it, by reason of the King of Swede's
diversion, without the Duke of Bavier's assistance.

Politic Observation.
DEfensive Alliances cannot but be very useful to all Princes, how great
soever. Few can subsist by themselves, and if any alone be able to defend
themselves from their enemies, it cannot be without danger, and sometimes loss
to their Countries; whereas if they unite themselves with others that are
powerful, no one will think of invading them. Though the Head be the noblest
Members of the Body, yet it stands in need of those others; and God who has
crowned the greatest Monarchs, has so established them, that they have all
occasion to make use of one another. This may be said in general of the
advantage of Defensive Alliances, but it is more particularly advantageous to
have recourse unto them, when a Neighbor Prince is so successeful in Arms,
that he begins to be terrible. On such occasions it is great prudence to
contract alliances with those which may join their Forces, as is usual amongst
such Princes whose Powers are indifferent, to follow the Fortune of the
Conquerors, because contracting an Alliance with such, they not only augment
their own Power, but weaken that of their enemy, and make him incapable of
further mischief. It is great prudence in him who has one enemy, to take a
care that he has not two; for their power being united, will be more terrible.
Thus the Comte de Cha^olois, son to Philip Duke de Burgogne, was very
sollicitous to contract an Alliance with Charles Duke of Normandy, only brother
to Lewis 11. knowing that by this means the King will be weakened one third, and
the less able to hurt him.

His Majesty sends Ambassadors to the King of Morocco.
THe Cardinal was not satisfied with the bare contributing to render his
Majesty the most renowned Prince in Europe by land, but endeavored to make him
likewise the most powerful by Sea, by causing diverse Ships to be rig'd out, and
taking care to furnish them with able Seamen. In order hereunto, the Sieurs de
Moleres, de Razilly, and de Chaalar, were sent to the King of Morocco, that an
Alliance might be contracted with him, and a safe Commerce obtained upon the
Coasts of Barbary. He had before by underhand Treaties so disposed of affairs,
that they were well received.

The Commander de Razilly was Admiral of the Squadron, and the Sieur de Chaalar
Vice Admiral; At their landing they were received by two Alcaides, and two
Companies of Soldiers: The King gave them present audience, and with as much
honor as they could wish; so venerable was his Majesty's Name amongst
Strangers.

Their first demand was in the behalf of an hundred and fourscore French slaves
who were in his Dominions, whose liberty was presently granted, the King of
Morocco not taking any thing for their ransom, to testify how much he esteemed
his Majesty: It is true indeed, he accepted a Present of Stuffs, worth an
hundred thousand Livres which the King sent to him; ^et his Proveydor would not
receive them but on condition that his Majesty would accept of such Horses as
the King his Master would send unto him, to testify the desire he had to hold
a good Correspondency with him. The next thing under consideration, was, the
articles of alliance for securing the French upon their Coasts and safe passage
into his Countries, which was presently accorded; the substance of it was thus,
that all French which should enter into his Ports with his Most Christian
Majesty's Pass, should not in future be made slaves, nor be compelled to pay
above the Tavaly or tenth of their goods, according to their usual custom;
that for the better continuing their correspondence, Ambassadors should be
interchangeably sent, and that all Religious persons might live in the King of
Morocco's States, but on condition not to exercise their Functions, unless only
to the French. The Treaty was signed; and the Sieur de Razilly presently
established three Consuls, at Morocco, Male, and Saphy. In fine, The French had
full Liberty to Trade in any Commodities of that Country.

Politic Observation.
IF Commerce in general brings riches to a Kingdom, without doubt that of the
Sea is more considerable, the gains being greater and more just: That of the
Land, how advantageous soever, seldom yields above 15. or 20. per Cent. and
many times is forced to such things as savor of Usury; whereas the Sea does
oftentimes yield Cent per Cent, and sometimes more, and that without giving the
least cause of complaint. Commerce at Sea is that which has made small States
very considerable, and great States vastly rich, and abounding with all sorts
of commodities: There is another reason which renders it the more important,
and that is, Princes being bound to make themselves powerful, as well by Sea as
by Land, which double Power is the highest pitch of their greatness, for it
renders them the more redoubted. It is in vain to drive a commerce by Sea,
unless a provision of Ships be made to secure them, otherwise their riches will
be exposed as a prey to Pirates; and is Prince who makes himself powerful on
this Element, is the more feared by his Neighbors, in regard he may make his
attempts upon them both by Sea and Land, in case they should presume to offend
him. Cosmo de Medicis first Duke of Tuscany, and the ablest Politician of his
time, said, That a Sovereign can never gain an high repute, unless he join both
those Powers together, which are to a State, as the Arms to the Body. This Sea
Power is that which makes England considerable; were they but deprived of it,
they would soon grow weak and poor; but maintaining that Power as they do, in a
good equipage, by a long tract of time, they want nothing, but are capable of
undertaking great expeditions. Has not this enabled the Hollanders, though
their Commonwealth may be reduced to a small number of men, to sustain the
whole power of Spain? What makes G^noa so rich, but this power by Sea? And what
but this makes the great Duke of Tuscany one of the richest Princes in Italy?
Thus we see all our Neighbors have been sollicitous to establish commerce by
Sea in their Territories; and we know that our late King Henry le grand, whose
Prudence was no less advantageous to this Kingdom, then his Courage, was
extremely desirous to settle it in France, after he allayed those storms of
Civil War; to which end he gave order unto the President Janin, when he was
treating with the Hollanders, to learn of them what was necessary in that
particular.

The Establishment of a Chamber of Justice in Paris.
AFter those great difficulties which the Parliament of Paris had raised,
against the proclaiming of his Majesty's Declaration against such as had
carried Monsieur out of the Kingdom; his Majesty finding it necessary to
proceed in the Instruction of their Process, and to chastise those who were
found guilty, was not willing to let it fall into their cognizance: He well
knew that Kings ought not to expose their authority to be dis-respected, as his
would have been, if the Parliament instead of punishing offenders, should
neglect to prosecute them, as was much to be feared they would. Those reasons
which gave the cause of that suspicion, were, their apparent discontent because
Pollette was not restored with such conditions as they desired, and because
their authority came short of being parallel with his Majesty's; and besides,
the correspondencies which several of Monsieur's, and the Queen-Mothers
Officers had amongst them. It was likewise considered, that diverse affairs of
concernment came to be divulged from their manner of proceedings, it being
impossible to keep a secret among so great a multitude; Whereupon his Majesty
resolved to establish a Chamber of Justice, composed of persons equally
considerable for their ability and integrity, who should have full power to
judge, seeing it was likewise requisite to commissionate some Judges
extraordinary, for the chastizing of diverse Clippers and Counterfeiters of
money, of which there were store in the Nation, the toleration of which did
much endamage Trade; so that both Commissions were given to the same Judges.
The King to carry on the business with the more sweetness, was pleased out of
his Prudence and usual Goodness, to elect most part of the Judges out of the
Parliament, and to appoint their meeting in the Palace, the common Seat of
Justice: But the Parliament little considering this grace, raised new
difficulties against the confirmation of the Letters of Establishment; which
obliged his Majesty to remove the Chamber unto the Arsenal, and to compose it
of two Counselors of State, six Masters of Requests, and six Counselors of
the grand Counsel, all chosen for their extraordinary merit, who began to sit
the tenth day of August.

Politic Observation.
THe King is the Head of Justice, and may commit the administration of it to
whom he will. The Sea distributeth her waters as she pleases, by subterranean
passages unto all Fountains, neither bath any thing right to control her
distribution; the Sun, that inexhaustible source of all worldly light,
communicates splendour unto the Stars, as God has ordained; neither can any of
them complain of receiving less then others. So a King, whom God has endued
with Sovereign Authority to distribute Justice to his people, may commit the
charge of it to such as he thinks fit, and that with such power and extent as
he judges proper for the good of his State; usually he intrusts this power
with Parliaments, but they ought to remember, that he who has given them this
Authority, may likewise take it from them, may bound it, or give it to others
as he pleases. The Authority of a Senate which is in Commonwealths or Free
Cities, cannot be altered by any Princes, because it partakes of Authority with
them, and is established to confine their Prudence; But it is not so with
Parliaments Monarchies, where the Mag^strates have no other glory but that of
being Ministers, to execute Justice in their Master's behalf; they are like
Clouds raised by the Sun from the Earth, which are by him refined, to represent
his Image; not that he deprives himself of the power of raising others, to whom
he may impart the same favors: Thus is their power a Twig sprung from the
Royal Authority, without depriving its Root of the power to produce others of
the same quality.

Judgment given against several Persons.
THis Chamber of Justice being thus established, they began to act with as much
zeal as integrity, to the punishment of the Coyners, and those who had brought
the State into trouble. Diverse of either sort were exemplarily punished; and
amongst the factious, Senelles and du Val were for ever condemned to the
Galleys, the Duke Rouannez, the Marquis de la Vi^ville, and the Marquis de
Fargis, were beheaded in Effigy, the rest were remitted till the next year.
Now as he who condemns the Body, confiscateth the Goods, so those of the
condemned did undoubtedly belong to the King; whereupon that it might be
accordingly adjudged, his Majesty being at Troyes, established a Chamber of
Domain, composed of Counselors of State, and Masters of Request to attend the
Court; who declared the goods of the Comte and Comtess de Moret, the Dukes d'
Elboeuf, de Bellegarde, and de Rouannez, the Marquis de Boissy, de la Vi^ville,
and de Sourdeac, and of the President le Coigneux, to be confiscate and
forfeited to the Crown: In fine, they who had any Governments or Offices, were
deprived of them; the Government of Picardy was taken away from Monsieur d'
Elboeuf, and bestowed on the Duke de Che^reuse; that of Burgogne was taken from
the Duke de Bellegarde, and Monsieur ^e Prince appointed in his place; the
King's Lievtenance which the Marquis de la Vieville had in Champagne, was
granted to the Sieur de Senneterre, as the charge of President was taken from
Coigneux, and conferred on the Sieur de Lamognon, and so of diverse others. Now
that which did more particularly oblige his Majesty to drive things to this
height, of finishing the Process of these factious persons, and of confiscating
their Goods and Offices, was, a discovery of their designs to attempt the
surprizal of diverse places in the Kingdom; They had gained the Marquis de
Valencay, who promised them Calais. La Louviere was employed to work upon the
Marquis Moncavrel, and to persuade him to do the like with Ardres: The Captain
du Val was hanged, for having attempted to surprise the Citadel of Verdune;
Threescore thousand Crowns were given in Monsieur's name to the Duke of
Bouillon, that he would raise a party in Sedan, one of the Ports of the
Kingdom, and that he would let in Foreigners that way, when thereunto desired;
There were likewise diverse Gentlemen seized upon, raising of Forces in several
parts of the Kingdom, and it was not unknown how they had induced the
Queen Mother and Monsieur to send persons of Quality into Spain, England, and
Holland, and to all Neighbor Princes, to procure what Soldiers they could for
him. What reason was there longer to let these attempts against the State go
unpunished? Such a patience had been unjust. That difficulty which the
Parliament of Paris made to confirm his Majesty's Ordinance, which commanded to
execute after six months the confiscation of such as were guilty of high
Treason, who had been condemned by Out-lawry, in regard of an ancient
Ordinance, might have seemed just enough in regard of those who are guilty of
mean crimes, but surely not in the behalf of Traitors, such as these were, who
had made Divisions in his Majesty's Family, who had attempted against his
Authority, who had endeavored to surprise diverse places, who had raised
Soldiers in diverse parts of the Kingdom, who had published a thousand
aspersions to eclipse his Majesty's glory. What reason (I say) could there be,
that such men as these should longer continue unpunished, by confiscating their
Offices and Goods, seeing their absence would not admit the punishment of their
persons? And hereupon it was that his Majesty commanded his Ordinance to be
proclaimed, and the Parliament accordingly obeyed it.

Politic Observation.
AMongst the diverse Powers of Sovereigns, that of making Laws is one of the
greatest marks of their Authority. God entrusting them to dispense Justice,
has not only appointed them to chastise the people, but likewise to make Laws
and Statutes, which may serve for a Rule of their Government. Hence the Lawyers
say, That Princes Will is Law. Democracy ascribes this power to the People;
but Monarchy restrains it to Kings only, and acknowledges no Laws but what
are signed by their Majesty's. Now as the power of making Laws is in them, so
is that of changing and adding, according as they shall think fit; if they had
not this power, we should have no other Laws then those of Nature, imprinted in
the heart of man by the mere instinct of reason, or such as were made by the
first Father of Mankind. All the Volumns of Theodosius and Justinian might be
burnt, and those of our Kings too, as so many attempts against the liberty of
the people, because they have been but of late Creation, there being none so
ancient but what did once savor of Novelty. Were not this to put the people
into an extreme licentiousness, and to shut our eyes against reason, which
teaches us, that the Kings of this age have no less power then those of old,
who in their Laws have included whatever they thought necessary, and which
could not tie up their Successors hands from following their examples left unto
them. It is a vulgar error, to imagine that to alter Laws must needs be
dangerous: Without just consideration indeed it ought not to be done, but when
there happens any such to be, the alteration of them cannot but be
advantageous; it being impossible that the first Lawmakers should foresee all
inconveniences; which being so, their Successors have power to change or
abrogate them, as occasion shall require. Absolutely to reject Laws because
they are new, is but a Cynical humor, seeing the antiquity of them cannot be a
just denial to the use of several others which have since been ordained;
neither can novelty be a sufficient reason to empower those which are at
present in use. Vlpian says, Kings may change any Laws into better: and Cicero
pleading against Verres, very boldly says, That the ancient ought to be left,
and the new received, when there is a probability of advantage by it. All
France has commended Hugh Capet for changing that law which called all the
male children to the succession of the Crown, and sti^l will appro^e of those
changes which tend to preserve the Royal Authority in its luster.

The Cardinal is created Duke and Peer of France.
THe King having established all things so firmly in France, that none of the
factious Caballists could trouble the Peace, and restored the Princes and
People of Italy to their Liberties by the Treaty of Quera^que, it was but just
that the Cardinals services should be rewarded with some new Titles of Honor,
in regard those important affairs had been managed by his discreet counsels. No
one can doubt but that the Quality of Duke and Peer was his just due, seeing he
had so gloriously acted the part of a Duke and Peer; which as the French
History relates, is either to govern the Affairs of State, or some particular
Province by his Majesty's Order, or else to command his Armies. Was it not in
these two employments that his prudence and courage so eminently appeared, that
all Strangers were no less terrified, then the true Frenchmen rejoiced? His
Majesty (who admires more then any one the eminence of his Genius) having made
the greatest experiments of him, was not defective to confer this honor upon
him. His Majesty dispatched his letters unto him, which carried in them an
extraordinary recommendation, it being seldom conferred on persons of his
worth, and after so many glorious actions. They were confirmed by the Court not
only without any difficulty, but with high eulogiums, and a particular
acknowledgement of the good offices he had done in France. In fine, he went to
take his Oath at the Palace, on Sept 15. accompanied with Monsieur le Prince,
the Dukes of Montmorancy, Chevreuse, Rets, Crequi, Vantadour, and Montbazon,
the Mar^schal d' Estree* Vitry, and d' Effiat, and many other Lords who desired
to follow him, to testify by their presence how great an esteem they had of
his services, which rendered him worthy of so eminent a quality. The Chambres
were all assembled, and coming into the great one, he took his Oath to serve
his King well and faithfully, in his highest, greatest, and most important
affairs; to do Justice impartially both to poor and rich, and to behave himself
in all things like a most virtuous, most generous, and most magnanimous Duke
and Peer of France; and then he took his place beneath all the rest of the
Dukes. Amongst these great honors, I cannot omit one remarkable passage, that
as the greatest Genius are the most modest, and scorn inferior men, who esteem
of nothing but an extraordinary honor,, so he would not pass by the great Gate
of the Palace, where many thousands attended him, but by a private door, where
he might not be seen, because he desired not to be publicly commended, as the
custom always was on such occasions; and indeed, the most eloquent of the
Barreau would have found themselves gravelled to have done it, his Actions and
Qualities being above expression.

Politic Observation.
A King ought never to forget the rewarding of extraordinary services, with
marks of honor; for glory is the Nurse of Virtue, and reward ought to follow
all Actions accompanied with Courage and Valor; so that it is unjust not to
reward those advantages which a grand Minister procures to the Crown It is
likewise true, that honorable Qualities cannot more justly be conferred on
any, then those that do honorable actions; seeing the most significant names
are given to Subjects, only in consideration of their ordinary Actions. Now the
name of Duke most properly belongs to him who leads an Army in War, and
manageth affairs of State in peace under the King's Authority. In this sense
the primitive Gauls took it, and it is most conformable to the Etymology of
the word: Those are the Offices which Just^nian ascribes in his Institutes to
a person of this Quality. Ancient Authors do not observe that this was taken
for any constant Honor, until Dioc^esian and Constantine, in whose time the
Governors of Provinces and Frontiers, and Generals of Armies, were called
Dukes, and Masters of War; as may be seen in Amienus Marcellinus. Tacitus
indeed who lived under Trajane, called Generals of Armies Dukes, but it was
only a temporary Quality, which lasted no longer then their Commands. It was
under the later Emperors, and our first Kings, that this qualification was
annexed to any particular person, and made permanent, as may be seen in Gregory
de Tours, the most ancient of our Historians; where it is observed, how King^
^^ntram gave the Dukeship and Government of the whole Kingdom for five years
unto Eudistus. At that rhyme indeed this quality was not so fixed, but that it
might sometimes be recalled from those on whom it had been bestowed, seeing it
was conferred on him but for a certain time; and the same Historian mentions
some Lords of those times who were deprived of the Ducal Dignity; yet commonly
it was given for life. As for the Dignity of Peer, that is not so ancient, but
very eminent; for that the Peers take place before all other Honors of the
Kingdom, as may be seen in the example of Philip the first Duke of Burgogne,
who went before Lewis Duke of Anjou his elder Brother, at the Creation of
Charles the sixth their Nephew, by reason he was a Peer, which his brother was
not. The most common opinion attributes the first Institution to Char^em^gne,
but without other proof then this, that History makes no mention of it before
his time, and it is believed that they were created to be Judges of State
Affairs, which were decided by the Parliament in the King's presence: That
great Prince establishing this Order in the Kingdom, to secure it from those
misfortunes whereunto the late Merouingiens had exposed it, by refusing to take
any other care then that of their pleasu^es. T^ere are some ancient Titles
found, which make appear, That the Comter de Champagne had seven Lords in their
Comte, who were Peers, and did astist them in great Ceremonies, and the
Decision of chief Affairs. In Germany there are some who are chief Ministers of
their Princes Justice; but although they partake of the Name, yet are they but
Images, and those very imperfect, in regard of the greatness of those of
France, who are thought to have been instituted to assist the King, to serve
him, and receive his Oath at his Consecration, and by their Office are
empowered to advise him in the Government of the State.

A Synod of the pretended Reformed Religion at Charenton.
THose of the pretended reformed Religion had obtained permission by the Kings
Breviate about the beginning of this year, to make a National Assembly of their
Ministers of France, for the maintaining of their Order and Belief. The
Cardinal was of opinion that his Majesty should require them to meet at
Charenton, because being within his view, they would have the less Freedom to
renew such Cabal as they had formerly made in their Assemblies of Guyenne and
Languedoc. This Order was followed, and the Sieur de Galland, Councellor to his
Majesty, was sent to be President in the King's behalf; his Loyalty was not to
be suspected, and they were obliged to accept of him, in regard of diverse
authentic testimonies which made appear, that this Order was conformable to
that of Councels assembled in the Primitive times, which they professed to
honor. The King especially commanded him to be careful that no Proposition
were made which did not concern their Faith or Discipline; to silence them in
his Majesty's name, in case they should discourse of any other affairs, and to
establish such rules as the Cardinal had proposed necessary to keep that Sect
in submission; To this end he used his utmost Prudence and Loyalty, he
persuaded them to enact, that there should not any more National Assemblies be
made, but in the presence of a Commissary from the King, who might (by
testifying their obedience) be a means of continuing them in quiet; besides he
induced them to resolve upon the absolute excluding of all stranger Ministers,
this being intended of all that were not natural French, and to inhibit their
Ministers from leaving the Kingdom without his Majesty's license, by this means
to prevent all intelligences, associations, and correspondencies with the
enemies of the State, according to the Laws of the Kingdom, and his Majesty's
particular prohibitions, in fine, he used so much prudence, that they required
their Ministers not to intermeddle in any affairs Politic or Military; and
condemned a Book of Berraut Minister of Montauban as erroneous, because he
maintained that Ministers had a particular Call from God to bear Arms. I shall
not relate those other Ordinances there made for the subsistence of their Sect,
it not being the Design of my History: It suffices me to have observed those
foregoing, which were necessary for the peace of the Kingdom, and were so many
effects of the Cardinal's prudence, who by this means disabled them from making
Cabals prejudicial to the King's service, broke their correspondency with
strangers, and left them no arms but the Kings goodness for their defense.

Politic Observation.
REligion is the strictest band to assemble people in any design, to conspire
unanimously to the Public good; neither is there any thing which does more
disunite them, then the diversity of Belief; it is a flaming torch which sets
the fire of Division among States and aqua fortis, which separateth the most
moderate minds; hence it was that the Kings of Egypt did heretofore entertain
divisions among their subjects, that they might render their own Powers over
them more absolute, by preventing them from uniting themselves in the same
designs of revolt; and this they did by engaging them in several different
Worships: Some of them adored a Crocodile, others an Eagle, this a Dog, that
some other thing, as himself fancied; thus they were never able to agree
together how to shake off the yoke of their Tyranny; But besides that this
maxim is impious, and directly repugnant to the Laws of Jesus Christ* it is
thought to be very dangerous for the most part in the judgment of the wisest
Politicians, because the diversity of Belief being reduced to two or three
parties, is most able to carry a people into a revolt against their Prince:
France for these last sixty years has had but too much trial of it* and if our
Kings had not been necessitated to permit this diversity, as the wise Pilots,
who in a Storm let their Sails go, they well knowing their resistance might
endanger their Shipwreck; they might have had secured the Estate from many
misfortunes, could they have prevented it in the beginning. Now what better
advice can be taken, then to deprive Heretics of the means to Revolt; which
are their holding Intelligences with Strangers, their being headed by Leaders
who are Turbulent and Factious, their being able to make Assemblies at their
pleasures, and there to deliberate what they think fit, without informing their
Prince of any thing? He who depriveth them of these Liberties, strikes a great
stroke in settling the Public Peace, and after despoiling them of their Arms,
which never ought to be allowed them* he cutteth off their power of being ever
able to recover it. Besides, it is necessary to repress their insolency, the
inseparable companion of Heresy: They have a certain insatiable fierceness,
which makes them always discontented; and the only way to tame them, is
absolutely to refuse them all things which are not absolutely necessary for the
exercise of their Religion; That resistance which they meet in the soul of a
generous and vigorous Prince hinders them, whereas if they find him weak, and
^asie to be wrought upon in condescending to their commands, they are never at
quiet, but do always take the liberty of making new request^, in hopes of a
like success: This does likewise much contribute to maintain them in obedience,
to support their quiet, without which they will easily revolt; it is the true
beginning of the peoples happiness, and cutteth up the root of their rebellions.

Affairs of Lorrain.
ABout the end of this year the King could no longer endure that the Duke of
Lorrain should abuse his clemency in continuing to be the supporter of those
who troubled the Kingdom. They had chosen him for their Brave, and an Army of
twelve or fifteen thousand men, which he had raised about Spring, were the
chief of their hopes, when Mounsieur went out of the Kingdom; they were so
inconsiderate, as to believe that these Forces entering into France, would be
like Rivers falling from great mountains, increase as they go; as if the King
(assisted by the sage counsels of the Cardinal) were not able to ruin all
their Soldiers upon their first taking the Field; It was however a great
satisfaction to his Majesty that he was not put to that trouble; the cause was
either Fortune, or peradventure the Cardinals prudence, which so wrought, that
the Emperor finding himself oppressed by the King of Swede, commanded the Duke
of Lorrain with his Army to assist him in his occasions; so that leaving
Monsieur's affairs for some months, he addressed himself to attend the
Emperor, and exercise the charge of Generallissimo of his Armies, but like the
Greyhound who running after two Hares, takes neither, he forsook Monsieur's
assistance as he had promised; and instead of coming to the Randezvouz
assigned by the Emperor 7000 of his men disbanded, and were scattered, whether
by a Panick fear, or by some accident which so disordered them, that it was
impossible to rally them again. It was a sensible displeasure to him to fall
into this disorder, after which he was forced to return to Nancy to take care
of his promises made unto Monsieur, and to make a recruit, which the Emperor
pressed him to do. The Cardinal did not lose so favorable an opportunity, to
teach him that he did but wrong himself in provoking the King, as he had done
for three or four years last past by fomenting of Cabals against his Majesty.
It was well known that he entertained Monsieur with turbulent hopes, not only
of raising a potent Army in his Country; but withal, of bringing forces from
Germany and the Low Countries, sufficient to force the King himself to grant
him his desires. It was well known that he had exasperated those divisions in
the Kings Family, by particular intelligences which he maintained with several
embroilers; that he had received Madam du Forgis with great honor, after her
disgrace as his chief correspondent; that there was not any foreign Prince
whom he did not endeavor to make an enemy to France, and if he did apprehend
that any one of them were discontented, that he would with him hold a
particular friendship, and all this without considering, that building without
a foundation, his superstructure would soon fall to the ground, and that his
Majesty would effect as many generous enterprises in his chastisement as
himself had conceived imaginary sign^, which were ever successelesse.

It was resolved that the Duke of Lorrain should be made sensible of the injury
he had done himself by provoking his Majesty by his Intreagues and devices. His
Majest would not however demand satisfaction from him, which was not
conformable to justice, the rule of all his actions, and in this he took the
sweetest course, he might with justice have seized on Bar, because he had
neglected to pay his fealty and homage, and have invaded his Countries, in
revenge of the injuries he had received. But he contented himself with
attempting to recover such places only as the said Duke and his Predecessors
had against all reason usurped from the Bishopprick of Met^; in particular,
whiles the Kings Arms were in Italy, he only seeking occasions to incense
France, that he might render himself the more considerable to the House of
Austria, induced the Emperor to make himself Master of Moyenvic, and to give
it him in keeping, the chiefest place of the Bishopprick of Mets; and the
Emperor animated by the Spaniards, was glad to have it, and fortify it,
though against reason, by a mere attempt against the rights of the Crown, and
his Majesty's reputation, who was Protector thereof. The Cardinal whose courage
could not put up such wrongs, seeing the Peace of Italy concluded, and the
Emperor sufficiently diverted in Germany, persuaded the King to retake it,
with as much justice as it had with little reason been usurped from France. The
King who needs no additional heat to his courage when the maintaining of his
glory is in question, did easily resolve upon it, and his Forces being come to
the Frontiers of Lorrain under the Marshal de la Force, defeated a Regiment of
Liege commanded by Colonel Mars, who had the confidence to advance into the
Kingdom, he sent him Order to lead them before Vic and Moyenvic. Vic presently
yielded, but Moyenvic did not. For the Governor was in hopes of relief which
made him resolve to hold out; he advised Colonel Offa the Emperors Commissary
with the condition of the place, and the little hopes of long holding it, if
not relieved; but he was answered, that it was to him a great astonishment that
the Duke of Lorrain who had promised the Emperor to relieve this place, should
be so careless of it, that himself was now upon return, and that to him he
ought to redress himself for relief. In conclusion, the Duke of Lorrain was
charged by the Emperor to defend it, after it had been fortified at his
charges, and that with such passion, that it was observed he caused the money
for payment of the workmen to be carried in his own Coach. He addressed himself
to the Duke; but he fearing left the storm he raised should fall upon himself,
durst not openly assist them, but gave order to the Governor of Marsal to
assist him with Men, Ammunitions, and Victuals, yet these succors were too
weak, is likewise the place, to resist the Kings power; whereupon a parley
followed, and conditions were agreed on for the surrendering of the place, if
within six days an Army able to relieve it did not appear. No Army appeared,
the Duke of Lorrain wanting forces but not ill will. The garrison marched out,
making it appear that unjust usurpations are not of long continuance and serve
only to expose people to the misfortunes of War, when they are committed
against a Prince able to carve his own satisfaction.

Politic Observation.
NO Prince whatever may usurp without injustice, but for a mean Prince to
attempt it, relisheth of mere imprudence. It was pardonable in Brennus who
boldly answered the Romans, that it was neither outrage nor injustice to seize
the goods of another, if he can make himselt Master of them, but that so doing
he follows the most ancient Law of the world, which gives leave to the strong
to take whatever they lay hold of. This indeed is not tolerable by the Law of
Christianity, which has ordained Justice to bound in the covetous Ambition of
Princes, although birth and succession in States at this present, are bars
enough to defend them. Usurpation was pardonable in Caesar who lived in
Paganism, but he who professes himself a Christian, ought to regulate his
designs by the Law of Jesus Christ. It is true indeed. Ambition of all the
passions of the Soul is most incurable, because never to be totally eradicated,
and a Pince is the more obliged to suppress such motions which persuade him to
make himself Master of that which belongs nothing to him, in regard the
vivacity of his spirit may raise a War in his own Country, and the heat of his
covetousness may without reason shed the blood, and destroy the lives of his
people. It were to be wished, that Princes were as solicitous to preserve the
blood of their subjects as Pericles the prime man of Greece in his time, who
being to die thought himself very happy that no Athenian had ever wore mourning
through his occasion: they would then be lovers of peace and the preservation
of their subject would be powerful enough to extinguish the heat of their
Ambition, it being most certain, that the usurper of another right, pulls
his Arms against his own State, and indangereth his Subjects to undergo a
thousand misfortunes.

ANNO 1632.
EVery one esteems the work of those poor men as unprofitable, who, that they
may enlarge their habitations, do build and make encroachments upon the Banks
of large Rivers, whose Waters upon the first great rain, break out of their
Channels, and by a thousand reinforced Waves, carry away whatever opposes
their violence, it being certain they will not spare the weak endeavors of
their hands. Who will not in like manner conclude, the attempts of a petty
Prince to be equally vain, who that he may gain some repute, and make himself
considerable, offers violence to the glory of a great Monarch, whose
victorious Arms are soon able to reduce the forgetful to their duties, and to
overrun whatever resists his power? Just thus ought we to consider the D. of
Lorrain's rashness in taking of Vic, in the Emperors name, and fortifying it
against France, when as his Majesty's Forces, if bent against him could not but
chastize his proceedings, break his designs, and render all his endeavors
useless. His Majesty's recovery of it, quickly showed the whole world, how
vain his attempts were* Neither did his Majesty's Forces rest there, for the
Marshals de la Force, and de Schomberg, forthwith besieged Moyenvic, which
rendered upon composition, and also invested Marsal a place of importance
belonging to the Duke, and one of those which his Predecessors had usurped from
the Bishopric of Mets. Now the Duke, though mastered by ambition, and filled
with hatred against France, was not however so senseless, but that finding
with what celerity Vic was reduced in despite of his Fortifications, wherewith
he had encompassed it, he began to suspect lest all the rest of his Country
might shortly run the same chance; in case he had not the sooner recourse unto
the Kings mercy, rather then his own forces or power. Hereupon, he resolved to
send unto his Majesty propositions of peace; but in effect, he was unwilling
totally to relinquish his unjust designs, which he would be sure to reinforce,
whenever any favorable opportunity, or an ex^raordinary succor from the
Emperor or Spaniard, should afford him the means, such deep root had the
hatred, which is almost natural to that Family against this Kingdom, taken in
him. It is also true, that finding himself straightened in point of time, and
knowing that the least delay would give the Kings Forces opportunity to take
other places, he at last resolved to go in person and meet the King at Mets,
that he might appease his Majesty by his feigned submissions, and hinder the
progress of his Armies, by a pretended Treaty of peace. Had this resolution
been frank and sincere, the visit had been commendable; but such was his malice
against his Majesty, that those things were the least of his thoughts. Not but
that he was particularly, and I may say, strictly obliged unto the King, who
was very careful of his education during his, youth, which he spent in this
Court; who had patiently expected for eight years together the homage of Bar,
whereas be might justly have seized upon it within one year after the late
Duke's death, for nonperformance thereof; who had passed by the several
troubles and intreagues raised by him, and his, against this State and Kingdom.
But all these things wrought not upon him, and he continued insensible of them.
He sent word unto his Majesty that he was coming to wait on him, and to give
him al satisfaction; accordingly, he came to Mets upon the 26 of December, with
his face composed of sorrow and sadness, for his late misbehaviour. The King
being informed of his approach near Mets, sent the Prince de Joinville with his
own and the Queen Coaches, who met him half a league from the City, and
conducted him to his lodging, where his Majesty had given order to his Officers
to defray his and his Retinues expenses. The Duke after a short repose, went to
see his Majesty and showed himself very submissive, protesting that he would
fly unto no other refuge, but his Majesty's goodness; in order to which
alone, it was that he had been so desirous of the honor to see him. The King
received him with all the demonstrations of kindness, which an offended
Majesty may be permitted to use; and shortly after being entered into discourse,
freely told him, that he would say before him an infallible sign of his
ill-behaviour; the Duke endeavored to justify himself, but he could not
allege any other reason, then only his being discontented with the Sieur de
Bret, Conseiller d' Esta^, for having used too much rigor in the Borders of
his Country, in his Inquest concerning the Rights of the Crown of France; and
his having been assured from the Marshal de Marillac, that his Majesty had
resolved to invade and ruin him. Unto this the King replied, every one might
justly enquire after ^is own Rights, so that what rigours the Sieur de Bret had
used were only the effects of Justice; and as for matter of invading him with
hostility, there needed no other proof to assure him of the contrary, then that
he would not at that time employ his power any more against him, in case he
returned to his devoir, whereas he then might easily ruin him, it being
impossible for those persons who had engaged him in those imbroils, to afford
him any succor or relief; whereas his Majesty would assuredly protect him,
from the victorious Arms of the Swedish King, who was upon the point of entering
into his Territories, and to take revenge for some injuries, which he pretended
to have received from him This proceeding of his Majesty was accompanied with
so much clemency, that the Duke could not but acknowledge at that very instant,
that his Majesty had just reason to be discontented with him, and that his
Majesty's readiness to forgive him, then when it was in his power to carve his
own satisfaction, would be a strong obligation upon him; and lastly, protested
that if he wanted power to defend himself from his Majesty's forces, hereafter
he should not desire it. Upon these respects his Majesty condiscended to pardon
him, and treat with him. His Majesty could not but be jealous of his fair
promises, for that chastisements, though just do usually exasperate those on
whom they are inflicted; whereupon, he demanded Marsal to be delivered up unto
him, for an assurance of his world. The Duke agreed thereunto, and in fine, the
Treaty of Peace was concluded and signed in the month of January at Vi^, by
which, the Duke did then engage to relinquish all Intelligences, Leagues,
Associations and practices whatever, which he had, or might have with any
Prince, in prejudice of his Majesty, his States and Country under his obedience
or protection; or in prejudice of the Treaty of Alliance and confederacy
contracted between his Majesty, the King of Swede, and Duke of Baviers, for the
preservation of the liberty of Germany the Catholic League, the defense and
protection of the Princes in friendship and alliance with the Crown of France:
Moreover, he engaged himself not to make alliance with any Prince whatsoever,
contrary to his Majesty's knowledge and approbation, to expel the Kings Enemies
out of his States, as also all his Majesty's Subjects who were then there
contrary to his Majesty's allowance, and in fine, not to give them any passage
or protection, nor to permit any Levies of Men against his Majesty's service.
The King on the other side, to testify his true and sincere affection,
promised to protect his person and defend his States with, and against all men;
and after the execution of this Treaty faithfully to surrender Marsal into his
hands Marsal was put into the King's power upon the thirteenth of January;
Monsieur the Kings Brother, being then at Nancy, departed; and thus every one
verily believed the Duke would sit down in Peace, and that this Treaty would
compel him to keep himself within bounds, either in regard his Majesty's
clemency was such, that it alone was sufficient to captivate the most stubborn
Rebels, or in regard the fear of losing Marsal would oblige him to be as good
as his word. But there are not any chains strong enough to bind up a spirit,
over-mastered by ambition and hatred, the only insinuaters of disloyalty into
the minds of men, and the sequel of his Actions made it apparent to the whole
World that he only engaged in this Treaty to divert that storm which threatened
him in case of non compliance, as also that to observe the performance of those
Articles, was the least part of his resolution, as we shall hereafter declare.

Politic Observation.
ALthough it do much concern little Princes, not to pull upon themselves the
forces of their neighbors, who exceed them in power; yet they are hardly to be
persuaded thereunto, unless compelled by mere force. Though they want power
yet they have a good mind, and want no ambition to instigate them; on the
contrary, as Passion increases by opposition, so it should seem their desires
of extending their Authorities, adds new provocations from those wants of
abilities which their sense represents unto them The most inconsiderate do
exceed those limits, which their debility has prescribed, and commit
themselves to the hazard of Fortune, which feeds and blinds them with vain
hopes; whereas, they who are truly wise, make a great virtue of this necessity,
knowing that the most eminent Philosophers have placed their greatest felicity
in being contented with their conditions, and in cutting their cloaks by their
cloth. Admit their minds to be of what temper soever, yet after they have once
rashly run into any designs against a Prince more potent then themselves, who
forces them to stoop under his Arms, and to be at Peace, it cannot be doubted
but they are obliged to act with all reality and sincerity; to allege his
power with whom they treat, as a pretext to cover their dissimulation, is
frivolous; indeed the power of an unjust U^urper, may give a Prince leave to
dissemble; yet the case is far otherwise, in consideration of the power of a
victorious Prince, who after being compelled by injuries and provoked by
indignities to take up his Arms, may lawfully, according to the custom of War,
give the Law to the vanquished, and compel them to Treaties very
disadvantagious to them. A private person indeed, who is forced to promise any
thing by contract, is not obliged to the performance thereof; but otherwise it
is, when there is a necessity of obeying a lawful Prince, or of compl^ance for
fear of just Laws. Thus a petty Prince oppres^'d by a Ty^anical force, to
promise any thing, is not obliged to act with integrity, or to perform any part
of his agreement; but if he find himself go by the worst in a just war,, and in
conclusion is forced to a Treaty, contrary to his Inclinations and desires, it
is far otherwise; for there he is obliged to proceed with reality, and is fully
bound to perform his agreement: If it were not thus, all Faith would be
banished from Treaties of War, for that usually one party finding himself the
weaker, is compelled by fear or necessity to submit unto such conditions which
else he would refuse. A Prince is a lively Image of the Divinity, and his
chiefest happiness consists in imitation thereof; Whereupon God being Truth
it self, he is the more obliged to study Truth in his Treaties, Antiquity
having esteemed them sacred, and not to be violated. He ought not to run into
any promises, which are not first discussed with mature deliberation; but
having once passed them, he is bound to perform them with Truth and Sincerity:
Admit it be to his disadvantage, he ought to complain of himself only, seeing
he first gave the occasion of War; and it is unreasonable to term that
violence, which is a mere and just chastisement of injuries. The Saguntines are
blamed by Plutarch for having falsified their Treaties with Hannibal, unto whom
they gave their Faith to be obedient, and to pay him three hundred Talents of
Silver, which they undertook to do, that he might be induced to raise the Siege
from before their City; but resolved upon his withdrawing from their Country,
to make use of the first advantage against him; whereas he (provoked by their
Treachery) returned to besiege them a second time, and forced them to surrender,
upon condition that the men were to march out with a single Coat, and no Arms,
the women with their wearing habits, and in this equipage to go live where they
best liked.

The Emperor and Infanta promise to protect the Duke of Lorrain.
THe enemies of France were much afflicted at the news of the Treaty between
the King and Duke of Lorrain. The Emperor sent Montecuculli unto the Duke, to
animate and assure him of a potent Army whenever he was in a condition to
defend himself from the King of S^ede. The Baron de ^^e^de came to him from the
Infanta, to give him the like assurance, and to beseech him to believe, that
the King of Spain's Forces and Treasure should ever be at his disposal, when
the Emperor should think it proper to attempt the recovery of his Towns; Nay
the Queen Mother too, though tied by all sorts of Reason to embrace the King's
Interests, resolved by persuasion of Cha^teloupe, to send a Letter unto the
Parliament of Paris, to engage them (if possible) in a Revolt, which
undoubtedly would have been seconded by that of Paris it self, with diverse
other Cities of the Kingdom, and all to force the King to withdraw his Army
from Lorrain, that he might extinguish the fire nearer home. That Enemy of the
public Peace, took occasion from the Parliaments discontents, for that the
King had sent some of the chief Officers of Mets, to give them a check for
their disorderly behavior in the confirmation of those letters whereof we
discoursed the foregoing year. There need no other indicium to prove the
letter to be his, then the bare reading of it: Not a person who had the honor
to be near her Majesty, could ever be persuaded that it proceeded from her
inclination, though signed with her hand, but that it was by the wicked
insinuations and devices of that seditious conspirator, who in peace being
inconsiderable, would needs make himself famous and remarkable by raising war
and troubles. He well knew how to work upon this great Princesses weakness, who
being extremely exasperated against the Cardinal, would easily be persuaded
unto any thing which might disadvantage him. Hereupon he made her believe, that
this propitious Genius of France, was upon the point of breaking the Peace with
Spain; That he had carried on the King to fall upon the Low Countries, and that
in fine, the Spaniards and Emperors Forces would jointly strike into France,
seize upon the Cities overrun the whole Champaigne country, pillage the Towns,
rob the people, pull down the Churches; That Religion would be laid aside, the
Nobility ruined, The Royal Houses errazed, and the French Nation exposed unto
death, or such miseries as were a terror to her very thoughts. This was the
purport of the letter, and these were the considerations which obliged her to
sign it. Strange it is to look upon the many disguisements tending to engage
that honorable company in a revolt, which has ever been the main support of
this State, It was only desired that they would oppose the Cardinal's designs,
although all the enterprises wherein he engaged the King, were indeed so many
additions to his and the Kingdoms glory, as was apparent in the relief of
Casal, and Treaty of Pignerol. They were solicited to ruin this great
Minister of State, whose prudent conduct was the chiefest sword which his
Majesty employed in defense of his Kingdom, and whose every action did like a
Thunderbolt, annihilate the ambitious designs of the House of Austria: But
especially were they wooed to induce his Majesty to make a peace with Germany,
though it was sufficiently apparent, how that that concluded in the year 1622.
had been the cause of all those misfortunes whereunto our Allies have been
exposed; that relaxation having afforded opportunity unto the Emperor, to take
those advantages which he obtained in the Palatinate, and upon diverse other
Princes.

I cannot omit one strange piece of Indiscretion which Chanteloupe committed in
this letter, viz. his oversight in letting the Queen Mother publicly profess
her giving credit to the predictions of those Astrologers who assured her that
the Cardinal should not hold out above three or four months, and in not
considering how that one included another much more sad for France, and which
could not but beget her the hatred of all those who had any sense of a good
Frenchman, or loyal Subject. But the blame of this defect, as likewise of the
whole Letter, was laid upon him as the true Author thereof, who had been so
sollicitous in procuring her to sign it, whose goodness (like that of the Sun)
cannot do any hurt, unless when in conjunction with some other Star of a
malignant quality; Neither had the Parliament any regard thereunto, but reputed
it as an aspersion animated by the Spaniards, who then finding themselves
reduced to an exigency, were apprehensive of those Forces which his Majesty was
dispatching into Germany, and began to look about them; when they saw the King
employing the courage of his Subjects in assisting his Allies, and also a
likelihood of Breach between the two Crowns, whereunto indeed his Majesty was
invited by diverse, although he would never be induced so to do, having always
thought it more glorious to preserve Treaties of peace with integrity, then to
conquer the Countries of his Neighbors.

Politic Observation.
ONe of those many and chief causes which persuaded the wise Politicians to
seclude women from the Government of States, is, their being easily
circumvented, either by their own passions, or the ill advices of others: If
the person enterprising any thing, be but in discredit with them, that is cause
enough to mislike the whole affair, or if it be not managed by a man whom they
fancy: Their passions are extreme, and lead them to discommend whatever is
undertaken by those who are in their displeasure; and on the contrary, they are
apt to approve of defects and faults in them whom they affect* They are born
with such inclinations, that there is no mediocrity in their distinctions;
their Love and Hatred are ever in the highest and hottest degree; and on the
contrary, when they pass from one passion to another, they evidence to the
whole world how little they can esteem him who was once their best beloved;
whereupon the wisest of Kings, and one whose Pen was guided by the holy Ghost,
said, There is no malice like that of a Woman; Now if to their hatred any
enterprise be attempted, which clasheth with their inclinations, as all War
does work upon their Fears, which are natural unto them, there cannot then be
any War, how just or necessary soever, but shall assuredly be condemned by
them. In vain it is to endeavor to persuade them that it is needful to make
war, or to carry that war into a Foreign Country, which is designed to be
brought into our own; it were bootless to represent unto them, how the wisest
Kings have ever kept the War at a distance from their own Countries, and
endeavored to extinguish the fire in their Neighbors houses, as knowing their
own to be the next in danger. It were but time and labor lost, to offer unto
their thoughts, that it is better to prevent a mortal sickness when it
threatens a State, then to apply remedies just when the height of the disease
threatens a total ruin. To conclude, it is to no purpose to persuade them
that the peoples charge in maintaining an Army out of the Kingdom, is less then
the inconveniences of an Intestine War. The fruitfulness of a Country will
afford the Inhabitants a sufficient livelihood, neither can want fall very
heavy upon them, notwithstanding any Taxes, though great, imposed upon them,
in case they have freedom of commerce, and work. But it is not so when an enemy
is once entered among them, for even then they are not exempted from
contributing to the means of their preservation, though they daily find the
enemy at their gates, their Cities lost and plundered, their Farms burnt, their
Grounds untilled, and they who are never so little worth, taken and forced to a
ransom, besides a thousand other cruelties and oppressions. There need no other
allegation to prove this Truth besides the People themselves, who think it well
enough if they may be free from Alarums, and the noise of Guns and Trumpets;
whereas they despair if they once see the enemy at their Gates, who
encompasseth them with confusion, makes them fly from their own houses, and
who on all hands makes them undergo a hard necessity, and even depriveth them
of the use of their very Highways. These reasons are so apparent, that one
must either be prepossessed with Passion, or surprised by some sinister advice,
to imagine the contrary; and they are so much the more considerable for France,
in regard the Emperor Charles the fifth discoursing with Francis the first
concerning the Natures of their Subjects, said, That both French and Spaniard
were naturally so inclined to murmur, that they would easily be led on to rebel
against their Prince, if not diverted by some Foreign employments. To be
brief, one of the chief causes which preserves Spain in peace, is, their
continual employing of all able to bear Arms in Foreign attempts; whereas
France has ever been engaged in Civil combustions and wars, because this Crown
has no Dominions lying aloof from it, unto which it might send abroad its
people. Which being so, the best course that can be taken, is to vent them in
the service of our Allies, so to do, is to follow the example of Scipio, who
finding the youth of Athens could not be kept quiet in Idleness, rigged out two
Galleys, and lead them (to show proofs of their courage) against the Persians;
and of the Romans too, who to divert Hannibal from coming any more into Italy,
resolved to invade him in Afric.

The Duke of Lorrain consents to Monsieur's marriage with the Princess
Marguerite.
THe Duke of Lorrain had other intention in the Treaty of Peace made with the
King, but to avoid the punishment due to his boldness; neither did he long keep
himself dis-ingaged from new Intreagues: and although his Majesty thinking the
best of his submissions and protestations, had sent unto the King of Swede
(then falling upon his State) to divert that storm, yet could he not forbear
running into fresh contrivances against the good of France. In conclusion, it
is found, that at what time he passed his word unto the King at Vic, he, at the
same time, brake it by his conventions at Nancy with Montecuculi, who was then
come thither to wait upon him; and that he might not omit any manner of
disloyalty, he shortly after executed the pretended marriage between the
Princess Marguerite his Sister, and Monsieur le Duc d' Orleans, whom he had
drawn thereunto by a thousand tricks and device^. He knew that most of the
children of France have occasioned such bloody wars, as have terribly afflicted
the State; the Courage wherewith they are born, not permitting them to expect
the time of their commanding; neither was he ignorant of Monsieur's discontent,
conceived against the management of the present affairs, although admired with
astonishment by all strangers, who found France daily increasing in glory, but
at their cost and charges; Hereupon he used his utmost skill to conclude that
marriage. The Princess de Falsbourg his eldest Sister was the chief Agent in
it; who as she had deserts enough to render her self amiable, so wanted she not
any art whereby to captivate the Sieur de Puy-Laurens by her attractions, whom
she persuaded she would marry, in case he could effect the match between
Monsieur and her Sister the Princess Marguerite, whereby besides the honor of
marrying with her, he should likewise become Brother in Law to his Master. He
was earnestly desirous of this Alliance, in regard it was very honorable; and
the King being childless, it was taken for granted that her Sister would one
day be Queen of France, which could not but be a great protection to their
Family, who have a long while been conversant in the Customs of France. The
Spaniards were not behind-hand to advance this Treaty, as well knowing the
power of France was not to be over-mastered, but by arming one party against
the other, which this match would infallibly bring to pass; by reason Monsieur
would then be irreconcilable to the King, and consequently the easilier
disposed to enter into France in the head of an Army, which would undoubtedly
divide the Nobility, and so divert his Majesty within the Kingdom, that he
might not possibly think of assisting the German Princes. The Cardinal who
suffers not the King to be ignorant of any thing, having discovered this
practice. forthwith acquainted his Majesty therewith, who was not backward in
complaining unto the Duke of L^rrain. But the Duke, well prepared how to make
his excuses, endeavored to vindicate himself from that aspersion by solemn
protestation, confirmed with deep Oaths, how that he never would attempt any
such thing; upon which his assurances there was not any thing more provided in
the Articles of the Treaty, as to that affair; but his Majesty verily believed
him to have relinquished all those Designs. Notwithstanding all this, no sooner
was the King departed from M^ts, but he concluded the match not so much as
asking his Majesty's consent, and quite contrary to the positive inhibition
thereof. This prohibition indeed did not a little trouble him, and raise
suspicions in his head, for that he knew no stranger had ever yet attempted to
marry his relations with any Prince of the Blood of France, without feeling the
Force of our Kings Powers: So that he proceeded herein with the mo^e
circumspection, and left the whole management thereof unto Monsieur de
Vaudemont his Father, and the Princess de Falsbourg his Sister, who had not
either of them much to lose.

The Princes of the Blood may not by the Laws of France, marry without the
Kings approbation.
THe Fundamental Laws of France do not permit Princes of the Blood to marry
without the King'^ consent* If it be demanded where that Law is to be found; I
must remit the Inquisitive Reader to a certain Book amongst the Public
Registers; where in one of the chapters of Royal R^ghts, it is expressly so
recorded. But this Register being but of four hundred ^eats standing at most,
whereas this Custom is as ancient as the Kingdom it self, I would fain ask
them, where the Salique Law is to be found, which has been inviolably observed
in the Kingdom, above twelve Ages together? Thus it was established by the
Custom, to which oftentimes there must be recourse had, and which must be
admitted for a Law, carrying in its forehead the Image of Justice much more
evidently then any written thing, and being also more prevalent to induce the
people to a due observation thereof. Who can then forbear to have this
particular custom in great esteem or not embrace it for a Fundamental Law, when
it has been observed from the beginning of this Monarchy, and then established
for the Kingdoms good?

Troubles happened in consequence of Marriage.
THe greatest troubles have been the consequences of Marriages, and they who
have contumaciously violated this custom have, been constantly punished by
their Kings. The example of Merouee, son to Chilperic, ninth King of France,
will evidently prove the establishment of this Custom in the beginning of this
Monarchy, who assuming the boldness of marrying with Bruneh^ut, without his
Fathers consent, became the object of hi^ Justice, and was punished according
to his desert, and Pretixtatus Bishop of Rouen who had a hand in the marriage,
was impeachel in a Council held at Paris, of that very thing, as a great Crime;
he indeed was the first who exceeded the limits of his duty in this partitular,
and accordingly was he chastised for it. Saint B^ru^ra willing excuse unto the
King the Comte: (...) hibaut de Champagne, accused for designing to marry his
children without his Majesty's consent, alleged, it was improbable a man of
his integrity would ever run into so great a praemunire. Thus Philip Con^te de
Namur, bro^her to Baudouin Con^te de Flandres, being overseer of Jean and
Marguerite his Neeces, daughters to the said Baudouin, engaged unto Philip
Augustus in a Treaty, that they should not be married without his Majesty's
consent, which one of our Historians says to be in reference to the Sovereign
right, which our Kings have over such persons, whose marriages may occasion
troubles to the Kingdom. Is there not yet extant in the Kings Charters, an Oath
made by the Grandees of the Nantion unto Charles the Fifth, which absolutely
implies they were not to marry with Rebels, disobedient or enemies of the
State? One of the Crimes charged in the Duke of Alencon's Indictment, was his
treating a Match between his Son and the Duchess of York, an English Prince's
daughter, without approbation from Charles the Seventh. The same Charles the
Seventh, would not look upon his Son, Lewis the Eleventh, though of Age, for
having treated a Match with Charlotte de Savoy, without his knowledge, though
it remained unconsummated until his permission, first had and obtained. Does
not an English Historian, though an enemy to France say, that the Match between
Anne ae Bretagne and Maximilian of Austriche, unto whom she was betrothed from
her Infancy was broken, in regard the King had not consented thereunto? Now if
any one imagine that this permission cannot avoid a marriage once consummated,
I shall endeavor to convince them of the contrary, by laying before them the
example of Lovic de Begne, who having married Ausgarde, without her fathers
consent, was in conclusion, forced to quit her, though he had children by her,
and though he was his eldest Son, and to marry Adelaide, and his son by her,
was acknowledged for right heir to the Crown, by name Charles the Simple. I
shall add this one more, of Judith daughter to Charles the Bauld, who having
(though a Widow to the King of England) married Comte Baudouin, against her
fathers Will, saw her marriage disanulled, by Pope Nicholas the first, together
with the Bishops of France, and was compelled after obtainment of her Fathers
approbation to be re-married, as she was, at Auxerre.

Monsieur's Marriage with the Princess Marguerite of Lorrain.
ALthough the Sieur de Puy-Laurens was very passionate for the concluding of
Monsieur's Marriage, yet (Princes Families: being often divided into factions)
the President Coigneux was not so inclined; but on the contrary, took occasion
in the to others absence, whilst he was at Brixels negotiating with the
Spaniards for aid, to represent diverse reasons unto Monsieur to divert him from
those thoughts. He was not to learn, that in case Monsieur married the
Princessee Marguerite, and the Sieur de Puy-Laurens the Princess of Falsbourg,
himself should totally lose that little credit and authority which he then had;
he was apprehensive of the ascendency which a Woman has over the soul of a
Prince, when she is once passionately beloved by him: Besides, he was the more
concerned in that particular of the Princess Marguerite, because he conceived
she would be guided by the instinct and directions of the Princess de
Falsbourg, who would, in fine, rule all; lastly, he doubted there was no way
left to break off this match, which would be imputed as his fault; by reason of
the place he held with Monsieur, so that there would be no hopes for him to be
restored to the Kings favor, or the enjoyment of his Goods and Offices. These
were the true motives and grounds which induced Coigneux to declare himself
against the marriage, and to dissuade Monsieur from any further progress
therein, although his advices were seconded with no other reasons then the
service of his Highness, and the good of his affairs. He one day took the
boldness to tell him, that he ought not to steer such a course as would
undoubtedly render the King irreconcilable unto him, seeing his greatest glory
and power was tied unto his Majesty's grace and favor, which this marriage
would assuredly hazard, nay utterly destroy; he laid before him, how that
though Princes are sometimes excusable, for doing such acts in their heat and
passion, which are displeasing unto their Sovereign, yet they never ought to
fly into such extravagances as may totally ruin them in their Kings Favor.
If may sometimes peradventure turn to their own advantage, to run out into
discontents, as the increasing of their stipends, or the obtaining of some
other gratification; but so it cannot be if they imbarque in such designs as
may cause an absolute breach. All the luster which Princes have* and which
renders them venerable, is the effect of their Sovereigns favor, just as the
light of the Stars, is derived from the Sun their Fountain. But these Councels
of Coigne^x being known, drew the whole house of Lorrain to have an eye upon
him. And I verily believe they might have wrought some good effect upon
M^nsieur (seeing he was ever inclined to be obedient unto the King) had not the
return of the Sieur de Puy-Lau^e^s prevented it, who at first dash spoiled all
the to others endeavors. This new Favorite had gotten so great an influence
over Monsieurs affections that he easily countermined and blew up all the others
reasons: neither could Monsieur possibly guard himself from the subtilty of his
insinuations: He persuaded him to believe that the King would doubtless at
length agree unto the Marriage, especially seeing his first Lady was altogether
of his Majesty's choice, and a person totally adhering unto the Interest of
Lorrain, and in regard there was not any inequality between the former and
this, diverse Kings of France having matched with the Princesses of Lorr^in, and
the Princess Marguerite her self, being daughter to a daughter of Fr^nce* He
represented unto him, that he could not choose but follow the same steps which
H^nry the Great had trodden out unto him, who did not stick to marry his late
sister unto the family of Lorrain which only consideration were sufficient to
induce his Majesty's confirmation of this marriage; and lastly, that in case it
should please God to set the Crown upon his head the whole Family of Lorrain, a
thing of no mean consideration, would be inseparably tied unto the interests of
France* These reason at first glance seem specious enough, yet could they not
have made any deep impression upon him, had he represented unto him, as indeed
he ought, how the late King was forced to marry his sister unto the House of
Lorrain, that he might thereby reclaim them from thwarting his designs; how
that the late Madam, had in that small time of her being married unto Mon^^eur
raised such a fire in the Court, as was not easily extinguished; and how that
the Alliance of H^nry the third with the House of Lorra^n, had only served to
encourage their boldness, and give them opportunity to prosecute their design
of pulling the Scepter from him. But these things entered not into his thoughts
the passion which he had for the Princess of Falsbourg having blinded ^im, and
left him no eyesight, but only how he might incompasse the consumnation of his
Masters marriage. That Princess her self whose Soul is very active, om^^ted no
invention to facilitate her designs, and being not to learn how powerful young
Beauties are to captivate the greatest courages, there needing no other device
to render them beloved then the bare letting them be seen, she used her utmost
endeavors to draw Monsieur unto such places where the Princes^e M^r^uerite
was, that in fine, the flames of her Beaut^ adding new forces to the Si^ur de
Puy-Laurens his reasons, might compel Mo^sieur to submit unto the Laws of Love.
Accordingly it succeeded, and the marriage was performed in presence of a
Religieux of the Cistercian Order, who had not any authority from his
superior, but only from the Cardinal de Lorrain. Bishop of Thal, though he had
not any jurisdiction over him to empower him to administer Sacraments, for that
he was exempt from the Diocese of Lorrain, as all the rest of his Order. The
Abbess of Remiremont* with whom the Princess Marguerite was brought up, was
assistant at the Ceremony, as also Monsieur d^ El^oeuf, and Monsieur de Puy-
Laurens who were witnesses; besides these, there were not any other present,
excepting only two Bernardines, to assist him who married them, and all this
secrecy was used to prevent his Majesty's knowledge thereof, and escape the
punishment which they could not but expect would fall upon them, as a reward
for such attempts, and not only so, but likewise because they much doubted the
validity of the marriage, which was thought such, that Monsieur de V^udemont
could not forbear saying, that in case his daughter were not fit one day to
wear the Crown of France, yet she would always be good enough to make an
Abbess of Remiremont, suspecting belike the weight of his Majesty's
prohibition.

Politic Observation.
AMongst the diverse Prerogatives of Princes, that of hindering marriages, is not
of the least importance. The right whereof may be proved from the Authority of
some Canonists, whose reputations stand clear in the schools of all Divines*
and who affirm it in express terms. But not to quote their testimonies, me
thinks we need no other proof to evince this truth, then common custom. For
were not the Emperors the first who determined the conditions and qualities of
those who might marry? Were not they the original institutors of who might, and
who might not marry? Has not the Church extracted her decrees from their Laws?
Besides those decrees of the Church, have not our Kings eftablished new Orders,
as is to be seen in the Ordinance of Blois, where Henry the Third declared all
Marriages void, wherein the Banes were not published, which however are not so
adjudged by the Church? And what has given credit to the Decree of the Council
of Trent, but our Kings Declarations? Now if the validity depend upon their
Seal, how can it be denied, but they likewise have authority to enforce this
new prohibition? And have they not likewise Ordained, notwithstanding the
Decree that Heretics should not be obliged to contract their Marriages in
presence of the Curate of the Parish where they live, which cease not to be
valid and in force? Besides, is there not likewise another Ordinance, which
empowered by our Kings only, and the custom of Bretayn, which makes the
marriages of Guardians with their Pupils to be void, then not effected by the
permission of the Justice, whereas the Church is of another opinion? These are
reasons which do evidently maintain and prove, that our King^ have a disposing
power in the marriages of their Subjects. And indeed, what reason were there
that they should be denied this privilege, seeing the whole power is
principally conferred upon them, for the preservation of the public Peace and
private Families, which depend exceedingly much, as is not unknown unto any
one, upon marriages; which besides, that it is so granted by the chief of
Divines, is likewise deduceable from common experience. Let not any one
therefore make a question of it. But if any one demand, in what manner they may
hinder and obstruct marriages, I shall make use of a distinction in my answer,
and say, that for the making of a general prohibition, it is requisite to
Ordain a public and universal Law, to signify their Will unto their
Subjects, as was done in the Ordinance of Lewis the Eleventh, which enforced
the publication of Banes. And in case of a particular marriage there need only
a particular inhibition, to be signified unto the particular persons, intending
to contract themselves, so that they be duly informed of the prohibition issued
out against their further proceedings therein.

The Catholic Electors of the Empire, propose to become Neuters.
During our Kings abode at Mots, the Catholic Electors were in such
disorders, that they were forced to make address unto his Majesty, for his
protection. The King of Sweden prosecuted his Conquests in the lower
Palatinate, with such extraordinary success, that they looked on themselves as
all undone, if his Majesty did not assist them, the Eperours Forces being
reduced to such an ebb, that they were not able to secure themselves. They well
knew, our Kings have ever been the Churches Refuge, the Scourge of Heretics,
the Protectors of the Holy Sea, and that all Ecclesiastiques have ever secured
themselves from those storms which threatened their ruin, by retiring
themselves under their Power; neither were they ignorant, that he who now
welldeth the French Scepter, has destroyed Heresy in this Kingdom, and made
his Actions illustrious, as well by Piety as Justice. Hereupon they sent their
deputies unto him to implore his assistance. The Bishop of Wittsbourg was chief
of the Embassy, on whom that employment was more especially imposed, in regard
he was most concerned to animate their complaints, by the report of the great
losses himself had sustained; the Baron de Te^iff accompanied him from the
Elector of Cologne, and the Sieur Ruter from the Duke of Baviers, neither of
them was backward in laying before his Majesty a large description of their
miseries, of the increase of Heresy, of the calamities whereunto the
Catholics were exposed, of the Swedish Kings Ambition, of the Churches
Interests, of France's concernments; and all this they frequently did at large
in their Audiences, that by this means they might infuse some jealousy into
the King's mind, which might draw him off from the Swede, and instill some
Ambition into his Soul, which inducing him to pretend unto the Empire, might
engage him in their protection. But his Majesty, informed by his Ambassadors
of the Swedish proceedings, and that their Victories were not extraordinary
from others, but conformable to the Treaty of Alliance, presently apprehended,
that the losses they had suffered, together with the fear of totally losing the
remainder, if they continued to countenance the ambitious designs of the House
of Austria, had persuaded them to make such pitiful complaints. He could not
be persuaded to change a War of State, into a War of Religion, or to believe
the King of Sweden intended the ruin of the Church, being fully assured his
intents were only to abase the Emperors pride, and to curb his Ambitious
designs. Yet the Compassion he had at the sense of their miseries, would not
permit him to dispatch them without some satisfaction, and the using his
intercession with the Swedish King for their safeties, and the securities of
their States. Having kissed his Majesty's hands, they visited the Cardinal,
whose zeal for the Churches interests gave them a most kind reception, and
ample assurances, that his advices should second their requests unto his
Majesty. In future coming to discourse the means, how to secure them, he
ingeniously told them, that the King of Swede striking directly at the Imperial
Party, it would be impossible to mediate any Treaty in their behalfs, unless
they withdrew themselves from that association; that this was it they were
necessarily to resolve upon, unless they would totally disable his Majesty
from making any interposition with the Swedish King, who no doubt, would never
be persuaded to spare them, whilst they endeavored to give a subsistence unto
the Imperial Army, both by assistances of men, money, and provisions of all
sorts. This discourse, although equally tempered with Prudence and sincerity,
seemed very harsh unto them, in regard of their affection to the House of
Austria. But as no interests are nearer then particular, so they showed a great
deal of readiness to submit unto the Kings Will and Judgment, to do as he
should think most proper, whereby they might the more strongly engage him in
their protection and defense. Whereupon it was thought fit that his Majesty
should deal with the Swedish King to permit them to continue Neuters, they
hoping to pick out some way or other of accommodation hereby, at least to gain
some time which might produce an overture to avoid the storm which threatened
their present ^ine.

Politic Observation.
PRinces are not in any thing more industrious, than in making their demands
seem plausible; now no pretenses make a deeper impression on men's minds, than
those of Religion; whence it is, that if they can with it cloak their designs,
they think they have done sufficiently; under this veil have they often
palliated their most vicious and ambitious devices, and they who treat with
them, if truly wise, do not easily believe, whatever is proposed under the
notion of Religion: The Faith which they profess, makes them zealous for the
Churches good, but this very Faith teaches them, that sometimes Wolves cloth
themselves in Sheepskins; and that as the Tree is known by his fruit, so there
is no safer way to judge of Princes Proposals, then by reflecting on the
government of their actions, the true fruits of their designs.

King Achas, that he might deceive Isaiah, played the Hypocrite, and did at
first refuse the proposition made unto him of craving a Miracle from God for
assurance of his promise, pretending himself to be respectfull and fearful of
offending God, that he made a difficulty of tempting him by an extraordinary
belief. Many there are who use such like slights, when they find it may conduce
to their advantage; in a word it is great Prudence, not always to believe
those who cover their designs with the Church, but maturely to examine their
Proposals, and to observe them by their former conduct and proceedings.

The King sends the Marquis de Breze, toward Gustavus Adolphus, Kign of
Sweden.
THe Cardinal informed his Majesty of the Propositions of Neutrality, to which
the Ambassadors of the Catholic League seemed to incline, and his Majesty
having cast his eyes upon the Marquis de Breze, as a person capable, by reason
of his Prudence and Ability to give a happy success thereunto dispatched him
unto the King of Swed^n to obtain his assent in that behalf. He departed from
Mets not long after, and arrived at Mayence, accompanied with above fifty
Gentlemen Volunteers, ambitious o^ seeing that King, whose victories were so
publicly famous over the World. The Marquess of Breze coming near unto
Mayence, was met upon the way by two Cornets of Horse, and the King of Swedes
own Coach to receive him the was conducted unto his Audience; where after he
had made his respects unto that victorious Prince, he told him* the King his
Master being so near had commanded him to wait upon him, and to assure him of
his joy for his victories. The King of Sweden returned those Civilities and
Honors due unto the Ambassadors of France; which passed over, they began to
discourse of affairs: He represented unto him, how his Master being eldest Son
and protector of the Church, looked on himself as obliged to make a request
unto him in behalf of the Catholics of Germany, and to beseech him to permit
them to become neuters, they being readily disposed to fall off from the
interests of the House of Austria, and not to uphold his forces by any way or
means whatever; how that his Master was the more willing to second their
desires, in regard he thought it very advantageous for the design which invited
him into Germany, for it was no small blow unto the Emperor to draw away from
him, the Electors of Cologne and Treves, the Duke of Baviers and diverse other
Catholic Princes; that in some sense it we to cut off one of his Arms, and
assuredly to destroy a third part of his strength; that in conclusion, he
believed his Majesty of Swede was obliged in point of discretion to permit them
to sit still, provided they did totally decline the Emperor's asistance with
whom alone he was engaged; that hereby convincing the World he intended not the
subversion of Religion, a thing much taking with the people, it would evidently
follow, that his enemies would oppose him with the less resolution. The King
of Sw^den received his Majesty's request made by the Marquis de Breze, with a
great deal of honor; but being a Prince of great understanding, he forthwith
^ounded the depth of the Catholic Princes promises, and made apparent unto
him, that their Proposals were not real; that they had possessed his Christian
Majesty with false impressions; that they had drawn upon themselves the evils
which they endured by their own unreasonable wilfulness contrary to the many
fair invitations sent unto them, of forsaking his enemies, and enjoying their
estates in quiet, under an indifferent contribution which he expected from
them. He likewise declared unto him, the resolutions of the League, concluded
in the Assemblies of Lantshud and Ingolstat, which were directly repugnant to
these proposals, as also the Duke of Bavi^rs Letters, who in the midst of his
protestations of forbearing hostility, did not however cease to raise forces,
fortify Towns, and send Letters of Exchange for the advancing of new Levies;
by all which it was evident enough, that his designs tended only to linger out
the time, whereby he might take better aim in future. The Marquess de Breze,
replied unto him, that in truth, the evil designs of those Catholic Princes
could no be executed in regard of he time passed, especially after sight of
their Letters, yet it was to be hoped they would hereafter manage their affairs
more advisedly, if there were a Treaty concluded with them: That the King his
Master was far from countenancing their unjust pretenses, but that in case they
should be reduced to reason, as his Majesty well hoped, and themselves had
fairly promised, he should then affectionately desire they might be permitted
to sit still; in order whereunto, he requested there might be a cessation of
Arms for fifteen days, in which time, some reasonable end might be concluded.
The King of Sweden promised to be willing for the Treaty in the behalf of
France, without which he should hardly have been persuaded to pass over the
Duke of Baviers, and the other Catholic Princes, after those affronts received
from them. In fine, it was no more then he might have desired, he being too
prudent not to observe, how by granting them to become Neuters, he did much
weaken his enemies, and how that satisfying the World, he intended not an
invasion of the Church, the Emperors Forces would not be so zealous in his
service, by which means, he might the easilier perfect their destruction.

Politic Observation.
IT is great Prudence in a Prince who undertaketh a War, not to declare himself
against Religion, a thing which mightily incourageth them who defend it, for
that most think it glorious to spend their in the preservation thereof. They
are still put in mind of those Eternal heavenly rewards of which they shall
becom^ partakers; so that if a Crown of Laurel, proposed as a reward in the
Olimpique Games, could produce such great passion in those who entered the
Lists; how much more them will the assurance of a rich Crown proposed in the
Heavens, animate the courages of the Soldiers. They are informed how the death
with which they meet, is not so much a death, as a happy passage from death,
which leads them from the grave to immortality, from unavoidable miseries, to
infinite goods, from tears, to unspeakable joy, and from a fight, to triumph:
Thus it being natural unto mankind to be concerned at the apprehension of
great rewards; it cannot be imagined how much they add unto the courage. The
most fearful, are stout and bold in defense of their Religion, of which, the
primitive times of the Church have afforded us frequent examples, seeing women
and children have for the conservation of their Religion, tryumphed over the
greatest courages of Emperors. He who never thought to go out of his own
house, willingly takes up Arms, when the Churches Liberty is in question. The
Jews (says Tacitus) were not much concerned to die in their wars, because they
believed another life: And Gaesar says, The Druides of France were
unconquerable in the Field, because they believed the Transmigration of Souls,
and took it for a shame to be fearful of losing that life which should be
restored unto them again. What resolution then would the Catholic have,
amidst their belief of another everlasting and most glorious life? The Valor
of man does not so much consist in his bodily strength, as the resolution of
his soul, and in that resolution which banisheth all sense of Fear from the
heart, which infuseth an universal heat, and leads men on to surmount all
kind of difficulties; Now who knows not that one Faiths chiesest effects is,
to replenish the soul with an heavenly fire, and to infuse it with power, for
the destruction of what ever resists the glory of God? No passion does so
encourage, as the zeal of Realigion, it rendereth men senseless in all
sufferings, converteth stripes into pleasures, causes labor to be delightful,
and makes the most cowardly and weak to become courageous.

A Treaty of the Catholic Princes of Germany with the King of Swede.
THe King of Swede having thought fit to suffer the Catholic Princes to
become Neuters, and consented to a cessation for fifteen days; there were
Articles drawn up, and those the most reasonable that could be wished, they
employed

1. That the League should forsake the Emperors Alliance and Interests, and
relinquish all Intelligence with him. 2. That they should recall their Forces
from the Imperial Army. 3. That the Palatinate should be restored. 4. That the
Duke of Baviers, and the other Catholic Princes, should return unto the
Protestant States whatever had been taken from them, since the year sixteen
hundred and eighteen. 5. That they should not permit the Emperor to make any
Levies in their States. 6. That they should deposit some places in the King of
Swede's hands, for their performance of the Treaty. 7. That in consideration of
these agreements, the King of Sweden should engage not to use any acts of
Hostility against them, or exact any contributions from them.
There could not possibly be proposed any Articles more just then these,
whereby to settle the Princes in neutrality; for in case they ceased to assist
the Emperor, the King of Swede would likewise forbear drawing any advantages
from them, and relinquish those which his Armies had lately acquired: There was
not any one but this victorious Prince who had cause to except against them,
yet the honor he owed the King obliged him to sign them. About the same time,
the Sieur de Varennes, then near Sarbruck, carried them in all diligence unto
his Majesty, and they were dispatched unto the persons interessed by sundry
Courriers. The King having received them, sent the Sieur de Charnce, unto the
Duke of Baviers, the Electors of Col^gne and Treves, the heads of the League,
to induce them to confirm the Treaty. He found them in such sensible
apprehensions of the Swedish forces then ready to assault their Gates, and
hopeless of repelling them; and yet notwithstanding so passionately bent
toward the Interests of the House of Austria that it was easy to perceive how
all the Proposals of accommodation made unto the King by the Bishop of
Wirtsbourg, tended to no other end but to protract the proceedings of the
Swid^, and in the interim to strengthen themselves, and then to make use of
their advantages. This inclination of theirs did not much surprise him for that
the Cardinal who is not ignorant of any thing, and whose Soul pierces into the
very depth of affairs, had cold him that he could expect no other overtures
from them; yet his zeal for the Churches good so animated him, that he was very
pressing upon them, to embrace the means necessary for a good accommodation:
Indeed they ought to have duly considered thereof, seeing the League which
united them, was called Catholic, and two of them were Feclesiastiques. But
the first Article was the stumbling block of all, for they could not find in
their hearts to withdraw themselves from the Emperors Interests. The Sieur de
Charnace, represented unto the Duke of Bavies, how that he professing to
embrace the Churches interests, ought to prefer the preservation thereof, both
in his own and his Neighbor States, before all other considerations whatever,
and that being now the thing in question, he ought much sooner to sorsake the
house of Austria then endanger the other. Notwithstanding these reasons, he
could not find the least inclination in him, so to do; but rather on the
contrary, the Duke publicly declared, he could not conclude upon it, in
regard of the great reason the Emperor would thereby have to complain against
him, unto which he replied, that there was not any cause to apprehend the
Emperors being discontented therewith, seeing every Princes proper interest is
to be preferred before all others whatever, and that the resolving on this
neutrality with the King of Swede, was the only visible way to preserve his
State from a ruin, which else was unavoidable. However this discourse though
grounded upon reason and piety, could not prevail upon him. He said as much
unto the Elector of Cologne, unto whom he made his next address from his
Majesty; neither here could he effect any thing considerable, so much were they
disposed to uphold the Interests of the House of Austria, before those of the
Church; as if they had not much regarded the beholding Gods houses demolished,
Altars profaned, Sacred things plundered, Priests and Religious men despoyled,
provided they might not see the House of Austria abased, or reduced to the
necessity of being contented with those States alone which did justry belong
unto them. It was a bewitching blindness, not to be enough admired, that these
two Electors (by embracing the Neutrality) might preserve themselves, their
Religion and States, and yet would by refusing it, expose all to assured ruin.
But will not every one be more surprised with astonishment, when he shall
understand, That they despising that accommodation which his Majesty had
mediated, should in the end ascribe all the calamities of the German Church
unto his Majesty's fault? As if he who furnished them with assured means to
preserve it, could be blamed for their non-acceptance, and ruining it: For my
part, I must needs conclude them alone guilty of those afflictions which befell
both the Church and themselves, for that he who refuses the means for
obtaining any end, can complain against no one but himself, if he miss of his
Design. In fin, they desired a prolongation of the Treaty; the fifteen days
being expired, that they might consider on some other ways of Agreement. The
King, that he might lay the whole fault at their own doors, as also that he
might not seem to decline any Proposals tending to the Churches good;
dispatched the Marquis de Breze a second time into Germany, for that purpose.
But the King of Sweden having laid before him how that there was not any more
likely way then that of Neutrality, by them refused; and that delays, (which
was but Truth) gave his Enemies opportunity to fortify themselves against him,
he desired to be excused: And thus their own wilful stubborness was the cause
of his pursuing his conquests.

Politic Observation.
IT is in petty Princes a fault not to be pardoned, if they stand off, and
submit not to that Conqueror who will undoubtedly be their ruin: They cannot
allege any reasons to justify themselves, for that Necessity is a lawful
excuse for all our actions, and Justice obliges the weaker to receive the Law
from the stronger. But much greater is their fault, who without any detriment
to themselves or Interests, may by sitting still make their Peace. Caesar (one
of the greatest Captains amongst the Ancients) advised to agree upon what
condition soever, provided it were sure, rather then to be obstinate in a War
with an Enemy more potent then ones self. Thus of evils, the least is to be
chosen; neither is the Pilot to be discommended, who that he may prevent an
absolute shipwreck, parts with some of his Lading unto the Sea. Humane hopes
are deceitful, so that it was the choice of a wise man, rather to secure
himself from an evil, then to assure himself of an uncertain good; it often
happens, That he who refuses an advantage offered unto him, lives to repent
his non-acceptance thereof. Thus the City of Tire was sorry, but too late, that
they had not sooner accepted of Alexander's conditions, by which they might
have been exempted from the calamities of a long siege; which refusing, did not
long after behold their beautiful Buildings ruined, part of their inhabitants
killed, and the rest brought into captivity. But it is not to be doubled that
Catholic Princes are obliged to comply with a Victorious King, if their
continuation of the War may bring any detriment unto Religion; nor can any
Alliance dispense with this Law; The Pagans themselves were so just in the
observation thereof, that they never encroached upon it. And indeed, what
reason can be alleged to prefer any man's State, before Gods? And what reason
is there to endure the profanation of his House, who is Lord of Lords, for the
advancing of an earthly Princes Interests? Which being so, Is it not just that
they acknowledge the Obligation they owe unto God, by preferring Religion the
only mark of our service, before the Ambition of any Sovereign, unto whom they
are only rued by the bonds of Friendship? Should they do otherwise, what could
they reasonably expect from so profane a scorn, but the inflicting of that
curse wherewith God threatened Solomon, for not preserving his contracts with
him, nor observing his Commandments, viz. That he would pluck away his Crow,
and give it to his servant.

The King takes the Archbishop of Treves into his Protection,
AT the same time the Sieur de Charnace made several journeys unto the Elector
to represent unto him the same considerations which he had offered unto the
Duke of Baviers, and Elector of Cologne; his Success with him was better then
with the other two, because he found him in a great Alarm, The Swedis were at
his Gates, and the Spaniards had already seized upon his chief City of Coblen,
with diverse other places of his State, insomuch that he had only Hermestine
left in his own disposal. He had then sent the Sieur de Sco^k, Gentleman of his
Bed chamber, unto the King of Sweden, to secure himself from that storm which
most threatened him; but his reception had been none of the best, in regard he
had not only furnished his own State with Soldiers, and made great
contributions toward the supporting of the League, but had lately taken the
Castle of Stolberg, and slain a young Comte de Solms, with two of his Trayn;
and his Letters too were none of the most respectful. All the answer this
Gentleman received, was, That he should advise his Master to keep his Purse
well provided, to satisfy all those guests who were coming into his Country;
That for his part he was not unmindful of the Treaty of Alliance made with
France, which engaged him to preseve all such Catholic Princes in the
enjoyment of their Estates* who should accept of the Neutrality, which he
should not fail to perform, when the Elector should adhere unto the conditions
of the said Treaty, which obliged him to come off from the Emperors party; the
which if he refused, he knew how to compel him to render him an account
thereof, as all the rest of his Associates. This answer seemed very high yet
indeed it was but reasonable, seeing he promised all fair usage if he became
Neuter, and observed the conditions contained in the Treaty France. Could more
favor be expected from a Prince against whom one commits acts of Hostility?
Now the Elector being naturally fearful, was so surpised, that be expected the
Swedes every hour at his Gates; and the same usage from them as the Bishop o^
Wittsbourg had already received; so that he resolved to cast himself into his
Majesty's Arms, who undertook to make his peace with the Swede, and to protect
him from all violence. Not that he wanted (to say the Truth) any affection for
the House of Austria, it being easy to read his inclinations in his very
looks; but because he knew in cases of Necessity, no one is obliged to assist
another to his own prejudice, especially if it cannot be attempted without
exposing himself to the danger of a manifest ruin. These were the chief
reasons which induced him to shelter himself under his Majesty wings; and
although his Proposals proceeded not from any good will to France, yet they
were such as were too important to be refused; viz. That he would surrender
part of his Towns lying on the Borders of this Kingdom, unto his Majesty, That
he would retire himself unto Trives, and there deliver his person as a gage of
his F^delity. These Proposals were the more considerable, in regard his Majesty
having him in his power, and the Electors of Saxony and Brandebourg at his
disposal, it would be impossible for the Emperor to get his Son crowned King of
the Romans, and King of Hungary, and this made his Majesty the more willing to
receive him into his Protection, and to persuade him to sit as Neuter, in
relation to the King of Swede.

Politic Observation.
ALthough Neutrality of it self carries little assurance with it, it being
frequently observed, that he who becomes Neuter, sees his Country exposed as a
Prey unto the Conqueror; yet the case is much altered, when his Neutrality is
countenanced by the protection of a great Monarch, who being his Neighbor,
secureth him from all danger. I should hardly advise a Petty Prince to put
himself under the defense if a King far distant from him, because in case of an
Invasion, his succors cannot without difficulty arrive unto him; and if they
come at all, it will be unseasonably, and too late for his defense. Every one
knows, that an Army in a long march disbandeth of it self, and those few who
hold out to the end, have more need to rest then fight; Hence it is those
Protections our Kings have embraced in Italy, find such ill success. Lewis the
XII. undertook the protection of John and Hannibal Bentivogli, who vere both
thrust out of Boulogne, when it was least suspected, neither was there any
means to prevent it.

Octavian Fregose put himself under the same protection, but all would not keep
him in the Duchy of Genoa. Pisa threw it self into the hands of the French,
but was deserted, it being impossile to dispatch Forces timely enough to defend
it. Otherwise it is in the protection of a Prince living under the eye of a
great Monarch; nothing is so easy as his assistance, and such a King is in
honor bound to defend such a Prince, with and against all men, that no
inconveniency betide him. The Law of Protection obliges him who craveth it, to
pay all honor and respect unto his Defender, and that with such submission,
that in case he recede from his devoir, it may become lawful for his Protector
to seize upon his State; and on the contrary, his Protector ought to undertake
his defense, and secure him from the oppression of any other whosoever. That
which rendereth the Protection of a Neighbor Monarch to be valid, and full of
safety, does most especially consist in the prudent Government of him who is
protected, as when he does wisely observe and regard the Laws of Neutrality,
which are neither to assist or provoke either party; in so managing his
affairs, he gives no occasion of offense; and if the prevalent power attempt
against him, his Injustice will appear the greater, because a petty Prince is
not obliged to declare himself, when his ruin is in danger. His Conduct indeed
cannot please either party, neither can it reasonably offend either; which if
so, neither can with reason attempt against him: whereas if he declare himself
against a great Prince lying on the skirts of his State, his utter destruction
will be unavoidable.

The King sends the Mareschals de la Force, and d' Effiat into Germany.
THe Catholic Princes had no sooner proposed to become Neuters, but the
Cardinal whose eyes are always open to see and Judge of what is fit and proper
for his masters glory, advised his Majesty to send a strong army into Germany,
to show them that they might safely put themselves under his protection although
he wanted not Forces who were already advanced unto the Borders of their
Country, to secure them in a case of need, and to defend them from any
violences which they might apprehend from the Emperonr, if the wheel of Fortune
should turn about. This Army consisted of about twenty four thousand men,
commanded jointly by the Mareschals de la Force, and d' Effiat. The Elector of
Treves, adhering unto the Neutrality, under the Kings protection, it was
thought requisite for his greater security, that his Towns should be delivered
into his Majesty's power, for that the Imperialists hold all for enemies who do
not countenance their ambitious Designs; and consequently would force the rest
(as they had already done part of his Towns) out of his hands; which if they
should effect, what were it but to run upon one Rock, by endeavoring to avoid
another He was soon persuaded of the necesity of this advice, which easily
induced him to admit French Garrisons into his Cities. During these things, the
Generals of the Army pressed him to conclude the Treaty, in order to his
promises, which he seemed but coldly to receive, having already been assured
from the Swedish King, that for his Majesty's sake nothing should be attempted
against him, whilst he was under his protection. They pressed him to be as
good as his word telling him, it was dishonorable for their Master to receive
him into his protection, and that others should hold his Towns from him;
whereupon he deposited the Castle of Hermesteine into their hands, a place
considerable, both for its Form and Situation, which is such, that it may
block up the River Rhine, at the foot whereof it is seated. Twelve Companies of
French marched into it, under the command of Saludie, who had long treated with
the said Elector, as well as the Sieur de Charnace: The like he would have done
with his chief City, had it been within his power, but the Chapter being gained
by the Imperialists, had forced him to quit it to the Comte d' Ysembourg, who
kept it with a Garrison of Spaniards sufficient for its defense: The next thing
he did, was to deliver Philipsbourg into their hands, but his Governor in
stead of obeying his commands, in receiving the Garrison, protested he would
not deliver the Places, unless unto those whom the Emperor did appoint.
Hereupon the Spaniards apprehended (the Elector being in this humor) that
Goblens might also be designed for his Majesty; to prevent which, they found
means to clap a Garrison into it. This place was more important then strong, is
situate upon the mouth of the Rhine and Mozelle, where they join their waters;
so that the Rhine only parted the French and Spaniard; which had been enough to
have kept them at peace, had not the Elector of Treves Interests given them
occasions of falling out. The King was engaged to project him, neither could
the waters of that large River quench the heat of their Fury, which egged them
on to skirmish as often as occasion required, which was the cause that they
continued not long so near together, without engagements on either party; and
their emulation had increased, had they continued their Neighborhood any
longer together.

The City of Treves besieged, and the Archbishop established by the Kings
Forces.
THe Cardinals advices and endeavors still tended to preserve a good
correspondency between the two Crowns, neither was he to seek for an effectual
means to continue it at this time, which he did, by the King of Swede's
interposition, who persuaded them to march forth from thence, and diverse other
places. The Design was concluded, and the Marshal Horn advanced thither from
Mayence, with eight thousand Horse, and six score Companies of Foot, all well
appointed. The Rhinegrave had a particular Commission for the re-taking of
Coblens, before which he came about mid- June, invested the place, and soon
forced the Garrison to surrender upon composition, which once delivered, he
restored unto the French, having first dealt with the inhabitants to discharge
the expenses of the siege, and his march thither. The taking of this place
struck such a fear and terror into the Spaniards, that they resolved to quit
diverse others, at least there needed but little persuasion to entreat their
removal; only they made some difficulty in relinquishing the City of Treves,
which they hoped to keep by the means of some new fortification they had there
raised and a sufficient Garrison to defend it. The Marshal d' Effiat was
commanded to besiege it, but whilst he was drawing his Army thither, Death,
which excuses neither Alexanders nor Caesar's, deprived him of his life at
Lutzelstein, but could not rob him of the glory of having served the King his
Master with an extraordinary Prudence, both in his Councels and Embassies, with
an approved integrity in the management of his Treasuries, and with an
illustrious courage in the command of his Armies. The King received the news
hereof with grief, and there being no time to be lost, in preventing the
Spaniards fortifying themselves, his Majesty soon dispatched the Marshal
d'Estree into his place, whose Prudence and Courage had been experimented in
several occasions, and had acquired him the quality of Marshal de France, ever
since the year 1624. He departed from Paris by Post toward the Army, where he
found the Vicomte de Arpajon, and the Comte de la Suze Marshals de Camp, who
had undertaken the command, of the Army, since the Marshal d' Effiats death,
already advanced near Treves, which they had summoned to deliver; the garrison
refused, being resolved to sustain the siege and defend the place. Hereupon the
Vicomte de Aspajon, made his approaches with the Army, and gave orders to
invest the place, which was performed with such expedition, that the
inhabitants found themselves unexpectedly surrounded the very next day. The
Comte de Yemsbourg had not confidence enough in the strength of the place to
suffer himself to be pent up in it, but quartered at Grafeumacher, neither had
he furnished it with above eight hundred men, which considering the French
power, he thought to augment by clapping three hundred horse and twelve hundred
foot into it, together with a good convoy of Ammunition. In order to which, he
made his approaches, but the Marshal d' Estree coming to the Army just as
intelligence was brought of this design, he took such course that they could
not effect it; for he no sooner received the news, but he commanded the Comte
de la Suze, and the Vicomte de Apajon to a place, by which they were of
necessity to pass; thither they went, and perceiving the enemy sent to
discover their Forces by Lieutenant Alexis, and twenty light horse, who
advancing further then was requisite, were quickly engaged by five squadrons of
horse, who forced them to give ground, but were not long unseconded by the
Sieur de Moulinet with five and twenty Gallants, by the Companies of Luzern and
Roche-Britant, and in fine by that of the Cardinal, led by the Marquis de Money
and Coeslin, so that the skirmish became very hot, and many Charges passed on
both sides, until at last they fell to it with their Swords only, so long,
that in conclusion, the Comte de Ysembourg's horse having long sustained the
French were repelled, and falling in upon their own foot disordered them, so
that the French had the pursuit of t hem, until the night concluded the
business, and favored the enemies retreit. The Imperialists left four score
Nobles, forty prisoners, their Convoy, and two Cornets behind them, which were
presented unto the King by the Sieur de Chezelles Bautru. After this dafeit the
Marshal d' Estree, looking more strictly into the siege, found some things in
disorder, which he quickly rectified, and brought all things into such method,
that the garrison was soon forced to surrender. The Chapter were sensible of
their Treason, and acknowledge their lawful Prince, and thus the Town was
taken by composition, of which the Chevalier de Seneterre was made Governor.
This piece of service thus happily effected, the conquest of those other places
in the Spanish hands, was not long in agitation; the Archbishop being restored
to the possession of his States and Revenues, by which he became sensible what
a happiness it was to enjoy the protection of France, which secured him from
all those dangers fallen upon the rest of his neighbors.

Politic Observation.
AMongst the most heroic actions of Kings, the defense of those who desire
their protection, is one which adds very much to their glory, and raises
their power to an eminent greatness. Nothing does more liken them unto the
Divinity, then the defense of the weak and feeble; and if in petty Princes it
be a mark of weakness to follow the fortune of the Conqueror; it cannot but
be a sign of great power in a King, not to deny those who sue for his
protection. The defending of them who request it, is an act well beseeroing the
Majesty of a King, who as he ought not to admit any Rival in his Crown, so
ought he not to deny the communicating of his power unto them who fly unto him
for refuge. This is it which makes a King Arbitrator of all his Neighbors
affairs, who gladly submit their differences unto the judgment of a Monarch,
who imployeth his power for the maintaining of Justice. No one can be ignorant
how this is it which renders them invincible, it being most certain, that who
so lends a hand to help his friends in their necessities, ingageth so many
serveral defendors, whenever his occsions shall require it. To be able to
subsist alone, without the help of others is very honoursble for a King, yet
his glory will be imperfect, if he do not employ his power to redress his
oppressed Neighbors in their necessities. Tyranny does build its greatness on
the usurpations of others rights, whereas Justice foundeth her glory on the
defending the oppressed. And if a King may at any time send his forces abroad
out of his own State, it ought to be either in preservation of his Allies,
under his protection, or in revenge of injuries offered unto him.

The Emperor endeavors at Rome to break the Kings Alliance with the Swede.
THe League between the Swede and France together with the Elector of Treves
inclination made such an Alarm in the house of Austria, now unable to divert
the storm hanging over them, that they resolved to have recourse unto Rome, and
there to represent the Churches grievances in such terms, that they might
receive the same advantages which the Spaniards heretofore did, upon the like
pretenses. The Cardinal Pasman was dispatched thither, in order thereunto,
where being come, he used is utmost endeavors to engage the Pope in their
affaris; his Holiness was pressed to make a Croisade for preservation of the
German Catholics, for the suppressing of Heresy, and establishing the Church
in its former splendour. There were diverse calumnies published abroad against
the Swedes, the disasters of the Church, and miseries of the Catholics were
aggravated unto excess, but not a word to be heard, how that the Interests of
the Church had not been in question, but by their unjust supporting the
ambitious designs of the Austrian family. He endeavored to persuade the Pope,
that the King of Sweden, like another Attila, had resolved to besiege Rome, and
force his Holiness from his Seat, but especially was he charged to declaim
against the Alliance between the Swede and France, and to solicit his Holiness
to send a Legate or extraordinary Nuncio, to break the knot as prejudicial to
the Catholic church. The Duke de Savelly, his Imperial Majesty's Ambassador,
and the Spanish Ambassador had order to second him: Cardinal Borgia newly tied
unto the Spanish party, by the gift of the Archbishopric of Sevill, did not
only underhand endeavor to procure the suffrages of particular Cardinals, but
in the open consistory did violently exclaim, in blaming the Pope for
abandoning the House of Austria, and in it, the Church it self, highly exalting
the King of Spain's zeal for Religion, and crying out against the cold
rewarding his good intentions.

Now diverse of the Consistory, being unacquainted with the affairs of Germany,
and how the misfortunes befallen on some Catholic Princes, was the only
effect of their own faults, were at first divided, and the Spanish Partisans
became so stout, that his Hosinesse had just cause to dislike their
proceedings. But his Holiness informing the Consistory with the true state of
affairs, made it appear unto the Cardinals, that the War of Germany was a War
of state, not Religion, and the matter was so managed that the house of Austria
had no great cause to rejoice. The Popes answer to their party was, that the
Emperor had drawn upon himself those evils which he now endured; that the men
and moneys wasted in the plundering of Italy, the Sacking of Mantua, and
threatening of the Holy Sea, would better have served to hinder the Swedes, and
put a stop to their conquests; that the Remoustrances of his Legates and
Nuntioes, had been deluded, Germany neglected, the Swedes slighted, Italy
invaded, and the Holy Sea forced to lay out it is Treasure, in the preservation
of it self, and St. Peter's Patrimony; that in fine, his Government might
possible be traduced, not blamed, that his endeavors already used, and which
he resolved to continue, were capable enough to justify his cares for the
Churches good, that he would willingly contribute the remainder of his power
which was but small, having consumed the Treasures of the Church in the War of
Italy; And lastly, that he would gladly employ any remedy which he should find
expedient to destroy Heresy and preserve the Church; and that he might unto
this Temporal add a Spiritual remedy, he proclaimed an universal Jubilee,
exhorting all men to assist the Church of Germany with their Prayers. The
Deputies of Germany were but little comforted herewith, but departed from Rome,
unsatisfied. They might easily have obtained, as heretofore, thundering
Excommunications against France, and have exposed the Kingdom to ruin, had
Gregory the Fourteenth been yet alive, but we do not now live in those times.
The Masque of Religion wherewith the House of Austria use to cover their
designs, is now taken off, and the Cardinal who knows of what concernment it
is for States to hold Rome in friendship was not backward, both for the good of
the Church and this Kingdom, to inform his Holiness of the design contrived by
the House of Austria, for the overrunning of Italy, and bringing the Holy Sea
into such subjection, that themselves might overaw the Censures, Decrees and
Excommunications of the Church; so the Pope convinced of the truth hereof, was
not possibly to be surprised, but blamed the German Princes for exposing their
States to such miseries, in behalf of the ambitious design of the House of
Austria; and on the contrary, commended his Majesty for his readiness and
willingness, to protect the Church and those very Princes, in case they would
recede from their wicked designs.

That Catholic Princes ought to hold good correspondence with Rome.
IT was not without great reason, what Antonio Peers once told the late Henry
the Great, viz. that the French being unmatchable for courage, would
undoubtedly conquer the whole earth, if to their natural valor, the favor of
Rome, the mastery of the Sea, and a fixed Council of able Statesmen were
adjoined: These three things make a Prince truly great: And the course of
affairs now leads me to discourse of one of them, viz of the necessity of
holding a fair correspondence with the Roman Sea, which I may well say is
necessary, partly for the avoiding of those evils which may happen by want
thereof and partly for the inducing the people by its approbation to admit of
the many and several undertakings in a State. The Empire of Souls, is both
great and tickleth, if it were only in relation of those Anathemas which may be
darted out against Princes. One of the most conspicuous church-lights, said,
and that with great judgment, that the Thunders of the Church are to be
feared, how unjust soever; and indeed so they are, because the execrations of
Christ Jesus Vicar, are of great efficacy before God, who holds the
Government of Kingdoms in his hands, and also because of the terrors they
strike into the people, who concluding a Prince reproved by God, as soon as by
the Holy Sea, do not only lose their respect, due to such rulers, but even run
into disobedience and insurrection. Did not those Thunders in the times of the
late League, kindle the flames, which did long consume this Kingdom, what was
it which brought Navar into the Spaniards hands, but the imbroils between Lewis
the Twelfth and Julius the Second? Now if a good intelligence with the Sea of
Rome, is security from such like misfortunes; it is no less an advantage to a
State, in regard of its approbation of a Sovereigns enterprises, This is it
which holds the people in quiet, which makes them think the yoke of
obedience to be easy, which preserves the love of their Prince in their
minds; and which renders contributions imposed by necessity, the more
supportable; and in general it may be said, that there is not any thing how bad
soever, which they will distaste, if approved by the Holy Sea, so great a
respect does Religion produce in the minds of men. King Numa had no better
invention to make his actions received by the people of Rome, then by telling
them, he did nothing but by the Counsel of the Nymph Egeria, who communicated
the Will of the Gods unto him. No one is ignorant of the repute which the
South-sayers had with the people of Rome, in persuading them to approve of
their Consuls and Emperors designs and undertakings. Could then any more
likely way be invented, both to justify their undertakings, and encourage
their Soldiers, then by telling them the Gods approved of them? Neither can it
be doubted, but the Pope's approbation is an effectual way to persuade people
to like their Princes designs to live in quiet, and to be well satisfied with
the Government under which they live. But how much then are the Popes obliged
to be favorable toward France, which has ever been their Refuge, their
Asylum, their Prop and Protection? Besides, their Interests are the same with
ours* seeing the French use not such underhand shuffling as the Spaniards, and
are far enough from such ambitious designs as the House of Austria, who are
still contriving to oppress the Liberties of the Church, to subjugate the holy
See, and to overawe its Decrees; whereas the French endeavor only to preserve
every one in his own Right, and to be contented with a good Pope, an honest and
stout man, who will not suffer himself to be surprised by their Enemies, but
show himself a common Father to all, without procuring any ditriment to one, by
the suggestion of another.

The Cardinal ends a difference between the Bishops and Friars.
NOt long after the Kings return from Lorrain, the Cardinal undertook to
compose a difference between the Bishops and Friars, which had made a great
noise for sundry ages together; The Friars relying upon their privileges
obtained from the holy See, pretended to have power both to Preach and Confess,
without permission from the Bishops; and the Bishops unto whom all people
within their Diocese are subject, by common right, did perpetually thwart that
pretension: They could not down with the Friars Privileges, alleging they
ought to be declared void, as being oppugnant to the primitive constitutions of
the Church, which ought to be preserved in the same model, for the continuation
thereof in its pristine splendor. This quarrel had been especially fomented
during the last year, by reason some Books had been published in the name of
the English Catholics, which preferred the Monastical life before that of the
Prelates, and seemed to imply that Friars were more necessary, at least more
useful to the Church then the ordinary Pastors. To say the Truth* these
Propositions were bold, and without offense to any one, may safely be termed
rash and inconsiderate. But that likelihood was there of composing these
differences? Was it probable that the whole Society of Friars would relinquish
the privileges they had obtained from the holy See? On the other side, What
reason was there that the Prelates should have so little authority over them in
Administration of Sacraments, and the Word of God, seeing in the Primitive
times Friars were only mixed amongst the Laity, and addressed themselves unto
the Bishops Congregations to receive the Sacraments from their hands* or those
who executed their charge? No one but the Cardinal could give an end to these
differences, there being not a man who durst so much as make a a Proposal
whereby each party might receive satisfaction: neither did he wave the trouble,
but willingly took it upon himself, though he was even at that time employed in
the most important affairs of Christendom; yet such was his indefatigable zeal
for God's glory, and the Churches good, that he undertook the business. He
cause the Superiors of the Orders to come before him, one by one, well knowing,
that to negotiate such a business in a Public Assembly, would be a labor in
vain, and equally difficult as the breaking of a cable, whose particular
threads are easily to be forced asunder. He was a person well versed in all
Antiquities, and accordingly he represented to them, how that in the first
Institution of Monks, they were consecrated unto God by the mediation of
Bishops, who received their Vows, instructed them, and directed their
Consciences: He laid before them the original of the whole Affair,, and showed
them, how that the Sons of God had subjected all those who sold their goods,
and followed him, unto the Apostles, whose Successors the Bishops are;
whereupon they making a strict profession of leading an Evangelical life, were
more particularly obliged to observe the order established in and by the
Gospel; not that he would question the validity of those exemptions granted
from the holy See, unto which he owed much more respect and obedience then to
debate the Ordinances thereof, yet that he must needs inform them, that they
could not be dispensed with from following the order established by Jesus
Christ, or his Apostles, in administering the Sacraments and Word of God; That
it was not always proper to use the utmost of a man's power and that the wisest
persons are usually the most moderate; that in fine, themselves could not deny
but they were obliged to relinquish some part of their pretensions, for the
avoiding of trouble to the Church, which was likely to ensue upon this account,
and whereof the Heretics discoursed with much freedom and joy; That this
Peace would be more acceptable to God, then all the advantages it could
otherwise procure unto particular persons; That it would tend unto their
Honors, by testifying unto the world the moderations of their minds, and
humility of their Spirits* the two worthy ornaments of a Religious person, and
that consequently the world would esteem the better of them; That he hoped it
would be the more acceptable before God, in regard they did exemplarily set
forth the merit of obedience and submission to their Prelates in ordinary, unto
whom God has with his own mouth committed the leading of men unto charitable
works; that he should not willingly propose, that the Bishops should have
ordinary jurisdiction over their persons, or power to visit their Monasteries,
but that leaving them full liberty to execute their Monastical functions, it
seemed fit unto him* that they should not refuse to be dependent upon them in
matter of administering the Sacraments, of Thanksgiving, Penitence, Preaching
the Word, and to admit them to have power to repeal this privilege which was
derived from them, according as the Council of Trent has prescribed, all whose
Decrees are true, and ought to be observed. These Reasons were or themselves
strong enough, but much more powerful, when animated by the charms of his
discourse, which has so great an influence, that it is impossible to deny him
any thing, if all they who have had the honor to know him, may be credited.
Accordingly each one addressed himself to observe his directions; and although
some unreasonable persons began at first to create some difficulties yet his
Prudence soon prevailed over them, insomuch that they could not be thought the
same men, who had so lately and so stiffly maintained their absolute
Independencies upon their Ordinaries. He caused a Declaration to be drawn,
wherein they acknowledged themselves incapable to preach without examination,
license, and approbation from their Bishops first had and obtained, and that
the said Bishops might at any time revoke the said Licenses; withal, that they
neither ought nor could bear the Confessions of Secular men, without
approbation, which the said Bishops might likewise repeal, in case of any
incapacity, or public scandal. Every one subscribed thereunto. The Bishops
dispatched Copies thereof into all parts; and thus his Eminency ended a
difference which had made such a noise so many Ages together, and in which
there was but little hopes.

Politic Observation.
THe credit and esteem which an eminent person obtains in a State, have ever
been reputed sufficient to appease any embroyls what ever. His Judgment will
work the minds of men to what form he pleases, and every one regarde^h him as
a person blessed from heaven, and endued with so extraordinary an
understanding, that no one dares deny him any thing: They give so absolute a
power over their very wills, that there is no appeal from his resolutions; they
permit him to command any thing without contradiction, to rule them without
resistance, and to determine all things without, exception. The esteem of a
Physician does oftentimes as many cures as his Physic; and this same
persuasion is so powerful that sometimes the very sight has been a Cure. And is
it not likewise most certain, that the credit which a great person acquireth in
the opinions of men is more powerful then any other means to reduce them unto
reason? Nay, Does not his very presence sometimes appease great seditions? The
Authority of a Phocion at Athem, and of a Cato at Rome, has often wrought
wonderful effects. Was not the only appearance of the Philosopher Apollonius
Thyaneus sufficient to appease great discords between diverse Cities of Asia?
When Julius Caesar was in Afric, his very presence alone assuaged the Roman
Legions, raging in a mutiny; nay he reduced them to such a pass, that having
cashiered them, it was not without much entreaty that he restored them to the
Army. The Consul Popilius Menas was able by his mere presence to appease an
Insurrection of the common people of Rome against the Senators. It is (to speak
the truth) very strange to behold (...) people mutined, raging and foming like
the billows of an outrageous Sea (which overthrows and destroys whatever
opposes it) slighting the force of Arms, entreaties, threatenings, and all
things else, yet on the sudden becalmed at the presence of some great person,
who by his worth and services has acquired an extraordinary reputation amongst
them. But to him who knows how powerful Credit and Repute are, it will not
seem incredible; for he cannot be ignorant that opinion will sooner procure a
good proposition to be admitted, or an ill advice rejected, then any other
means or devices whatever. A good opinion will make any impression on men's
minds, it will more their hearts, tongues, hands and lead their wills and
affections as it were in a string. Credit and Esteem do inscribe I know not
what attracts of Majesty on the faces of those who have once acquired them, so
that a man is forced as it were to subscribe unto their inclinations, and most
men think it a rashness to resist their Wills in any thing whatever.

Monsieur arriveth at Bruxels.
THe Duke of Lorrain was not a little happy in having obtained his Peace from
the King's Bounty, neither was the Cardinal a little extolled for having settled
Peace between the Churchmen of the Kingdom: But the sky cannot long continue
without clouds, neither can a Peace be so established, as that no troubles
should at any time arise, which now fell out accordingly: For Monsieur having
resolved to go unto Bruxels, began to prepare himself for his journey, that he
might make sure of those Forces which the Spaniards had promised unto the Sieur
de Puy-Lauzens toward the invading of France, and there to conclude with them
that course it were best to steer. Monsieur at his departure from Nancy, made a
small days journey unto Remiremont, where the Princess Marguerite then was,
that he might satisfy the passion which is incident upon new Marriages; From
thence he went unto Besancon, whence after a short repose he went toward
Bruxels by Luxembourg. Passing by Thionville, he left Coigneux and Monsigot
behind him, having taken his Seals from the former, and delivered his Pen unto
Guillemi^ in place of the second. I may not omit to observe that the discredit
of these two persons was but the effect of Puy-Laurens displeasure, conceived
against them for their boldess in informing Monsieur with reasons to divert him
from the marriage, whereunto he had always inclined him: for from that time he
put an hundred several tricks upon them; and such was his Love and Ambition,
that he could not endure the sight of any one in the House, who durst
contradict his Will and Pleasure. The Infanta hearing that Monsieur was drawing
near unto Bruxelles, gave order for his reception according to his Quality: At
his coming he was entertained not only with great honor by her Highness, but
from the Spaniards too, who finding him inclined to interest himself in their
designs, endeavored to give all imaginable content. Monsieur made his entrance
on the 28. of January, attended with two hundred Horse. The Marabel received
him in the King of Spain's name. The Marquis de Saint Croix, with all the
Officers and Nobility of Flanders, met him a league from Bruxels, with a Troop
of Gentlemen before them, armed from head to foot: All the Companies of the
City came to salute him; Briefly they did him all the same Honors as had been
showed to the Queen his Mother; He dismounted at the Infantas Palace before he
visited the Queen; She received him with those Civilities and Favors which are
inherent in her, and those so obligingly, that they were extraordinary great in
persons of her age. She came to meet him at the first Hall, where she intended
him his audience, and presently told him she was very sorry there should be any
quarrel between them at their first interview, because he had come to visit her
before the Queen his Mother: Whereunto Monsieur replied very handsomely, that he
should more easily give her satisfaction as to that Quarrel, then for the great
obligations which he owed unto her: After some other Civilities, she lead him
into a Hall, where were the Grandees of Spain, together with the Knights of the
Golden Fleece, who saluted him, being all bare, himself being likewise
uncovered some little time: After which Monsieur and her Highness seated
themselves in chairs provided for that purpose, the Infanta in that on the left
hand, and Monsieur on the right; where after half an hours entertainment,
Monsieur desired leave to kiss the Ladies, who were all placed as if it had
been at a Ball, This complement passed over, he went to visit the Queen his
Mother, who considering him as the person who should vindicate her quarrel,
force his Majesty to banish the Cardinal from the Court, and establish her in
her former power in France, received him with all the testimonies of joy and
gladness, though she forbore to discover all her thoughts, the better to hide
the intelligence and agreement between them. The Infanta defrayed all his
expenses until the 17. of May, when he departed from Bruxels, and took great
care that he might pass away his time with all sorts of diversions, both within
door, and abroad; which recreations were sometimes interrupted by the jealousies
and quarrels happening between those of her Court, and the Queen-Mothers.

The danger of Drawing Strangers into a Kingdom.
IT is very dangerous to call strangers into a State, in hopes to support a
revolt by their means. No doubt they will be ready to foment any discontent,
and to encourage any attempt* but it is wisdom to mistrust them. Is it not a
madness to hope for men and miracles from a Prince who has enough to do to
defend himself? If there be any Libertines incapable of civil society, any
disorderly irreligious persons, any Plunderers, such as take all they meet,
these are the men with whom they shall be furnished; Now were it not (I pray) a
folly to build hopes and designs upon men so qualified? To say the truth, such
men as they cannot affectionately engage themselves, so will they not readily
endanger themselves, but behave themselves most courageously in rifling and
robbing naked and poor people, until they come to fight, and then nothing is so
pitiful and backward. Now if it be weakness to trust in strange Soldiers, it
is more folly to confide in their Commanders, who if persons of no courage,
what reasonable expectations can be hoped from them? And if they be persons
well qualified, and fit to command, there is then more cause to fear then trust
them, for doubtless they will hardly forsake any Hold they once take in a
Country, but will do their utmost to surprise some place of Importance; which
if it be not suddenly to be effected, yet certainly they will design it, and
bring it to pass, when opportunity inviteth them. The Carthaginians (according
as Polybius relates) saw their affairs run from bad to worse, when their Army
became full of Strangers, Gauls, Spaniards, Greeks and Fugitives, and Tacitus
tells us the true cause, why Armies composed of Strangers subsist no longer
then Fortune smileth upon them, but disband upon the least blow or loss,
because they want affection. The Emperor of Constantinople having called ten
thousand Turks unto his assistance, soon perceived his own folly; because they
finding themselves the strongest party, would not return back again, but laid
the foundation of those miseries under which they now hold that Empire. But
that we go no further then France it self, which has more endangered it, then
the calling in of the English and Spaniards; and does not every one know, that
when Civil Wars have opened the Gates of a Kingdom unto Strangers, they soon
fortify themselves so strongly, that they are hardly to be removed, but after
long and sad Wars? It is great prudence in a Prince, not to engage in any
revolt, but if he be so ill advised, as to take up Arms against his Sovereign,
let him beware of calling in strangers to his assistance.

Monsieur resolves to join himself with Goncales de Cordoue.
MOnsieur perceiving the Spring to come on, and the time for leading Armies
into the Field draw near, resolved to leave Bruxelles, and join with Dom
Gonccales de Cordoue, who expected him at Treves. Before his departure, he took
leave of the Infanta at a public Audience, who, after he had been re-conducted
by all the great Lords of the Court unto his Lodgings, sent him a Present to
three Coffers, which bespoke her no less magnificence then nobleness of mind.
The first was of perfumed Leather imbroidred, the Lock, Key, and Arms of Gold,
enamelled, within were two suits very rich; the second was of crimson Velvet
embroidered, filled with very fine linen; and the third was full of all sorts
of sweet meats: She likewise presented him with a Suit of Arms and two handsome
Horses, fitter for show then use; neither was she unmindful of gratifying the
chief Gentlemen of his Retinue, some with Rings, some with Diamonds, and others
with Chains of Gold, having Meddals of the King of Spain hanging at the ends of
them. Monsieur being once departed from Bruxels, made his usual speed toward
Treves, whither Dom Goncales de Cordoue was advanced, with design to fall upon
the Palatinate (as he pretended) and there to establish his Masters affairs,
which the Swedes had much disordered; but in truth, to invade France with
Monsieur which was most probable. The King of Spain had dispatched him from
Court, about the beginning of January, with Commission to command the Army in
the Palatinate, and Order to go into France, as an extraordinary Ambassador to
endeavor some way of accommodation for the affairs of Germany; and from thence
to go unto the Arch Duchess, who should give him instructions for his further
procedure. Accordingly, he came to Paris, and thence went to Saint Germain en
Lare, about mid March* the King being then there. His Majesty treated him with
a great deal of splendor, and caused his Musketeers to exercise before him,
that he might see, how dextrous he was to imbattle an Army, and to lead them on
to fight with more judgment then the ablest Commander in his Kingdom. The next
thing he did, was to visit the Cardinal, by whom he was very civilly received;
but having never seen him before, he thought to surprise him, and in his
discourses upon the affairs of Germany, to make him swallow shadows for real
substances* But his Eminency let him perceive that the Emperors and his Masters
designs were but too well known, and that it was but a trick ^o persuade the
World that the War of Germany, was a War of Religion, and not of State; so that
in conclusion, he saw his devices were eluded, and that there is not any Fetch
able to circumvent the prudence o^ that grand Minister. Hereupon, he made no
long stay at Court, his design thither being for other ends then to receive
bare complements and civilities; yet in going off, he committed one Act
absolutely contrary to the custom of all Ambassadors* viz. his refusing of a
Sword beset with Diamonds, which with the Scabbard was worth ten thousand
Crowns, sent unto him from the King for a Present, showing by this Action, that
having left Spain, to trouble France, he would not receive any Present which
might oblige him to lessen his ill will* Not but that he was soon paid in his
own coin, and that by the Sieur de Guron, who was the presenter of the Sword,
for Dom Goncales his Secretary, coming to him, and offering him some Present
from his Master, was told, that he would not receive any thing from a Minister
of Spain, who had refused the Liberalities of his Master, and that it was hard
to surprise him at Paris, as at Cazal.

After he had continued some few days in this Court, he departed toward
Bruxels, and from thence having received Orders from the Infanta, went toward
Treves in expectation of Monsieur, who came to him about the end of May. Dom
Goncales received him with all imaginable honor, went to meet him with the
Spanish Nobility, entertained him and his retinue at Supper with a great deal
of splendor; and in fine, left his own lodgings unto him. Treves was the
Randezvouz for the forces of Dom Goncales, of the Comte de M^rode, of the Comte
de Embden, had he not been diverted. Monsieur was in consultation with them,
hoping he might carry most of their Forces into France; but they let him see
how the Spaniards have not yet lost their old custom of promising much, and
performing little, to such as expect relief from them. The King indeed had, by
the Cardinals persuasion, taken a good course to divert their designs, viz. by
giving them work enough in Germany and the Low Countries, so to keep them off
from invading their neighbors: For just at that nick of time it was, that the
Hollanders by his advice, went and besieged Maestry, with so potent an Army,
that the whole force of Spain and the Empire, could not possibly relieve it.
Dom Goncales found himself necessitated to draw thither, that one affair being
work enough to employ his utmost force; so that Monsieur was necessitated to be
satisfied with such few men as could be spared, and to dispatch the Sieur de
Fargis unto Spain, there to negotiate a greater assistance; in the interim, he
advanced toward Nancy, hoping to supply this defect, by the forces which he
expected from the Duke of Lorrain.

Politic Observation.
IT is great Prudence in a Minister of State, having once discovered that the
designs of a Foreign Prince, are to foment and support Revolts in his State,
to cause an enemy to encounter him, that being a most infallible way to break
his resolutions; for most certain it is, every one will sooner bestir himself
to quench the fire which burns his own house, then to kindle a fire in his
neighbors. Prevention, and Diversion, are too great advantages in War (says
Alphonsus de Arragon) thus did the Syracusians, procure the Lacedaemonians to
invade the Athenlans, whereby they might prevent their sending of succors to
Nice in Sicily: Thus Hannibal advised An^iochus to go and Forage the country
of Philip; to the end, that finding new work for his Forces, he might be
disabled from sending them to the Romans to fight against him; and thus Avitus
a Roman Captain, invaded the Country of Tentari, to hinder them from assisting
the Ansibarians with their Forces. To provide great Armies for the defense of a
State, and for the suppressing of an insurrection, is not all, no, there ought
to be prudence, and discretion in the management of affairs, and to make a
strong diversion, is as necessary as to fight well: Besides, Prudence is of so
much the more advantage, in regard by such diversions it weakneth those who
revolt, reduces them to exigencies, and inability of doing any thing
considerable; and in fine, makes them easy to be overcome, whereas without it,
it would be a hard matter to secure any thing from their violence.

The Indictment of the Marshal de Marillac.
IT was near about this time that the Marshal de Marillac was condemned, having
been imprisoned at Saint Menehoust, in the year, 1630. as has formerly been
declared. The Cardinal knew, that the punishing of great persons ought not to
be precipitated, left that which is indeed the effect of Justice, be thought
the hand of Revenge, whereupon he was of opinion to delay the prosecution of
his Indictment for some certain time, and only to follow the usual course
though the further way about, for the more ample information and instruction of
his Judges: Besides, he was not ignorant, that as the highest stars are slowest
in their motions; so Kings whom God has raised above the orninary pitch of
men, ought to be less active in the works of Justice, then other men. I insert
this criminal in the Catalogue of great men, not in regard of his birth or the
services he has done the State; but in consideration of the employment
wherewith his Majesty was pleased to honor him, which was more to avoid the
Queen-Mothers importunities, then for any reward of his deserts, which could
hardly have invited his Majesty to raise him unto so eminent a degree. Indeed
the whole Court was astouish'd to see the King advance him to that dignity,
openly saying, that the extortions he had used in his imploiments were his most
remarkable actions, they accused his courage, nor could they dissemble their
opinions, that such honors were not used to be conlerr'd on persons of his
temper. The late King, H^nry le Grand, did ever slight him, nor did he ever
appear at Court, but under the Queen-Mothers Regency, who had given him a Wife
of one of the Daughters of a branch of the House of Medicia, before the Crown
of Florence had been setlet on that family; and who besides the honor of his
name, had nothing which could entitle him to any great actions. Running at the
Ring war then much in fashion, where his diligence got him more credit then any
fight he had ever seen. The first command he had was under Monsieur de
Angoulesm, were he was Commissary of the Victuals, which he discharged so
untowardly, that the King had then punished him upon diverse complaints made
against him, but that the Cardinal interposed in his behalf. The building of
the Citadel of Verdun was the next thing entrusted to his care, but he
presently fell to make such exactions upon poor men's labors, that some
particulars thereof already proved, besides what is yet in dispute are
prodigious. The Garrison being once established, he robbed the Soldiers, as
much as the Builders; and being Lieutenant of the Country, he went on to that
height, that he exacted from the Villages, whatever was necessary to be spent
in his house, diverse Towns paid him yearly compositions, raised by compact,
that they might prevent the quartering of his Soldiers; others agreed to
provide necessaries for his house, which however, for the most part, were
delivered but once in kind, and then altered into sums of ready money. If any
Town made the least resistance or grumbling, the inhabitants were sure to be
ruined and plundered by his Soldiers, who knew they should not be called to
account for it, but rather that they should be countenanced for it, by him who
set them on work. This trade did he drive, and that so publicly over all the
extent of his power, as if the King himself had approved thereof; neither was
there want of any proof to make evident at his Trial. In the year 1627. he was
employed at Rochel, where the credit he got was so little to his advantage,
that the Commander de Valance, who calls every thing by its right name,
talking one day unto the King of a man without courage, openly said, that he
was no more a coward then Marillac. About that very time was it, that he
endeavored by his Letters, and the designs of those of his Cabal, to sow the
Seeds of discontent between the Queen Mother and the Cardinal, which have
proved so unhappy to the whole Kingdom; and he continued to foment that fire
with such care and address that the sparks of it are not yet quite
extinguished. During the Kings abode in Italy, the Cardinal to please the
Queen Mother, procured the command of the Army in Campaign, to be conferred
upon him, where he robbed the Soldiers of their very bread with such
boldness, that he sometimes exacted a third, frequently a quarter, but never
missed a fifth; and when he was commanded with his Forces into Italy, he
delayed the time with excuses, either that he might cross the Kings designs
(which they of his Cabal much desired) or because he would not divide that
command with another, on the other side the Mountains, which himself enjoyed
alone in Campaign; insomuch, that his Majesty's affairs had fallen into extreme
disorder, had it not been for the Prudent Conduct of the Cardinal and Generals
who commanded the Army in Italy. Succeeding Ages will hardly believe, that such
excesses were put up so long together, especially if they compare it with
preceding times, where the Marshal de Gie, descended from one of the best
houses of the Kingdom, and a person entrusted with great employments under
three several Kings, where the Admiral Chabot, one of the most valiant of those
times, and one who governed the State with Anne de Montmorency, where the
Marshal de Biez, the Chancellor Poiet, Jean de Montaign, Grand Maistre de
France, Peter des Essart^ and Semblance, were severally punished for the same,
and yet much less crime of purloining the Treasure. But these things were all
connived, at inconsideration of the Queen-Mothers, whom the Cardinal would not
provoke, and therefore kept those Passages from the Kings ears: But at last,
his seditious in^reag^es, together with his Brothers, and their Faction at
Court, for to destroy the Cardinal, and to exasperate the Queen Mother to that
height, which they did, as appeared in the Battle at Dupes, did so provoke the
King, both in regard of his base ingratitude toward the Cardinal, by whose
only means it was, that he enjoyed all his Honors and Benefits from his
Majesty, and also because they endeavored to compel his Majesty to destroy the
Cardinal, by whose prudent conduct the State had received such signal
advantages as are not to be equalized since the memory of man, that he was at
last forced to leave him in the hands of Justice, to receive the punishment of
the law, for the oppressions he had committed upon the people.

Politic Observation.
THe Oppression of the poor, is a crime which reaches high as heaven, and
cries for revenge unto God. The Poor have this advantage over the Rich, in
exchange of the goods of fortune that God owneth them for so many particular
Members of his Body, and will not suffer them who injure them to be unpunished,
in regard he takes it as acted against himself. He gives great men power
enough to defend themselves, which having denied unto the poor, himself
becomes their Protector; and he strictly requires all Kings, the lively
Images of his power to do justice unto them. Upon this just ground are the
Ordinances of France founded, which severely punish (like the Roman Laws) all
such Governors and Commanders, as oppress the poor to satisfy their own
covetousness, and our Kings have made the greatest persons of the Kingdom, the
Objects of their Justice, whever they have been convicted of Tyrannical
violence. What reason is there, that poor men who have enough to do to satisfy
the necessities of life, who undergo great inconveniences in quartering of
Soldiers, and in effect, bear the greatest but then of War, should be forced
to satiate the unbounded Avarice of a Governor or General? Were not that to
bury them alive, or to force them to despairs: Despairs the more dangerous,
because they are a soil in which great men usually sow the Seeds of their
discontents, to raise divisons, and beget civil dissentions? Is not the King
more injured therein then any other whatever? Is he not truly the head of his
Subjects, the heart of their lives, and fountain of their souls? Which being
so, is it possible to exhaust their blood and substance, without weakening and
destroying him? Besides, in case any sudden necessity befall, where shall he
look for assistance? And in case of an invasion, will they not be easily
engaged to a Revolt, upon hopes of more gentle usage?

The Marshal de Marillac's Death.
THe Marshal de Marillac's Indictment was finished with all due formality: he
was first conducted to St. Menehoust, thence to V^rdun, the Theater of his
Crimes, and where the proof of them would most easity appear; from thence he
was carried to the Castle of Ruel, where the King commanded judgment to be
given by the Lord Keeper and 22 Judges, elected by his Majesty for their
integrities and known abilities. His kindred solicited for him, as often, as
many, and with what liberty they pleased. They used their utmost endeavors to
engage the Judges to save his life, nay they threatened them, partly by
recommendations, partly by menaces, sent from persons abroad, the most potent
that could be interessed in his protection. The discussing of the Informations,
Interrogatories, and Pleas by him used to save his life, too up two months
times in the Court. All the Commissaries were perfectly instructed of every
proceeding, it being permitted them, to deliver the full and ample extract of
all his charge and defense, unto those who solicited in his behalf. He was so
favorably dealt withal, that one of the Commissaries, who had drawn up the
information, was not received as Judge, nor diverse others against whom he
excepted, at which the King was not a little offended. It was permitted that
one of the Judges who pleaded unto his fellow Brethren, nothing but reasons of
lenity, and all arguments which might induce them to acquit him, was admitted
to sit as Judge, though by the strictness of law he might have been excluded.
The King himself proceeded with so much Clemency, that there was not any one
appeared on his behalf, to solicit his condemnation; but on the contrary, his
Majesty called all the Judges before him, and that he might give them free
liberty to act, told them, he expected no other Justice from them, but such as
they would willingly show unto his meanest subject. To be short, before they
proceeded to judgment, he was twice demanded after the longest Interrogatories
that ever were heard (it having lasted three whole days) if he had any thing to
say for himself, unto which he answered, no. Here was as much favor and lenity
showed, as possibly could have been desired, toward a person designed to be
saved. But what likelihood was there to defend him, from the penalty of the
Ordinance in 46. ratified in Parliament, which declares, that whoever
purloineth the Treasure, shall be punished by confiscation of Body and Goods?
Upon what account could he be exempted from the penalty of the Ordinance de
Blois, which commands that all the Heads and Members of Companies, found to
have exacted moneys to avoid quartering in Houses or Villages, shall be
punished with death, without hopes of pardon, with this additional clause, that
though his Majesty should by his favor, or the importunity of others, be
induced to pardon it, yet the Lord Keeper is prohibited to Seal it, and the
Judges required not to regard it? Could the Judges possibly have eluded that
Law, which tieth up the Kings very Mercy? Moreover, what could they find in the
Prisones, or his Crimes, which could invite them to favor him, who had not
made himself considerable in any his imploiment, wherewith the King had
honored him, but by the extortions he had imposed on the people? Are not all
Magistrates bound to employ their utmost care, in defense of the poor, who have
no relief but Justice? Whereas his Robberies, accompanied with such, endless
impositions, made him worthy of death, and did they not likewise oblige his
Judges to be the more severe toward him? The State could not receive any loss
by his death, who had never done any remarkable service for his King or
Country; but who on the contrary, was the chief instrument to persuade Monsieur
to come into the Kingdom with his Sword in his hand. Could it with reason have
been expected that the Cardinal whose services are indeed considerable enough
to obtain his Majesty's pardon for any offender, should use his power with the
King to beg his pardon, who had consented and peradventure proposed to destroy
him, at least promised his assisting hand in so execrable an action? Can it be
denied, but that after such strong and weighty reasons, it had been injustice
to afford him any favor! Whereupon, twelve of his Judges, conforming their
opinions to the rigours of the Law, adjudged him worthy of death, declaring him
attained and convicted of purloining the Treasure, or public extortion,
exactions, falsities, counterfeits, cheats, over-charging and oppressing the
Kings Subjects. Two days after, viz. upon the 8th. of May, he was beheaded at
la Greve, wither he was carried from Ruel.

Politic Observation.
HAppy is that State where the Laws are strictly observed, was the saying of an
Ancient: and it ^ay truly be called Happy indeed, because the Laws inhibit any
thing repugnant to the Public good, cherish whatever is conducing to the
advantage thereof; for that the true happiness of a State consists in the
privation of those evils which may afflict it, and in the enjoyment of those
things which contribute to its advantage. When the Laws are despised, then are
the people oppressed, then the Usurpation of another's Right, Disobediences,
Revolts, Violences, and all the crimes which are the plague and ruin of a
State are in agitation; whereas as Justice on the other side, consisting only
in the due observation of Law, cutteth off these enormities, and secureth every
one in th'enjoyment of those goods which Fortune has bestowed upon him The
Emperor Justinian writ very fully and well unto the Praetor of Lacaoni^, as is
to be seen in his Institutions: A sentence indeed it is deserving to be set up
wherever Kings make their usual residence, whereby they may be out in mind of
the advantages which happen to a State by the due observation of the Law: All
things (says he) which pertain to the well government of a State, we ordered
by the Constitutions of Kings; whereupon who so would walk wisely, shall never
fail, if he propose them for the Rule of his Actions. A King is called the
living Law of his Country; implying the lise he infuseth into the Laws, and
that his commands do chiefly rend to enforce the observation of them. Whatever
severity he uses in this particular, is commendable, because it is a means to
secure his State from those disorders which are repugnant to the public good;
and though he should be severe, he cannot possibly be though violent, because
it is only in conformity to the Laws, unto which violence is absolutely
contrary. It were to be wished, that a Prince would be careful to reward the
services done either to his Person or State; but on the other side, he never
ought to let the Laws fall into dis-esteem, especially those which keep the
people in obedience, and which serve to secure them from oppression. Indeed to
what purpose do the Laws command and enjoin punishments to be inflicted on such
who infringe them, unless Justice puts them in execution? Were not this to
put Arrows into a Quiver from whence they can never be drawn. It were to make
the Magistrate an immovable Statue, a Chimera, which only serves to fright
people in Ballads, or to still little children, but vanish at a time of need,
without effecting that for which they were established in the world.

The Duke of Lorrain recommenceth the War.
THe Duke of Lorrain having only made his peace with the King at Vic, with a
resolution to recommence the War upon the first fair opportunity, did verily
believe he had now fallen upon a fit conjuncture of time, considering how
affairs then stood, and how Monsieus was inclined; whereupon he began to raise
men* and to fortify some of his Towns. The King was fully informed of his
Designs, by diverse intercepted letter, the undubitable witnesses of his
ill will, and which convinced his Majesty beyond all his fair words which be
sent unto the King, to keep him off from securing the Frontiers of the Kingdom.
Some there were written by his Father, others by the Princess of Falsbourg,
which did not only assure Monsieur of Forces in Lorrain, but withal, did
seriously invite him to stick close to his Interests, and to put himself into a
posture to gather the Crown of France, which they positively said would shortly
fall of it self into his hands. Othersome from the Sieur de Puy-Lourens unto
the Princess of Falsbourg, in which he assured her, that certain designs of
great importance then contrived, were infallible. Besides that the Cardinal's
penetrating sight (which pierces into the secrets of Princes Cabinets) had
discovered all those devices from the correspondence they held in the Kingdom;
his Majesty had just reason to transport his Forces into Lorrain, to to^^ out
that Duke, and to overrun his Countries; But the Cardinal, who never advises
the making of a War, unless when it is impossible longer to continue peace, was
opinion, That his Majesty should do well first to send the Sieur de Guro^ unto
him, to complain of his unjust proceedings, to endeavor to dissuade him, and
to make a more full discovery of his intentions, and the order he designed to
prosecute. This advice pleased his Majesty wondrous well, and the Sieur de
Guro^ was dispatched toward the Duke, who salute him from the King hi^ Master,
and the^ represented to him, that he could not sufficiently admire, that having
made a league with his Majesty but four or five months since, wherein he
positively engaged to break off all correspondence and intelligence between
himself and Monsieur the Kings Brother, as also the enemies of France, he
should so quickly (contrary to the Agreement) solicit Monsieur to come unto
Nancy, and invade the Kingdom of France, and not only so, but likewise
negociate both the Emperor and the King of Spain to assist him with Forces for
that end and purpose, knowing that his own would only serve to augment the
glory of France. This Discourse grounded upon undeniable Truths) touched the
Duke so to the quick, that he was at a nonplus neither could he allege any
thing in justification of himself, but by adding new impostures, which did the
more evidently declare his wicked intentions, and peradventure more to the
life, then a confession of his disloyalty. But that was not the only time they
discoursed together, nor were those the only reasons wherewith the Sieur de
Guron endeavored to divert him; no, he laid before him his Majesty's clemency,
particularly know unto him in the Treaty of Vic, where his Majesty found him at
a loss, in great distress, without hopes of relief from the House of Austria,
and in a condition unable to defend himself or his State; yet would not his
Majesty prosecute the advantages he then had: Then that he might somewhat
terrify him, he represented to him sundry reasons to persuade him to believe,
that the King would easily destroy any Forces which should invade the Kingdom;
which once effected, he for his part would be exposed to an ine^^^able mine;
for that his Majesty was then bound by all reasons what ever, to revenge the
injuries offered unto his Crown and State. That the might well believe his
Majesty having done his business both with the Spaniards in Italy, and the
English at R^, his few Forces would easily be scattered upon the first view of
his Majesty's ^^dry. These reasons were so just and weighty, that a wiser
Prince, and less p^ssio^ (...) against France, would easily have been persuaded
to relinquish the War; But such was his blindness, and so great his vain hopes,
that he could not be drawn to any thing: Not that he did then openly declare
himself, but putting off his answer from day to day, delayed the time so long,
until Monsieur came to enter into the Kingdom with his Sword in his hand, and
not so only, but continued to make warlike preparations; from whence it was
easy to be seen, that he was little inclined to peace and quietness. The next
thing hereupon which his Majesty did, was to command the Marshall d' Effiat to
advance with his Army into Lorrain, where be intended to be in his own person;
well knowing, that the presence of a Prince does not a little encourage the
Soldiery of France. His Majesty likewise ordained, that the new raised Forces
should march toward the Frontiers, and there expect, until he had dispatched
an Affair of great concernment, which then called him away; The securing of
Calais was a thing extremely necessary, the Governor of which place had been
gained by Monsieur's Cabal, and engaged to serve him and his Interests in any
thing: That Town is of no small consideration, it having formerly given the
English, when, and as often as they desired, an uncontrouled entrance into the
Kingdom; and with them Monsieur held but too strict an intelligence at this
very time. This was a disease not to be suffered to grow any older, yet the
cure of it had been almost desperate to any other but the King; for Calais as
it is far removed from Paris, so is it likewise more distant from Lorrain. But
his Majesty, whose vigilance does oftentimes give him great Victories, did
easily endure the troubles of the Journey. He knew from his cradle it was not
without great reason that an Emperor designing to represent upon the Reverse
of a Medail, the means which the Roman Republique had used in conquering the
Universe, contrived a Rome with wings upon its feet and hands; intimating, that
Vigilance had made her Mistress of the world: In order whereunto, he never
apprehended any embroyl elther within or without the Kingdom, which he did not
readily encounter in his own person, upon the least assurance that he might
take them unproprovided, who had contrived any thing against his State or
person, and thereby overcome them with less trouble, and more ease.

The King departed then from Saint Germain about the beginning of May, and not
long after came to Calais, where being arrived, he placed six Companies of the
Regiment of Navarre in the Citadel, commanded the Sieur de Va^ance to retire
himself to one of his Houses, left the Sieur de R^mbures to command it, until
his Majesty should otherwise dispose of it, and having stayed two days, he
departed toward Lorrain; that he might let the Duke know, his proceedings had
made him guilty both of Injustice and Rashness, which two things he was come to
chastise by the force of his Arms.

Politic Observation.
GOd having constituted Kings as the Images of his Power, does no less require
them to punish any injuries committed against their Majesty, then the crimes of
their Subjects. To what other end is it that they have the sword of Justice
entrusted with them, unless it be as an assured testimony of the power they
have to Right themselves for any injuries? He who has so little courage as to
pass them by, will soon become the object of his Neighbors scorn, every one
will trample on him, and God himself being offended at his little care in
preserving those stamps of his Majesty which he has imprinted on his Forehead,
will justly permit him to be despoyled of that honor which he had bestowed
upon him. God has unto private men given no other means to repel the injuries
offered unto them, then the Justice of their Sovereigns, whom he has commanded
to right them; but otherwise it is with Kings, unto them he has given power to
punish those who offend them, be they of what quality soever. There is not a
man above them who can arbitrate their differences, themselves are the only
Judges of their own Rights, and they may lawfully take up Arms both when and as
often as their Prudence and Justice shall think fit. The Primum Mobile has no
dependence on any other Orb in point of his motion; and Kings (those primary
causes of a State) have no superior authority over them, to direct them in
point of War. It is sufficient that they against whom they take up Arms, have
given them cause so to do. Hence it is that one of the eminent'st lights of the
Church calls that War just, which is undertaken to revenge injuries: And
Archidamus in Thucydides says, Every War is just, which is made to revenge any
groundless injury. Now amongst all the things which may provoke a Prince to
take up Arms, that of raising Forces to invade his Kingdom, of violating
Treaties, and recommencing old Quarrels, are most justifiable. The Rules of
Politic Justice do not only permit a War as lawful, against them who come and
besiege Towns, and commit disorders in another State; no, they are not bound to
sit still in expectation of that storm, but it suffices to have only known and
discovered their designs and malicious intentions: for otherwise it were a very
great imprudence, the ablest Commanders having ever concluded it better to
carry a war into his Country who designeth to invade, then to expect him in our
own; In fine, The Breach of Treaties and Promises has always been accounted
highly injurious unto Princes. Gentlemen have their throats cut for breach of
word, and Princes may not put it up, if it be of never so little concernment,
without making war upon it, With the Spaniards indeed it is proverbial, Wind
carries Words and Feathers. The wisest Politicians do tell us, That to promise
in a Treaty what is not intended to be performed, is to scorn a Prince, and
Homer says, He who promises one thing, and intends another, ought to be
reputed for an Enemy.

Mounsieur enters Lorrain in Arms.
THe King being at Laon, was informed by a Courier from the Marshall de la
Force, that Monsieur had passed by Malatour, a little Village between Verdun
and Mets, and that his Forces were joined with the Duke's; and by another near
the same time, that Monsieur no sooner arrived, but he began the war, having
cut off a Troop of Carabines, sent by the Marshall d' Effiat in peace, the
Duke being obliged to give his Ma Majesty's Troops free passage; and in fine,
that he was entered the Kingdom in Arms. Hereupon the King advanced in ^ast
toward the Army* which was numerous and strong the Marshall d' Effiat being
arrived from Germany, and commanded the Duke de Chaune, and Marshall d' Effiat
to draw together the Nobility which came to attend him upon the Frontiers. To
make short, he came to Saint Monehoust the 15. of June, ready to fall with his
Army upon the Duke of Lorrain, in case he offered to stir a foot, or send and
Forces with Monsieur into France, but he was better advised, as it fell out,
then so to do. The Marshall d' Effiat without more loss of time, presented his
Army before Pont-a Mousson, which so terrified the Inhabitants, that they
opened their Garet without resistance: The Duke of Lorrain was no less
astonished, and now beginning to foresee his ruin, desired a meeting with the
Marshall d' Effiat; where he accused Monsieur's arrival at Nancy, protesting
it was not by his procurement, and telling him he would give his Majesty any
satisfaction or assurance of his fidelity. The Marshall acquainted his Majesty
therewith, who thought it not best to pardon him a second time, without some
kind of revenge, especially seeing there was no trust to be given to his
promises, after so manifest a discovery of his malice and designs against
France; whereupon he drew up to Vaubecourt, to enter upon Lorrain. In the mean
time having Intelligence brought, that a Regiment of the Duke's Horse,
commanded by the Sieur de Lenoncourt, was not far from Rouuray, that he might
teach him to be another time more wary, he commanded the Comte d' Alets to draw
out six hundred Horse, his own Musquettiers, thirty of the Cardinals Guard, two
hundred Musquettiers of the Regiment des Gardes, all mounted upon small Naggs,
and to go charge them; which was effected accordingly, with such courage and
success, that two hundred and fifty were left dead on the place, many wounded
and taken, besides five Cornets, and store of Horses which afforded the Foot
opportunity to march more to their ease. The King's loss was not great, there
being only seven killed, and some few hurt, amongst whom the Duke d' Halvin,
Commander of the light Horse, and the Sieur de Bouchavennes received two Pistol
shots in their Arms. The Sieur de Calabre was at that time about two leagues
distant, raising a Troop of Dragoons for the Duke's service, but he was hindered
by thirty of the King's light horse, and as many of the Marshall at Schomberg,
who by his Majesty's order charged them so home, and so suddenly, that they had
not leisure to make any defense, but were all brought away Prisoners. The King
in the interim advanced into Lorrain, and took diverse places one after another.
Bar le Duc surrendered upon the first summons, Saint Mihel did the like, into
which place his Majesty entered in Triumph, accompanied by the Prisoners of
Rounray, and his whole Army, to the great astonishment of the Inhabitants, who
were not used to behold so great a Power. He ordained the Sieur De Nesmond to
take the place of Justice in the Seat of the Sovereign Counsel of Lorrain in
this City; and finding the Officers refusing to take the Oath of Allegiance, he
prohibited them to exercise their Offices, and appointed others in their stead;
hereby showing unto the Duke of Lorrain, that his ruin was inevitable, as
often as he durst attempt any thing against France, or recede from his devoir.
In earnest, I know not unto what that little Prince may be compared more fitly,
then unto the earth, which may well fill the Air with exhalations, and sometimes
over-cast the Sun with clouds, from which not long after proceed Thunders and
Hail, to destroy whatever she has of beauty, and to reduce her richest
Harvests unto nothing. For just thus, who-ever has beheld the designs of his
contrivance; the preparations he has made, and his attempts ever since his
first coming to the Dukedom, must conclude his whole work has been to raise
storms, which have in the end fallen upon his own head, to his great loss, and
then vanished like a cloud of Thunder.

Politic Observation.
NO War is just but that which is necessary, according to the opinion of the
wisest Politicians: So that a Prince never ought to undertake it, but upon just
considerations. War is know to be the source of all misfortunes, it fills a
State with impieties, violences; extortions, and cruelties, it destroys the
innocent, incommodateth the rich, and pulls away the bread out of the hands
of the poor, what reason therefore to commence it, unless upon good ground,
and when necessity does even enforce it? Now of all Princes which fail of their
designs in point of War none are more justly punished for their temerity, then
those who build designs disproportionable to their powers; such Princes are
easily reduced either to a necessity of seeing their Army cut in pieces, or of
making a Peace upon dishonorable conditions. Perhaps they fancy an
augmentation of credit power, and glory; but in conclusion, they are driven to
exigencies and confusions, which had never befallen them, bad they but
prudently remembered that the Creator of the Universe has set bounds to all
Empires; that he had before our births pre-ordained, what condition we should
here enjoy; that our lives and our fortunes are both limited, and that
notwithstanding all our care, all our endeavors, we cannot increase the one,
or protract the the other one tittle, unless Heaven concur to favor our
attempts: They find by experience, that the most active and busy drive on
their ends more slowly then other men; that those men whose minds are taken up
with continual broyls, do often fall into the snare they had contrived for
others; and that those Princes who think to be most wise and subtle in
deceiving others, are commonly themselves mistaken and deluded. To conclude,
they who are truly wise, do foresee at a distance what the issue of their
attempts may be, and do refer the management of affairs unto their Judgment,
without following the impetuousness of their emotions; they know, that who so
is master of his passions, is master of his Fortune; and they imitate Caesar's
Prudence, who never took the Field, until he had taken care for four things
which seem to be the true foundation of Victory.

The first whereof is, To be fully informed of an Enemies Force, of his
Advantages, and of his Wants, before he encounter with him.

The second is, To have an Army in readiness, if possible, before he hear of it.

The third is, To have all Provisions both of Ammunition and Victuals in a
readiness.

And the fourth is, To have all sorts of Instruments and Warlike Engines at
Command.

These were the things which gave Caesar the opportunity to prosecute his
Conquests with success, and to bring great exploits to perfection, in a very
small time. He who would imitate his Victories, ought to imitate the example of
his Prudence, otherwise his misfortune will be as great as were his Quondam
hopes of glory.

The Duke of Lorrain sends to assure the King of his Service.
IN vain do the Stars endeavor to twinkle in the Sun's presence, who ushered
in by the morning, darkens them at his only sight. In vain do the great Rivers
(which astonish the world by the impetuousness of their waters) endeavor to
contest with the Ocean, which forces them to pour all their store into his
Bosom, as a Tribute due to his greatness: And in vain does a petty Prince make
a muster of his Forces, in presence of those of a great King, before whom he is
only esteemed as a small star, which has neither light nor luster, when the
Sun comes in view. The Duke of Lorrain was forced to confess as much, though
against his Will, both in consideration of the defeat of his Forces, and loss
of his Towns: In fine, he was necessitated to send the Sieur de Courtrisson to
offer all sort of satisfaction unto his Majesty. The King amidst the greatest
Victories, was ever wont to prefer peace before war; yet because Infidelities
are a just cause of distrust, he could not believe that the Duke had any
cordial intention to conclude the war, his Word and Actions being disconsonant:
Whereupon be Proceeded on Wednesday June 23. to invest Nancy, and accordingly
he came with his Army two days after unto Liverdun, which is only two Leagues
distant from it, and sent another part of his Army within half a league from
it. The Duke well perceived that the King was resolved in good earnest to
chastise him for all his ill designs against France, and finding himself
pressed by the near approaches of the Army, sent the Sieur de Ville, chief
Gentleman of his Bedchamber, and Janin; Secretary of State, once more to offer
him all manner of content, giving them likewise full liberty to treat. They
testified unto his Majesty, that their Master was very much afflicted for
having inconsiderately suffered himself to be engaged with Monsieur, They
protested that in future he would continue immovable in his Devoir; That he
would pay him the Fealty and Homage due for the Duchy of Bar; That he would
inviolably adhere to the Interests of France, particularly offering to join his
Forces with his, to be employed in any expedition whatever; and withal, that he
would deposite part of his Towns in his Majesty's hands, as a gage of his
performance. The King received them very courteously, knowing it to be more
glorious to receive the submissions of his Enemies, confessing themselves
vanquished, then to destroy them, despoil them, and insult upon them; and then,
as if he would set no bounds to his clemency, he promised to pardon him a
second time, and that he would not be against any accommodation that reasonably
could be desired, provided there might be any assurance of his promises. But it
being requisite to find out some other kind of security for performance of his
engagement, then what had formerly been, whereby he might be deprived of the
means of running any more into his former designs, his Majesty remitted them to
the Cardinal to conclude the Articles of the Treaty.

Politic Observation.
ALthough all Princes have power and riches more then enough, wherewithal to be
contented, yet some there are, who pursuing their ambitious Inclinations;
sooner then the Laws of Prudence, do daily engage themselves in new Designs.
They seem to divert their eyes from what they possess, covetously to behold
what they have not; and to quit the true and solid goods of peace, that they
may obtain an uncertain vainglory in War. Their Design of growing great,
feeds them with discontents; and that they may not bound their pretensions,
their minds are perpetually floting in uncertainties: Oftentimes it falls
out, that they do but ill proportion their undertakings to their abilities, by
which means, when they imagine themselves to be highest, they fall lowest. God
(that he may punish them) seldom permits them to gather any other fruit from
their desires, but trouble and vexation; and that those who endeavor to rise
highest, should have the greatest falls. To conclude, a little child forsaken
by his Nurse before he be well able to go alone, will not so soon fall, as an
ambitious Prince in the midst of his whole Power; for the child finding himself
unsupported, begins to fear, to lay hold on any thing, and not to stir a foot:
But a Prince once bewitched with this Passion, being too too confident, does
inconsiderately run into every danger, attempteth things above his reach, and
in fine, shows by woeful experience in himself, that he who fears no man, is
soon to be destroyed. Better it were that they bounded their affections, and
that considering it is not the large extent of a Princes Dominion which gives
him contentment, but the moderation of his desires, they would arrest those
emotions and ebullitions which set them in action, and make them stoop to the
Empire of Reason.

The second Treaty of Peace with the Duke of Lorrain.
What good success might there not be expected from this Treaty, when the
Cardinal had the management of it? His courage and conduct had already extended
the bounds of France, raised several Trophies to the King's glory, and acquired
new Laurels to his Majesty; wherefore it was not to be doubted, but that he
would a second time let the Lorrainers know, that his Master does as well
inherit the courage as the Crowns of his Predecessors, who have ever forced
their Ancestors to stoop under their Arms, in despite of the House of Austria,
the Supporters of their hopes, not their State; and that there was no
conclusion to be made with him, without extraordinary pledges for performance
of their promises. To this end tended his very first discourse, that he might
presently cut off their hopes of surprising him, and destroy their designs of
getting clear for a few fair words, or protestations of fidelity. Two causes
there were which inclined the Deputies to receive the Law from him; First, An
unavoydable necessity either of accommodation, or of ruin to their Master's
affairs: And secondly, That in regard it was to be doubted* that in case these
effects did not oblige him, he would resolve, notwithstanding all the
misfortunes arrived upon him, to re-commence the War upon the first fair
opportunity of time or hopes, wherewith the House of Austria entertained him.
This latter was so improbable, that it could hardly sink into the Cardinal's
thoughts; yet because he somewhat suspected it, he made it his main design in
this Treaty to obtain such advantages for the King, that it should be
altogether impossible for the Duke of Lorrain to engage himself in a third War,
without his utter ruin. The meeting was at Liverdun, where after diverse
contests, it was at length concluded, That the Duke should deliver the Town and
Castle of Stenay within six days, and within three days after the Town and
Castle of Jamets, with the Arms, Ammunitions, and Victuals therein unto his
Majesty, for four years times, as gages of his fidelity, upon condition that
the said time being expired, the said places should be restored, in the same
condition they then were: That during the said term of time, it should be
lawful for the King to put into them what number of men he pleased; That the
Inhabitants take the Oath of Allegiance unto his Majesty, and swear, not to
attempt any thing contrary to his service. That the Duke should within three
days surrender into the King's hands, the City and Fortress of Clermont* which
his Majesty pretended to belong unto him, by Process of the Parliament of
Paris, who had adjudged his Majesty to have the possession thereof, paying to
the said Duke such a sum of money as should be agreed on by Commissioners from
both parties, in recompense of the Revenue he received from thence. That the
Duke should be obliged to render homage and fealty for Bar. within one year,
unto the King. And as touching all differences moved, or which hereafter should
be moved between them, that there should be Commissioners of either side
appointed to sit at Paris, whenever it should please his Majesty to think fit,
to make a fair end between them. It was likewise concluded, that the Duke
should religiously observe and keep the five first Articles of the Treaty of
Vic, which should be confirmed without any exception what ever: That be should
faithfully adhere unto his Majesty's Interests: That he should join his Forces
with his Majesty's, and assist him to his utmost in any War whatever: That his
Majesty's Forces should have free passage through his Country: In consideration
whereof, the Cardinal undertook in his Majesty's behalf, to surrender the City
and Castle of Bar unto the Duke, as also the City and Castle of Saint Mihel,
Pont-a-Mousson, and generally whatever his Majesty had taken from him, to
withdraw his Forces from Lorrain, and to protect the Person and Estates of the
said Duke against all persons without exception. The Cardinal persuaded his
Majesty to confirm these conditions, which could not be well misliked, they
being advantageous for the glory of France, and leaving his Majesty at full
liberty to go and chastise them, who abusing Monsieurs name, had set the
Kingdom in an uproar. And thus was the Treaty of Liverdun signed upon the 26.
day of June.

This Treaty being thus concluded, the King went to Pont-a-Mousson, where the
Cardinal de Lorrain came to meet him, and to give caution for performance of
his Brothers promises; in order whereunto, Stenay was put into the possession
of the Sieur de Lambertie, Jametts of the Sieur de Plessis, who entered with
their several Regiments into them; and the King surrendered what places he had
lately taken in Lorrain From thence the King went to Sech^pre, whither the Duke
came to wait upon him; testifying himself to be sorrowful for having given his
Majesty any cause of discontent, and beseeching him to forget what was passed.
The King received his Highness with all demonstrations of kindness, assuring
him he should no more remember what was passed, and hoping his good conduct for
the future would never give him occasion to think of it hereafter. The Duke was
not backward to make many protestations, though he little intended to perform
any part of them. In conclusion, his Majesty returned into France, and so to
Paris, choosing rather to follow the instigations of his goodness, then of
distrust, which he had however cause to return.

Politic Observation.
IT is ever more commendable in a Prince to exceed rather in credulity then
jealousy, especially if it be not to his disadvantage: whereas on the other
side, Distrust is praiseworthy in Treaties with a person not to be credited,
and where an easy Belief may breed inconveniences. It is equally bad* to
believe no man, and to believe every man; and as it is prudence not to trust a
man whom there is cause to suspect* so it is a sign of courage, not to fear
where there is no cause of distrust. It sometimes happens, that confidence
breaks the courage of an enemy, reduces him to his devoir, and forces him
to relinquish his Designs: For as distrust does extremely much dis-oblige the
truest friends, so confidence has such charms, that it is able to captivate
the most mortal enemies. Men's passions are not unconquerable; sometimes clemency
and bounty may effect more then force and violence. A soil, though bad of it
self, and apt to produce nothing but Thistles and Brambles. yet when cultivated
and manured with industry, may bring forth good grain: and spirits (though
naturally deceitful and false, yet) may be reformed by reason, and generous
dealing. The Venetians did heretofore show a notable example hereof, when
having taken a certain Prince of Mantua prisoner, who extremely much slighted
them, and had sworn their ruin, they not only restored him to Liberty, but
withal, made him General of the^r Armies; and he finding himself overcome by so
great a confidence, laid out the utmost of his care and courage to serve them.
And The Emperor Augustus by his confidence in Lucius Cinna, accused for having
designed to murder him, so absolutely wrought upon him, that he had not
afterward any person more faithful or affectionate to his service.

Monsieur goes into Burgogne.
WE have before declared how the King being just upon his March into Lorrain,
Monsieur passed by with his Forces; The sight of his Majesty's Forces hindered
him from making any great stay, as also from carrying the Duke of Lorrain's
Troops along with him, which he intended, and was a thing very necessary, in
order to his designs, because the business in Languedoc was not yet so forward
as was expected. From Lorrain he went into Bassigny, and quartered at Andelot
on the 13 of June, where they who abused his favor, and made use of his Name,
published the most seditious Libel that was ever yet heard; it was fraught with
infinite protestations of doing his Majesty service, their usual pretexts who
imbroyl the State: As if to trouble the whole Kingdom, to besiege Towns and
Cities, to oppress his Subjects, to seize on the money belonging to the
Exchequer, to engage the Nobility in a Revolt, were to do his Majesty service,
and all this expressly against his Majesty's command and inhibition. Were not
these Protestations a specious veyl, wherewith Monsieurs followers endeavored
to hide the impatiency of their spirits;, when they saw those predictions which
foretold the King's death above two years before come to nothing upon which
they built all the hopes of their advancements? That indeed was the true cause
which induced them to spread those libellous calumnies against the Cardinal,
with such absurd exaggerations, that they made them incredible; so true it is,
that slanders of excess, and contrary to any probable appearance, make but
small impressions upon them who are masters but of never so little reason.
Indeed who could well believe him to be a disturber of the Public peace, an
enemy to the King and Royal Family, as they published in their Manifest, who in
fifteen days time procured by his prudent conduct, so many glories for France
and his Majesty in Lorrain? What probability was there to persuade the world
that he would make himself Master of the State, as they endeavored to convince
unto Monsieur, who had used such great industry to cause his return into
France, when he first left the Kingdom, and who never stirred toward Piedmont,
until his return was certainly concluded? And in the end, he forced them to
dis-own that imputation, by his persuading the King to show him so much
clemency, and such extraordinary magnificence, to oblige him to a second
return. What reason could they then have to take up Arms upon his account? They
had not any the least just ground for it, which is evident to all the world;
neither were all their slanders able to sully his glory in any particular
whatever: But rather on the contrary, as Musk and Civet acquire a pleasant and
delightful smell amidst the dunghill and Ordure, by the same Anti-peristasis
that fire is hottest in the coldest of Winter; so all their slanders proclaimed
against him, served only to increase the sweet odor of his Reputation, which
his Services and Qualities (more then humane) had acquired unto him: That I may
say something touching his own particular resentment, it is most certain, his
soul was more affected with compassion for France* then concerned for his own
Interests, amidst all those Thunders, which did not much trouble him. All the
vain attempts of those storms did but redouble his courage; all those Thunders
did break themselves against the Rocks of his constancy, which seemed to have
grown harder from those many blows struck against him in the course of one
year: In fine, all those waves and huge Billows which threatened to overwhelm
him, served only to manifest, that his services had made his favor
inexpugnable.

Politic Observation.
IT cannot but be an unjust reward, to repay the services of a grand Minister
with calumnies. If good offices do by all kinds of Justice oblige a grateful
return, what reason can there then be, injuriously to attaint his honor, who
imployeth his whole time in his Countries good? It is faith an Ancient, a great
man's misery, when he sees himself appayed with slanders; yet notwithstanding,
the most famous men of Antiquity, and those very persons from whom our Kings
have received most signal services, have found themselves ingratefully
rewarded. Let us a little look back into the beginning of this Monarchy, and
take a view of those who have served our Kings, hardly shall we find any one
whose conduct has not been blamed, accused condemned. We have hereof laid down
the reasons in other places; at present I shall insert this only, That the
Favor of their Master the Benefits they receive from Him, and the Glory which
they obtain by their services, are a sufficient cause to procure them hatred;
so great an Empire has Envy in the Courts of Princes. Not that this misfortune
is only appropriate to this Monarchy; No, it is of longer standing, and more
universal: For did not the Athenians banish Themistocles, the greatest man of
his time, and one who had done them unspeakable service? Was not Coriolanus
hated, accused, banished by the Romans, whom nothing but mere necessity could
reduce to a sense of their fault? And how often did the Israelites rebel
against Moses, who had how-ever done so many miracles before their eyes? A
thousand other examples might be produced, were the universality hereof a thing
questionable. Surely a deplorable thing it is, either in respect of its
injustice, it being unreasonable, that a person who has done the State good
service, should be therefore ill requited: or else in respect of the ill
consequences, it being frequently seen that it begets troubles, to which only
end such defamations are spread abroad. Marlius Capitolinus had no other way to
raise a Sedition in R^me against Camillus, after he had secured the City from
the French, who had surprised it, then by raising of scandals upon him, and
endeavoring to persuade the people that he had embezelled the Public
Treasure. But what? may it not I pray, in general be said, That aspersions have
been the seeds of all the Revolts which ever happened in France, and that the
Authors of them have seldom gotten any thing thereby, except shame, hatred, and
confusion.

Monsieur the Duke of Orleance's Entry into Burgogne.
IT is said that Dogs do never bark so much against the Moon, as when she is at
her full, and shines brightest; and true it is, that those factious spirits
which abused Monsieurs name and favor, did never spread abroad more aspersions
against the Cardinal, then just when he acquired most glory by his services
against the Spaniard, the English, the Dukes of Savoy and Lorrain. Every one
knows how that their Libels were published at that very time. But as the fair
star which rules the night, cease not to prosecute her course,
notwithstanding all the snarlings and barkings here beneath; so likewise this
grand Minister, whose merits had raised him to the Government of affairs, and
whom God seemed to have bestowed upon France, as a bright star to dissipate all
those clouds, wherewith the hatred and envy of the French, endeavored to
eclipse him, did no^ discontinue his Career, nor suffer the effects of his
courage to be diverted, out of a sense of fear, either of the one or the other.
All their attempts served only to reinforce his diligence, that he might stifle
the fire in its first eruption, which was designed to burn the whole Kingdom.
Monsieur was marched into France, with about two thousand Horse, Liegeois,
Walloons, and Germans, commanded by the Sieur Meternie Canon of Treves, and des
Granges of Liege; at first he fell into Bourgogne, because Monsieur de
Montmorency's Letters, acquainted him, how the affairs of Languedoc were not
yet ripe for his service, which made him resolve to spend some time there.
Being advanced within four or five Leagues of Dijon, he writ unto the Mayor and
Sheriffs, as also unto the Parliament, to induce them to favor his stay, and
to furnish him with means for his Armies subsistence, thinking with himself,
that in case they should condescend thereunto, he might quickly find some way
or other to get himself into the City, and become Master thereof. But as it
fell out, they were not inclined to give him that content; rather, on the
contrary, having received his Letters, with great respect, they sent them all
unto the King, and beseeched his Highness that he would approve of their
proceedings herein, to the intent that receiving his Majesty's directions, they
might follow his instructions in that particular. In the mean time, they raised
the whole City, and mounted their Canon, in case need should require. Whereupon
a Body of Monsieurs Horse, coming up to fire the Fauxbourg Saint Nicholas; the
great shot gave them so hot a welcome, that they were forced to retire with the
loss of about twenty men, whom they lest upon the place, amongst whom was a
certain Captain, a Liegeois, much esteemed by Monsieur, who departed the next
morning. Monsieurs Forces were so netled at this disaster, that they resolved
to be revenged. In conclusion, they committed such disorders, that most part of
the adjacent Villages were burned, being first of all plundered. But it was not
the backwardness of Dijon which forced him to leave that Country, the Marshal
de la Force, who followed him at hand, was the chief cause of his removal from
those parts: For as soon as ever the King understood of Mousieur's march into
France, knowing no time ought to be lost, in preventing a Revolt, and that
delays may afford such persons opportunity to raise Forces, and seize upon
strong places; he commanded the Marshal de la Force, to take with him about ten
thousand foot and two thousand horse of the Lorrain forces, and to attend upon
his motions, to prevent any further inconveniency, so that the Treaty of
Liverdun being once concluded, Monsieur had but little time of rest in that
Country. His Majesty likewise thought fit to send the Marshal de Schomberg upon
the same design, with fifteen hundred Maistros, Gensdarmes, and Light Horse, as
also nine hundred Musketeers mounted, which himself chose out of the Regiment
of his Guard; so that hating these two in his Rear, he was forced to march with
the more speed. His Troops being all composed of strangers, committed great
insolences, wherever they went, which thing, besides the obedience they owed
unto his Majesty, obliged every little Town to stand upon their guard. Some of
his Forces, attempted to seize upon about thirty or forty Mules, near Corcone;
but the Inhabitants falling upon them, beat them back, and saved their Mules,
but with the loss of twelve men left dead in the place, which so incensed his
Highness* that he resolved to besiege the Town, and make them pay dearly for
it: But the Bishop de Mande, whose Loyalty and Courage was well known, hearing
thereof, raised a hundred Gentlemen* and four hundred foot, and with them got
into the Town, and resolved to defend it: Whereupon, Monsieur who had no
leisure to stay in any place, marched off, traversing the whole Kingdom,
without any considerable thing done, until he came to Languedoc, such good
order had the Cardinal taken under his Majesty's Authority.

Politic Observation.
IT is great Prudence, not to neglect or slight the smallest Revolts, but to
cut them off in the first growth. Some are so fatally blind, as to persuade
themselves, that having great Forces a small Army can hardly get any advantage
upon them. But the wisest men have learnt from Reason and Experience, that mean
beginnings, have sometimes had dangerous ends, and that insurrections, are like
Rivers, which the further they run, the more they increase their Channels, and
enlarge their Banks. They are not ignorant of the instability of humane
affairs, and that of all others the chances of War are most uncertain. They
know, that to disregard an enemy, gives him a great advantage, for that he is
thereby permitted to raise Forces, and to fortify himself; so that in
conclusion, it will be as hard a task to subdue him, as at first it would have
been easy to have prevented him from making the least progress in his design.
One of the Pharaohs of Egypt was so inconsiderate, as to slight the Caldeans,
being thereunto persuaded by some eminent men of Tunis, who told him, that for
a Prince of his birth, descended from a stem of ancient Kings, Lord of a large
Country, and esteemed by every one, as the Arbitrator of War and Peace; to fear
so inconsiderable an enemy, would be injurious and dishonorable to him; but he
was not long unpayed, for the Caldeans invaded his Country, assaulted his
Cities, and ruined his Kingdom, they meeting with no opposition at all. The
small esteem which those of Ninive made of their Besiegers, and the great
confidence they put in their own Walls and Power, were the causes of their
being taken in the midst of their mirth. There need no more but one small
sparkle to kindle a great Fire, and but a small Revolt to overrun a whole
Kingdom, if there be not some preventive Force used. Do we not see how the
greatest Storms, begin with a little Gale of Wind; and that the greatest
darknesses are Ushered in by small Clouds; so do we likewise often see, the
greatest Wars to grow from little beginnings. A State is seldom without, I
think, I may safely say never, some discontented persons, who would be very
glad to join their forces, with those of any Revolted Prince, if they could
have but a small opportunity: And some, indeed, too too many Rans^ckers, who
would be extraordinary glad, to be under any protection, where they might be
permitted to forage, Pillage, and Plunder. The surest remedy in such cases,
is, to prevent them betimes, and to wait upon the first appearers in the field,
with such power and force, that they may not have time to know where they are,
and that others may not dare to stir a foot to join with them.

Monsieur de Montmorency's Discontents.
THe Duke of Montmorency, was the man who had engaged Monsieur to come into
Languedoc, giving him to hope for great assistance in those parts, and that
himself had credit and power enough to arm all that Province in his behalf. He
had been much discontented from the year, 1629. when the Esleus were
established of such concern, was the Creation of those new Officers unto him;
for they were then empowered to impose the Contributions upon the people which
formerly belonged unto the States, and especially the Governor. Who sometimes
would exact a hundred thousand Livres for his own share, which loss he could
ill brook, by reason he was used to make great expenses: It is true indeed, the
Sieur de Emery, Intendent of the Treasuries, being sent into Languedoc to
execute the Edict, about the year 1631, found a means to content him, which was
to levy the said Contributions, by certain Commissioners, from whom the King
should receive as great advantage as from the Esleus, and yet who should act
nothing but by direction from the States, and thus had the Governor of the
Province still liberty to make his usual profits: But the Marshal d'Effiat
Super-intendent of the Treasuries, could not approve hereof, either by reason
of the disgusts which happened between them whilst they commanded the Army
together in Piedmont; or else because it was not just that the Governors of
Provinces, should raise such sums upon the people, already too much oppressed,
and that without any benefit to the King: So that Monsieur de Montmorency's
Discontent, rendered Monsieur de Emery's Proposal of accommodation of no use.
Besides, he was resolved to prosecute the Office of Marshal General of his
Majesty's Camps and Armies, which would have conferred upon him, almost all the
Functions of Constable, which he could not obtain, upon just considerations, he
having ever showed more of Courage then Prudence in his Conduct. The Refusal
hereof was the more sensibly resented by him, in regard his birth and the
honor his Ancestors had in being Constables, persuaded him that he deserved
it. These were the chief causes of his discontents, which engaged him to
revolt; whereunto may be added, his Wifes persuasions, who being an Italian
born, for which and her particular merits rice Queen Mother much honored her,
she so dealt with him, that he embraced her interests; and consequently,
Monsieur who was then strictly leagued with the Queen Mother, for to ruin the
Cardinal. For most certain it is, she did very much contribute to engage him in
those designs, unto which, he was of himself sufficiently inclined, having
naturally more fire then earth in his temper: Besides, he verily believed, that
the great acquaintances which his forefathers Governors of that Province, for
a long tract of tis^e, had left unto him, together with what himself had
acquired, would enable him to dispose the Cities, the Nobility, the States and
people, as himself pleased, whereby he might rail the whole Province as one
man, and being then countenanced by Monsieur, that he might force the Cardinal,
and suppress the Edict of Esleus, and to obtain for him what honors he should
desire. In order to this design, he used his utmost endeavors with the Bishops
and Nobility of Languedoc, to oblige them to him, well knowing, that the people
are like the small stars in the Firmament, which having no particular motions
of themselves, are guided by the higher Orbs. This his design succeeded
according to his own wish, yet not without much detriment to his glory; it
being most certain, that the readiness he met in many to embrace his
Proposals, was another tie to engage him in that Revolt. His Majesty and the
Cardinal had particular notice of all these Passages, it being impossible that
such contrivances should long be kept secret. The Laws of Justice obliged his
Majesty not to delay the punishment due to the Authors of them; but the
Cardinal, considering that Sovereigns ought not to be severe in such affairs,
until a trial of fair means persuade his Majesty to endeavor by the mediation
of some ingenious person, to set him right again in his former duty, and not
only for that reason, but because he thought it an act becoming a generous
Prince, to preserve a man of his quality from a shipwreck, which had not fallen
upon him, but in regard of an inconsiderate heat and fury. He gave the
Archbishop of Arles, and the Sieur d'Emery instructions and orders to go to
him, to tell him from his Majesty what causes he had given of suspicion, that
he should have a care of himself, that if he regarded his duty, he would find
it not to be lawful for a private person to order and govern the State as he
should think fit, such power being only Regal: That if the good of the Province
were in question, War and Rebellion were but two ill remedies to redress the
grievances and disorders thereof. That if he designed to raise his Fortunes,
Revolt was but an ill Foundation, and would be his infallible ruin, seeing his
Majesty had hitherto oretopt all his neighbors, and would doubtless do the like
by him, whenever he should begin to stir. That in conclusion his Birth did lay
an obligation upon him of being loyal, seeing his Ancestors had inviolably
adhered unto their Kings Interests; And that he could not but injure himself,
if he should eclipse the glory they had left him, by actions contrary to
theirs. These Reasons were too weighty and just not to remove him from his
designs, had he never so little considered of them; but discontent and passion
had taken such deep root in his soul, that he had not the power to reflect on
them; rather he stoutly disowned that he had any project in hand against the
service and obedience which he owed unto his Majesty; yet at the same time he
persisted to make sure of all such as might be useful to him in his design. Oh
what blindness and strange resistance was this! But who will not then bless
himself at the Cardinal's goodness, which cannot without great reluctance,
persuade his Majesty to any rigorous proceedings, how just soever; who would
not accept of this resistance, but induced his Majesty to give new Orders and
Instructions in that particular, unto the Sieur de Sondeuil, thinking perchance
that he would sooner hear him then any other, because he had ever admitted him
into the first place of his confidence? The King caused him fortwith to set
forwards, as soon as he had received the Cardinal's directions what to say unto
Monsieur de Montmorency, to dissuade him from his designs, and to keep him off
from that Revolt, in which if he engaged, be would even force his Majesty to
destroy him. When he arrived to him, he used all his Rhetorique, his utmost
care, affection, and address, though to no purpose; his Resolution being fixed,
and himself then engaged to and with diverse other persons.

Politic Observation.
IT is dangerous to be wilfully obstinate in any Design, and to be deaf to
their counsels, who by their wisdom may force the ill consequences and
successes thereof. Those great men, who suffer themselves so 'to abound in
their own sense, are commonly the causers of great evils; they beget disorders,
and having fallen into any adversity, do ruin not only themselves, but their
friends and partakers. Though Alexander wanted neither courage nor success, yet
was he blameworthy, for so obstinately refusing the advices of the sage
Egyptians, who counseled him not to go into Babylon, for that they found by
their Art he would there die: For despising their opinions, he went thither,
and was there poisoned by Thessalus his Physician. Sometimes it is prudence to
change resolutions, especially such as are unjust or rebellious. It is only
proper to Mountains not to run backward, but it is a wise man's duty to break
the course of his conduct, if evil, and to steer a contrary way, which may be
more propitious; to change from bad actions to good and better, though never so
often, cannot be accounted Inconstancy, neither will any wise man be so wedded
to an ill design, as to persist in it. A prudent man receives counsel with
joy, and makes use thereof as occasion requires, knowing it is not lightness
to forsake an error once found so to be: He had much rather confess his
indiscretion, then persist in it; and he knows that sometimes to be
vanquished, is to be victorious. In fine, Stubborness is then especially
inexcusable, when it ingageth a man to fall off from that obedience which is
due to his Sovereign. No one whatever may take up Arms against Prince, upon
what pretense soever. God has placed the Sword in the hands of Kings, nor may
any of their subjects draw it, unless by their Princes authority. Grandees are
so much the more to be blamed for raising of troubles, by how much it is
honorable for them to be makers of peace. They who raise seditions, and think
to hide themselves under a pretense of the public good, do but deceive
themselves; for there is not any man so simple who will believe insurrections
to have been really made upon that account; and every one knows, that the first
contrivers were set on work either by ambition or interests. But admit the
State were in disorder, it is then no more tolerable for the Grandees of the
Kingdom to give the Law unto their Sovereign, then for the members of man's body
to rule and direct the Head and Heart, those chiefer parts. Marcellus who
heretofore lived in Heathenish darkness, said, Good Princes are to be begged
from the Gods with vows and prayers; but be they what they will, they ought to
be loved, honored, feared. This was the opinion of an Heathen. But if any
Nation have less excuses for rebellion then others, it is doubtless the
Christian, whom God has both in the Old and New Testament sundry times
commanded to be obedient unto Kings, to be respectful unto Superior Powers, nay
patiently to suffer their very disorders and Tyrannies.

The Duke de Montmorency re-doubleth his Intreagues upon Monsieur's arrival in
Languedoc.
MOnsieur being once entered into Languedoc, the Duke of Montmorency having
pre-assured him that the Nobility would generally rise, and diverse strong
places open their gates unto him, upon his first appearance in the field, he
began to reinforce his endeavors to effect both one and the other; until then
he fed the King with fair words, having sent seven Couriers to the Court one
after another, and all to assure his Majesty of his Fidelity: But it was no
more time to dissemble; whereupon he summoned all his Friends engaged with him,
to reduce their promises into action, which was followed by several open
meetings, contrary to his Majesty's Laws and Service. Monsieur by several
Placards published in his own Name, and declared himself to be his Majesty's
Lieutenant General, against the present Government. The Cities of Alby,
Bagnols, Beziers, and Lunel, the Castles of Beaucaire and Al^ts, with diverse
other places of less consequence, revolted. There were seen four or five
thousand Neapolitans in the Road near Narbone, sent by the Spaniard: There were
many false Publications made, inveighing against the disorders of the State,
only pretended so to be, whereby to raise the people. There was a practice had
with many of the Prelates, Barons, and Deputies of the States, who were engaged
so far, that by a Result of the States, they concluded to offer unto Monsieur
that Province, with all its Dependencies, to assist him to re-establish the
State in better order, and to afford him means to destroy such as opposed, of
whom they made the Cardinal to be Head; and promised the Duke of Montmorency to
league themselves with him, and never to forsake or fall off from his
Interests; and particularly commanded, that nothing should be registered of that
which had been promised unto the Sieur d' Emery, concerning the Edict for
Fsleus, but that all such Acts should be void and burned. Moreover the Duke of
Montmorency sent several Commissions unto diverse Gentlemen, and others, in his
own name, to proceed to divide the Kings money in the Diocesses: At the same
time he writ letters unto the Commonalty, to invite them to approve of the said
Commissions, and unanimously to embrace the States resolutions. He endeavored
to withdraw the Marquis de Fossez Governor of Montpellier, from his Majesty's
service, proffering to make him Marshall of France immediately, and diverse
other rewards in future as was evidenced unto his Majesty by his own letters.
He caused the Archbishop of Narbone, President of the States, and the Sieur
d'Emery to be arrested, because they had ever opposed his Designs; He not only
raised all the Soldiers he could both in that and the adjacent Provinces, but
also he sent one of his Domestique servants into Spain, with the Sieur de
Farg^, to negotiate there for a supply of men and moneys: To conclude, he left
no stone unturned which he conceived might any way contribute to advance his
Designs: and had Monsieur stayed but one three weeks longer before he came
thither, questionless his attempts and successes would have been more
prejudicial to the State, as was conceived by all men who had any judgment in
affairs of that nature. The Parliament of Tholose (which has ever been
notoriously true and faithful unto the King upon all occasions) taking notice
of these his undue proceedings, issued out several Inhibitions, to hinder his
further progressions; First they ordained that the Substitutes of the Attorney
General in all Marshalsies and Courts of Judicature, should make diligent
enquiries to discover his Designs and Actions: They condemned the Result of the
States, as rebellious: They prohibited any moneys to be levied, paid, or
collected in the Duke of Montmorency's name: They made a Decree against all the
Officers of the States, who had any way procured the said Result, enjoying them
to be taken and imprisoned, that they might be brought to trial and condign
punishment; and particularly, the Bishop of Alby having delivered the said
place unto Monsieur, they seized upon all his Goods and Revenues, inhibiting
his Tenants or Debitors to disseize them, under penalty of being accountable
for it in their own names and persons: By which their generous example, they
left a pattern to all other Parliaments, that they ought not to regard any man
whatever, when his Majesty's service and the public Peace is in question.

Politic Observation.
Seeing Parliaments have only received the power of Justice from Kings, that
they might preserve the obedience due unto them, and the people in their Dues
and Rights, it cannot then be doubted but they are obliged to oppose all kinds
of Revolts, those known destroyers of Royal Authority: If they be deficient on
such occasions, they are defective in the chiefest of their Duties: The Princes
Power is with them entrusted for preservation of the Public Peace; To what
purpose then should they let it lie dormant, when the Peoples quiet and repose
is attempted to be disturbed? In such conjunctures it is not enough that they
barely keep themselves within the limits of their duties; which example may
peradventure be sufficient to contain the vulgar sort in good order, but they
are withal obliged to lay out their utmost endeavors and Authority entrusted
with them, for the preservation of their Sovereigns power, which by Civil
dissentions cannot but be very much endangered, if not totally destroyed* Does
not every one know, that Parliaments are living Laws, and that they have
rigours and punishments in their hands, wherewith to crush any Rebellions in
their Cradles? If they should be backward in restraining such disorders, were
they not equally culpable with Soldiers, who refuse to fight when occasion
requires? Neither can they be guilty of this defect without ingratitude, and
that in the highest degree, for that all their Honor and Power is but
derivative from that of their Sovereigns. The Sun is originally clothed with
that splendor which makes him shine in the eyes of all mankind, whereas the
Stars twinkle not but by a light borrowed from his; so have Kings an absolute
primitive power inherent in themselves, for which they are only beholding unto
God: But otherwise it is with Magistrates, who upon stricter enquiry into
themselves, will find, that they have not any Authority or Honor but what is
dependent upon their Sovereigns; which if so, do not the Laws of gratitude, as
also those of submission, enjoin them to oppose any thing which may entrench
upon their Majesty's and Glories? And is it not likewise true, that by
upholding their Princes Power, they preserve their own, seeing in their first
Institution they were subordinate to them, and depending on their good Will and
Pleasure; and that themselves cannot be continued in that Respect due to their
Qualities, but by the preservation and subsistence of the Original Fountain
from whence theirs first flowed. Their Princes are like their souls, from whom
they receive life and being If the obedience due to a King be violated, the
Authority of a Magistrate cannot then long subsist. Rivers cease to run, when
their Springs are stopped: The Body cease to have life or motion, when
deprived of the Soul; whenever therefore Parliaments endeavor to preserve
their Princes Authority, they labor to sustain themselves, and their own
Powers; and they destroy themselves whenever they forsake them.

The King grants a Commission to Monsieur le Prince, to Command diverse
Provinces in his absence.
AS in times of Revolts there ought always especial eye to be had upon the
Insurrections which a Rebellious party may make, especially in the absence of
heir Sovereign. His Majesty before his removal from Paris, thought good to
commit the Government of that place, and the adjacent Provinces, unto the
management of some Princes of the Blood. Accordingly he dispatched his letters
unto Monsieur le Prince de Conde, to empower him to command in Nivernois,
Berry, Bourbon, Tourain, Poictou, Aunis, Zainctonge, Haut, and Basse, Marcke,
Limosin, and Auvergne, to preserve them in peace and quiet, which he entrusted
with him especially, in confidence that his loyalty and zeal for his service,
as also his Prudence and good Conduct, would effectually cause him to be very
sollicitous and diligent in preventing any troubles what ever. The Letters were
accompanied with an extraordinary and unlimitted power, which did a little
surprise some people of small understanding, who think a King never ought to
entrust so great a power with any Prince of the Blood. But indeed it was an
effect, and that a very remarkable one, of the Cardinal's Prudence, who knew
there is not any cause to fear the power of a Grandee, where there is any
assurance of his being discreet, The Laws of Gratitude and Submission do both
oblige them to oppose any thing which incroacheth upon their Kings glory; and
it cannot be denied but that they preserve their own in particular, by
preserving their Kings Authority. Whilst the Duke of Montmorency was disposing
all things in order for the war, Monsieur marched into Albigieis and the Bishop
delivered Alby into his hands. He rested there some time to refresh his Army,
and from thence he went, leaving five hundred horse behind him, unto
Carcassenne, where he held some intelligence; but having been informed of the
Sieur Mangot Villarceaux his great care to preserve the Inhabitants in their
duties, he passed on Beziers, and gave order for a new Fortification. From
thence he designed to march to Narbone, and make sure of that place, by the
help of some Intelligence which he there had, which would have been a Port at
command, to have received any assistance from Spain, as likewise to retire
unto, in case of necessity. But he was presently discomfited to hear that those
of his party had been over pow'red by the Arch Bishop, and some other of his
Majesty's servants, who under pretense of assisting him, got into the place,
and so mastered it. Now the King being informed of all these proceedings, The
Result of the States, she Revolt of Cities, and of the inclinations of some
Lords, thought his presence would be necessary about those parts; The Cardinal
was of the same opinion, and assured his Majesty, that if he would undertake
the trouble of the journey, all those storms would pass away in fix weeks time,
as it fell out accordingly. Hereupon the King concluded upon the expedition,
and before he left Paris, caused the Parliament to publish a Declaration in
common form, against all those who followed Monsieur, or favored his designs,
proclaiming them to be Rebels, guilty of high Treason, and Disturbers of the
Public Peace; commanding all Officers to proceed against them, according to
the Rigor of the Law, yet with so particular a testimony of affection unto
Monsieur, that his Majesty would not have him declared guilty; but its the
Declaration published, That he would totally forgive him, if he acknowledged
his error within six weeks after publication thereof. His Majesty likewise made
a Declaration sent unto the Parliament of Tholose, to proclaim the Duke of
Montmorency guity of high Treason, degraded from all honors and dignities, the
Duchy of Montmorency extinct, and reunited in the Crown, and all his goods
confiscate, enjoining the Parliament of Tholose to make his Process, and
requiring all Prelates, Barons, Consuls and Deputies of any Cities, who had
assisted, subscribed, or assented unto the Result of the States, to appear
before the Parliament at Tholose, or the next Presidial to their dwelling
houses, within fifteen days after publication thereof, to dis-own their Actions
and Consents; and in case of non-obedience, to be deemed as Rebels and
Traitors, degraded from all honor and dignity, prohibiting the imposing of any
Taxes, by virtue of any order from the said States. Moreover, his Majesty
expressly commanded the Mareschals de la Force, and de Schomberg, to be careful
that Monsieurs levies might not draw into a Body together, but that they should
fall upon them upon their first appearance. These things thus settled, he
departed from Paris the eleventh of August. The very news of his march out of
Paris, so encouraged his Majesty's servants, and disheartened the Rebels, that
all their contrivances did forthwith begin to fall. The first thing which befell
them (but which was a great good Fortune for France) was a division between
their Leaders, which gave the two Mareschals a great advantage upon them: The
Sieur de Puy-Laurens had been accustomed to command all who came near Monsieur,
and could not now well endure that the Duke of Montmorency should issue out
Orders for the carrying on of the War; whereupon there grew a great jealousy
between them. Moreover the Duke d' Elboeuf being of another quality then the
Duke of Montmorency. pretended to be Monsieurs Lieutenant General, which
however the Duke would not admit off, in regard he was Governor of the
Province where all the Tragedy was to be acted. Hereupon it being hard to make
any accommodation between them, it was thought requisite to part them, and to
assign every one what he should command, who being thus divided by and amongst
themselves, were easily overcome by his Majesty's Forces.

Politic Observation.
THere is not any thing which gives more advantage against Revolts, and in
general all enemies, then the division of their Commanders and Forces; if
unexpectedly they fall into this disorder, fortune is to be thanked; and if it
be possible to contribute in the least thereunto, it ought the more
industriously to be attempted, in regard the effect cannot but be advantageous:
All great Captains have been chiefly solicitous of this one thing. Coriolanus
warring against the Romans, destroyed the possessions of all their principal
men, but saved those of the people, that so he might provoke the one against
the other: Hannibal on the contrary, he preserved those of Fabius, but burnt
all the rest. The Thebans advised Mardonius to send great Presents to the most
eminent of the Grecians, that the rest might be jealous of it: And Cleomenius
the Athenian, assaulting the Fraezenians, cast certain darts into the City,
with Letters fastened to them, which served to raise a sedition amongst them,
in the heat whereof he fell upon them, and became Master of the City. To
prevent this disorder, the wisest Politicians have ever thought it proper* that
there should not be several Heads of an Army of equal power, unless every one
so commanded in particular, that there should be only one at one time to be
obeyed. We see if it he otherwise, jealousy takes place among them, and every
one in particular is careful that no one obtain any advantage which may
procure him greater honor then himself; insomuch that they make a difficulty
to support and assist one another; so many men, so many minds: This approves
one Counsel, he another; and in this diversity of opinions, the thing commonly
is left undone: Was it not to prevent this inconvenience, that the Romans,
having two Consuls, would not that both together should have the marks of
Sovereign authority, but that each should take his turn? Did they not also
Ordain, that they should not both together command the Armies, but each in his
day? And yet notwithstanding that care, some divisions happened amongst them. A
well governed Army ought to be like the Body of Man, whose Members are joined
and united to the Head by invisible Nerves and Arteries, which enable him to
move them according as he lists. And thus to prevent divisions, it were
expedient, there were but one Head to command the motion of all the Forces,
according as he shall think fit. Agesilaus King of the Lacedaemonians (though
one of the greatest men of Antiquity, yet) that he might countermine Lysander,
and discredit his Authority, abrogated his sentences, and acted quite contrary
to his advises: And usually it happens, where there are two Commanders of an
Army the one thwarts the others designs, then hatred, envy, and obstinacy,
^ri^g all things into disorder, which obstruct the carrying on of every small
inconsiderable enterprise. For this cause was it, that Lycurgus one of the
wisest Legislators among the Ancients ordained in his Laws that the Kings of
Sparta in times of Peace, should act jointly with their Magistrates, but in War
should have Sovereign authority, and that all thing should depend upon their
Wills.

Another Commission to Monsieur le Comte de Soissons.
AS in times of revolt, and the Sovereign's absence, the insurrections which
Rebels may make ought to be mistrusted his Majesty before his departure from
the adjacent Provinces of Paris, gave the like power, to Monsieur le Comte de
Soissons in Paris, and the Isle of France, as also over the Army in Picardy,
with instructions to repair thither as occasions should require. By this means,
the Provinces thereabout remained in great quiet: But that I may say somewhat
concerning that Army left by his Majesty in Picardy; and in that particular,
evince the Cardinal's usual prudence, I shall observe the advantages which might
there by have been made in the present conjucture of affairs. It cannot be
doubted, but that it was the securing of those Provinces, and the awing of such
factious spirits, at were inclinable to foment the troubles; for in case the
least insurrection had been, that Army had soon fallen in upon them, and buried
them in their own ruins. Moreover, it was near about that time, when the
leading men of the Low Countries, weary of the Spanish Tyranny, insupportable
to the common people, laid the design of shaking off that yoke, and setting
their Country at liberty: The had recourse unto the King, to implore his
protection, and made diverse overtures unto him, to enter upon the Comtez d'
Artois and Flanders, which belonged to him by a just Title. But his Majesty who
never approves of Revolts in other Princes Subjects, more then in his own,
made a scruple of absolute engaging with them, or of passing his word to assist
them in that design; though the Spaniards, being less religious in the
observation of Treaties, and who preserve the greatness of their State, only
by fomenting divisions among their neighbors, were at that very time engaged
to support Monsieur in his revolt, and to furnish him with Forces for the
overrunning of Languedoc. His Majesty did not totally refuse them, but kept
himself in a condition of sending them forces, in case the Spaniard invaded
France, as they had promised: Thus did this Army serve to keep off the
Spaniards in the Bay of Languedoc from landing* they mistrusting to be repayed
in the Low Countries, and doubting if they entered France, the French would do
the like to assist those Lords who were sufficiently disposed for revolt. It is
likewise true, that it served to beget such jealousy in the Spaniards, that
they were forced to retain many of their Troops in the Low countries, Hainaut
and Artois, which would have done them more service at Mastrich against the
Dutch, whom by this means his Majesty did equally succor, as if he had sent
the Marshal d'Estree with the Army, in the Country of Treves according to their
own desires and proposals.

Politic Observation.
THough Armies for the most part are raised to fight, yet sometimes they are
designed for other ends, wise Princes having oftentimes obtained great
advantages by them, without striking a blow. The mere jealousy which their
motion may strike into an enemy, obliges him to stand upon his guard, who
otherwise had designed to assault some place; and in case he have assaulted it,
to recall some part of his Forces to prevent any attempts. This effect is not
of mean consequence, because it divides an enemies force, and consequently,
renders him more easy to be conquered: Whilst the Waters of a great River
are all shut up in their own Channel, their torrent is more impetuous, their
force the greater; and who so then indeavoureth to waft over them, runs no
small hazard; whereas if dispersed into several Rivulets; their course is more
slow, their depth less, so that they are both safely and easily to be Forded:
Thus an enemies Army may sometimes be so strong, that he is to be feared, and
then nothing better then to divide him, and force him to separate himself by
some motions which may fill him with suspicions. How often have Princes been
compelled to stay at home in their own defense by their apprehensions of an
Army appearing on their own Frontiers, just when they have been upon the point
of invading their Neighbors? Besides, what Armies soever a Prince places on
his Frontiers in times of War, they always give him this advantage of keeping
his own Country in security; either as to Foreigners, who commonly make use of
any pretensions about the Borders of a Country to color their attempts; or as
to the discontented persons of a Kingdom, who possibly may stir in their
Prince's absence. To preserve Peace without making war, is an effect
advantageous enough, and indeed a cause sufficient always to keep an Army on
Foot; A thing, in my sense, of the more use, in regard War ought not to be
made, but in order to Peace; and withal, it being more useful for to preserve
Peace by a show of War, then by War it self, that common Usher of Fire and
Sword. For this reason it is that a Prince ought not then to raise his Army,
when a Forreiner is upon the point of invading his Kingdom, or when factious
spirits are just ready to revolt: No, He ought to prevent both the one and the
other: and the bare sight of an Army is sufficient to deter them from the
boldness of any enterprise.

The Mareschals de la Force, and de Schomberg charge Monsieur 's Army.
THe Mareschals de la Force, and de Schomberg being arrived with part of their
Forces in Languedoc, were not men of that temper, as to stand with their hands
in their pockets, and to let the Rebels play their game, without defending
themselves, or indeed, without assaulting them; their courage redoubled when
they saw the principal Cities stand firm in his Majesty's service, and that
diverse chief Lords of the Country, dis-abused of their first impressions, gave
assurance of serving his Majesty against all men. The Marshall de la Force
thought it time to show himself to the Enemy; and whilst he was yet at
Pont-Saint-Esprit, expecting the coming in of sundry other Troops, be deemed it
proper for his Majesty's service, to send part of those he had into Vivarest to
defeat those Soldiers which the Vicomte de l' Estrange had there levied; He
commanded part of the Regiments de Vaubecourt, and de Saut, with four Cornets
of Horse, led by the Sieur de la R^cque Massebout, to march thither; and their
courages having soon transported them, they found most of the Forces in a Body
near the Vicomt's quarter, who commanded them in person, and very near Privas.
The Officers having called a Council of War, and considered the State of the
Enemy, resolved to fall on them in their Trenches, whereto they were retired;
and having made their approches, the Combat was very hot, and the defense
courageous; but after three hours dispute, the Vicomte de l' Estrange was
forced to tender himself Prisoner, and being delivered over into the Sieur de
Machault's hand, a Master of Requests, was convicted, and beheaded at l'
Estrange, for in example to other Rebels, and ^o oblige them, if possible, by
the just rigor to return to their Duties. Not long after this defeat, the said
Marshall de la Force had Intelligence that the Baron (...) Peraut Governor of
the Castle de Beautaire, and the Sieur de Rostide, Captain of the Town, wrought
upon by the Duke de Montmorency, employed all their endeavors to gain the
thief Inhabitants, and persuade them to receive Monsieur with his Forces: But
such was the course he took, that all their attempts were to no purpose. It was
impossible on the sudden to prevent Monsieur's getting unto the Castle, there
being a particular Gate to receive any in, without passing through the City:
But having instructed du Pay the King's Attorney, and la Roche chief Consul,
with what they should do in their own defense against the Castle, in case it
should declare it self, and that Monsieur or his should get into it; they
showed such courage and good conduct, that they preserved the Town in his
Majesty's obedience; and instead of furnishing them with any considerable
Force, which might have much weakened the Army under his command, which he kept
in a posture to fight the Enemy assembled in those parts, he thought it most
proper to desire four hundred men of the Army under the command of the
Marshall de Vitry in Provence, might cast themselves into the City. Mean while
Monsieur gets into the Castle with store of Horse, and the Marshall de Vitry
having Intelligence thereof, dispatched thither his own Regiment, who himself
followed in person; and there were such strong Fortifications raised against
the Castle, that it was impossible for them within it to force the City*
without great loss to themselves. Yet such was Monsieur's courage, that the
Assault was resolved; whereupon all his Forces were commanded to prepare
themselves to fall on, and accordingly were disposed in order: But the Dukes de
Montmorency and d' Elboeuf both there, were so exasperated by jealousies
between them, that they could not resolve upon precedence: so that their strife
hindered the execution of the design, and changed their assault into store of
Cannon shot discharged against the City, to batter and ruin it. The
Inhabitants were no whit terrified hereat, rather on the contrary, as if their
fidelity had received new vigor from those violences, they resolved to
undertake a Siege against the Castle: In fine, some got upon the Towers, others
into the Steeple of the great Church, from whence they found a means to shoot
into the Castle, which did ^ot a little disturb the Garrison; They likewise
invested it on the other quarters, by the help of those Troops which the
Mareschals de la Force, and de Vitry had sent unto them; so that the Garrison
was much incommodated, having not Ammunitions necessary long to subsist, or to
sustain a Siege. The Duke d' Elboeuf having got out, provided to send a Convoy
with provision of Victuals, and Ammunition of War into the place: But the
Garrisons placed by the Marshall de Vitry, both in Vartabregues and the Castle
de Saint Romain, prevented his Design, having twice or thrice intercepted the
Mules; and besides, the Marrescal de la Force informed that the Duke d' Elboeuf
did gather together store of Ammunition at Monfrein, to clap them into the
Castle, marched on the second of September from Pont-Saint-Esprit, and
presently forced the Duke d' Elboeuf to retire with his Forces from those
Quarters; and having commanded the Sieur de N^ualles to seize on Monfrien, upon
the Governors promise to receive him, he marched into the place, and carried
off all the said Ammunitions, together with the Duke d' Elboeuf's baggage,
which did not a little refre^^ the King's Army. This once effected, they in the
Castle despaired of relief, and surrendered upon composition on the sixth of
September, The courage and fidelity of the Inhabitants giving the Lie to that
Proverb, Who so is Master of the Castle, will soon be Master of the City; and
the King to reward them, and encourage other Cities to do the like, bestowed on
them diverse Favors and Privileges.

Politic Observation.
IT is an error to believe it impossible to preserve Cities, their Castles once
taken. Diverse examples have evidenced, that, as there is hardly any force equal
to their courages who are stoutly resolved to defend themselves; so there is
not any thing which can compel a City to surrender, when it may be fortified
against the Castle, and whose Inhabitants are men of courage. The order which
the Commander of such a place ought to follow, is, first to inform himself
whether the people be divided, whether some party among them be not
well-wi^hers to the Castle; and in case there be, presently to send them
packing; then ought he to animate the rest, both by discourses and example, to
give proofs of their fidelity: It were good that the Inhabitants did forthwith
raise Barricadoes from one street to another, and place Guards to defend them.
He is likewise obliged to use extraordinary diligence in raising Fortifications
to secure it against the Castle, to guard the Ports, and all Avennues, with
Soldiers sufficient to make good any assault against those of the Castle, in
case they should attempt it. To this end, if there be not sufficient Force
among the Inhabitants, trained up in the Exercises of War, he ought not to be
defective in procuring them from other places; He shall do prudently, if he
visit the main-guard every hour, to see that all be in a readiness. If the City
be weak on any quarter, whereby it may be liable to a surprise, he ought to be
dexterous in Fortifying it? and in conclusion, having once brought the place
into a posture of Defense, he then ought to resolve on laying siege to the
Castle: for as an assault adds more courage to the Assailors then the
Defendants, so doubtless his will show more valor, then if they were reduced
to the necessity of their own proper defense. But that which I esteem most
considerable, is, that those of the Castle once surrounded and besieged, date
not attempt any thing upon the City, having enough to do to defend themselves:
He ought so to invest the Castle, that there may be no way left for the
carrying of men or provisions into it: which once brought to perfection, unless
they are excellently provided, the Garrison will soon be straightened: If there be
any Hill which does command it, it were proper to raise a Battery thereon,
whereby to play upon the Castle: as also to fill the highest Steeples with
Soldiers, who by often shooting at them wherever they appear, may in the end
tire them out. Neither is it less necessary that he have Soldiers abroad upon
all Avennues, to prevent any relief; and thus the prudence of a Governor
animated by his Courage, may secure a City after the loss of its Castle.

The taking of Monsieur de Montmorency.
THe Marshall de Schomberg who commanded his Majesty's other Army, being
advanced near T^olouse, sought all occasions which might afford him any means
of testifying his courage: He resolved to besiege Alby, but was first obliged
to relieve the City of S. Felix de Carmain, whose Castle had been surpised by
four Brothers, called the Judges, then in Monsieur his service: In order
whereunto, he sent thither the Marquis d' Ambres with some Forces, and himself
followed with the residue of his small Army; But before his coming thither, he
was acquainted how the Marquis d' Ambres, who held a particular correspondence
with those four Brothers, had offered them a considerable sum of money, which
they thought themselves happy in accepting of, and so to deliver up the place
unto him on the first of October. Now Monsieur then upon his march to clap some
Forces into the Castle, hearing of the surrender, was so much the more desirous
to encounter the Marshall de Schomberg, because he it was that had deprived
him of that place; as also because his Highness Army was of the two the more
numerous. He was returned from Beaucaire, having left the Duke d' Elboeuf there
to secure the Castle if possible. The Duke de Montmorency was come with him,
who animated him to fight; The Baron de Linieres offered himself to go and
discover the state of the Mareschal's Army, which that he might the more easily
and securely effect, he went in he habit of a Cordelier, which only served to
render him suspected, so apparent was it that he had seldom used to wear it.
The two Armies met near Castelnaudery and the Marshall de Schombergh having
intelligence that the Duke de Montmorency, who led Monsieur's Army, had a
design to fall upon him, he acquainted the Marquis de Breze therewith, who
commanded the rest of his Majesty's Army, in the quality of Marshall de Camp;
and after some discourse together* they concluded and prepared to fight. The
Marquis was the first who discovered Monsieur's Army, within two Musket shot
of the way, at what time he was passing the King's Army over a little River, in
the Valley. Now conceiving by the Enemy's countenance, that they designed to
let him pass over a small narrow Bridge with one half of his Army, which
consisted only of a thousand Horse, four Companies of his Mjesty's Regiment des
Gardes, and six of that of Chamblay, that they might the better fall upon the
Rear-guard, and break it, being in a condition not to be relieved; he gave
notice to the Marshall de Schomberg, how he thought fit to pass the Army by a
good passage about two thousand paces higher, by which they might get over
before the Enemy could discover their intent. The Marshall approved his
advice, as very judicious; and having signified as much to him, he put it in
execution, and whole Army passed the Brook, before any of the Enemy advanced
toward them. They presently saw the Army in Battalia within a great Meadow,
and withal, to give the Kings Army leave to pass, they drew off a little
nearer Castelnaudary: But had they taken their stations, when the enemy in have
passed the River, who were paid in their own coin; for the Marshal de
Schomberg discovering their Forlorn Hope, sent to charge them before they were
all passed over; the foot made their shot, as also the enemy's, and the Horse
advancing, were at first impeded by certain ditches, though the Sieurs de
Loriers, and de Beauregard Champreu, found a way to pass through with twelve
or fifteen of their followers: And Monsieur de Montmorency, who was advanced
only to discover them, came on presently, and charged them with an hundred
Gentlemen, they met with all possible courage, but with great loss on
Monsieur's part; for the D. de Montmorency was wounded, the Comtes de Rieux,
and de la Fucillade slain, four or five hundred slain upon the place, and
amongst them the Comte de Moret; for the Kings Musketeers having discharged
upon their Horse, beat them out of the Field, insomuch as Monsieur de
Montmorency, was on a sudden forsaken by all, saving four or five of his
followers. His courage was nevertheless so impetuous, that he was not moved at
it; but on the contrary, suffering himself to be transported by an
inconsiderate rashness, as if his wounds had bereft him of sense, he advanced
from the place where he was, with those four or five others in his company,
into the Field, where meeting the Marshall de Schombergh's company of
Gendarmes, he gave and received some wounds, both of Sword and Pistol, without
any more consideration of the danger he ran, then if he had been immortal: He
charged up to the very Guards, and Chamblay's Regiment, where they discharged
so thick on him, that his Horse being wounded in diverse places, fell down, and
his Master under him, by which means he was taken Prisoner by the Officers and
Soldiers of the Regiment des Gardes; which yet was so far from encouraging
Monsieur's Army to endeavor the fetching of him off, rather on the contrary,
they were so astonished at it, that they kept their stand, as if fear and grief
had equally surpised them. Hereupon the Marshall de Schomberg, and the
Marquis de Breze found that they were out of danger, and having discoursed some
few minutes concerning the present State of affairs, they judged, that having
fought so luckily, slain so many persons of quality, and taken him prisoner who
was the soul of the Rebellion, it would be improper to run a second hazard;
because having the person of Monsieur de Montmorency, the residue of the revolt
would dissipate of it self, without necessitating the King's Forces to go fight
Monsieur's Army afresh, by a strait Bridge, where but few could march together,
and that within Cannon-shot. However they made a stand about and hour in the
field, to see if the enemy would demand any thing, but perceiving them not to
advance, they drew off the King's Army to the City and Suburbs of
Castelnaudary, where Monsieur de Montmorency was kept for some time, until his
wounds would permit him to be conducted to some place of greater security, and
that his Majesty's pleasure concerning him were known.

Politic Observation.
IT is usual with Soldiers upon obtaining any great advantage in fight, to
prosecute their Victory to the full; but a prudent General is obliged to curb
in their impetuousness, and to enjoy the favors of Fortune with great
moderation; The satisfaction of seeing his enemies overcome with fear, ought
not to blind him, but he ought to make use of Prudence, and not to run the
hazard of losing a certain Victory already obtained, in hopes of a greater, but
uncertain; He who cannot be contented with an indifferent Victory, endangereth
the losing of that which he has gotten. Briefly, It is great rashness to drive
an enemy to extremities; for, to reduce them to a necessity of fighting, does
often expel all fear from them, fills them with courage, raises up one to be
as good as four, and redeems the Victory they had lost. What, but necessity
made the Locrois behave themselves so courageously, that fifteen thousand of
them defeated an hundred and thirty thousand of their enemies? Was it not the
same necessity, as History observes, which made the Romans, when so hotly
pursued by the Lacedaemonians, that they had not time to retire to their
Vessels, to turn again, make a stand, fight like Lions, kill two hundred of
them, and take as many Prisoners? The Consul Manlius, that not a man of his
enemies might escape him, set strong Guards upon all places by which they were
to retreat, but the enemy perceiving it, and knowing the impossibility of
saving themselves, fell upon him, slew him, and became so furious, that they
had likewise cut the rest in pieces, had they not had free liberty to retreat
granted them. For this very reason it was, that the French retreating from
Naples, the ablest Italians were of opinion, to let them have free liberty of
departure; and which is more, if occasion were, to favor their retreat. It is
always glory enough to vanquish, in what measure soever; but who so contenteth
not himself, renders himself unworthy to keep the Victory he has gotten.

The Sequel of what happened at Castelnaudary.
THe taking of Monsieur de Montmorency, was received by Monsieur's Army as the
greatest misfortune that could befall them, though it was in fine the greatest
happiness that his Majesty's servants could wish for, either in regard of
Monsieur's person, who (had the Engagement longer continued) could not have
been kept from it; or else in regard of the Interest of France, by this means
secured from the enterprises of a Faction, exposing her Natives to sundry
miseries and violences. Every one attributed this accident to the Leaders of
Monsieur's Army, who had too much courage, and too little conduct; and to his
Soldiers, who showed no courage at all. But to omit the causes of this happy
defeat, I shall say. The King received notice hereof at Lions, from whence his
Majesty resolved to depart, upon the Cardinal's assuring him, that his only
presence, after such an advantage, would soon reduce the whole Province of
Languedoc, as accordingly it happened. Notwithstanding the satisfaction which his
Majesty received from this Victory, be could not set forward, so apprehensive
was he of Monsieur's state, without dispatching unto him the Sieur d'
Aiguebonne to assure him of his affection; who departed upon the ninth of
September, with order to tell him, that his Majesty touched with the same
affection he always had for him, was ready to receive him, to entertain him
favorably at Court, and to perform the contents of his last Declaration; that
he should be restored to his Goods, Pensions, Annuities, and Governments, in
case he would acknowledge his fault, and relinquish all his correspondencies,
both at home and abroad, who had engaged him in that Revolt: that if he had
rather live in any other place, his Majesty would assent thereunto, Provided it
were a place free from suspicion; That he would restore the Duke d' Elboeuf,
and would pardon all his Domestiques their Lives and Estates. Could more
tenderness and affection toward Monsieur be wished for in the Kings heart,
then what was here showed, which cannot be denied to have proceeded from a
bounty truly extraordinary?

The sequel of the Negotiation with Monsieur.
BUt that I may say something of the event of this Treaty, I shall tell you how
the Sieur d' Aiguebonne coming to Monsieur, found him much discontented, not
only for Monsieur de Montmorency being taken, but to see most of the Nobility
of Languedoc falling off from him; which did not a little affright the Sieur de
Puy-Leurens, and those of his Faction, no less sollicitous of their own, then
their Master's interst; who then began to misdoubt their being taken, and made
objects of his Majesty's Justice; for that he was obliged to punish the whole
Rebellion upon their persons, they having been the chief contrivers thereof.
Neither were they less afflicted for having missed of those advantages which
they fancied to obtain by the War. But on the other side, considering the
preservation of life is to be preferred before all other Interests, they had
already concluded, that Monsieur wanting Forces to carry on the War, should
seem to desire Peace from the King, the only way to secure them from otherwise
unavoydable misfortunes, and to betake them to their Arms again upon the first
occasion of advantage, which might give them hopes of better success. Monsieur
was the more readily inclined to follow their advice, in regard he found
himself unable to prosecute the War, and reduced to a necessity of submitting
to that Law which his Majesty would impose on him; so that he had already sent
the Sieur de Chaudebonne toward his Majesty, to testify unto him his sorrow
for having given him occasion of discontent; and to make him all sorts of
Protestations of Obedience and Loyalty for the future; beseeching him to
forget what was past, and by the affection wherewith he had ever honored him,
to moderate that anger he might have conceived against him for his late
proceedings: Withal Chaudebonne had order to beg Monsieur de Montmorency's
Freedom, his re establishment in his Goods and Offices, and the like for the
Duke de Bellegarde, with all other his Adherents, or the Queen-Mothers. To
demand a place of Security for Monsieur, That the Queer-Mother should be
recalled; That the places deposited by Monsieur de Lorrain should be restored;
That a million of Livres should be granted to Monsieur, to pay off what he had
borrowed from the Spaniards and the Duke of Lorrain; and that the Arrest issued
out against the Lady du Fargis, should be repealed. All this had been acted
before the Sieur d' Aiguibonne's Arrival; so that his coming to Monsieur was
not a little welcome, all his Retinue beholding him as their Deliverer; and the
Wisest among them were unable to admire the Excess of his Majesty's Bounty.

Politic Observation
AMongst the diverse marks of Good Will, Compassion (the Mother thereof) is the
most assured; it being certain, that none is sollicitous to set a person
indifferent to him, or against whom he has some cause of anger, reduced to
extremity. Indifferency is too stupid to excite any sentiments of grief at
others sufferings; and the heat of blood and choler cause joy rather then
sadness. A man from the top of some Hill beholds with delight his enemies
Vessel beaten by a Tempest, with his Masts already broken, and Sayls torn,
ready to be swallowed up by the fury of the Winds and Waves; but otherwise is
he affected if the Ship contain any person who is dear unto him; at such a
sight he would be wholly transported with grief, his eyes would be lifted up to
Heaven, and he would presently address himself to send him assistance: In the
same manner is a great Prince touched with compassion for those who relate to
him, or are esteemed by him, when he sees them reduced to any deplorable
condition. The Arms which they have carried against him cannot prevent such
sentiments, it being most certain that true generousnesse never delights to
behold a very enemy reduced to the utmost extremity of misfortune. A
well-grounded courage will rejoice to obtain a victory against his enemy, but
then he uses all means he can to comfort him in his affliction, and bears
some part of his sadness with him. Thus a noble Roman Captain, having defeated
the Macedonians, began to shed tears when he saw their King brought Prisoner
before him, and rising from his seat, went to receive him with all honor, as a
grand person fallen by accident into such misfortune; and when he cast himself
at his feet, would not suffer it, but raised him with a sense of compassion for
that estate, wherein he then beheld him. In the same manner the Samnite having
overthrown two Roman Consular Armies at the Furcae Caudinae, and brought them
into slavery, would not enter into the City of Capua but by night, as if they
would compassionately hide the confusions which they saw them suffer under the
obscurity of darkness: In conclusion, pitying their distress, they restored
to the Consuls their dgnities, their fasces, their Ushers, with the rest of
their Train, and thus entering into Capua, both Magistrates and people came to
comfort them. In the same manner, the ruin which befalls persons of eminent
quality, deserves the more pity from the greatness of their fall, and in
regard their confusion is exposed not only to a family or City, but many times
to all Europe.

A Treaty of Peace with Monsieur.
MOnsieur received these testimonies of the King's Clemency, whilst he was yet
at Castelnaudary, and though his present extremity caused him to receive them
with a great deal of satisfaction, yet his affection for the D. of Montmorency
kept him off from concluding any thing, until he had endeavored to obtain
some assurances of his life and liberty: He seemed unto the Sieur de
Aiguebonne, to be exceeding sensible of his Majesty's goodness, beseeching him
to assure his Majesty that he was very sorry for having offended him; that he
was firmly resolved to render him all manner of obedience for the future, and
never to thwart his pleasure: In brief, he desired him to beseech his Majesty
in his behalf, as himself most humbly did, to grant, according to his usual
clemency, those graces he had already requested by Chaudebonne, particulary in
the behalf of the D. of Montmorency. That he respectfully accepted his
Majesty's offers, but that, adding that one favor to the person who he loved,
and one who had not engaged but for his sake, he should be infinitely much more
obliged, and that he would then go any whither where his Majesty should think
fit. The Sieur de Aiguebonne, returned with this answer of Monsieurs to the
King, being yet at Pont-Saint Esprit, but there had been a return made
thereunto by Chaudebonne, who had set forward the day before; by whom his
Majesty writ to Monsieur that he could not grant him any other thing that what
had already been proposed to the Sieur de Aiguebonne, and conjured him to
accept of them without making other pretensions, his demands being neither
agreeable to his Majesty's dignity, the good of the State, nor his own proper
interest. Now Chaudebonne returning with this Letter to Monsieur, his Highness
was not a little troubled to see the difficulty of delivering the D. de
Montmorency from the danger wherein he was; but the Sieur de Puy-Laurens, not
forgetful of those jealousies which had been between them, was solicitous to
extinguish those thoughts, and pressed Monsieur to withdraw himself from the
Precipice, by laying before him the obsolute necessities, as his affairs then
stood, either of ruin or accommodation; neither did he much care, as every one
observed, to let the D^de Montmorency to be cast away, provided himself might
be safe from shipwreck. Monsieur however could not be so soon induced to that
resolution, though he was somewhat staggered, but sent Chaudebonne a second
time, to make new instances upon his first Proposition^ and then retired into
Beziers with part of his Forces, which, however quartered thereabouts, but
neither the Governor nor Inhabitants would permit them to enter. This was the
cause that he made no long stay there, but departed on the twentieth of
September before four in the morning by torch-light, having received an A^arm
that the Kings Army commanded by the Marshals de Vitry, and de la Force were
making their approaches to besiege him. Mean while the King removed from
Pont-Saint Esprit, and came to Nismes, where Chaudebonne, who but three days
before, had returned toward Monsieur, came again to meet his Majesty, and
reinforce the former Propositions, and more especially to procure that the
favor which his Majesty granted unto Monsieur might be extended unto all of
his party. But his Majesty persisted in admitting of no other conditions,
whereupon Chaudebonne gave some hopes that Monsieur might be persuaded to
submit, in case any one went to treat with him from his Majesty, for that the
Sieur de Puy-Laurens was laboring to persuade him thereunto. By this his
Highness was reduced to such extremity, that he knew not well where to make
any sure retreat, his forces being many of them disbanded, and those of Beziers
it self, now in his Majesty's obedience, and who, after his departure from
them, had made fresh protestations of fidelity to him, refused to receive him;
and in conclusion, had not admitted him at all but by order from his Majesty,
who commanded them to receive him, but with his Train only, and to render him
all the honor due to his quality. The King approved of the overture, and
seeing Monsieur was at Beziers, sent unto him the Sieur de Bullion
Superintendent of the Treasury, and the Marquess de Fossez, Governor of
Montpellier, but without any other conditions then those, proposed by the Sieur
de Aiguebonne: At their first arrival Monsieur declared, that he could not
resolve to abandon the D of Montmorency, who had not engaged himself in that
War but for his sake, no more than the rest of his adherents; that for any
thing else he was unalterably fixed to render all obedience and service to his
Majesty. They replied, that indeed such sentiments could not but be
commendable, neither could they proceed from any thing beside the goodness of
his nature; and beseeched his Highness to consider, that if he had any
interest in their concerns, the King had incomparably much more reason not to
capitulate at all with him, or to grant, by way of compulsion, any grace to
such Rebellious Subjects, who had deferved the most rigorous chastizements of
his Justice. They represented to him, that capitulations ought not to be made
but between Sovereigns, and that Princes though of his quality, had no other
way to obtain grace, but by submission and acknowledgement of their faults;
that he might reasonably expect any favor from his Majesty's goodness,
seeing, his Majesty had of his own mere motion, and that before any overtures
made by him unto him to obtain his favor, sent to invite him; that after all
this, to mistrust his Clemency would be injurious; that for their parts they
could not ensure him of any favor for the D. de Montmorency. or any other his
Domestics, having no order but the former; but that they might safely tell
him, that in case it should stand with his Majesty's service, to extend his
favor toward all those whom his Highness desired, his own innate Clemency
would invite him thereunto; that in fine, his Majesty was doubtless obliged to
inflict some exemplary punishment upon the chief Authors of that Revolt, as a
thing necessary to secure the tranquillity of the State, to maintain his
Majesty's authority, to deter others, and to chastize this Rebellion, which of
it self compelled his Majesty to execute some justice, unless he would render
himself culpable against his own estate. These reasons were urged with such
address, moderation, and prudence, that Monsieur was from that time, almost
absolutely resolved to submit himself unto his Majesty's Will, yet some time he
desired to consider of it; which was in effect, that he might the better confer
with the Sieur de Puy-Laurens, who finding no other way left then that of
accommodation whereby to secure himself from the danger he was in, induced
Monsieur to resolve to treat; he alleged to him that he ought to make the
less difficulty of it, in regard he might afterward take his own advantage,
and put himself in a condition to obtain more advantageous terms; and in fine,
he acquainted the Sieur de Bullion, and the Marquess de Fossez with Monsieurs
resolution; they took his word, and the Articles of accommodation were
concluded, by which Monsieur acknowledging his fault beseeched his Majesty:

First, That he would forget and forgive him: He promised his Majesty to
relapse no more; that he would relinquish all intelligences with Foreigners,
and with the Queen Mother, during her abode out of the Kingdom, contrary to his
Majesty's Will.

That he would dwell in such place as his Majesty would prescribe, and live
like a true Brother and Subject.

Moreover, Monsieur obliged himself not to take any part in their Interest who
were engaged with him; nor complain, if at any time the King should bring them
to condign punishment.

To receive such persons as his Majesty should nominate into the Offices which
should at any time become vacant in his family; and to remove such as should be
disagreeable to his Majesty.

Briefly, It was agreed that the Sieur de Puy-Laurens, having been the chief
Agent of those evil Councels, which had engaged Monsieur in the War, should be
obliged sincerely to inform his Majesty of what ever had been negotiated for
the time past, by which the State might receive any prejudice, and that under
penalty of being reputed Criminal, and to have incurred his Majesty's
displeasure.

These were the chief Articles whereunto Monsieur consented, an assured
testimony they were of his natural inclination to live quietly and submissely:
They were signed by him for his Majesty's greater assurance; and thereupon the
Sieurs de Bullion and Fossex, promised him in his Majesty behalf, that his
Majesty should receive him into his favor, establish him in all his goods and
pensions; give him liberty to live peaceably in such of his houses, as should
be thought fit, and that a pardon should be granted to Monsieur de Elboeuf, and
all others then residing near his person, without engaging any thing for the
rest.

His Majesty received these Articles by the Marquess de Fossez, and
accordingly ratified them; and thus was this desired agreement concluded, which
every one considered as one of the most certain foundations of France its
happiness. Nothing was discoursed of but Peace: the King permitted the
strangers six days time to march out of France by Roussillon, who scattering
themselves abroad from one Coast to another, received the same entertainment
from the Country people as they had before offered unto them. Monsieur retired
to his house of Champigzy near Tours, seemed to be satisfied in his very soul,
and withal writ several Letters to the Cardinal full of affectionate
expressions, disowning those aspersions published against him under his name,
assuring him, that he had never consented to them in a though, and that in his
greatest Passion he had ever much esteem for him, not only in regard of his
loyalty toward the King, but also for his eminent virtues, and the great
services he had done the State. And thus every one saw an agreeable calm
succeed that storm wherewith France had been so much agitated.

Politic Observation.
AS Kings are obliged to chastize some of the chief Authors of a revolt, as
shall hereafter be declared, so ought they readily to pardon the rest, Caesar
was more esteemed for his easy condiscension to be reconciled to his enemies,
that Hannibal for his harsh courage. It was his usual saying, that nothing was
less proper for those who aspired unto great things, than wilfully to persist
in enmities, which oftentimes cause those forces, which were designed for great
achievements, to be made use of in a man's own defense, and to secure him for
the ambushments of his enemies. Clemency ought to shut a Sovereign's eyes, that
he may no more behold their faults, who beg his favor in matters of revolt,
having first laid by some of the chief, for examples sake. And is it not then
a generous revenge to pardon a man already overcome, especially if he be of the
same blood? Pardon is sometimes as difficult to be supported by Grandees, as
the confusion of a defeat; some have chosen rather to perish then to beg it.
Withal, a King is so far from receiving any detriment in his government by
granting it, the rather on the contrary, Clemency is a spell which charmeth
every one to love him; it is one of the strongest Pillars of his State, besides
the glory which it carries with it, whose splendor is not small, generosity
having no stamp more venerable then Clemency. And Experience evidenceth, that
all good courages have a natural sweetness to cure wounds, without leaving any
scars behind them. The Herb, called by Homer, Nepenthe, presented to Helen by
the Queen of Egypt, was much esteemed of for the allaying of all griefs, for
causing an oblivion of offenses, and for restoring the same sentiments of
affection, which had been before the breach of friendship. The Grecians were
esteemed very wise, who, when they could find no other expedient to redress
the many crimes, during the time of the thirty Tyrants, published a Decree by
them called the Amnesty, commanding they should all be buried in Oblivion; and
the valiant Scipio took the same course with his revolted Soldiers, telling
them, he desired Oblivion might efface their fault, and in case that could not
do it, it might at least be smothered in silence, to the intent it might not be
cast in their teeth. All that Princes have to consider in communicating the
effects of their Clemency, is, so to pardon, that they leave neither the
courage nor the liberty of relapsing into a second fault, by making sure of
those who may occasion it. Those who humble themselves, they ought to set free
from the rigours of their justice; yet the favors they grant ought to be
managed with such prudence, that whilst they forget those crimes which they
pardon, the other may forget their ways of offending them.

The Cities of Languedoc, return to their Obedience.
AS a Tempest usually gives place to the Sun so diverse the revolted Cities of
Languedoc, upon his Majesty's approach to their Province, returned to their
obedience; and among others, Bagnols, Alby, Lunel, Villenene, Maguelonne,
Frontignac and Beziers. But the Calm did entirely manifest it self, after
Monsieur's accommodation had been signed and confirmed, every one then
returning to his duty; yet because the Peace of that Province, and the peoples
safety were necessarily to be secured, his Majesty commanded, that Brescon, the
Castle of Pezenas, the Citadel of Beziers, and diverse other places should be
eraz'd; which not being any Frontiers, could only serve for a retreat to
Rebels: Withal, he gave Commission to the Sieur de Muchaut, Master of the
Requests, assisted by the Marquess de Tavannes, Marshal of his Camps and
Armies, to chastize diverse partakers of that Rebellion, both in their persons,
and the razure of their Castles. And in conclusion, that he might draw a
general acknowledgement of the Rebellions committed by those of that Province,
and leave some better settlement behind him, he assembled the Estates at
Beziers, upon the first of October, the next day the Session began, himself
being personally present. He appears with that splendor wherewith he is
usually environed when he sits in his Throne of Justice, being accompanied
by the Cardinals, Princes, Dukes, and Peers, Marshals of France, and other
Lords attending him The first sitting of the Court was in his Majesty's
presence, and the Keeper of the Seals, having represented to the Bishops,
Gentlemen, and other Deputies there present, how heinous the crime of
Rebellion, which they had committed in the late Commotions, was, he was most
humbly beseeched by the Archbishop of Narbone their Speaker, that he would
pardon the whole Province; in whose name he promised him a most inviolable
fidelity. Whereupon, the King that he might fully make to appear the effects of
his Clemency, not only pardoned them, but suppressed the Esleus, and confirmed
their privileges; yet, he made a new order for the imposition of moneys, which
were at any time to be levied in their Province.

Politic Observation.
IT is not enough to beat Rebels out of the field, and to force them to their
houses; a Sovereign is moreover obliged to establish such an Order in the
Province where the Rebellion has been, that it remain not exposed to the
danger of a second storm, after he shall withdraw himself. He ought judiciously
to imitate the Prudent Physician, who having raised his Patient out his bed,
indeavoureth to re-establish his temper, and to restore him to such a condition
of health that he may not fear a relapse. It would be a great rashness to
punish all that are guilty; so to do, would assuredly raise a greater revolt,
and which instead of troubling one single Province, might endanger the whole
Kingdom. It is indeed proper to assemble some of them, that he may receive and
acknowledgement of their crimes, their submissions, and their repentance; that
once past, his Clemency ought to pardon the multitude, his Justice having
reserved some of the Ringleaders for exemplary punishment. Thus Aristides
having received intelligence in the War, how some the noblest of the Athenians,
finding themselves oppressed by poverty, and discontented to see themselves
deprived of that Authority they had formerly enjoyed in them management of
affairs, had conspired against the people, and resolved to deliver the
Commonwealth into the hands of the Barbarians, rather then live in the estate
whereunto they were then reduced, satisfied himself with causing eight of the
principle to be taken to punishment, and exhorted the rest to behave themselves
with such courage, that their generousnesse might efface the memory of so
ignominious and enterprise; which one thing wrought more effectually with them,
then if he had severely punished them. It is only fit for inferior Judges to
raise informations against all the particular accessaries to a crime: Kings,
who Clemency makes far more glorious then Severity, ought to wink at the
disorders of the multitude, seeing they had not engaged in a Rebellion, but by
the Artifice of the chief men of the Province, who are more in fault on, but by
the Artifice of the chief men of the Province, who are more in fault then all
the rest. I will moreover add, that it were proper they did a little sweeten
those Orders which clash with the peoples sense, and which have served for a
pretense to their Rebellion; for it is exceeding dangerous to be obstinately
resolute in any thing that goes against the hair of the multitude; not that I
should think it Prudence to admit of what ever they desire, that were too base
a condescension, and would imbolden them too too much; a mean ought to be used,
and a more pleasing way to obtain the same ends. The highest point of
discretion consists in acquiring the end we propose, by such windings as may
best convey us to it, though it be the further way about; and the greatest
Triumph of reason seems sometimes to yield to Time and Necessity, and to sit
still with effecting, though not all we would, yet what we may without
exasperating the people. A King may lawfully, without all peradventure,
establish that which is right, and which carries with it any advantage to the
public, but Prudence ought to precede all his Decrees, and he ought to be
careful that there happen not at any time more evil then good by his commands.

The Requests of diverse Lords for Monsieur de Montmorency, his life and liberty.
ALthough his Majesty had pardoned the common fry, yet the Duke of Montmorency
being their chief Ringleader, there was small likelihood of passing by his
Delinquency, without due punishment, unless it were purposely to give all
other Governors free liberty to rebel as often as they pleased, considering
how it was by the chance of War, and his own only rashness, that he fell into
the hands of his Majesty's Officers. For this reason it was, that the King
commanded him to be carried to Tholose (whither his Majesty came not long
after) imprisoned in the Townhouse, and sent a particular Commission to the
Parliament to prosecute his Indictment against him. He was examined, witnesses
produced face to face, according to course, neither was there any great
difficulty in proving such things as made him guilty of death; he having been
taken with his Sword in his hand, against the King, as himself confessed
(adding with tears in his eyes, as is usual with all persons of quality, when
they find themselves convicted; That if it would please his Majesty to pardon
him his life, he would not desire to obtain it unless to lay it out in his
service, and that he might expiate part of his Crimes, with his Blood. Sundry
persons of quality, and amongst others, the Princess of Conde his sister; the
Cardinal de la Valette, and the Dukes d' Espernon, and de Cheureuse, were very
earnest with the King to obtain his pardon, and Monsieur himself sent the Sieur
de Lavaupot, to cast himself at his Majesty's feet, and to Petition in his
behalf. But what likelihood was there, of passing by so heinous an offense
without chastizing it? What reason was there to give life unto him, who had
endeavored to raise all the Grandees in the Kingdom, with whom he had the
least acquaintance, who had used his utmost to engage one of the chief
Provinces of the Kingdom in a Rebellion, who had induced Monsieur to march in
Arms through all France, that he might the better countenance his designs, who
had introduced the Spaniard, who had had the boldness to procure the States of
the Province to authorize his Rebellion, who had raised all the Soldiers he
possibly could against the King: briefly, who had left no stone unturned which
might any ways contribute to the advancement of his pernicious designs? What
reason can there be alleged sufficient to excuse such a crime? It was not a
fault committed by mistake, or rashly, but a designed contrivance deliberated
and discussed; for the effecting whereof, he had bent all his wits, and set all
his Engines on work, for above seven or eight months together. His name was
indeed honorable, in regard of his Ancestors, but he deserved no honor for
having been deficient in following the Copies of their Loyalty, was his family
illustrious, his Crime was of the greater consequence and the more dangerous
for persons of his quality, especially such as had raised great advantages by
the favors conferred upon them, and the punishment of his offense ought to be
exemplary, to warn the Nobility to contain themselves within the bounds of
their duties, and within the limits of fear of his Majesty's Justice. He had
indeed done his Majesty service in two or three occasions, but not such as were
any way considerable, with that of this his attempt, which struck at the root
of the Kingdom, which forced the people from their obedience, which tended to
the destruction of his Majesty's authority, and the ruin of his Subjects. What
would strangers have said at the report of such excessive Clemency, far
different from those prudent severities which themselves frequently exemplify
unto us, upon the least commotions in their own Countries? Had it not been a
wilful blindness in matters of State, and the establishment of the public
quiet to have suffered such a Rebellion to pass unpunished? To say truth, he
must have no longer been a King, had he tied up the hands of Justice, and
hindered her from prosecuting those Orders prescribed by the Laws on such
occasions. Thus the Marshal de Chastillon, going to wait upon the King, with
intent to join his request with others in his behalf told him, that the
countenance and eyes of those who supplicated him, did sufficiently declare,
that his Majesty would oblige very many persons, if it would please him to
pardon Monsieur de Montmorency's life, but was answered with a Prudence
well-becomming his Majesty that he should not be King, if his sentiments were
such as those of private men.

Politic Observation.
A King would render himself much blameworthy toward his State, if in all his
actions he did not regard the public good, before the satisfaction of diverse
persons. Good Emperors even according to the opinion of the most eminent
Lights of the Church, have preferred the State before their Fathers or
children; and indeed of such consideration ought it to be unto them, seeing
they are obliged not to give way to their own wills, when they desire any thing
in prejudice thereof. Were it not a madness to expose all the Souls in a
Vessel to th hazard of Shipwreck, by endeavoring to save one particular man?
Seeing the very life of a King ought not by himself to be considered, when as
the public good is in agitation, of what weight then ought another life be to
him? The object of Princes is the civil good, and is folded up in that of the
people in general. No one can doubt* but that it is for the interest and
advantage of the people, to prefer the common good, before that of any
particular man, who has run into any heinous offenses. So the Laws have more
regard to the safety of all, then of any one criminal, and that Prince who
being obliged to propose to himself the Laws for a guide of his Actions, will
commit a manifest oversight, if he dotq^not follow the like example. He
deserves not to wear the Crown, if he permit the oppression of his Subjects,
and the Revolt of others to go unpunished; God Almighty having entrusted the
Sword of Justice in his hands, that he might preserve them in obedience and
defend them from oppressions. Kingdoms (says Plato) are then well governed,
when the guilty are punished. The Lawyer says, that the chiefest care which a
Governor of a Province ought to have, is to dreseree Peace; to which end, he
must purge the Country of those who are likely to create troubles, by punishing
them according to their demerits; in a word, private men propose the
well-ordering of their families, for the end of heir business, and so ought
Kings to prefer nothing before the good of their Kingdoms. It is the property
of private men, to be solicitous of private concernments, and it is the duty of
a King to regard nothing in regard of the public good.

Mosieur de Montmorency's Death.
THese were the just considerations which moved the Parliament of Tholose,
after process made against him withal legal proceedings, to condemn him to be
beheaded by their sentence of the 30. October. But before I proceed to the
execution, I cannot but observe the Fortitude and Piety wherewith he received
his death. The Cardinal de la Valette, foreseeing no probability of saving
him, beseeched the King would be pleased to allow him a Confessor, the better
to dispose him to receive with submission the sentence of the Parliament. His
Majesty was easily entreated to admit thereof, being glad to contribute any
thing toward the saving of his Soul, by making his body an example of
Rebellion, which favor although it be not usually granted to persons indicted,
before their sentence be passed, yet his Majesty gave oder to the Marshal de
Breze, to conduct Father Arnoux, Superior of the Jesuits, particularly desired
by the Duke of Montmorency, and to charge him to assist him, day and night, for
so long time, as he should thing fit and requi^te for his consoation. The
Father went to him, and found that God bestowed may Graces upon him, in order
to his well-dying; to which end, he desired to make a general Confession. One
thing did somewhat trouble him, which was this, he believed that to acquit
himself of this pious duty; there would be longer time required, then was
probably left for him; he supposing, as accordingly it was that they had
resolved to sentence him the next morning whereupon he earnestly conjured the
Father Arnoux, and the Sieur de Launay to go and acquaint his Majesty that he
beseeched him to bestow the next whole morning upon him, that he might the more
deliberately and without molestation, look back into his Conscience, that he
might make such a Confession, as might cause him to die without inquietude of
mind, and that he should take this for one of the greatest favors he had ever
received from him. The King condescended thereunto, and his Piety being no
less resplendent then his Justice, he readily granted him that liberty,
commanding, that the sentencing of him should be deferred for one day; and also
permitting him to communicate, although contrary to the use for persons in his
condition. He ended those holy duties, which once passed over, he employed the
afternoon in making his Will, according as his Majesty had permitted him,
wherein he bequeathed unto Monsieur the Cardinal, one esteemed for the rarest
piece of France, being a Picture, representing Saint Sebastian dying, and
beseeched him to believe that he died his servant. The morning following, he
was called unto the Palace to be examined at the Bar where be answered unto all
Interrogations, such submission and generousnesse, that he discovered no other
fear of death, but with what is natural to the greatest courages; and at the
same time that he went out of the grand Chamber, the whole Court (the Lord
Keeper being President) condemned him to be beheaded in the place du Salin, as
guilty of High Treason, in the highest degree. The Sentence was pronounced to
him with the usual forms of Justice, which when he heard he told the
Commissaries, how he thanked them, and the whole Company, beseeching them to
tell them in his behalf, that he received the Judgment from the Kings Justice,
as a sentence of Mercy from God. After this, his thoughts were altogether taken
up, in disposing of himself to die like a Christian. And having showed all
imaginable proofs of so dying, he was executed in the Court of the Townhouse
where his Majesty commanded it to be performed, though he was not entreated to
bestow that last favor upon him.

Politic Observation.
TO pardon every one, is a cruelty more dangerous then to pardon no one; this
only injureth the nocent, but that the innocent, seeing it exposes all men to
great misfortunes. This only destroys particular families, whereas that is
commonly the occasion of the breaking out again of civil Wars, which were
thought to have been quite extinguished by Clemency, but do then endanger the
absolute ruin of a whole Kingdom, by their second eruptions. Now amongst those
many which deserve to be chastised, the chief heads of a Revolt, ought to be
punished much rather then the hands and feet, which were but accessaries
thereunto: It is the order prescribed by Justice, and in effect, it is more
equitable to punish those who are the original and true causes of evil, then
those who could hardly defend themselves from following their violent motions.
The greatness of their qualities may not privilege them from the punishment
due to the heinousness of their Crimes, although the faults of common mean
persons are usually pardoned by the too too great indulgence of Magistrates. On
the contrary, if at any time Ambition transporteth them into seditions, it
likewise renders, them much more culpable, and consequently more deserving of
punishment, then the least and most obscure persons of the Kingdom. Their
lapses are not only equal and liable to the inflictions provided for other
Subjects; but they are the more notorious, by how much their quality is more
conspicuous, because their exorbitances are of a more dangerous consequence.
Every one is more concerned at the Eclipses of the Sun, then those of other
Stars, because such are commonly attended by sad events; so the crimes of the
chief leading men in a Nation, are more to be regarded, because their effects
are more to be feared then those of private men. The revolt of a mean
Gentleman, is seldom capable to raise any great troubles in a Kingdom, but that
of a Governor of a Province, or some chief person in the State cannot happen,
without carrying great misfortunes along with it.

It is great Prudence in such occasions, to follow the council, give by
Thrasibulus to Periander, who sent his Ambassadors to him, desiring to be
informed how he might happily govern his State: He carried them out into a
large field, and discoursing to them of things indifferent, he cut of the
highest ears of Corn, and then told them they should acquaint their Master,
with what they had seen him do, and how that was the best advice he could give
him: Periander understood the meaning, and well concluded, that the only means
to rule in quiet, was to cut off their heads, who might any ways trouble the
State, and that Prince who follows not this Rule, when Justice requires it,
shall quickly find himself necessitated to sustain the inconveniences of a
Civil War. He who cherishes that Serpent which has formerly stung him,
exposes himself to the danger of a second wound; and that Prince who once
pardons the Ringleader of a Rebellion, gives life to a man, who may in time
find an opportunity to raise a second and more dangerous revolt, because he may
then better provide in prevension of those evils which caused his first ruin,
whereas him death were a Quietus est. In a word, a Prince cannot but be
commended for sacrificing the life of a Rebel, to the quiet of his State.

A Design to surprise the Duchess d' Esguillon.
THe news of Monsieur de Montmorency's taking, being brought to Bruxels, the
Queen Mother and Spaniards, received it with no less sorrow then astonishment;
concluding, that seeing the strongest Pillar of the Rebellion by them raised in
France, was surpised and carried to a place, where he was only in a condition
of suffering, the whole contrivance which they had so finely spun to force the
King to stoop unto their Wills, would now vanish into nothing. The Queen Mother
in particular, who had ever a great kindness for the Duke of Montmorency, was
in great fear for him, lest the King should make him the object of his Justice,
for an example to others, as he had well deserved. But Father Chanteloupe, who
never wants remedies, at least imaginary ones, for all accidents, which do
never so little provoke the Queen-Mothers passion, knowing that in Women's
affairs, a Man is ever acceptable to them, in case he do but sooth them in
their affections, advised to surprise Madam de Combalet, and to bring her away
to Bruxels; assuring themselves, that having that Lady in their hands, who
being the Cardinals Niece, and endued with such qualities, as rendered her not
only the most amiable, but the most deserving person of the Court, was the
object of his affections, that grand Minister would be compelled to obtain his
pardon, for very fear lest she might find some harsh usage, in case they should
put him to death. I may safely say, that the important services of this
favorable Genius, ought to have hindered the Queen Mother, who knew him better
then any other person whatever, from consenting to so unjust a design when it
was first proposed, for that consideration alone, ought to have been an
inviolable security to all his relations. But I will only say, the merit of
that Lady was sufficient of it self, to oblige her to punish the Authors of
such rash Councels, seeing she is the Ornament and Glory of the Court, the
honor of her Sex, a miracle of Virtues, and replenished with exemplary Piety,
not precise or disagreeable, but attractive and taking; that she does (as it
were) force a respective love in the Souls of all who behold the many Graces
wherewith Heaven has enriched her. But what reason was there, or indeed what
reason could there be alleged to expiate the Duke de Montmorency's Crimes of
Rebellion, upon a person whose acquired Virtues and innate Graces did oblige
all Mankind to pay her all imaginable honor and respect? Yet Passion having
no eyes to behold any truth which thwarts it; the Queen Mother approved of
Chanteloup's design, thought good to command the execution thereof at Becancon,
writ unto sundry Gentlemen whom she entrusted, to assist the attempt, and took
care that for the safer bringing her away, horses should be laid ready upon
the Road between Bruxels and Paris. But God who is pleased to defend Justice,
and willingly protecteth such as are by him endued with any extraordinary
qualities, discovered the Plot by one Rouure, one of the chief Conspirators,
who acquainted Madam de Combalet with the whole contrivance; and moreover,
furnished her with the means of taking nine principal Agents therein, by the
Chevalier du G^^t, who were all carried to the Bastille. It was not long before
there were Commissioners appointed for their Examination, and their design
being proved, by many undeniable testimonies, they could not have escaped the
reward due to such crimes, had not Madam de Combalet, of her own good nature,
whose charity shines among her other virtues, hindered the execution, by her
humble Petition unto the King. It was satisfaction enough for her, that she was
safe from the danger, and she was more solicitous of rewarding Rouure, who had
been instrumental in her escape, then of causiing them to be punished who would
have acted so outrageous a violence.

Politic Observation.
ALthough besides the injustice, it be an impudent boldness, to injure Ladies
of Quality and Honor, their Sex and Merit having ever secured them from all
outrages, even in the hottest times of War, yet they receive no little glory by
pardoning such rudeness, if any be offered unto them. It is not the same thing
in matter of forgiving wrongs, between private persons and Princes, the latter
being often obliged to follow the rigor of the Laws for the good of his State;
whereas it is always honorable for the former to forgive, especially for
Ladies, sweetness being a becoming Virtue of their Sex, although cruelty be a
usual ingredient in their constitutions. It is a most assured mark of
Generosity, then to pardon injuries when one is able to revenge them. None but
great Courages are touched with pity; for those who have showed themselves
most inhumane, they only convert their Anger into Compassion, whereas they
might justly enough take exceptions against them. Julius Caesar, whose Virtue
is not only notorious, but admired by all the World, was hardly to be moved to
anger by the common fry of men, thinking them (belike) beneath his Passion, and
too inconsiderable to disquiet him. In a word, it is one of the highest points
of Moral virtue, but Christianity inhanceth in somewhat further, obliging us to
forgive those who have offended us, for Gods sake, who invites us unto it; an
advantage it is, and that much more advantageous against offenders, then
punishing of them, seeing there is not any thing wherein we can more lively
resemble the Divine Bounty, then in pardoning of injuries. Kings themselves are
not more considerable for their Justice then their Clemency. Many there have
been ingenious enough in punishing the guilty, but few are the examples of
Clemency, it being rarely seen, that a grand patience cohabits with a Sovereign
power; though the Sun be the most worthy Ornament of the Heavens, yet he is
only respected by men, in regard of his benign influences, which he sends
amongst them; and true it is, that let a Lady be never so great, yet nothing
can so much recommend her, as Clemency, especially such as carries her on, to
do good unto them who have made themselves unworthy thereof, by their
endeavors to do her a mischief.

Monsieur leaves France, and goes into Lorrain.
MOnsieur's accommodation being concluded, and his Majesty's prudence having
disposed of every thing, which seemed necessary for the establishing a secure
Peace in France, every one supposed that the wings of those who favored
Monsieur's Revolt, had been so clipped, that it would be a long time ere they
could fly into such disorders. All good Frenchmen, were touched with such joy,
as they who having been long weather-beaten, by a Tempest at Sea, do at length
safely arrive unto their wished Haven. But those joys were short lived, the Sea
being quickly covered with Fleets scouring up and down, which threatened France
with a furious storm: The Sieur de Puy-Laurens, and some others, who carried
any sway in Monsieur's Councels, had only persuaded him to reconcile himself
unto the King, with design to engage him in some new Revolt, as occasion should
present; and in hopes to make a more advantageous use of it toward the
obtaining of their pretensions, then they had done in Languedoc; they were not
long without a pretense to palliate their intentions, Monsieur de Montmorency's
death, should be the ground of his leaving the Kingdom. They suggested to him
that his entreaties having been so ineffectual and unconsidered in the saving
his life, who was a person of such near concernment to him, he could not think
himself over secure of his own freedom, in case there should be any suspicion
upon him, that however it was a strange affront put upon him, in the sight of
all Europe, seeing he had not credit enough to save a Gentleman, who had
adventured his life and fortunes for his interests. At the same time they gave
out, that his life had been promised unto Monsieur upon his accommodation;
whereas on the contrary, the Sieur de Bullion, and the Marquess de Fossez, did
never give him any such assurance, that having failed in a particular so much
concerning his honor, his Highness could not make any longer abode in France.
Now although all of that Cabal did jointly conclude to carry him out of the
Kingdom, yet they could not agree upon the place whither to carry him. The
Sieur de Puy-Laurens who was passionately in love with the Princess de
Phalsbourg, proposed Lorrain, the place where his heart was, and advised him to
retire thither, it being a thing due to the Princess Marguerite, and there
being no such powerful invitations to carry him into any other place: The rest
found but little safety in Lorrain, by reason of the Dukes weakness, unable to
secure their retreat, or stay there; but were of opinion, that Monsieur should
retire into Cazal, where they assured themselves the Marshal de Toiras, would
receive his Highness, and where he might live secure from all fear. The little
assurance of safety which Monsieur foresaw in Lorrain, did somewhat touch him,
but the Sieur de Puy-Laurens, insinuating to him how easily he might retire
from Nancy to Bruxelles, in case his Majesty should seem to incline toward any
expedition against Lorrain; in consideration of him, and how that he would
always be received there, his birth rendering him considerable, swayed his
former resolutions, and made him incline to that side, so powerful was his
credit with him; although the rest represented to him, that he would find less
security by casting himself into the hands of the Spaniards, then in any other
place whatever; that they might perchance entertain him with honor; but that
it was to be feared, he would not long continue Master of his own liberty, or
that he might have the freedom to get off when he should most desire it. The
resolution of departing being concluded, Monsieur went into Lorrain in
November, and for the more specious pretext of their relapse, they presumed to
write unto the King, persisting to abuse his name and pen; how that the
preservation of Monsieur to Montmorency's life, and the procuring of his
liberty, having induced him to submit to whatever his Majesty was pleased to
impose, the taking off of his head being a person so dear to him, was so
public an affront, and slight, that he could no longer endure it; and
withal, that it was impossible he should longer continue in France, without
giving cause to suspect, he had made his own accommodation with other
intentions, then of obtaining that favor, of which he was still fed with great
hopes: Besides that, he could expect little satisfaction for his own person,
seeing his requests and entreaties had been so little considerable in the
executing of him, whose life was equally dear to him, with his own, and whose
death he could not digest without great dishonor. This was the substance of the
Letter, whereunto there need no other answer, but that the Duke of Montmorency
having been condemned by one of the most famous Parliaments of the Kingdom, for
a Crime which could not be let pass without punishment, unless to the very
great detriment of the State, especially after himself had sent seven Couriers
to assure his Majesty of his fidelity, after he had conspired with Forraigners
to destroy the Kingdom, after he had almost totally raised one of the chiefest
Provinces, after he had been taken in the head of an Army, with his sword died
with blood in his hand, actually fighting against his Majesty's service, after
he had somented divisions in his Majesty's family, and committed several other
enormities as has been declared; there was little reason to expect his pardon,
and as to the other part, that it was improbable his Highness should consent
to the Treaty made at Beziers, only in order to obtain Monsieur de
Montmorency's pardon, when as he was absolutely forced by necessity to submit
thereunto, having not forces enough to defend himself. Such was the reply which
the King sent unto him, wherein he testified to the whole World, how he never
offered any just cause to those of his royal blood, to separate themselves from
him, or to be deficient in paying those respects, unto which nature and his
Majesty's affection did not a little oblige them.

Politic Observation.
Whatever refusal a Prince receives from his King, yet he renders himself
inexcusable, if his Passion transport him beyond his duty: He ought to
recollect unto his memory, how that no one, in a well-governed State can impose
the Law on his Sovereign, but that every one ought to submit his own private,
to his Princes Will. There are in a State, as in the Soul, superior and
inferior powers; and as the law of Nature has ordained the weaker faculties
give way unto the stronger and more able; so the Grandees of a Kingdom are
obliged to stoop under the Laws of their Supreme Prince, and to comply with his
Will, without any the least contradiction. What but Death can be expected from
that body whose particular Members refuse to execute those Offices which are
enjoined them by the Head? And what can be looked for from a State, where the
Nobles fly out, and deny obedience to the Sovereigns Decrees? This were
repugnant to the Order of Justice, nothing but misfortunes could attend it. It
matters not whether they always meet with their particular satisfaction,
seeing a King is obliged to intend the public good, not the requests of his
Grandees. The Sun which presideth in the Heavens does not always shine and
smile on the earth, as we would have him, but as he is obliged in order to the
universal good, so he withdraws himself at certain hours, and who so should
be discontented herewith, would it not appear unreasonable? Are not Kings
sometimes necessitated in consideration of their State, to withold their
favors, and to deny their pardon for certain crimes, which otherwise they
would not scruple to grant? And were it not too too little submission, upon
such occasions for a Subject to fall off, and to fly out into extremities?
Reasons of State are often so visibly apparent, that there need nothing but a
privation of passion to behold and force a confession, that it were imprudence
not to prosecute them; but admit there were no such evincing arguments, yet no
man can justly complain against his Sovereign, in regard reasons of State are
for the most part kept secret. Antiquity did observe a custom very mysterious,
which was this, they placed a Sphynx over the Portals of their Temples, to
teach the people they ought not to enter they but with submissions, such as
should as it were lock up their bold curiosities, from inquiring into the
mysteries which they adored, it being more proper humbly to reverence divine
things, then to pry into them with a needless Inquisition. I could wish the
like Statues were placed at the Gates of our Kings Palaces, to teach men of
all conditions, to receive their Commands and Laws with obedience,
cheerfulness and submission, without examining the reasons of them, which
ought by them, though unknown, to be esteemed for good and just, especially
seeing at last, their Will ought to be a Law to all their Subjects, and that it
is a kind of Rebellion, as it were, to contradict it. For my part, I think it
likewise a great prudence not to inquire into the motives, reasons or
inducements of their Wills, because Ministers might thereby be obliged to
discover Truths, not proper to be known, as happened at Florence, in the time
of Cosime de Medicis, who being extremely pressed by a Florentine to tell him
the reason, why he had refused him an Office whose Predecessor had been hanged
for ill discharging it; at last told him, after many importunities, that he did
it, because he feared he would likewise be hanged as the former, letting him
see by this answer, how he knew him to be like enough for his wickedness to
dance in the same rope. So a Prince expressing any discontent for punishing of
any Grandee, who had engaged him in a Rebellion, and earnestly pressing to know
the reason of such rigor, might be answered, that it was done for fear he might
draw him a second time into the same snares. It is always safer for Princes to
dissemble their discontents, and cheerfully to submit unto their Sovereigns
Will, then to express any dislikes which only serve to bring them into
distrust, to raise suspicions and spies upon their actions, and to hinder their
receiving of any more favors; whereas by their seeming to be well satisfied,
they preserve themselves in their Sovereigns good opinion, and in a condition
to reap abundance of advantages: And Guichardine in his advices says, that he
had oftentimes obtained his ends, by dissembling his discontents with those,
who else would never have served his turn, and that he had received such
friendships and favors from them, as he could not have expected had he
discovered any dislike.

Certain Bishops of Languedoc, deposed from their Charges.
THe Duke of Montmorency, had acquired so great credit in Languedoc, that he
not only drew off diverse men of quality from his Majesty's service, but several
Bishops also, and persuaded seven or eight to subscribe unto the Declaration of
the States; some recanted what they had done, and became conformable to what
his Majesty had ordained in his Declaration; but othersome stood out in their
Rebellion, amongst whom were those of Alby and Vsses, who had delivered their
Cities into Monsieur's hands, of Nismes who would have done the like, of Alets
and Saint-Pont, well-willers to the Rebellion, either by raising of forces or
provisions to be sent to places already revolted. The Archbishop of Narbone
President of the States, had not been defective in endeavoring to divert them
from their designs representing to them how contrary it was to their
profession, which tended to procure Peace, and to show examples of obedience
unto others. And why Gentlemen (quoth he, one day, in a full Assembly, speaking
unto them) and why would you add fuel to the fire already kindled in this
Province, or assist those who endeavor to subvert the State, or why will you
dispense with the service you ow both the King and people, to assist those who
contrive wickedness? Will you be the men who shall make this place a Theater
of bloody Tragedies? Why do you not consider that the designs in which you have
been engaged, tend only to serve some discontented persons of the Court, to
come and extinguish the firebrarnds of their Ambition, in the blood of our
Diocesans, and to fight out their quarrels upon our very Altars? Have ye not
heard how that Forrainers are at the Gates of the Kingdom, and ready to invade
us? Think you they will not fall to divide the spoil, in case they obtain any
little success? And shall this Province become a Conquest, where Rebels and
strangers shall have so much as their Swords will entitle them unto? Have ye
forgot the disasters which the Church suffered in these parts during the Civil
Wars? Would ye be willing to see your Altars profaned, your Goods destroyed,
your Church Ornaments plundered, the Portions of the poor rifled, and the
Priests of the whole Country, flying from their Cures into places of Safety?
And admit these Heavenly considerations should not affect you, how can you
countenance the revolt of this Province, where his Majesty has destroyed
Heresy, restored Peace, Liberty, and Glory to the Church, of which she had so
many years been deprived? Can you forget how his Majesty came personally into
those very places, wherein you now countenance Rebellion with his Sword in his
hand for our defense, what dangers he attempted, how often he grapled with our
enemies, and to what hazards he exposed himself, that be might reestablish us
in our Functions, and the free enjoyment of our Goods? Can you think on these
things and not remain firm in the obedience you ow unto him? Behold an
opportunity of obtaining great glory is now presented by God in us. It is in
this occasion God has enjoined us to show forth that loyalty and submission,
by him so often recommended unto his Apostles, whose successors we have the
honor to be. This is it, unto which I cannot sufficiently invite you, yet you
may herein gain honor and happiness, and more then that too, if you will do
me the honor to believe me. This Rhetorique had been powerful enough to have
retained them in their devoirs, had not their souls been pre-possessed by
Passion, that alone prevented it, insomuch that most of them persevered to run
on in their Rebellion. Hereupon, the King finding them who should have
preserved the people in obedience, both by exhortation and example, to excite
them to Rebellion, could not put up such disorders, but appointed Collectors in
their several Bishoprics, to receive their Revenues, and to employ them in
reparation of Religious Houses, and Episcopal Seas, and thinking it improper to
entrust the care of Souls with such disloyal persons, he procured a breviat
from the Pope addressed to the Archbishop of Arles, the Bishops of St. Fl^ur,
and St. Malo, to draw up their process against them. His Majesty might have
made use of his own power, and have punished them, by his ordinary Justice,
inasmuch as it was Treason, from which there is no exemption, neither could it
have been thought strange by themselves, seeing Jesus Christ himself, and the
two Apostles whom we acknowledge for the chief of Ministers of the Gospel,
refused not to be judged by the Laiety: Yet his Majesty ever a great respecter
of Ecclesiastical men, would not commit their judgment but unto persons of
their own Coat, who deposed the Bishops of Alby and Nismes only, death
preventing the Bishop of Vssez from receiving the like punishment; the rest
they restored to their Bishoprics, having not evidences enough to condemn
them, although they might peradventure be sufficiently guilty.

Politic Observation.
ALthough Bishops by their places are raised to an high degree of honor, yet
they wrong themselves if they think they are exempted from their Kings
Authority, seeing the Popes have in their writings as Gelasius to the Emperor
Anastatius, Pelagius to Childebert, one of our first Kings, and St Gregory to
the Emperor Manritius, acknowledged themselves depending upon their authority.
It is moreover true, that Bishops are more especially obliged, beyond any other
Subjects, to live in an exemplary Loyalty, and by their endeavors to preserve
the people in peace. Upon their promotion to that spiritual dignity, the take a
new Oath of Allegiance, which as it were a second Chain, tieth them to the yoke
of obedience, but admitting that were not so, yet the Ministers of the Church
conforming themselves to the temper of their Mother, which is a spirit of
peace, are bound to appease and pacify the people when they are tumultuously
given, and much more not to blow the Coals of their dissension. Savanarola was
exceedingly condemned for exasperating an insurrection in Florence, against the
Medicis when he publicly preached, that it was Gods Will and Pleasure to have
a popular Government established, to the intent the chief of the City might
have no longer power to dispose of the safety of some, and the Liberty of
others. They who are so inconsiderate as to follow such sedicious tracts, do
render themselves the more unworthy of their callings, by how much the Church
does abhor War and Blood. We should think it very strange, if Heaven which was
created by the eternal Providence of God, to inlighten the World with its
stars, to produce nourishments, by its influences for the preservation of all
creatures, to enamel the earth with all sorts of Flowers, and to overspread it
with a thousand kinds of Fruits, should in a sudden alter its nature, and only
fill us with darkness, terrify us with Thunders, and load the Earth with
Briars and Thorns: And would it not be more wonderful to behold (the Son of
God having not more strictly charged his Disciples with any one thing, then to
be obedient, and to preserve that Peace which he had brought unto Mankind)
Bishops, their Successors, endeavoring to their utmost to destroy and die the
land with blood, to divert people from their duties, to arm them against their
lawful Prince, and by their power of Souls to ruin that Authority, which
Christ their Master has given to their Sovereigns? This were absolutely
repugnant to the Orders by him established, and directly opposite to the Laws
to them prescribed. If any of them should be so forgetful of their duties, the
Ministers of State are the more obliged to punish them, in regard the reverence
wherewith they are esteemed, and the opinion which men have of their sanctity
and Doctrine, renders their example of a more dangerous consequence, and their
discourses more powerful to persuade, whatever they are disposed to inculcate.
For this very reason was it, that Giles Archbishop of Rheimes, was deposed by
Childebert, that Pretextatus was deprived of the Archbishopric of Rouen. In
the time of Childery, that Theodor lost that of Arles by the command of Clovis;
upon this score it was, that Lewis the Debonair, forced the Archbishop of
Milan to give an account of his disloyalties, Abon Archbishop of Rheims,
Volsphod Bishop of Cremone, and Theodolph Bishop of Orleans, accomplices in the
Conspiracy of Bernard King of Italy. Did not Hugh Capet cause Arnoul convicted
of Falsehood and Treason to be drawn from the Sea of Rheims. It is the ancient
politic custom of France, a Right belonging to our Kings, and which Pope
Zachary himself advised Pepin to put in execution, without any scruple, when
and so often as occasion should require. And what probability, I pray is there,
that the Bishops and Churchmen of a Kingdom, should have a privilege to engage
men in Rebellion, and not be punished for so doing, to instill sedicious
Tenants in the minds of men, and that Magistrates should not call them to
account for it, or depose them from their functions, after they had rendered
themselves unworthy of them, by their evil deportment.

Diverse Cabals made by the Duke de Guise.
THe King having secured the Peace in Languedoc, Monsieur le Cardinal invited
him to have an eye after the establishment of it in Provence, where the Duke of
Guise held diverse practices tending to Rebellion, and which were depending upon
the same design with Monsieur de Montmorency. The King having been informed of
his evil deportment, for at least a year before, had often moved him to
surrender the Government of that Province, in consideration of other
recompenses offered unto him; and upon his refusal had commanded him to come to
Court, that he might fairly and handsomely dis-ingage him, without taking notice
of those contrivances in which he was then imbarking: It having ever been the
Cardinal's advice unto his Majesty, not to proceed unto the extremities of
rigor, but when he should be, as it were, enforced it, by the extremities of
dis-obedience. But the Duke of Guise kept himself in Provence, being fearful
lest his actions might be a means of stopping him at Court, and laying him up
in a place where he could not be capable of imbroiling, whereupon instead of
waiting upon his Majesty, he caused his Mother the Duchess of Guise, to beg
leave of his Majesty, that he might pass away two or three months time at Rome
and Loretta. The King was very glad of it, and readily granted his desire, as
knowing that travel does often correct passion in matters of revolt and love;
yet was it nevertheless upon condition, that after his return, he should come
to Court, and clear some suspicions which had been taken at the manner of his
late Conduct. But instead of returning back from Italy, he dispatched the Sieur
de Grand Pre, one of his Domestiques, to beseech his Majesty then at Vic, to
bestow some employment upon him, amongst those forces which were then marching
toward Italy, for the safety of his Allies: His Majesty denied to grant his
request, conceiving that he rather aimed to palliate his disobedience, then to
do any real service, and thereupon renewed his former command, that he should
come to him, and justify himself as to diverse particulars whereof he was
suspected. But he being never inclined to obey this command; and on the
contrary, living out of the Kingdom, without his Majesty's permission, against
the inhibition contained in the Law, which declares such Princes as violate it,
guilty of High Treason; withal, residing there to entertain intelligences to
the King's disservice, of which he had particular advice, there was no other
way to look on him, but in the quality of a Rebel, and to deprive him of the
Government of Provence, which lay convenient for him to let in a Foreign
enemy; he being further to be suspected, in regard the House of Lorrain lays
some ancient claim, although upon weak pretenses to this Province; whereupon
the King (provoked by these important reasons resolved to discharge him of that
Government, and to bestow it on the Marshal de Vitry, whose valor prudence,
and affection his Majesty might rely on, with confidence that the D.o Guise
could attempt nothing in prejudice of the State, which would not as quickly be
repelled; and withal, caused him to take the Oath of Governor the same day,
that the Peace was concluded with Monsieur, though his Letters Patents had been
dispatched in April.

Politic Observation.
IT is very dangerous to commit the Government of a Province to a Grandee who
has once had his hand in a Revolt, who has declared his discontent, or has
any pretense to the place in his charge. The disloyalty which engaged him in
any faction, renders him more deserving of punishment then preferment, and the
least chastisement which can be inflicted on him, is to deprive him of all
employments, it being a thing of great concern, exemplarily to chastize those
Governors which are guilty of such offenses. The punishment inflicted on them,
serves for an example to others, and keeps them in their duties, whereas
impunity incourageth others to run into the same faults. Besides, he who has
once had the impudence to imbark himself in a rebellious design, will be ever
ready to put it in execution, when a fair opportunity invites him. Great
sicknesses administer suspicion of relapses; and the wisest Kings, having once
seen a Grandee fall off from his Allegiance, have ever distrusted him, and
never afforded him the opportunity of doing the least evil. Small things may
be hazarded, but amongst such, the Government of a Province, one of the most
important charges of a State may not be reckoned. It is likewise equally
dangerous, to trust a Grandee who has once showed himself to be discontented;
it were to be ignorant of the usual consequences which attend great men's
discontents to entrust the Government of a Province with them. There is not any
thing more natural to a man who is either provoked or believes himself
injured, then to study revenge, and to use his utmost endeavor to retort it.
To give such a man authority, were to empower him to satisfy his Passion,
which attended with weakness would be ineffectual. The great employments of
the Marshal de Marillac, did only serve to render him the more culpable,
neither indeed may any thing else be reasonably suspected from those men that
give themselves over to a male-contented humor.

But above all, it is a most signal imprudence to commit the government of
great Provinces, to such as have any pretensions unto them, how old or ancient
soever. This latter age has afforded us a memorable example hereof, in the
person of the Duke de Mercoeur, who had not raised a faction in Bretaign but
upon some pretenses as ancient as frivolous. Does not every one know, how much
the late King was troubled to get him out? And was not the deceased King
blamed, for having bestowed the Government of it upon the Sieur do Vendosm, his
son-in-law, who in process of time, was suspected to have designed to make
himself Duke thereof. Ambition does easily ground new designs upon ancient
pretenses, it teaches Grandees disloyalty, and makes them like Moles, always
undermining; it makes them slight their quiet Life, Health, Laws, and Religion
it self and all, that they may gain the ends unto which they aspire; nay, it
sometimes so puffs them up, that some of them have carried in their hearts,
the Crowns which their Kings have wore on their heads. Mark Anthony made a
discreet Order, when Cassius had made himself Master of Syria, his native
Country, whose inhabitants had assisted him in that design, whereby he
inhibited the conferring any command upon a man in his own Country. How
dangerous is it then to bestow it upon such who persuade themselves it is their
brith-right? If Ambition be to be feared, though without a pretext, how much
more is it then to be suspected, when there is some apparent justice for the
ground of it? If the Province be divided into parties, he need then only
adhere to the strongest, and then much may be done; but if it be united, he may
possibly engage the whole in revolt, if he once get the affections of the
people, which is easily brought to pass if a man designs it, and makes it his
business.

The King returns from Languedoc to Paris.
THe King having settled all things in Languedoc, in such a posture, as there
remained nothing to be feared; his Majesty parted from Tholose upon the 29. of
October, to return toward Paris^ Now having formerly understood, that Monsieur
had only made his Peace with a resolution to fly out again upon the first
fair invitation, he intended to march thither with all speed; to which end, he
would only be attended with some Light Horse, certain Companies of Musketeers
and Pikemen on horseback. The Cardianl whose body is not so vigorous as his
Soul, could not resolve to make such speed, especially considering the labors
he had undergone in the voyages, and much more the pains he had taken in
smothering the Wars of Lorrain and Languedoc in their birth, had much decayed
his strength: Whereupon he thought better to wait upon the Queen, but scarce
was he gone two days journey from Tholose, when he found himself seized with
violent sickness, which forced him to retire to Bourdeaux, where is pains so
increased, that France was like to loose him, who in the conduct of his
Majesty's Arms and affairs, had established her in the highest point of glory
she had ever yet been. His Majesty was not only tenderly affected thereat but
exceedingly afflicted; far otherwise it was with strangers the most ambitious
of who were persuaded to believe he was dead. If they apprehended any joy
thereat, much more did the factious spirits of the Court begin to lift up their
heads, persuading themselves this Sun once set, they might rise with more
luster; and among the rest, le Guard des Sceaux de Chasteauneuf, instead of
bewailing with tears of blood, the loss of him who had obtained all that
honor for him which he possessed, and who had preserved him maugre the malice
of his many enemies, suffered himself to be so vainly puffed up with the hopes of
succeeding in his place, that he began to act the chief Minister, to issue out
Orders which concerned him not, and to engage himself in Cabals with such
persons, who not only hated Monsieur the Cardinal, and passionately wished his
death, but had evil designs against the State. The Cardinal had ever prevented
him from engaging very much among them by the strict hand which he kept over
him, and by curbing in his vanities, but being once got out of his sight he
lost himself, by setting too forward in affairs, and inconsiderately
precipitated himself into disgrace by aspiring unto too much honor.

Politic Observation.
NOthing is more ordinary with men then to be bewitched to great employments.
This was one of the chief reasons, that the Ancients painted Fortune blind, for
few persons there are who can keep a medium in great Offices. There are none
but eminent genius's who can secure themselves from certain ebullitions, which
do (as it were) naturally arise from extraordinary prosperity, and do cause
most men to fall from favor to ruin. Ambition and Vanity do every day engage
those whom Fortune smiles upon in new designs to rise higher. and in case they
want lawful ways, they refuse none which flatter their Passion, when they find
themselves most fixed in their power, then do they most despise that of the
law, and assume the licentiousness to advance themselves by any means
whatever; the higher they are mounted, the sooner they forget those who have
exalted them, and they are industrious to destroy their Benefactors, that they
may enjoy their honors. That which is most deplorable, is, neither age nor
time can cure this Court-sicknesse; but on the contrary, it does daily acquire
more force and deeper root in ordinary spirits who are the more apt to esteem
their own deserts from the time of their experience. Hence it is that they can
nerver be sufficiently rewarded. This is that which has ever been a maxim with
me, a great rise is commonly the first step to misfortune, especially to a man
who is not endued with an extraordinary conduct to curb his Passions, and
preserve his soul in modesty neither did I ever think any man the happier for
being in great Offices, he has more trouble for the time to come, then
satisfaction for the present; the superabundant cares, the troubles and
discontents which accompany him day and night, and his insatiable passions
which do incessantly solicit him to aspire unto more, force him to deny
himself, the enjoyment of what he has* that he may arrive unto what he has
not. Happy is the man who is content with his own condition, he is Master of
more enjoyments and tranquillity then those who afflict themselves in their
greater pretensions; and on the contrary, there is no person more unfortunate
then him, which knows not how to bound his desires, nor to acknowledge his
good fortune.

ANNO 1633.
The Arrival of the Cardinal at Paris, after his sickness at Languedoc.
IT is reported that the people of Thule grieved with the Sun's long absence,
who for the space of 40 days leaves them in an absolute darkness, did
heretofore go up to the tops of the Mountains, when first they saw the morning
Usher him in, to welcome his approach with a thousand shouts of joy, and
offered sacrifices to him. It should likewise seem that most men of quality, at
Court, or in Paris the beginning of this year, impatient of once more seeing
the Cardinal, who every one considered as a most propitious star, on whose
Prudence the King has often said the happiness of his State depended, would
imitate the like actions at his arrival. Heaven which is frequently pleased to
mingle some evils with the prosperities of this life, had sent this grand
Minister, together with the joys of those happy successes which his Counsels
had obtained for his Majesty in Languedoc and Lorrain, a very dangerous
sickness, to the great grief of all such who were any whit desirous of the
good of France; but Passions changing with Objects, joy succeeded their grief,
when it was once known that he was returning indifferent well, and the desire
which all considerable persons had to see him invited them out to meet him, so
that they rode from Paris to Roche-Fort, a small Village belonging to the Duke
de Montbazon, where he was to rest before he came to Paris, which was covered
with Horses and Coaches f^ll of Nobility. Diverse went to meet him as far a
Estamps, and others to Orleans; but who will not be surprised to hear that the
King himself was pleased to honor him so far, as to visit him at Rochefort,
and to show him the testimonies of so particular an affection, that nothing
could be more visible or obliging: Hardly had the Cardinal alighted, when the
King arrived. His Majesty impatient to see him, went up into his Chamber by a
back-stair, which was the nearer way, whilst this grand Minister hearing of
his coming, went down the great stairs with more diligence then his strength
would well bear; so that instead of meeting, that agility which is natural unto
the King, caused him to go down again, and after some hindrance by the press
of the Nobility, they at last met in the Castle Court. The Cardinal approaching
his Majesty cast himself at his feet, but the King presently raising him with
one hand, embraced him with the other so tenderly, that most of the beholders
could not forbear tears of joy, each one professing that it was impossible to
see testimonies of a more cordial favor from a Master or more respectfull
affection from a servant. Such were the sentiments both of one and the other,
that at first they were speechless; but having recovered the liberty of their
tongues, the King told him, that he received as much joy to see him in so good
plight, as the enemies of France had at the false report of his death, that
this testimony of their hatred was a new instigation to augment that esteem he
ever had on his services, and that he should not recommend any thing with more
earnestness unto him, then the being careful of his own health. The Cardinal
answered, he desired not to live but to serve his Majesty, that he daily begged
of God that his services might be the boundaries of his life, and that his
health would soon be recruited, since he found his Majesty in so good
condition. After this they retired two hours in private together, to consider
of diverse affairs which his Majesty would not conclude without him, after which
his Majesty returned to Paris.

Politic Observation.
EXtraordinary honors are justly due to great Ministers of State, as the only
luster of their fair attempts. The joy of their return from a long voyage, has
often invited the people to go forth and meet them, and to render them all
imaginable respects. Thus Pompey returning, after he had been some time
detained at Naples by a dangerous sickness, the greatest part of the Romans
marched out of the City, the ways, the Port and the streets were so full, that
there was hardly any Passage. Some were offering sacrifice for his health,
others feasting and making merry in sign of joy; some marched before him with
Torches, and others strewed the way with flowers. Thus likewise Scipio returning
from Germany where he achieved glorious exploits, every one longed to see him
return triumphing to Rome, that they might render him the glory which he
deserved, yet because the Triumph was not a custom to be granted to such who
were neither Pro-consuls nor Magistrates, the Senate could not resolve to grant
him that honor neither did he desire it; but on the other side, it is observed
in History, that there never was so great a concourse of people in Rome, as at
his return either to see him, or to testify their acknowledgements they had of
his services by their going out to receive him. I will pass a little further,
and add that justice and prudence, do oblige Kings to join with their people on
such occasions, and so render extraordinary honors unto their Ministers,
either for the more ample acknowledgement of the services they have received
from them or for the more countenancing of them in the execution of their
commands, or to encourage others to be affectionate to their service.
Acknowledgement is a Virtue requisite both in Prince and people, and seeing the
service done to a State is of no less advantage to a Prince, then to his
Subjects, he is no less obliged to testify his gratitude, if these proofs of
his good will confer a great honor on those who have served him, himself
receives no mean advantage thereby; because the Nobility who are extreme
sensible of honor, will not then stick at any thing which may tend to his
service, and the Agents of his Will have more credit and authority to execute
his Commands. It there any thing more glorious (said the great Chancellor of
Thiery, King of the Goths) then to deserve praise and approbation, who by
reason of their Sovereignty are not to be suspected of Flattery? Surely no, the
honor which they confer upon any one proceeding from the favorable Judgments
which they give of his actions, and their authority permitting not them to be
guilty of adulation. Which if true (as doubtless it is) there is not any thing
then which does more encourage Nobility, then the glory wherewith Princes
honor their servants, nor is there any thing which does more empower a
Minister then the carresses which his Prince bestows upon him; they confer no
less credit upon their Ministers, then their stamps do on their moneys.

Tiberius one of the wisest Roman Emperors did well understand the importance
of this maxim in the honors which he bestowed on the Consuls those chief
Ministers of his Will, when he went to receive them at the Gate of his Palace,
at such time as they came to sup with him, and waited on them back again when
they took their leaves.

Ferdinand King of Spain, the man who laid the foundation of that great power
which this Monarchy has since obtained, was not to seek in it, when as
Gonzalve one of his greatest Captains, returning to Burgos after having rendered
him such important services as are well known to every one, he went out to
receive him with such honor as cannot be expressed. Neither was the manner of
his entertaining Cardinal Xinimes less remarkable, for he seldom spoke to him
but bare headed, and sometimes received him upon his knee. He well knew, that
the honor wherewith he acknowledged his services, did animate others to follow
his example, and gave that grand Minister so powerful an authority to execute
his commands, that there was not a person of what condition soever durst oppose
him.

A dispatch sent to the Hollanders to hinder the Treaty.
IT being of great concernment to prevent the conclusion of any Treaty between
the Spaniard and Hollander, his Majesty bent his chief care to take order
accordingly: Indeed it was at that time a matter of so great concernment, that
the Fortunes of most Princes of Europe seemed to depend thereupon; and so much
the more circumspection ought his Majesty to use, in regard of the Procedures
of the Spaniard, who had contrary to form permitted the States of the Provinces
obeying the Low Countries, to negotiate the particulars of the Treaty with the
Hollanders, and the advantageous proffers by him made to obtain it, gave great
cause to look about, lest they might be induced to assent thereunto: Neither
was it unknown, how that he designed (the League once concluded) to assist the
Duke of Orleans with an Army, as also the Duke of Lorrain to invade France, and
to send the residue of his Forces unto the Emperor, the better to curb the
Swede, and to prosecute those advantages he had lately obtained against them.
The Cardinal who pierces into the depth of their pretensions, was industrious
to fortify his Majesty in the resolution of preventing the conclusion of that
Treaty; in order to which, he likewise made him certain Proposals
well-becomming the acuteness of his more then humane spirit: He committed the
management of that negotiation unto the Sieur of Charnace, who was newly
returned from Germany, where he had given such sundry proofs of his prudence
amongst diverse Princes, that his well-acquitting himself of that employment,
could not be any ways suspected. I shall not say any thing concerning his
instructions, only this, the Orders contained in them were so many
incomparable effects of the Cardinal, to whom nothing was impossible, but I
shall pass on to the address which he used in the execution of it, so happy I
say it was that he obtained all that could be desired. After having passed the
usual Complements in his Majesty's behalf to the Prince of Orange, the
Governors and Deputies of the States of Holland; he told them that his Majesty
was very solicitous of such a League, which may conclude their differences in
an happy peace, but not finding any likelihood thereof in that now proposed
unto them he was pleased out of his affection and good will to their interests
to send him unto them to communicate such thoughts unto them as he conceived
most advantageous to their Commonwealth. He beseeched them to consider that
the eagerness alone wherewith the Spaniards prosecuted it, was enough to
render it suspected, that Counsels entertained with heat by an enemy, connot be
but with design to advantage himself, that it was visible the disorder of his
affairs was the only cause he so passionately prosecuted it, that the
extremity to which he was reduced being assaulted over all the Indies, in
Germany, in Italy, in the Low Countries unable to furnish out new Levies or
moneys necessary for his security, did not a little incline him thereunto: He
further represented to them, how it had always been esteemed for a matter of
great concernment, not to give an enemy breath when he is upon the point of
falling, and made it easy to be concluded, that for them to make a Peace with
the Spaniard in this his low condition, would be the more prejudicial to them,
he having hardly any other shift to make himself considerable, than the
reporting of this Treaty to be concluded; neither was he backward to represent
unto them, that admitting these his reasons should be invalid, yet they did
abuse themselves, if they believed that the Treaty could include their Peace in
it, in regard of the Spaniards obstinate resolution of never relinquishing his
pretended Sovereignty over their Countries, a resolution which he has ever
protested against the Decree of the 16. of July,* 1588 which declared Philip
the second to have lost all his right over them, and how that after he had
treated with them as between Sovereign and Sovereign by concluding that Treaty,
1609, yet he could not forbear his ill intention during the 12 years that it
lasted, and which is more set Berkins Chancellor of Brabant in the year 1621.
to sosicite them to return unto the obedience, as he was pleased to say of
their natural Prince that in vain they did persuade themselves the Council of
Spain would relinquish his pretensions; seeing on the contrary, upon every
occasion he has been ready to drive on his pretenses both upon them and
others, and that admitting the Treaty should be once concluded, yet they must
ever be renewing of it; and in effect that nothing would be obtained thereby,
but the loss of a fair opportunity, whiles the Spaniards were reduced to so
low an ebb. He moreover, forced them to confess, that the Treaty being
incapable of producing their Peace, the State of their affairs, and good of
their Country did not oblige them in any respect to desire it, that their
Provinces were never more flourishing, that Learning, Husbandry, Trade and
whatever Peace makes elsewhere to flourish, were with them freely exercised in
times of War, that their Disciplines were so carefully improved, that the
Athenians could never with so much reason represent an armed Pallas as they
might, that their Pastures and Plains, were not in the least troubled with the
Soldiers; that their Plow-shares were as bright as their Pikes and Swords; and
that the noise of the Cannons did not at all hinder their Traffic, as the
Province of Zealand, and those others which are most addicted unto Merchandise
have declared by their aversions to this Treaty. Some private ones of Spain
might paradventure object that admitting the State of their Provinces might not
compel them to a cessation of Arms for some years! yet it could not however but
be advantageous to them, because the Flemings and Walloons, would in that
interim forget their warlike exercises, and that the Swedes and Protestants
would so weaken the House of Austria, that there would be no more cause of
fear; but he easily convinced them of the vanity of their hopes, and
represented to them, how little reason there was to believe that the want of
account during the Treaty, would effeminat the Flemings and Walloons, because
the Spaniard would not leave them idle, but find employments enough for them in
other parts: and that on the contrary, undoubtedly the Spaniard would transport
all his force into Germany, which he had formerly entertained in the
Low Countries; by which means he would force those Princes who counterpoised
his Power, to receive the Law from him, and to lay down their Arms, and which
once effected, that he would bring back his Forces from Germany recruited with
a far greater strength, which had for many years supported the House of
Austria; and that it would not then be very difficult to reduce Holland unto
slavery. This Answer was the more to be considered, in regard it was so
convincing, contrary to the preservation of their State and Liberty; nor did he
forget to add that on the contrary, it was not a little important to foresee
how much this Treaty would undoubtedly weaken the united Provinces, both in
regard of the Division it would raise among them, or the dis-use of Arms, and
their Traffic in the Indies, so far was it from any likelihood of increasing
their power; that it was but vain to hope for it without reliquishing the Trade
of both the Indies; the Spaniard being not so indiscreet as to condescend
thereunto after the receiving so great detriment as he had from them; but that
in case they concluded it, they would thereby blast their fairest hopes,
diminish the stock of their riches, and cut off their right hand, their power
by Sea, without which they were not considerable among their neighbors: As to
what concerned the discontinuation of the War, he freely told them that States
preserve not themselves but by such means as have served to establish them, as
natural bodies subsist not but by the same things as are in their first
compositions; and that they did in vain strive to cause their State to flourish
in peace, which had received it is birth and being from War, and which could not
but by War be preserved in its present splendour. He laid before them that peace
would be absolutely prejudicial to them, as experience had evinced in the late
12 years Treaty, during which the Spanish Plots, Gold, and devises had wrought
them a 1000 times more damage then all their open force could ever do; besides,
the Soldiers laying by their usual exercises, would loose much of their valor,
by which till then they had obtained such signal advantages, and being not
ignorant how powerful impressions truth makes, when it is seconded by glory;
that he might excite them, he proclaimed aloud, that there never yet was
Commonwealth, so like the Roman, as that of the Hollander; adding withal,
that if that had received such continual growth from War, as it had not in
seven hundred years from it is first foundation until Augustus time, but only
twice shut up the Temple of Janus, so it had lost it self by an unactive Peace*
and that nothing but the like misfortune could befall them, when once they
should relinquish their exercise of Arms. Nor did he conceal from them that in
case they should then conclude the Treaty, their Republique would totally
discredit it self with its Allies, not only because they would no more esteem
their conduct after they should fee them run on to so disadvantagious a
resolution; but the more, in regard they did in such a conjuncture of time as
would be very prejudicial to their neighbors, especially those of Germany, who
finding themselves thereby dis-obliged, could not for the future be so
assisting to them, as formerly they had been. He beseeched them to remember
that a State which injureth its Allies, injureth it self; and that in fine, if
after so many victories they should humonr the Spaniard in his passionate
desire of the Treaty, there could no other esteem be had of them but such as
Caesar had of Pompey when he was well handled by him at Duras but not
prosecuted, who openly said, Pompey knows not how to overcome. This was the
substance of most of the reasons no less judicious then powerful, which the
Sieur de Charnace employed at diverse meetings had with the Ministers of Holland
to prevent the Treaty, so dexterously did he manage them, so vigorously and with
such address that he easily convinced the Prince of Orange, who for some
particular interest was indifferent well inclined thereunto, and persuaded the
Governors and Deputies of the States to confess, that there was no more to be
thought but how to force the Spaniard by Arms to an absolute relinquishing his
pretensions over their country, in a Treaty of Peace, wherein all the Princes
their Allies should be included to oblige him the more firmly to observe the
conditions thereof, neither satisfied with this resolution, he assured them
according as he was commanded, that they might the more readily take the field;
how the King would cause a succor of then or twelve thousand men, to be sent
unto them from the Swede, who accordingly were conducted unto them about August
by the Collonell Melander; so that about the beginning of Spring, the Prince of
Orange besieged Rimberg and carried it, and sent Count William of Nassau to the
confines of Flanders to divert the Spaniard.

Politic Observation.
Whatever terror the horror of Arms do naturally carry with them, yet do I
think that Peace ought not to be concluded but on four occasions. The first is,
when there is a just ground to believe that it will carry things to an
advantageous Peace, for seeing War ought not to be undertaken but in order to
the obtaining of a good Peace, and that the end is ever to be preferred before
the means, it cannot be doubted but that Arms are to be laid by when there are
any more likely means to obtain it: The Olive Trees, true Symbols of Peace,
bearing fruit use-full for man's life are doubtless more to be esteemed then
Laurels which only put forth unprofitable berries; and the great advantages
which are obtained by Peace, are more to be esteemed then the greatest glory
acquired to Wars. I have formerly sufficiently proved this truth, nor will I
longer dwell upon it. The second is, when the eexpences and incommodities of War
do in force a Treaty. There is not any courage which is not obliged to submit
to the law of necessity, and the impossibility of prosecuting an enterprise,
how just and glorious soever, has exempted the greatest Princes from any
blame. War ought not to be continued but to obtain Victory, which when there is
no likelihood of amidst the ruins of a Country, it is then much more expedient
to make a League then totally to fall. The Gods themselves, says an Ancient,
do submit to necessity; there is nothing stronger then it, and the greatest
virtue must stoop to it, neither is any valor or prudence obliged to oppose
it. The third is, when it may reasonably be hoped that the League will weaken
the enemy, whom at that time we despair to overcome, and that either by sowing
some division among them, or by effeminating them by the discontinuation of
their warlike exercise. The wise Pilot does not obstinately withstand the
Tempest, when he sees his Vessel extremely bruised, but letting fall the
Sails, runs into some shelter where he may ride at Anchor, until such time
as the fury of the Winds be abated that he may put to Sea again: Thus is it an
effect of discretion to lay by the Sword for some time when an enemy is so
potent that there is no likelihood of any thing but loss by the prosecution of
the War. The fourth is that a League ought to be concluded, when it will afford
the means of taking more advantage. War is a kind of sickness in the State,
and as sick people are permitted to rest, the better to recover their lost
strength; so I think it cannot but be commendable in a Prince to surcease the
War for some time, the better to refresh his forces, to recruit them, and to
raise moneys necessary to maintain them. If on such occasions it be reasonable
to conclude a Treaty, it will then be very improper to conclude it, when a
Country is flourishing, and raises more advantages by War then Peace. Most
certain it is, that sometimes so it happens, and Hannibal well knew it, when
seeing the Carthaginians weep upon the first demand of the Tribute granted to
the Romans, at the end of the second Punick War, he reproached them, as Livy
observes it. Ye had much more reason, quoth he, to have weep'd when you were
prohibited to War against strangers, that was the would which killed you. The
Lacedaemonians and the Romans were not ignorant of it, it being upon this ground
that they would never discontinue the use of Arms, unless when Fortune
designing the ruin of their Empires, persuaded them to taste the sweets of
Idleness, which opening the door to delight and luxury, might in a little time
dull their courages, and make them easily conquered by their enemies. This if
true, among most States it is certainly much more apparent in relation to those
who have received their Beings from War, nor can be preserved but by War. It
were likewise great imprudence to make a League which might afford an enemy
time to recruit. Had King Perseus known the condition of the Romans, he would
have been more wary in concluding that Peace with them which he did, as Livy
records, which gave their Ambassadors accasion at their return to laugh at
him, for having suffered himself to be surprised by them; for he had then ready
all provisions necessary for the War, of which the Romans were altogether
unprovided; so that concluding a League he gave them time to settle their
affairs and take an advantage upon him; besides all these considerations, if a
League does not at least serve to obtain an happy peace, it cannot but be
esteemed for disadvantagious. For what reason can there be to deprive ones self
of power, and to give a weakened enemy leave and leisure to reinforce himself;
when there is not an assurance that it will end in a peace of use and profit?
So to proceed were some kind of blindness, neither can any one so act, unless
an enemy to his own interest.

The Marquess de St. Chaumont, sent by the King into the Country of the Elector
of Treves, to force his Enemies from the rest of his Towns, and to establish
him.
IF his Majesty showed any thing of Prudence in preventing the conclusion of
any Treaty between the Spaniard and the Hollanders, he discovered no less
courage in his endeavor to re-establish the Elector of Treves, in the rest of
those places which his enemies had usurped from him, Fumay and Reveign,
situated on two Pennisula's upon the River Meuse, had ever acknowledged him
for their Sovereign Lord; but the Spaniard whom convenience seems to entitle
unto any places which they may master, had clapped a garrison into them,
designing to fortify them, to secure the Commerce of that River, and withal
to make some enterprise upon the Frontier of Champagne. The King could not put
up such an injury offered unto the Elector, since he had taken him into his
protection, but ordered the Marquess de St. Chaumont to march toward Meziers,
with those forces which he commanded in Champagne to dislodge them. The Sieur
de Chastelliers Barlort, and the Comte de la Suze, were made Marshals de Camp,
who coming to the Army marched directly away toward those two places. His
courage made him wish that he might find some opposition, whereby he might
obtain the more glory to his Masters Arms; but making his approaches he
understood that the Spanish Garrison, notwithstanding all their Rodomontades had
marched out the night before without sound of Trumpet, so that instead of
fighting, all he had to do, was to receive testimonies of the inhabitants joy,
who acknowledging his Majesty for their Protector, did willingly receive the
Regiment of Champagne into Fumay, and that of Normandy into Reveign. The
Marquess de St. Chaumont, finding himself obliged to remunerate their good
will, by all the favors which he could do them in quartering of the Army,
settled so good an Order amongst the Soldiers, that they never took any thing
without paying for it, but behaved themselves with great moderation and
courtesy. The Enemy did not then oblige him to be more active at that time,
and indeed the season of the year was such, in regard of the Snows and Frost,
that he could not march without difficulty, so that his Majesty sent him Order
to return, and to leave his Forces in Garrison upon the Frontier. He returned
to spend some time at the Fort, whereupon the 10th. of February, he and the
Comte Brissac were created Ministers of State to serve his Majesty in his
Counsel, the Spaniards who never sleep but when they have nothing to do, took
the occasion of his absence to return into the Country of the Elector of
Treves, and to do what they pleased; but the King, and the invitation of the
Spring, permitting his return, he carried the Army back again, and without much
ado forced them to quit the Field. The next thing he resolved, was to assault
Freidembourg, upon which they had seized, whose Garrison offered a thousand
violences to Travelers, and the adjacent places. The Comte de la Suze
commanded it to be invested, and coming in person before it in the month of
June, he summoned Machinister who commanded it for the Comte d'Embden, and upon
refusal of a surrender they provided to assault it. The Town was won with
little resistance, and the Castle forced within two days after, there being
not above three or four men slain on both parts. Thus the Country of Treves was
totally reduced unto his Majesty's Possession; nevertheless his Majesty having
only secured it for the Archbishop the true Lord thereof, caused him to be
restored in his Metropolitan City, about the beginning of October, by the Sieur
de Bussilamet. The Archbishop indeed finding himself unable to make it good
against the Spaniards, he desired him to stay with him and command his forces,
and the Sieur de Bussy having presented the Keys unto him, he presently
returned them, saying, I beseech you keep them for his Majesty; his Eminence
likewise published a Declaration about the end of this year, commanding his
Subjects to acknowledge the King for their Lord, to assist him in his interest,
to receive his Soldiers into their Cities, jointly to defend them, and to give
unto them the best entertainment the places could afford.

The principal Obligations of him who takes a Prince into Protection.
Doubtless it is honorable for a great Prince to undertake the Protection of
another, unable to subsist by his own force, but though it is honorable, yet
it is not without care, if this protection be to his advantage, yet is he
obliged to recover whatever is taken from him; and in fine, fairly to restore
it. To leave him a prey to his enemies were a sign of weakness, or want of
courage, or an absolute breach of promise in the first assumption. He that for
fear of the charge, the success of the War, or any other consideration shall
neglect it does not only deprive himself of that honor which the quality of a
Protector ascribes unto him, but does likewise cloth himself with shame.
Moreover, what expenses soever he is at on such occasions, yet he is obliged by
Justice to restore all places into the hands of their natural Prince, he being
only, as it were, a Depositary; and as the Laws of Deposition do not permit the
appropriating of any thing to ones self, the restoring of them, will be as
honorable, as the detaining of them will be unjust. Ptolomy King of Egypt
dying, committed his son heir to his Crowns, then a child, unto the protection
of the Commonwealth of Rome, who professing a particular observation of their
promises, were not deficient in resigning the Kingdom into his power upon his
first being capable of Government. Thus Archadius, seeing his son Theodosius
very young and unable to secure himself from the power of the Persians, so
played his Game with Indigertes their King, that he undertook his protection;
and by this means he tied up his Arms by delivering his son into his hands.
Indigertes received the Tutillage as an honor, and discharged it with such
fidelity that he preserved Theodosius life and Empire. That I may let you see
these latter ages want not the like examples, Philip of Austria, King of
Castile, leaving his son Charles but of twelve years age, requested Lewis the
Twelfth by his Will to be his Guardian, and to take the Kingdom into his
protection. The King accepted thereof, and in prosecution of his charge, was so
punctually correspondent to the Trust Philip had reposed in it, that he
preserved his States against France it self, nor would usurp the least whatever
provocations Maximilian gave him. In fine, notwithstanding all restitutions or
expenses, which a King is obliged unto, yet ought he never to refuse the
protection of a Prince bordering upon his Countries; because besides the glory
whereof he deprives himself, he inforceth the other to throw himself into the
protection of some one as powerful as himself, who may raise advantages by it,
and peradventure to his prejudice.

The Embassy and Negotiation of the Sieur de Feuquieres, to the Queen of
Swede, and the renewing the treaty of Alliance between the two Crowns.
THe Cardinal representing unto the King how the affairs of Germany were no
less considerable the those of Holland, his Majesty resolved to provide
accordingly, and made choice of the Sieur de Feuquieres, to negotiate those
concerns with the Allies of this Crown. The experience this Gentleman had
acquired in other considerable employments, rendered him no less deserving of
this, then the address and dispatch which he showed in proving those Orders
which were delivered unto him; and it was the more needful to make use of such
a man as he was in this German affair, in regard it concerned the curbing in of
the House of Austria's Ambition, who were become very powerful by usurping the
Protestant Princes States, who were feared by their neighbors, and would have
been a terror to France it self, could the have prosecuted their advantages.
His Orders were chiefly three; the first was, to testify to Christina Queen of
Swede, daughter and heir to the late King in the person of the Chancellor
Oxenstern, and all the Princes of the League of Leipsic; what care his Majesty
took in their interest, the Passion he had to see them restored who had been
despoiled of their Estates; and how ready he was by assisting them to afford
them the means of securing their late victories. The second was, to reunite
them and confirm them in the resolution of prosecuting the designs of the
League by a new Treaty of Alliance. And the third was to take such course for
the management of the Wars, that their Armies might want nothing but might be
always ready for action. The Princes had resolved about the end of the last
year to hold a Diet a Hailbron upon Nekar, to conclude upon the affairs of the
War by a common consent, and there it was where the foundation of all was to be
laid. The Sieur de Feuquieres took Post the fifth of February, that he might
the sooner get thither; but the Cardinal knowing such like Assemblies are
commonly full of confusion, unless each of them in particular be predisposed
to reason, persuaded his Majesty to send him to the Courts of diverse the chief
among them, the better to insinuate unto them how much it concerned them to
continue in Union. He received Orders accordingly, nor was it of small
consideration, because he could easilier dispose them one by one, then in a
multitude, nor was he defective of coming with the first unto Hailbron, to
prevent those whom he had not yet seen, and to confirm the others in their
resolutions; and being arrived, the first care he took was to testify the
singular and constant affection which his Majesty had for the common good, and
to assure them that they should receive indubitable proofs of it upon any fair
occasion. The next thing he did was to illustrate what great assistances his
Majesty had contributed to their part; what moneys he had sent to the Crown of
Swede and the Hollanders; the strong diversions he had made in Italy, in
Lorrain, and other places, the great Armies he maintained in his Frontiers to
assist them if occasion should require, the great expenses he had been at in
sundry Embassies, tending only to their advantage. Having thus recollected
things past to their memories, he clearly represented unto them the present
State of affairs, how needful it was that they should preserve their union,
and take good Order for the subsistence of their Armies. This he did with such
vigor and Prudence both to them in general and particular, that he confirmed
diverse among them in the first designs of the League who were then wavering
upon the King of Swede's death, and inclining to make a Peace with the
Emperor. He was not ignorant that private interest is the most sensible part
to touch a Prince on, and therefore clearly evinced unto them, that Peace being
the only remedy which could cure the distempers of Germany, and that his Peace
being neither advantageous nor honorable, if it did not restore liberty unto
the Empire, and the ejected Princes to their Estates, there would be no means
to obtain it but by their strict union, which the Emperor not finding any
means to break would in time despair of being able to support him against their
power, the far greater of the two, whilst their confederacy lasted. He had not
much ado to confirm them in believing the House of Austria had long designed to
render it self Mistress of all Germany, they having too many pregnant proofs to
be ignorant of that truth, neither found he much difficulty to insinuate unto
them that their union failing would weaken their party, and give the Emperor a
fair opportunity to seiz upon the Estates at his pleasure. In fine, the found
themselves forced to confess they had no other way left but to be firm, and to
strengthen their confederacy by a new Treaty. This advice conduced much to the
end of his design, which having happily obtained, he lost no more time, but
entered upon the new Alliance, between the King and Kingdom of France on the one
part, and Christian Queen of Sweden and the Kingdom of Sweden, on the other
part, which was concluded and signed by the Chancellor Oxenstern. The first
Article contained the grounds of their Alliance, which was for the defense of
their common friends, for the securing of the Ocean and Baltic Sea; for the
obtaining a lasting Peace in the Empire, by which every one might be restored
to his rights. The rest imported that the Queen of Swede and her confederates
should entertain 30000 foot, and 6000 horse, that the King should contribute
every year a million of Livers toward the charge of the War, that the
confederates might raise Soldiers in one another Countries, that Delinquents
and Fugitives should be delivered to their Sovereign Lords to be by them
punished; that the Queen of Swede should permit the free exercise of the
Catholic Religion in all places which she should take, in the same manner as
she found it; that the Duxe of Baviers and the Princes of the Catholic League
might be admitted into the Treaty of Neutrality, if they pleased that all other
States and Princes should be invited to be of their confederacy; that there
should not be any Treaties but by and with the consent of all the confederates,
that their confederacy should hold until there were a Peace concluded, which
if broken by the enemies, the confederates should again take up Arms to assist
one another. The first Treaty was the foundation of the Union of the German
Princes, who otherwise had soon accommodated themselves with the Emperor, yet
this was not all, it was necessary to conclude another with all the Princes and
Protestant States of high Germany; to obtain which, the Sieur de Feuquieres
used his utmost diligence. The Articles agreed upon were, that there should be
a firm and strict union between the Kingdom of Swede, and the Electors Princes
and Protestant States of high Germany; by virtue of which, they were to unite
their Forces and to assist one another, until Germany were settled in its first
liberty; that the Laws of the Empire should be in force, that the Princes
should be established in their States and Possessions; that the Crown of Swede
should be satisfied for the expenses of the War, and that a good and lasting
Peace should be settled. Moreover, that the Chancellor Oxenstern should have
the management of affairs, who to this end should have a Counsel consigned unto
him, composed of qualified persons; some Officers of the Crown of Swede, and a
Deputy of each Circuit of the Empire; that none of the Confederates in
particular, should treat of Peace without the joint consent of the rest; in
which, if any one failed he should be declared an enemy; that the Confederates
of the four Circuits should furnish the Armies with Victuals, Ammunition, and
Artillery; that the Armies should take the Oath of Fidelity to the King of
Swedes, and the Confederates; that the President with the Counsel, should take
great care to retain the Soldier in good Order, and to secure Trade: In a
word, that all the States and confederate Princes, should oblige themselves to
maintain the Crown of Swede in the possession of what they should get in
Germany, until the War were ended, and that they were duly satisfied, as well
as the confederates, for the loss which they had sustained. This was the
substance of the chief Articles of those Treaties, which were looked upon to be
so advantageous, that they were the substance of those great Armies, which
during this year checked the House of Austria's proceedings. Neither did the
Cardinal receive any little glory by it, who by his continual Instructions and
Orders, gave life the Sieur de Feuquieres motions; glorious for him it was
indeed, and the more, seeing he had for witnesses of it the, four Protestant
(...) of Francony, Swave, the upper and the lower Rhine, Amstrudel the English
Ambassador, the Chancellor Oxenstern, the Chevalier Raches, Ambassador of
Swede; Le Sieur de Pau Ambassador of Holland, and diverse free Lords of
Germany, who entered the Treaty of Alliance, and who had granted unto them a
Deputy to be of Chancellor Oxenstern's Council.

That great Enterprises ought to be prosecuted to the height.
THe glory of great enterprises depends upon the end, not the beginning which
a wise Prince is bound to drive to the height, without suffering himself to be
stopped with any obstacles whatever. I do not mean such incounters where the
misfortunes of War may oblige a Prince to make a Peace upon what condition
soever, to secure himself from an absolute ruin. It is then indeed Prudence to
comply, and to take in the Sails, until a more favorable opportunity permit
him to put to Sea; but abating this one exception, a Prince is absolutely
obliged to stand immovable, as a Center, whiles Fortune the Mistress of War,
raises diverse motions in the circumference thereof. The timorous must
inevitably meet with impediments in the execution of their designs; but they
who are courageous, raise Trophies of glory to themselves, so far are they from
being diverted from their resolutions by every wind. Fire does not only
naturally move from the Earth, but consumes all obstacles which hinder its
ascent; and a Prince truly generous, is not only excited by his valor to great
designs, but likewise to vanquish all difficulties which oppose his glory. I
may add, that this Element would be inconsiderable, without this second
quality, nor would a Prince be regarded by his neighbors, unless he testify
a strong resolution of surmounting all difficulties. The wise Pilot forsakes
not the Helm at the sight of every storm, but keeps on his course toward his
Port, nor will a valorous Prince relinquish a great design upon every
obstruction which thwarts him; but whetting his courage, and stirring up his
valor he will bend all his endeavors to carry it to the end he first
proposed, well knowing, that all things do in the end give way to him who is
constant and resolute in affairs. Though Julius Caesar were oftentimes
inferior to Pompey, as to number of Soldiers, yet was he never backward,
during the whole War between them, to challenge him to the fight in confidence
of the valor and experience of his Soldiers, long trained up in those
exercises. Fabius Maximus was no less confident in the War which he managed
against Hannibal; for seeing him appear like an impetuous torrent swollen up by
fresh waters, whose course is hardly to be stopped at first by any obstacle
whatever; he quitted not the resolution of overcomming him, but prudently
judging that at the long run he might defeat him, without any hazard; he
resolved to accost him in all straits and places of difficulty, where himself
could not be assaulted but to the others great disadvantage, and by this means
he dulled the edge of his Armies valor, newly puffed up with their late
victory, and was so happy that whiles he continued in that resolution,
Hannibal's Forces decayed. To such generous examples ought a Prince to conform
himself. Prudence may peradventure prompt a man to alter his course, intended
for the obtaining of his design, but the Laws of valor do not permit him to
relinquish his first design, though he encounter some obstacles in the
execution; rather on the contrary, they oblige him to prosecute the end,
otherwise he discrediteth himself, and letting his enemies take advantage of
his weakness, offers himself in the end a fit object for their victory.

The King sends the Duke de Crequy to Pope Urbane the Eighth, to congratulate
him according to custom, and to compose the differences with the Venetians.
IT was not enough to provide for the affairs of Germany and Holland, unless
those of Italy were likewise considered, unto which the Cardinal had disposed
his Majesty since the beginning of the year. Some person of quality was
necessary to be sent Extraordinary Ambassador to the Pope to render him
obedience, nor indeed could his Majesty longer defer that Complement. That this
Embassy might serve for more then a bare ceremony, the Cardinal persuaded his
Majesty to employ some person capable to serve the Pope in the difference
between him and the Venetians, and to work his Holiness to favor the
interests of France, as occasion should happen. To this end, he proposed the
Duke de Creaquy, as a person whose great riches were not only able to bear the
expense suitable to his honor; but withal, who had been a long time
experienced in the affairs of Italy, and who had address enough to dispose the
Pope to any thing, which would be reasonably desired. His Majesty approved of
this grand Ministers choice, and concluded the Duke de Crecquy, to be a person
very proper for that employment, nor was he ignorant that one of the greatest
points of policy, is to proportionate meant to business. His Majesty according
to the usual Piety of the Kings, his Predecessors, gave him order to perform
that obedience to the Pope, and making use of his usual Prudence, commanded him
to endeavor an accommodation between his Holiness and the Venetians; and
withal, to take occasion from the troubles of Italy, to unite his Holiness to
the interest of France. The Duke de Crecquy accepted this Embassy with joy,
having ever been of the humor to spend his money upon his honor and pleasure.
The Magnificence wherewith it was proper he should appear at Rome, obliged him
to stay at Court till the beginning of May, the better to set forth his
equipage; which ended, he went by water that he might regain his lost time by
the help of the Winds. Being come to Rome, he was received with all honors due
to the Extraordinary Ambassador of the Christian King, and eldest son of the
Church; but the garb in which he appeared was such, that since the stately
Triumphs of the Emperors, nothing has been seen like unto it. I will not
trouble my self to make a particular description thereof, seeing other
Histories relate it, intending only to observe that which passed of most
consideration in the management of affairs. All I shall say, is, he had above
five hundred persons to attend him, Gold and Silver did so abound upon his
Liveries, his Officers, and among his whole equipage, as if he had been Master
of the Indies. His first reception and audience was very stately; but that I
may come to the effect of his Embassy, he first kissed his Holiness's feet in
his Majesty's name, and passed some Complements of Civility, next them the
Sieur de B^issieu, Lieutenant General of Grenoble, who accompanied him in
quality of his Majesty's Orator, made the accustomed Oration of obedience, in
which the most critical could discern no less discretion then eloquence. He
represented unto the Pope, that his Majesty had not so long deferred to
testify his joy, for his promotion to the Papacy, but that he might likewise
send with it, the Spoils his Arms had obtained upon the enemies of the Church,
together with the proofs of his obedience. Next of all he observed to him the
great benefits, protection, and assistance, which the Holy See had from time to
received from the Kings of France; in consideration whereof, the had obtained
the honor of Most Christian and eldest Son of the Church. Thence he descended
to a more particular description of the signal advantages his Holiness had
received from his Majesty's Victories, and assured his Holiness that the
defense of his interest, would ever be the most acceptable employment for his
Forces; and in conclusion, that he might satisfy the chief end of his
Embassy, he told him, that his Majesty had no less joy at his Holinesse's
promotion, then his Holiness had heretofore had at his birth; that imitating
the Piety of the Kings his Predecessors, he prostrated himself at his feet, and
most humbly kissed them with Protestations of honor and obedience due unto
him, and that he acknowledged him for Christ's only Vicar, the Successor of St.
Peter, and the Arbitrator of the Kingdom of Heaven in all things which concern
Salvation, with caution however, that this submission was done out of Christian
civility, not duty, to prevent any mistakes which might induced a belief that
this Crown had some temporal dependence upon the Holy See. One of his
Holinesse's Secretaries, answered him with Complements and terms of honor,
that his Holiness did receive with great joy, those testimonies of respect and
obedience which his Majesty rendered unto him; nor did the Pope himself omit any
thing which might express his content; but the Duke, who chiefly designed to
induce the Pope to befriend his Masters interests, as occasion should require,
did no longer dwell upon Complements in his succeeding Audiences. He offered
unto his Holiness the Arms of France to serve him on any occasions,
particularly his own endeavors to compose the difference he had with the
Venetians; well knowing, that nothing does more effectually oblige a Prince to
the interest of another, then to let him see that he will meet with advantages
by uniting himself with him. The difference between them, was concerning the
Confines of Gorre, and certain Islands of the Country besides; some ran-contre
there had been between the Romans and Venetians in Ferara, which was suspected
would be get an absolute breach. The Pope whose power is never more conspicuous
then in Peace, was fearful of it, so that he willingly accepted of his
interposition, and that with much acknowledgement of his Majesty's affection
for his interest; in prosecution whereof, the Duke parting from Rome, went to
Venice to treat with such as the Senate should appoint concerning this affair.
The Sieur de la Thuylerie, his Majesty's Ambassador Resident with that
Commonwealth, so ordered affairs, that both parties did forbear their Arms, by
which there was hopes of an accommodation. But before he departed from Rome,
and after he had obliged his Holiness by assuring him of his Majesty's
readiness to assist him, by mediating in this affair; he was not defective in
obtaining all possible advantages for the interest of France. He gave his
Holiness a great insight into the affairs of Germany, and discovered to him
that their War was not for Religion, but mere State, the only dispute being for
the preserving of the German Princes, in the enjoyment of their estates, and
those indubitable rights which belong unto them, that his Majesty was extremely
displeased to hear of some violences which were offered to certain
Ecclesiastical persons, though they were not so bad as were represented to him;
which however was absolutely contrary to the express words of the Treaty which
is Majesty had made, and by the fault of the Catholic Princes themselves who
would not become Neuters; and that in fine, those damages which the Church had
received would easily be repaired by such means as he represented unto his
Holiness, with which he remained very well satisfied. He further confirmed him
in the knowledge which he had a long time had of the House of Austria's designs
upon Italy, which tend to the direct ruin of the Holy See; and assured his
Holiness that his Majesty's Arms would protect him, and never forsake him. In
fine, designing to engage him in a defensive League with France for protection
of the Ecclesiastical estate against the Venetians, or for security of the
Princes of Italy. His Holiness who has ever more feared then loved the
Spaniards, could not be induced thereunto; alleging for his excuse, that he
resolved to contine a common Father between the two Crowns. He was not backward
to represent unto him, that a father does not at all act against his relation,
if he support himself by one of his children, against the violence of another;
but the Popes humor, which is naturally fearful would afford nothing but
assurances that his Holinesse's forces should not lie idle if any enterprise
were made against the Churches greatness, or the liberties of Italy.

The Embassies of Obedience from our Kings unto his Holiness.
THe Piety of our Kings and their zeal to the Pope, have made it a custom to
send Extraordinary Ambassadors to congratulate them shortly after their
promotions, to acknowledge them for Fathers truly spiritual, to assure them of
their obedience in that quality, and to recommend unto them the French Church,
their persons and Kingdoms which God has given them. There are ancient
examples thereof, and withal, instructions yet extant given to Ambassadors
sent by our Kings, which declare this obedience to tend only to congratulation
and Complement. The truth of this is evident, in the Letters which Philip le
Bell, sent to Pope Benedict the Eleventh, by the Sieur de Mercueil, Messieur
Guillaume du Plessis Cheval^er and Maistre Pierre de Belle Perch, Canon of the
Church of Chartres his Ambassadors, to offer this obedience to his Holiness.
Lewis the Eleventh indeed, for some particular consideration, would needs
render a little more unto Pope Pius the Second, by the Cardinal d' Alby, but he
was discommended for it by the whole Kingdom. The Court of Parliament made
great Remonstrances against it, both by word of mouth and writing; besides the
three States of the Kingdom assembled at Tours, complained to him of it, as may
be seen in the papers presented to him by Ma^stre Jean Durety, Doctor of
Divinity, and Canon of the Church of Paris their Deputy. Some Italians I know
there are who will needs have this Protestation of obedience to be an homage
and a mark of temporal dependence; but the truth is, they only flatter the Pope
upon no grounds: For to what end should our Kings have, in temporal things, any
dependence upon the Pope; seeing diverse of them have acknowledged themselves
their Subjects, and confessed it in their writings? As Pope Gelasius to the
Emperor Anastatius, Pelagius the First, in his profession of Faith, sent unto
Childebert one of our first Kings, and St. Gregory the Great, to the Emperor
Mauritius. The like is to be seen, in that of Pope Innocent the Third, in one
of his Decrees, where he says, the Kings of France in temporal things depend
upon no one whatever. But how could the Popes themselves pretend that any such
remporal dependence should be without contradicting the belief of the first
Fathers of the Church; the Luminaries of our Faith, especially of ^er^ullian,
who in his Apology subjecteth Kings unto God alone; and of St. Hierom who
expounding that of the Royal Prophet, Against thee only have I sinned, says
this great King, uses these terms, purposely to show that there is none but
God above Kings? I could easily add the testimonies of many others; but I
think I shall say enough, if I conclude, that this Protestation of obedience is
offered more out of Christian humility, that for any civil obligation or duty,
as diverse Popes have upon their promotions, sent unto our Kings the Professions
of our Faith in authentic form, together with testimonies of their affections.
Boniface the Eighth, sent his sealed up in Lead, like unto that of Pelagius,
Adon observes in his Chronicle, that Pope Adrian dying in the year 786. Pope
Leo who succeeded him, sent two Legates to Charlemain, to present him with the
Keys of St. Peter's confession, and the Standard of the City of Rome. Stephen
the Fifth, upon his promotion, sent Legates to Lewis the Debonnair, with great
Presents, as Pledges of his friendship. There are to be seen in his Majesty's
Treasury of Records, several Bulls which diverse Princes have sent unto our
King, to acquaint them with their Consecration, and to assure them of their
good Will, whereupon Charles de Lorrain, Cardinal de Guise, performing the
obedience to the Pope, in the behalf of Henry the Second, Anno ^547 amongst
other things said unto them, that the Popes were ordained by the Laws of the
Church, presently after their assumption, to dispatch Legates unto the Kingdom
of France for confirmation of the ancient friendship between them.

Monsieur Seguyer made Chancellor of France.
AFter the disgrace which befell the Marquess de Chasteauneuf, of which we
spoke about the end of the last year; experience having taught his Majesty, to
know of what great concern it was not to bestow the Office of Lord Keeper, but
upon persons very eminently able both for integrity and all other virtues; he
cast his eyes upon Messieur Pierre Seguyer, one of the Presidents of the
Parliament of Paris, to bestow it upon him, as a person fitted by Heaven for
great employments. His Majesty was not only pleased to send him a bare
Commission of Guard Seaux, as is commonly done, but expedited Letters Patents,
to assure him of the Office of Chancellor of France, after Monsieur de Halygres
death, well knowing, that men of his merit ought to be treated beside the
common Road, though such was the modesty of that great Minister, that he never
ascribed that favor to any thing but his Majesty's own goodness. This choice
added much to his Majesty's glory; it was a sufficient testimony of his
judgment, intrusting the Sword of Justice in his hand, who had ever maintained
it by his integrity, nor wanted any of those qualities requisite in an able
man. His Prudence had taught his Majesty that chief places ought not to be
filled but with persons of an illustrious birth; because men of mean descent
are more envied the respected; neither was he ignorant that this man was born
amidst the characters of honor, from a Family whose dignities have gone had in
hand with their virtues for many ages; that he was the Fourth of his name who
had the honor to sit upon the Flowers de luce in the quality of President of
Mortier in the Parliament of Paris; and that there had not been any man in his
family for a long time known, who had not either obtained or deserved the
greatest employment of the long Robe. It was said of the Emperor Constantine,
that the moderation of Augustus Caesar, the virtue of Tra^ane, the Piety of
Antonius, were all united in his person, to render him worthy of the Empire;
and true it is, the integrity, sufficiency, knowledge, elocution, zeal, and
fidelity for his Majesty's service, which were eminently conspicuous in
Monsieur le Lieutenant Civil his father, and in the Messieurs the three
Presidents of his name, were all united in his Soul to make him appear worthy
of the chief place of Justice. Besides, if he were honorably descended, his
Majesty was well informed that he was not satisfied with those bare Titles
wherewith his Fathers had adorned him; but that like the Cedars, who though
they grow on the tops of Mountains, cease not however to raise up their heads;
his merit and industry had advanced him to the highest degree of virtuous men.
He was in the common opinion of men, reputed for one of the truest maintainers
of Justice; and indeed, he had discharged himself with such courage and
integrity, that neither the noise of greatness, nor the sight of riches, could
ever so blind or affright him, as to surpize him. His Majesty most certainly
could not entrust his Seals in any honester hand then his. The great Revenues
he possessed, rendered him incapable of that corruption, which is annexed unto a
necessitous fortune; yet this happy incapacity, conjoined with such virtue made
him so much the more proper for that office, in regard no one would dare to
tempt him with money, who abounded both in riches and virtue. If his integrity
made him immovable in point of Justice, the solidity and penetrating vivacity,
of his spirit secured him from all possibility of a surprise, these two
qualities permitting him to incline to no part but that of truth. Disguisements
and Artifices could never form any Clouds, thick enough, to hide any thing from
his judgment. Oftentimes has he been seen to disguise darknesses and
obscurities in the discoveries of great offenses. Withal the Sciences which he
has acquired in an high degree, had added no small perfection to the natural
endowments of his mind, for that his family were both learned and honest. When
age had first given him the use of Reason, his kindred had taught him that
Sciences give much luster to a man of Eminence; that they not only draw him
from a stupid and savage life, but refine him, furbish him, and make him
capable of all things, more sweet, more civil, more courteous, more venerable,
and more worthy of honor; and in fine, when he came to a riper age, whereas
common spirits satisfy themselves with learning some one Science conformable
to their inclinations, he dived into the secrets of all, and became very
accomplished in them, there being nothing so high which passed his capacity. He
had penetrated into the difficultest questions of Philosophy and Divinity, the
Law was his usual employment, the Mathematics his diversions, with History he
was familiar, eloquence was natural to him; for before he had learned the rules
of it, his discourses were so replenished with the strength of reason, with the
purity of words, the sweetness and elegance of expression, that his language
was bewitching. These things were not a little considerable in the election of
a Guard de Seaux, who being his Majesty's mouth to express his intentions in
all great Assemblies, is bound to speak royally, that is, in terms becoming
the Majesty of his Master. I will not say any thing of his Piety, though that
be so much the more considerable in a Statesman, as it is the foundation of a
Kingdoms happiness; because it is a subject too large for me to engage in; my
discourse of his merit being by accident, nor will I trouble my self to give
you a description of the experience he had gotten in the Offices of a
Counselor, a Master of Requests, Judge in diverse Provinces, and President au
Mortier; his conduct and reputation have sufficiently made it known: only this,
these things concentring in him, seemed, as it were, to conspire to force his
Majesty to choose him Minister of his Justice; I shall add, that if his Soul
was replenished with all these qualities necessary in a great man; the King
well saw the graces had endued his body, with all that could render him lovely,
or acquire him respect and authority. He was always gravely modest, his
discourse serious, his conversation agreeable and profitable, his patience in
all affairs and all pleadings invincible, the complaisance wherewith he
answered, was truly admirable, yet such, that he could never be won to abate
from Justice or his Majesty's service. There need no more to love him, but only
to see him, the charms of his words rendered that severity which Justice obliged
him sometimes to use, so taking, that none could be offended at it. I would
add more, if the Laws of his Majesty's History would permit me, though in some
sort it were not to desist from his Majesty's commendation, seeing there is not
any thing which does more apparently denote his Majesty's wisdom, then the
virtues and eminent qualities of his Ministers, his noblest creatures.

Qualities necessary for a Chancellor, and Lord Keeper.
SEeing the Chancellor, and the Lord Keeper who holds the place of
Chancellor, executes that change, and ought to succeed him, as the chief
Officer of the Crown, the eyes of his Majesty's Justice, the Depositories of
his Seals, the Ministers of his Councels; the Organs by which his Majesty uses
to declare his intentions and pronounce his judgments; doubtless he ought to
be eminently qualified with all those parts which may render a man signally
remarkable. It matters not much whether the Potters who work altogether in
clay, be dextrous; because whatever he spoils is of small value; but otherwise
it is, with men who are in the chief Offices of a State, none of their faults
are little, and their actions are of consequence; and for this reason ought
they to be replenished with all sort of perfections. France has ever had, as
other States, certain families supporters of its glory, who have served like
Pillars to uphold its greatness, and seem to have been destined by Heaven to
preserve the beauty of its Flower de luces, the puissance of its Kings, and the
glory of its Crown, against the injuries of time. A chief Minister of the
Kingdom, when descended from such an house; has a notable advantage by it,
seeing his very name carries and Hereditary credit with it, which Plaineth out
the way to all great actions; at least I think it fit that his virtue should be
authorized by the Nobility of his blood, seeing his illustrious birth will
acquire him such an opinion as an upstart, how prudent or virtuous soever, will
hardly acquire, but after the showing of many proofs of his deserts. If
Nobility without Virtue be but a subject of reproach, in regard a man deviateth
from the example of his Ancestors, it cannot be gain-sayed but that Virtue
without Nobility carries little credit with it; but where Nobility and Virtue
meet in one subject, they advance that man to an high degree, and render him
worthy of all eminent dignities. Among the rest of those virtuous qualities, or
indeed in the Front of them, which ought to set off a person of quality, this I
account the chiefest, that he be endued with an high natural ability, and that
clearness of judgment which dissipateth the Clouds of falsities, discovers
truth, and going before Justice, ushereth it in as some Stars do the Sun.
Learning ought to go hand in hand with this ability, seeing natural parts
without improvement are so much the more dangerous, in regard they are subject
to failings, and like the fruitfulness of a field, which if not cultivated,
serves only to produce the more Thorns. Amongst the Sciences, those of Justice
and Policy are most needful, for that they are the true Objects of
Chancellours and Lord Keepers; those are the Fountains, from whence they man
derive the maxims of Government, the Fundamental Laws of Monarchy, the
Statutes and Customs, and generally whatever concerns the duty of Magistrates,
the Office of Judges, and art of Lawyers. To this Doctrine, I may add
Experience, a thing so necessary in a Lord Keeper and Chancellor, that without
it, the very greatest lights wherewith their natural parts or study can furnish
them, are as little useful, as the instrument in the hand of a workman,
skilled in the Theory, but not the Practick. Integrity ought to accompany him,
being the Mother of Loyalty, and the Father of that zeal which all public
persons are obliged to evidence in the Administration of their Charges. The
Integrity of a person of small ability, will indeed so far carry him, that the
public good will be the end at which he aims, but he cannot contribute so much
unto it, as willingly he would, whereas he who is destitute thereof, does most
frequently look after his own interest. It was not the want of capacity but
fidelity, which so often exposed the Athenians and those other Commonwealths
of Greece, to the fury of Foreign and Civil Wars. Never was that illustrious
corner of the World so replenished with Philosophers, Orators and great
Statesmen, as when it first began to decay; but that unbridled Passion which
leads great men to prefer their own interests before that of the States which
they govern, hurrieth them into that misfortune which betides the body of man;
where the Stomach which ought to concoct nutriment for the individual parts,
digesteth it only for it self. Eloquence will be of no small use to them in
many occasions, where they are obliged to pronounce judgments, and declare
their Masters Wills; it elevateth a man so much above others, says the Roman
Orator, as speech raises him above his fellow creatures. If it be befitting
and useful to any, it is particularly to Statesmen; for there is not any thing
which acquires more authority to a man appearing in public, then good
elocution. For my part, I think Eloquence so much the more proper for them, in
regard it persuades the people to approve what Wisdom directs, what Prudence
resolves, and what Justice requires; without it, the wisest Counsels have
oftentimes been ineffectual. I will not dis-approve the advancing of rich
persons to such dignities; because riches if lawfully acquired, do give much
credit to virtue, serve to excite it, and execute their just and generous
designs. I think them very necessary for a man who is to serve the public,
experience teaching us, that without them, virtue is often weak and
languishing. Though virtue alone merit before God, it is unactive, unfruitful,
and inglorious among men. To be short, where the Goods of the body, co-habit
with those of the mind and fortune, in eminent persons; it adds no small
authority unto them, seeing the beauty and Majesty of the body has certain
attractions to captivate the courage, to enforce respect and reverence, and to
persuade men to what ever they please; infomuch that the ancients have thought
them worthy of Crowns and Empires.

His Majesty's choice of Learned and Religious Prelates at the Cardinal's
request.
THe Church ought necessarily to be governed by Bishops, whose Doctrine and
Piety may serve for a guide to the people to instruct them in the ways of
Heaven. The State receives no small advantage by them. Hereupon, the Cardinal
did very well resolve to persuade his Majesty not to bestow any Bishopric, but
upon persons well-deserving, who might be capable of serving God and the State,
especially not to grant them unto children or persons of a licentious life, or
such as lay under any ignominy as had formerly been practiced; so that in a few
yeas the face of the Clergy of France was much altered, being replenished with
persons of ability and virtue. This was put in execution in all vacant places,
after the Cardinal's promotion to the Ministry. I shall forbear to speak of
it, till the History of this year, because it furnishes us with many examples.
The Cardinal proposed unto his Majesty, to be admitted into the Bishoprics of
Languedoc, whose Pastors had been deposed, Le Sieur Cohon, for Nismes; the
Sieur Grillet for Vssez; the Sieur Vilazel for St. Brieu. His Majesty whose
Piety is no less illustrious then his Ju-Justice, which renders him venerable
to all his people, being well satisfied of their merit, concluded them fit for
that honor. The were persons who for above ten years past, had appeared in the
most eminent Pulpits of Paris, to the great admiration of their auditory; and
whereas the Doctrine of Preachers ought to be animated by a good life; their
conduct had testified for them, that they had no less virtue and eloquence
then zeal for his Majesty's service, to preserve the people in the obedience
they ow him, as Gods Lieutenant on earth.

That the right of presenting to Bishoprics, is one of the most ancient
Privileges of the Crown, and what Bishops ought to be chosen for the good of
the State.
AMong the Rights of this Crown, that of the presenting to Bishoprics, is one
of the most signal, as most ancient. The Primitive Bishops of the French
Church, who have been the most shining lights of our Faith, have acknowledged
it from the beginning of this Monarchy, in the fifth Council of Orleans, where
they ordained that none should consecrate any Bishop, without his Majesty's
consent, the practice whereof is so frequent in History, that nothing but
ignorance can question it. Gregory of Tours reports, that Bishop Quintianus
being dead, Gallus was substituted in his place, and created Bishop of Overgne,
by his Majesty's means; and that after Gallus his decease, there was some
design to elect one Cato, but that the Archdeacon Cantinus having prevented
the King, and first acquainted him with the news of Gallus his death, was
constituted Bishop in his place. He likewise reports that Nonnichius was
established in the Bishopric of Nantes, in the room of Felix, by the Kings
Order; as also Vitus in that of Vie^na, that Childebert made St. German Bishop
of Paris, Clodomir, Omatius, Bishop of Tours, Clotair St. Medard, Bishop of
Vermandoi^, and Euphronius, Bishop of Tours. History is pregnant with the like
examples, so that to cite them were but vain, those already alleged being
sufficient to confirm it, which who can question, seeing our Kings have with
their Crown received power to dispose of all things, which concern the good of
their Kingdom, and tranquillity of their people; and that the election of
Bishops is not an act merely Ecclesiastical, but as much reflecting on the good
of the State, as the Salvation of Souls? Bishops have a great influence over
the peoples sprits, to draw them by the links of Piety and Religion, unto what
they please, as experience has evidenced, in the time of Lewis the Debonnair,
who was almost Deposed by a Faction they raise against him, and as was
afterward seen in Languedoc, where five or six of them fomented a Civil War.
The Empire of Souls i^ wonderfully potent, and its Arms though spiritual, are
more to be feared them Pikes or Muskets. The Soul once mastered, the body will
soon yield, the one is the inevitable consequence of the other; and for this
reason is it that the promotion of Bishops has ever depended on our Kings, and
that it has been judged very necessary to elect persons for those employments,
who may, indeed, be able to edify the people by their Doctrine and example,
and altogether incapable of ind^ngering the public. The happiness of States
depends much upon Religion, and the splendor of Religion, does more depend
upon the vigilance and care of Bishops, next to the blessing of Heaven, the any
other thing whatever. May they not indeed be called the foundation of it? Who
does more effectually fix the people in the fidelity which they ow their
Sovereigns, in obedience to Magistrates, in reverence to Parents, in respect to
Justice, the rule of their conduct? Doubtless it is then very considerable in
Government, not to choose such persons as are incapable of bringing these
advantages to a State. I shall not in this place say any thing of the obedience
they ought to show to Magistrates; but only it is necessary that they be honest
men; because if licentious they will be apt to do more hurt then good, and to
neglect the restraining of the people, not that I shall approve of choosing such
persons who are of an indiscreet zeal; for such persons designing to do too
much good, do oftentimes raise great disorders, which themselves are unable to
redress. Preachers are so much the more deserving of this promotion, because
the function of preaching, was primitively reserved to the Bishops, who
communicated it unto Priests, only by way of privilege, and that at sundry
times in sundry places. The Bishops of the East, did first grant this power to
Priests, as may be proved by the examples of Pierius and Chrysostom, who while
they were yet Priests, Preached one in Alexandria, the other in Antioch, a
thing not used in Afric before St. Austine, who during his Priesthood, had
the liberty of Preaching conferred upon him, by Bishop Valerius, a thing
without President; and in Gaul this custom was introduced, about an hundred
year after the Council of Vaison.

The King makes a Declaration to Depose three Officers, two of the Parliament
of Paris, and one of the Chamber of Accounts, from their Charges.
SHortly after, Monsieur le President Seguiers, promotion to the Seals, the ill
conduct of President Cogneux, the Sieur Deslandes, Councellor of the
Parliament, and the Sieur de Monsigot, Master of the Chamber of Accounts of
Paris, forced his Majesty to deprive them of their Offices. I have inserted in
the History of the foregoing years, the Rebellious acts in which they engaged
themselves; and in this I shall add, that it being a shame for his Majesty,
and unbefitting the reputation of the affairs of France, to suffer the chief
Officers of the Parliament of Paris, and a Master of the chief Chamber of
Accounts in the Kingdom, to live abroad in Foreign parts, avoiding the
punishment due to their Rebellion, and with the marks of their authority still
about them, as if they had been innocent; his Majesty resolved to depose them;
for the more orderly doing whereof, he went to the Parliament of sit in the
Seat of Justice, and publish a Declaration, with expounding the Ordinance of
Blois where it is said, that all guilty of High Treason, particularly, his
Majesty's Officers, should never be restored to their Offices; Declared, that
it ought to be understood of Officers condemned of Rebellion or Treason, as
well by default and contumacy of those who were present at their Trials; there
being no reason to suffer those who had had their hands in conspracies and
intelligences prejudicial to his Majesty's service, to enjoy their dignities,
those rays of his Majesty's power; and moreover, that the twenty eighth Article
of the Ordinance of Molins, more ancient then that of Blois, where it is
specified, that those who are condemned by default and contumacy, may have five
years time to acquit themselves, should not be interpreted in favor of them;
his Majesty requiring, that judgment once pronounced against Traitors, though
condemned by default or contumacy, should after publication be put it
execution, as to the confiscation of their offices only, without being restored
either by Letters or otherwise. This very Declaration suppressed the offices of
President le Cogneux, and the Sieur Deslandes as guilty of High Treason,
whereof they were condemned by contumacy; they were unworthy of any favor, in
regard his Majesty had given them a months time to recollect themselves, and
to return into the Kingdom, which they had neglected to do. Besides, the King
published his Letters Patents to create the like offices, and conferred that of
the President a^ Mortier, upon the Sieur de Lamoignon. formerly President of
the third Chamber of Inquests; and placed the Sieur de la Hage de Vantelay,
Councellor of the grand Counsel, in that of Counselor of the Parliament. His
Majesty caused them to take their Oath in his Presence, and then to take their
places. Monsieur le Comte de Soissons, went in his Majesty's behalf to the
Chamber of Accounts, to cause the like Declaration to be published against the
Sieur de Monsigot, and his Letters Patents by which Le Sieur des Rues, was
established in the office of Master of Accounts. Thus his Majesty outed three
Rebellious Officers, and taught the rest that they having no Authority but what
depended upon his pleasure, they should be sure to be deprived of it, if once
they should be sound unworthy by Revolts.

Politic Observation.
When Kings create Magistrates, and communicate part of their power to them;
it is not to exempt them from obedience, but to fix their Crowns by new
supports, and to keep the people by their examples and decrees within the
bounds of their subjection. To this end only it is, that Kings confer their
power upon them, who as they command their people to make their addresses to
them, to decide their differences; so do they no less oblige their Magistrates
to preserve them within their bounds, by the example of their submissions, and
the integrity of their judgments. If Magistrates ow the second to the people
by their places, they are no less indebted to their Kings, in the first, with
this distinction of obligation, that the good of the State invites them to it,
the Order of Monarchy requires it, and Justice it self commands it. What
presumpion were it, for the Stars to endeavor to eclipse the Sun 's light,
when their own, is but the effect of his? What a disorder were it, if the
inferior Spheres, should oppose the motions of the Primum mobile? And what
likelihood is there, that those Magistrates who receive their Authority from
their Princes to support their Crowns, and confirm their Subjects in their
obedience, should fly into Rebellion, and endeavor to draw them to follow
their examples? They ought to beware that their disobedience do not cause the
Flower de luces to fade, and that they do not instead of cultivating them with
care, to render them more beautiful to the French, and more respected by
strangers, endanger them by their ill examples, and render themselves unworthy
to sit upon them. Know they not that their obedience and the integrity of their
judgments, is the foundation of the peoples submissions? The Rebellion of such
men ought not to be connived at; in regard it may not be tolerated without
putting all things into disorder. The People are like clay, without form in
themselves, but easily wrought by the Potters. In fine, they behold most
affairs with the eyes of their Magistrates, and suffer themselves easily to be
directed by their motions; they dislike what the other reject, and if they
should rise against their Sovereign, they would make no difficulty to follow
them. In affairs of this nature, Kings are obliged to conform themselves to the
example of the Sun, who finding the Moon to oppose her light to his, and
endeavoring to eclipse his light presently depriveth her of all her light, and
turns her Christaline into a dark body King ought to reassume to themselves
their Justice, which formerly they had entrusted with them, and to punish their
Rebellions with severity. They who are the most mild, are forced by such crimes
to draw their Swords of Justice, to prevent the eclipsing of their power, to
take the Thunderbolts of severity into their hands, and dart them against them
to reduce them to nothing.

Diverse Changes of Governors in sundry Provinces made this year.
THose were not the only Changes which happened this year, there were diverse
others in the governments of Provinces, some that they might be entrusted with
persons incapable of engaging in any divisions which were suspected by reason
of Monsieur's absence, and others for a recompense of several persons of
quality which have deserved them, and which I cannot pass by unobserved. The
Marshal de Thoyras, Governor of Cazal, had given some cause of jealousy,
though indeed his fidelity was invincible, as has since been seen; however,
that place is of such importance, that nothing ought to be hazarded for the
preservation of it. The King sent the Marquess de Tavannes in his place, and
gave the Marshal permission to slay in Italy, upon some difficulties which he
made upon coming to Court. Le Sieur de Malissi, Captain of the Regiment des
Gardes, was at the same time, made Governor of Pignerol, the Duke de
Vantadour, was gratified with the Government of Limosin, and having surrendered
into the Kings hands, the Lieutenancy of Languedoc; his Majesty divided it
amongst four, and bestowed it upon the Comte de Tournon, the Vice Comte d'
Arpajon, the Marquess d' Ambres, and the Vice Comte de Polignac. Le Comte de
Joncac was made Governor and Lieutenant General of Xaintong, Angoulmois,
Aunis, and the City of Rochel, the Baron de Pont Chasteau, Lieutenant General
of Low Britain, Le Comte de Palisse, Sieur do St. Geran, was made Governor of
Bourbonnois, le Comte de Cheravet of Stenay, le Sieur de la Serre, first
Captain of the Regiment of Picardy of Jamets, le Duc de la Valette of the
Bishopric of Mets, the Duc de Chaune of Picardy, le Duc d'Alvin of Languedoc,
and the Citadel of Montpellier, le Marquess de Senecay of Bourgogne au
Bailliage de Masconnois; insomuch that there are few years which produce so
great changes of government.

That it is necessary to commit the Government of Provinces and Places, into
the hands of trusty Persons, in times of danger.
IT is very important, when there is any suspicion of civil dissentions, to
entrust the Government of Provinces and places with persons of fidelity. I do
much approve of the King of Spain's rule, who often changes his Governors. A
man must be altogether ignorant of History, if he knows not the great
services which Gonzalvus did the King of Aragon his Master, in the Kingdom of
Naples: However, that wise prudent King, would not always entrust the
Government of that place with him; for fear, lest in process of time, he might
keep it to himself. The continuation of the Government of France granted unto
Julius Caesar, encouraged him to attempt upon the Roman liberty; whereupon,
remembering that nothing had made him so ambitious of commanding, as that
continuation upon his return to Rome, after the Afric War, he ordained that
to Praetor should enjoy his Office, above one year, nor no Consul above two.
The Governor who has long resided in a Province, may make creatures, contract
frienships; an so play his game, that he may act the little King, and will be
apt to engage himself to some Revolt, if Ambition, which great men seldom want,
should once inflame him. This made the Dictator Mamercus, say, the short
continuation of Governors is the surest preservative of the public; besides,
the liberty of changing of Governors, after some few years, and substituting
others in their places, is of great advantage, for that a Sovereign may thereby
render more persons capable of great affairs, then if he should always
continue them in the same places. The memory of new benefits disposes men to
be grateful, and doubtless makes Kings to be served with more affection:
Great men long accustomed do so habituate themselves, that they look upon their
Governments as their Demesne, without any sense of obligation to him who
permits him; whereas he who is but lately possessed of them, having the
favor fresh in his memory, indeavoureth to deserve it with more industry and
affection. This maxim, I know will not very much agree with the sense of most
great men; but surely their dislike relisheth more of Ambition then reason; I
may likewise add, that it is little considerable to their Fortunes, seeing if
they acquit themselves, as they ought, of a place, their merit will be a
sufficient recommendation to attain them others. It were to be wished, that
such men in their own concerns, were of Quintus Fabius Maximus his humor, who
having been five times Consul; and considering with himself that his
grandfather and great grandfather had often been charged with the same
Office; and how it was very dangerous to continue great Offices in a family,
was very earnest with the people of Rome, to divert them from conferring that
honor on his son.

The Creation of Knights of the Holy Ghost.
THe King had for many years, received so many proofs of the valor of his
Nobility, that he could not refuse them the honor of being Knights of his
Orders; and his Majesty who has a particular inclination to recompense valor,
resolved to grant them this honorable reward. He was confirmed in this
resolution by Monsieur the Cardinal, who represented to him that the French
Nobility could not be tied to his service, by any stricter Banes then those of
honor, and that this would not a little augment that courage and fidelity,
which they had as often as occasion required, discovered unto him; so that
finding himself at leisure about the beginning of the Spring, and without a
necessity of being over early in the field, he resolved to perform the Ceremony
of the Knights of the Holy Ghost, and to fill up all the vacant places. It is
impossible in such affairs to content all men, because there are never so many
places vacant, as men who think their services worthy of that honor. All that
can be done, is to prefer those who are most considerable, either for their
birth, their services, or the particular inclination of the Prince, who in such
things ought to have his own liberty. His Majesty took this course, but that he
might totally follow the Orders of the Primitive constitution* he gave a
Commission to the Cardinal de Lion, great Almner of France, and Commander of
the Order, to inform him of their Religion, Life, and Works, who were proposed,
and to send him his informations sealed up. The next thing his Majesty did, was
to assemble the Chapter of the Order at Fountainbleau, where the Ceremony was
performed, and where all the Knights met, and told them by the mouth of the
Sieur de Bullion, Lord Keeper of that Order, that he should be very glad before
the Creation of the Knights, to have their opinions about the Rebellion and
Felony of the Duke d' Elboeuf, and the Marquess de la Vieville, who being fled
out of the Kingdom, and having born Arms contrary to his Majesty's service; and
consequently broken the Statutes of the Order, had rendered themselves unworthy
of Knighthood, and deserved to be degraded; the Sieur de Bullion, adding that
his advice was, to follow the example of Charles Duke de Bourgogne, toward
Charles Duke de Brabant his cousin, viz. to erase their Arms, and that in their
Escutcheon should be inserted their judgment and degradation. All the Knights
were of the same opinion with the Lord Keeper, excepting only the Marquess de
Trajanel: So that the judgment of their degradation was pronounced and
executed before the new Creation. In prosecution of this judgment, his Majesty
caused the Role of those whom he would have of this Order to be read aloud, and
nominated eight Knights to assist at the trial of the proofs of their Nobility,
Life, and Manners; and the proposing the difference which was between those who
were Dukes and Peers, and those who were only Dukes, concerning their order and
place in the Ceremony; it was ordered that all the Dukes in general should
march according to the Order of their Creation, because the Peers hold no place
in Assemblies. It was likewise decreed, that if any of those who were name to
be Knights, did not appear at the time of the promotion to receive their Order,
it should not be sent unto them. The 14 of May was the day assigned for the
Ceremony, and his Majesty being there punctually followed the Statutes of that
Order, and conferred it upon Monsieur the Cardinal of Richelieu, The Cardinal
de la Valette. The Archbishop of Paris. The Archbishop of Bourdeaux, The
Archbishop of Narbone. The Duc de Longueville. The Comte d' Harcourt. The
Comte d' Alets. The Duc de la Trimouille. The Duc de Vantadour. The Duc d'
Alvin. The Duc de Brissac. The Duc de Candale. The Duc de la Valette. The Comte
de Tonnerre. The Marshall d' Estree. The Sieurs de Vaubecourt, and de
Seneterre. The Vicomte de Pompadour. The Marquis de Nesse. The Marquis de
Gordes. The Comte de Lannoy. The Marquis de Varennes. The Mares^hal de Breze.
The Comte de Brassac. The Comte de Noailles. The Sieur de Popanne. The Marquis
de Fossez. The Marquis de Bourbonne. The Vicomte de Pollignac. The Vicomte d'
Arpajon. The Marquis d' Aluye. The Comte de Saulx. The Comte d' Orval. The
Sieur de St. Simon premiers Escuyer. The Baron de Pont-Chasteau. The Sieur de
Pont-Courlay. The Sieur de la Messeray. The Marquis de Mortemart. The Sieur de
Villequier. The Comte de Teurnon. The Sieur de la Mailleraye. The Comte de
Tianges. The Marquis d' Ambres. The Comte de Parabere. The Sieurs de
Montcaurel, and De Liancourt. De St. Simon l'aisne.


I will not trouble my self to describe the particulars of the Ceremony; it is
beyond my design; only for conclusion, I will say his Majesty by this
conferring of Honor, showed that he did as well acknowledge, as know the
services of his Nobility.

Politic Observation.
THe reward of Services, and the punishment of Crimes, are equally great
supporters to a State; whereupon Socrates being demanded, what Estate could be
esteemed the best governed, answered, that where honest men are rewarded, and
knaves punished. Xenophon likewise thought, that a man being naturally more
courageous the fearful, should be excited sooner to great actions by praise
riches or honors after a Victory? For this reason it was, that Plato in the
Fifth of his Republics, would that all men who behaved themselves courageously
in the War, should be gratified in all reasonable things, nay they were
permitted to marry diverse women, the better to replenish the Commonwealth with
valiant men.

This licentiousness, I must confess, is contrary to the Laws of
Christianity, and Experience has told us, that it is seldom seen, brave men
beget children like themselves; but in the main, the gratifying of valiant men
in all reasonable things, is conformable to the rules of all politic States.
Thus Homer to give a testimony of Agamemnon's conduct, does usually bring him
in at all feasts in the Greek Army, honored with an whole Chine of Beef, being
the greatest rarity among them. Upon the same example, Plato grounded his
Decrees for the honoring of those at public Feasts, who had given proofs of
their valor by serving them with the greatest dainties, and the best Wines;
and by singing of songs in their praise, to invite others to imitate them. To
speak the truth, if the flame dies for want of Wood, generosity languisheth if
unrewarded. All goes to rack in that State where men of courage are no better
treated then useless cowards. It should seem the greatest courages are, as it
were, benumbed, where the splendor of honor, the reward of handsome actions,
does not encourage them. All that can be further observed is, that recompenses
be proportioned to the qualities of the persons. Soldiers are more usually
pleased with riches then honor, and are more proper to be acknowledged with
reward accordingly. The Nobility on the other side, are better satisfied with
honor, Let them have it. This course did the Commonwealth of Venice take,
after that memorable battle of Tar; they exalted the Marquis of Mantua, from
that government, to be general of the Army; and as to those Soldiers who had
behaved themselves courageously, they increased their pay. They gave diverse
recompenses to the Sons of such as were slain, Dowries to their daughters, and
good Pensions to such as were maimed. The Romans did much more esteem the
rewards of honor, then any other; and indeed they are more to be esteemed,
because Honor is more excellent then Wealth. There was no Crown more esteemed
among them, then the obsidional, which however was made of Turf, that of Gold
inlaid with Stones, was beneath it, because less honorable; there was not any
greater honor in their Commonwealth then that of Triumph, which however
brought no Wealth to the Triumpher; for after he had appeared in a Chariot
clothed and attended magnificently, he was obliged to live in the City, in the
quality of a private person, without other reward then the glory of their
actions. Cneus Ovillius, thought himself more highly rewarded, after he had
concluded the first Carthaginian War, by the Commonwealths permitting him to
have a Trumpet always march before him; and Pompey by the power granted him
wear his Triumphant Robe at all public Feasts and Caesar by the privilege of
continually wearing the Laurel Crown, then if they had had all the riches of
the Empire divided amongst them.

The Institution of the Parliament of Mets, after the King had reduced to his
Obedience, diverse Cities and Places of Lorrain.
AFter the King had reduced to his Obedience diverse Cities and places of the
Bishoprics of Mets, Toul, and Verdun. and recovered to his Crown diverse Lands
and Lordships, heretofore pulled from it; he thought it necessary for the
preservation of the people in Obedience and Peace, and for conservation of the
Rights of his Crown to establish a Sovereign court of Justice, which should
have full power to Judge, without further Appeal, all matters both civil and
criminal. His Majesty was the rather invited unto it, by the earnest entreaties
of all the Orders of the Cities and Provinces, in prosecution of the promise
made unto them, by the late King Henry le grand; especially to redress those
great abuses committed in the Administration of Justice, in regard of the
inexperience of the Magistrates, as to prevent the Dukes of Lorrain's
usurpation, who had oftentimes presumed to give judgment in places; and upon
persons depending on the Crown of France. It was resolved about the beginning
of the year. The King ordained a Sovereign court, with the Title of Parliament,
in his Bishoprics of Toul, Mets, and Verdun; the seat whereof he founded at
Mets; both in regard of the commodiousnesse of the situation; as also the
populousness of the place, and confluence of the people, which came from all
parts; and besides, that place having been formerly the Metropolis of
Austracia, one of the best Flowers of this Crown. His Majesty ordained there
should be one chief President, six other Presidents, forty six Counselors, of
which six should be of the Clergy, the rest of the Laity, one Attorney General,
two Advocates General; and to brief, all Officers usual in other Parliaments,
to execute Justice, without Appeal, every six months, upon the Cities and
persons of those Bishoprics; as also upon Mouzon, Chasteau-Regnaud, and its
Appurtenances; notwithstanding any Sovereignty they might heretofore claim:
Lastly, desiring to choose such persons as might be capable of doing actual
service in this Parliament, he committed the charge of chief President to the
Sieur de Bretaign, and of the other Presidents to the Sieurs of Charpentier,
Blundeau, Pinon, Treslon, Vignier and Chanteclair, all men of worth; that of
Attorney General to the Sieur de Paris, Master of Requests; those of the two
Advocates General, to the Sieurs de la Gresliere, Remifort, and Fardoil; they
had all Commission to go with four Masters of Request, and five or six who were
created Counselors, to establish the Parliament, which they did about the end
of August, to the great happiness and satisfaction of the inhabitants of Mets,
glad to see their City reassume its ancient splendor; and true it is, the
industry they used to preserve his Majesty's right, and the people in their
obedience, did not a little conduce to the establishment of the Royal Authority
in its luster.

That new Magistrates of Justice ought to be established in Countries newly
conquered.
AS Subjects ow love and obedience to their Kings; so Kings ow them Justice and
affection. The debts are mutual, and two incumbent duties, which compose the
most agreeable harmony in States, upon the accomplishment of which depends
the good fortune of both Prince and People; which being so, a Prince can no
sooner conquer a country, but be is obliged to do them Justice; nor is it of
small importance to him to execute it by new Judges, and to change the old
Magistrates. Caesar and Nero knew it well enough, by their endeavors to
suppress the Senate, at least to diminish their power when they despaired of
being able absolutely to depose them. In a word, the Sovereign power being
composed of the Authority of a Prince, and that of Magistrates, to force a
country out of the hands of another Prince, and not to change the Magistrates,
were to be but half Master of it; for their Prince having bestowed those
employments on them, they cannot but preserve some affection for him, nor will
they ever fail to serve him, so that great inconveniences may thereby arise;
for as they in some sort serve as a Chain to tie the people in obedience to
their Sovereign, they will do their utmost endeavor to preserve them in their
dependence upon him, from whom they have received their employments, and with
time they are able to cause a general insurrection. A Seat of Justice though
without a Sword, with the Purple only, and those other marks of its dignity,
does oftentimes cause that which they favor, to be more respected and obeyed,
then the force of an whole Army, so much are the people used to submit to its
judgments, and to follow its motions; therefore there is nothing of a conquest
secured, until the Conqueror has settled such Magistrates as are affectionate
and loyal to his service. That once done, let the people mutiny, make unlawful
Assemblies, and be factious, it signifies little; especially, if there are any
strong Garrisons or Soldiers in pay to quel them. The people do commonly return
to their duties, at the only sight of their Magistrates, and they quickly calm
themselves, as tossed vessels do at the appearance of Castor and Pollux; but if
they find any to second their insurrection, they rage more and more, and fly
out into all kind of extremities.

Alpheston and Chavagnac, executed at Mets by Decree of Parliament.
THe exemplary punishment which the Parliament of Mets, executed this year upon
Alpheston and Chavagnac, was one of the greatest services which could be
rendered to the State. Alpheston a notorious Assassinate, came to Mets about the
end of September, with Sausier and Bellanger, who had both been of the Marshal
de Marillac's guard. These two Soldiers touched with repentance and horror
for the crime, wherein they had been engaged, made their addresses to the Sieur
de Mommas, Governor of the City, for the Duke de la Valette, and discovered to
him, upon what design they were come from the Low Countries. The Sieur de
Mommas secured them all three, which being signified to the chief President,
they were examined, and Process made against Alpheston in the usual form; it
was proved, that Alpheston having murdered a certain Courier, called
Clairbourg, for fear lest he should discover a design upon St. Disier, which he
had entrusted with him, fled into Flanders, where having made some stay at
Bruxels, he got acquainted with Father Chanteloup, and one la Roche, intendent
of his affairs, who had engaged him, together with Sausier and Bellanger, to
kill the Cardinal Duc de Richelieu, passing through Chaallons, where they were
to lodge over against him; that they had been assured by Father Chanteloup, how
that affair had been consulted by persons of Piety and Learning, and adjudged
it might be executed with a safe Conscience; that la Roche had given an hundred
Livres to Sausier, as many to Bellanger, and a hundred crowns to Alpheston,
with promise to reward their services better; that Alpheston had oftentimes
conversed with Father Chanteloup concerning that affair; that la Roche had
caused a Gelding of the Queens Stable to be given him, which was afterward
known to be the same, by the Sieur de Villiers, one of her Querris. All this
was Deposed by Sausier and Bellanger, and confessed by Alpheston himself; so
that he was condemned upon the 23 of September, to be broke on the wheel for
his offense. The Sentence was executed, and as it is very important for the
security of Kings and their States, to pardon those who discover things of this
nature; Sausier and Bellanger were acquitted in conformity to the Law
prescribed in such cases. Nor was this Assassina^ the only Monster which
Chanteloup, sent abroad to execute that horrible attempt; not long after Blaise
Ruflet, was discovered under the name of Chavagnac, and convicted in the same
Parliament to have designed the death of that grand Minister, by causing him to
read a poisoned Letter; an action so black, and full of horror, that it is
hardly credible in a person of his condition, bad it not been formally proved,
and withal confessed by himself, who for his punishment was adjudged to be
hanged. The Parliament of Mets could not see Chanteloup guilty of such
abominations, without declaring what he was; whereupon they drew up his
indictment, and condemned him by default to be broken alive. Thus did God, by
his Providence, defend this incomparable Minister from the fury of his enemies,
who before they could effect their design, had the impudence to publish in
diverse places, that it were a piece of conscience to murder him; that the
merit were greater then the crime; that it were an act of Justice, and that
diverse having already contrived, the design was only deterred by fear. Thus did
they endeavor to infuse the poison of this abominable Doctrine, into the
minds of some melancholy men, and to persuade them to Dye their hands in the
blood of a Cardinal, a Bishop, a chief and incomparable Minister of State. This
in a word, is the strangest fury that Hell can lead a man into; but that which
was more wonderful, was to see the Queen Mother, whose Piety and Clemency had
in all her Government been so conspicuous, suffer such persons as were about
her, not only to publish, but approve such bloody Doctrines and Sacralegious
maxims, and to be obstinate in the keeping him for her only Minister, who made
it his business to cut the thread of his life; whose whose services the King
her son did every day publish with so many honorable Eulogiums, that he
ascribed the happy success of all his enterprises to his only counsels. This
her procedure was totally repugnant to that pretended desire of hers, to return
into France, and to make her Peace with his Majesty; however they who had the
honor to know her, did not at all detract from their opinions of her goodness,
knowing her to be by nature as far from this barbarous doctrine, as heaven is
from earth, they only wish she had not so easily suffered her self to be
surprised by those whom she honored with her confidence.

How abominable assassination has ever been, and that great men never ought
to be drawn into it.
TO murder a Cardinal is a detestable sacrilege, not only because it
injureth a particular person, but the sacred College of Cardinals, the Pope,
and the whole Church. He who murdereth a Minister of State, is guilty of high
Treason, as I have heretofore made appear, and generally of all others, it is
the most horrible Crime. Murderers among the Israelites were so much detested,
that private men were allowed to destroy them, if the Magistrate did not; nay,
he who had killed another by accident was in such abomination with them, that
he was banished his Country as unworthy of their conversation and forced to
retire to their Cities of refuge, under penalty of being slain, without
punishment by him who had undertaken to revenge the death. All nations have
chastised it with grievous punishments; those of Brasil in particular do so
detest it, that if the murderer save himself by flight, yet his children,
sisters and cousins are all made slaves to the kindred of the party murdered.
Has not God declared himself an enemy unto it, when he says, He who kills
his Brother shall die by the sword. History is full of examples verifying his
Divine justice to correspond with his threats. Plutarch though having the light
of nature only, writes that a certain murderer of one Mitias a Grecian
escaping scot free, the divine providence so ordered it, that his statue fell
upon him in the public place, and crushed him to death; but if murder destroy
those that are guilty thereof with shame, surely all Princes peccant in this
particular are much more blameworthy; because they do an act contrary to that
mercy, justice, generosity, and greatness of power which they are obliged to
have. Never would the Romans in the flourishing time of their Commonwealth,
permit their enemies to be thus killed; and Tacitus reports, that when the
Senate read Algau destrius Prince of the Catti his Letters, in which he
undertook to poison Arminius the German Captain, provided they would send him
poison, returned him this answer, that the people of Rome used to have
satisfaction from their enemies, openly and not by treachery. That I may show
this true valor has not been unimitated in these latter ages, Dom Rogero
Comte de Pallant, offered Alphonsus King of Naples, to kill the King of Castile
his enemy with his own hands; whereunto Alphonsus answered, think not, I pray,
upon such an action; because were it to put me in quiet possession not only of
Castile, but of the whole world, yet would I never give my consent unto it.

The Acts of Hostility committed by the Duke of Lorrain against France.
VVHilest his Majesty's prudence and courage were taking care for his sundry
affairs, the Duke of Lorrain, setting by the Laws of honor which obliged him
to keep his promises, suffering himself to be transported by an unjust hatred
against France, took all opportunities to discover his ill will; he was obliged
by the last Treaty to send his Forces to his Majesty; but hardly was the Treaty
signed, and the Marshal d' Effiat, one of the Generals of his Majesty's Army in
Germany, received the command of them, ere he sent Order to their Commanders to
disband them, that he might give Mont-Baillon Lorrain opportunity to gather
them together, and lead them into Alsace for the Emperors service. Hereupon it
was not long before they vanished, excepting the Regiments de Guerquoy, to the
Commander of which he had forgot to make known his intention. Nor did he
forbear to testify that this very Regiment, abiding some while in his
Majesty's service was displeasing to him; for upon the return into his
Territories, after the Marshal de Effiats decease, he disbanded them, that he
might bestow them upon Vervane a Subject of his, and Soldier of Fortune, who
led them into Alsace, where he got into Massenal, and was defeated by the
Swede. He was obliged to hinder any Levies in his country, made without his
Majesty's consent; but he gave way thereunto, at the same time that Ajax the
Italian endeavored to get into Brisac. The Treaty engaged him not do any thing
against the Allies of France; and he past his word to General Horn, not to
countenance any design against Haguenaw, which place he underhand assisted
with fifteen hundred men; and without regard had to his word, gave forces to
the Cemte de Salme, under pretense of discharging them, which afforded him the
means and opportunity of taking in that place; nor did he afterward contribute
to preserve the place, by sending Victuals and Soldiers to fortify that
Garrison. Every one knows he gave leave to Montecuculi Benti voglio and Nassau,
to raise Forces in Lorrain, for three or four months time; the two former
pretending all that while they would desert the service; but did indeed send
them to fight against the Swede; and the last of them, did openly lead his
forces into Alsace. Moreover, as weak courages do easily pass from anger to
cruelty, the passion he had against France, and its Allies, transported him to
many unworthy actions: For more cruel deeds, then those of Nassau, could not be
conceived by the wit of Man, who sometimes was with his Forces at Sarguemine,
robbing and killing all such French Merchants as he could meet with; he caused
a murder to be executed upon Colonel du Bois, who had very worthily served
the Swedes in Germany; he committed violences in the Territory of Strasbourg,
in the Duchy of Deux Ponts, and the Comte de Hanau; he highly injured the
Comte d' Halberstein, taking him in his shirt out of his bed, and plundering
his house without any other difference, but only because he had always been
affectionate to France; he kept barbarous cut throats, at Saint Hypolitus, to
rob and kill all such Swedes and French, as passed by, but weakly attended.
That he might the more absolutely declare himself for the House of Austria,
against the Allies of France; did he not proclaim, in his Army, by sound of
Trumpet, that no one should presume to call it any other then the Emperors
Army? And did he not cause it to march under that notion, unto the Fort of
Gerbaden, to beat off the Swedes who had besieged it? Did he not frequently
entertain discourses and correspondencies with the chief of his Officers, with
the Comte de Salm, Montecuculi, Merode, and the Marquis de Celade? Did he not
receive the moneys brought by the last of them, to pay his forces, with the
same satisfaction and facility, as the Soldiers sent by the Valsfeign, and the
confiscation sent him by the Emperor, of all his Neighbor Princes, and Allies
of France's lands, who were in the Assembly of Hailbron? Did he not likewise
make a League with the Emperor; whereby Haguenau, and the other ten Cities of
the Imperial Provost, together with Sclestat and Colmah, were delivered to him
for their most strict intelligence, though at that very time he was obliged by
Treaty with the King, not to engage himself with any Prince, without his
Majesty's knowledge or consent? Nor satisfied with that alone, he caused the
Marquis de Ville, to tell the Swedes contrary to all likelihood and truth, that
he might make them jealous of the King, how he acted nothing against them, but
by his Order, and sent ten thousand men to force them from the siege of
Haguenau. Indeed he was the Author of his own punishment; for they finding
themselves forced to leave their Trenches, marched out, cut off a party of
them, and took his Canon and Baggage. This Procedure did sufficiently discover
his Passion, but he stayed not there, rather as if he had delighted to break
all Articles of former Treaties, he would not be persuaded to do his homage for
Bar and though after infinite delays, he did at last send Commissaries to
estimate the Demesnes of Clermont; the Propositions they made in valuing the
buildings and fortifications contrary to the Treaty, which imported that he
should pay after the rate of fifty years purchase in hand; for the Revenue
only, did sufficiently testify that they came not to perform the Treaty, but
under that pretext to break it. Nor was he more exact in observing that
Article, wherein he was obliged not to give any harbor or passage to his
Majesty's Subject, who should be out of France, contrary to his Majesty's
pleasure, nor to entertain any correspondence with them, seeing he continually
treated with those who abused Monsieur the Duke of Orleans his credulity and
favor. In general it may be said, that hatred and choler had gotten so
transcendent a possession over his Soul, that they forced him to recede from
all kind of honor, nay, and to neglect his own interest, and all to revenge
himself against France, which he hoped to effect by the Spaniards means, who
when he had concluded the Treaty with the Hollander, then in agitation and
probability, had engaged to assist Monsieur with all his Forces, to invade the
Kingdom, to force his Majesty to such conditions of Peace, as himself pleased,
to compel him to ratify Monsieurs marriage with the Princess Marguerite; and
finally to surrender to him such places as he had made himself Master of.

That Sovereigns are obliged to moderate their Passion, principally in point of
War.
IF Choler be blamable in private persons, it is no less dangerous for
Sovereigns, then pernicious for their Estates; Prudence ought to be the guide
of all their actions, without which they will be inevitably reduced to
troublesome inconveniences. Who knows not that Choler is incompatible with
this virtue, and an enemy to all good counsels? A Prince may sometimes make
Choler as useful to him as Soldiers, and may be thereby drawn to a generous
impetuosity to surmount almost incredible difficulties; but there is a
difference betwixt that gentle heat which increases courage, and that fire
which inflames and subdues our reason; and therefore a Prince must be careful
that he let not his passion pervert his judgment, to precipitate his reason
into base resolutions. He who among Kings has deserved the name of wise,
says, It is better to moderate choler, then to take a City. Now although this
Passion seems to carry the stamp of courage, because it pretends to
vanquish all, and to subscribe to no man, yet really it is a weakness, which
whoever surmounteth, is incomparably a person of more spirit and courage, then
he who suffers himself to be transported by it. It has ever been the opinion
of the wisest Politicians, that choleric men are no ways fit for government.
Curopalates Commenus, Emperor of Constantinople, did sufficiently declare how
incapable he thought them of it, when being on his deathbed, he sent for the
chief men o^ his Court, and told them, he thought his eldest son Isaac, less
fit for the Empire, then his younger son Manuel, in regard of his inclination
to anger, which oftentimes hindered him from being Master of his own reason. A
Philosopher was demanded why he would not meddle with public affairs. Not,
quoth he, that I fear them, but suspect my self; intimating, that his naturally
choleric humor was totally repugnant to the management of State Affairs.
Amongst those misfortunes wherein choler may engage a Prince, the provoking a
Potent King to declare War against him, is one of the most dangerous; War is
never to be undertaken in Passion, but to be entered into by the Gate of
Prudence, else it turns to the Adventurers ruin. Anger transporteth a Prince
without giving him leave to compare his Forces with his enemies, without
preparing means necessary for his defense, or obtaining an happy end, and
without any thoughts of desisting, or of making any advantageous Peace; but
having hastily taken up his Sword, he is oftentimes seen to let it fall with
repentance, though too late, because such heady resolutions can hardly restore
him to his first state. He that has once set a fire on a Forest, is no more
able to extinguish it, but it runs from Tree to Tree until it has consumed
all, nay hardly will it be quenched upon the borders, and that Prince who has
once kindled a War cannot extinguish it at his pleasure, nor can he prevent the
ruins, which by little and little attend it, or keep it back from doing all
manner of outrages in his own country. Well may Passion engage the weakest,
but being once heated, it belongs to the Victorious to renounce it. There are
many Princes, says Polybius, who egged on by an impetuous violence, either to
revenge themselves, or grow great, do attempt many things; but few there are
who know rightly how to conduct their enterprises to obtain an happy end, or
have understanding or industry sufficient to vanquish the resistances of
fortune.

The King sends the Sieur de Guron, to treat with the Duke of Lorrain.
THough Monsieur de Lorrain's behavior, provoked the King to fall upon him,
both with his own and his Allies forces, yet such was his Clemency which
diverteth him from all proceedings of rigor, unless at the last extremity,
that he sent to the Swedes after the battle of Haguenau, to entreat them not to
prosecute any further their conquests in Lorrain, and gave them to understand
that it was in his Majesty's protection, assuring them the said Duke should no
more thwart them in their undertakings. The truth is, it was not the Duke of
Lorrain's interest alone which induced his Majesty so to do, for he was not
ignorant that the neighborhood of great Conquerours, is always to be feared;
yet his Majesty had this design in preserving him, he well hoped this present
assistance would work upon him so much the more, because his danger was so
eminent. The Swedes were commanded by persons, who amidst the prosperity of
their Victories, thought no action glorious, unless just and conformable to
the Treaty made with the King, whereupon they made no difficulty to consent
unto it, but passed their words not to attempt any thing for the future upon
Lorrain. The Duke in reason ought to have been very sensible of this
Protection, seeing in the opinion of all people, though of never so little
judgment, it prevented his ruin; yet such was his Passion, that he took no
notice of it. The King sorry for him, as for a man who would destroy himself,
presently sent the Sieur de Guron, if possible, to open his eyes, and to show
him how irrational proceedings were; but the Duke instead of reverencing his
Majesty's goodness, who could not resolve to ruin him, according as he
deserved, hid himself, and for some time would not suffer the Sieur de Guron to
see him. At Nancy where the Sieur de Guron went to see him, he was not to be
found nor could he hear any news of him, whereupon he was forced to return upon
his way toward Mets until the Duke fearful, it seems, lest his Majesty should
resent his dis-respect of a person of quality coming in his behalf, sent to
tell him that he was at Luneville; he had not Artifice enough to satisfy the
Sieur de Guron in appearance, but on the contrary, suffered himself so to be
hurried away by Passion, which had gotten the mastery of him, that he gave him
cause to suspect, he only waited a fair occasion to declare himself against his
Majesty. The Sieur de Guron used his utmost endeavor to bring him to reason;
in order to which he laid before him the little Justice of his Procedures, and
the danger whereunto he exposed himself, if he should still drive on those
discontents, which he had for some years last past given unto his Majesty.
However, when he found his endeavors ineffectual, according as he had received
instructions, he applied himself to make a discovery of his designs, which in
the Dukes anger he often did. The Duke passed many Complements unto him, and
made general protestations how ready he was to render his Majesty all respect;
but when they came to the ground of affairs, his Passion would insensibly
transport him to speak such things as did sufficiently evidence his ill
intentions, especially after that light which those of his Court gave, who were
gained to give intelligence, and the Sieur de Guron himself learned from the
particular conversation of diverse persons, during his stay in those parts, he
having dexterity enough to inform himself of any thing he desired to know, or
had charge to inquire. He was certainly informed that the new fortifications
made by the Duke at Nancy, were to no other end but to secure himself with his
own force, and to defend the injustice of his proceedings, under the shelter of
those bulwarks, instead of obtaining pardon from his Majesty's clemency, by a
true change of his behavior; that he had delivered his Commissions to raise
store of horse and foot, whose Randezvouz was to be near St. Michael, the first
of July next following, and that those Forces were appointed to invade France,
together with those which the Emperor and King of Spain had promised him. These
designs were of great importance, of all which he gave his Majesty advice, as
they came to his knowledge. The King unable to put up so insolent behavior,
presently resolved by the wise Counsel of the Cardinal, to reduce this small
Prince by force of Arms to such a pass, that he should not be in a condition
to attempt any thing, but what would make him be pitied.

That it is important to send Ambassadors to such Princes against whom War is
designed, to discover their intentions: and how it may be done.
IF it be necessary to be well informed of an enemies designs, of his humor,
of his Forces, of the succors he expects, and generally of all things which
may strengthen or weaken him, as all Politicians are of opinion; it is no less
useful to send persons to him, who under pretense of some familiarity, may
give advice thereof. Tiberius, one of the Roman Emperors, was so solicitous in
this kind, as Tacitus observes, that he was not ignorant of one of his enemies
resolutions; so that he often times raised great advantages from their
stratagems. Amongst all persons fit for this employment, none are so proper as
Ambassadors; because having the liberty of speaking to an enemy, to his
Ministers and Statesmen, the may well discover more then men of inferior
condition, who converse with none but those of their own quality. Xenophon
reports that Cyrus sent Ambassadors of a certain King of the Indies, toward
the King of the Assyrians, under pretense of making a Treaty of League with
him, but in effect to discover his designs. Not but that I think it necessary
to send with them persons of inferior qualities, who may be crafty and capable
to find admission every where to get acquaintance, to inform themselves of all
passages, and make their discoveries thereof, for such men give no small light
to affairs. Thus did Scipio, as Plutarch observes in his life, that he might
discover the State of the Carthaginians and Siphax.

Merchants used to Traffic in an Enemies Country, are not improper for this
purpose, in regard of their general acquaintance, as Xenophon, one of the
ablest Statesmen of his time, has declared; but one thing especially ought to
be observed in employing such persons, that is, that they be men of
understanding and fidelity; for if they be defective in the former, their
advices will not only be frivolous, but hurtful; because they may engage
resolutions contrary to what is fit: and if they be deficient in the latter, it
is easy to conclude how dangerously inconvenient it may be. As to the means
which all in general are to use for their information, none are better, then
those which engage men to talk much, and discover themselves: Anger has been
ever esteemed a fit subject to work upon, because it depriveth the use of
reason, and gives only the tongue liberty; and therefore it would not be
amiss that an Ambassador should dexterously provoke an Enemy-Prince, or his
Ministers, to drive them into this Passion; however this ought to be managed
both with ingenuity and respect, lest he so far exasperate them, as to refuse
him any more audience. It will not a little conduce to this end, to visit such
Grandees of State, who they find talkative; it being usual with great talkers,
to let fall whatever is in their thoughts, just as Torrents hurry away all that
oppose them. Ladies are very proper to discover secrets, especially where a man
may partake of their favors. For this reason did Augustus usually make love to
his Enemies Wives; and indeed, it is impossible the should keep any thing
secret from their Gallants: Nor ought they to be defective in feasting those
who know the Country, because Wine is as much an enemy to a secret, as love;
but especially money makes the Mare go. That is it which discovers all, and
was one of the means used by that great Captain Gonzalvus, to inform himself of
all his Masters enemies affairs, during his abode in Naples, as was to be seen
in his account after the War, where to this end he had spent 600494 crowns.

The King sends the Sieur de la Nauve, to seiz upon Bar, for defect of
Homage, and to reunite to the Crown all his lost Royalties.
THe King intending to be revenged on Monsieur de Lorrain, thought good to
begin it by seizing upon Bar, as the best remedy, in hopes that by letting him
see his Majesty's resolution, no longer to endure the effects of his hatred; he
would, in fine, return to his duty without engaging himself in greater
extremities. Upon this design he caused him to be summoned to the Parliament of
Paris, to try whether the said Duchy were not lapsed to the Crown for default
of Homage, upon whose nonappearance the Parliament decreed by the Judgment of
the 30. of July. that a Commission should be issued out to the Attorney General
to seiz upon it, and deliver it into his Majesty's hands, together with its
dependances, until the said Duke should do his Homage. In prosecution of this
Decree, the Parliament gave a Commission to the Sieur de la Nauve, one of their
most ancient Counselors, whose ability in learning, experience in affairs, and
integrity in the Administration of Justice, together with his birth and
manners, were thought capable enough to cause his Majesty's name to be honored
in Bar, and to re-establish his Authority in that luster, of which Monsieur de
Lorrain's Ambition had deprived him. His Majesty approved of their choice; and
the Sieur de la Nauve, going to take his leave of his Majesty, and receive the
honor of his commands; he gave them another Commission, under the Great Seal,
not only to execute the Parliaments Decree, but also to reunite unto the
Crown, the Royal Prerogatives of Bar, the grant of which had heretofore been
made by Charles the Ninth, and Henry the Third, to the then Duke Lorrain,
without mature consideration of the consequence of such alienation. These
things thus ended, the Sieur de la Nauve, bent all his thought toward Bar,
together with such Officers, as the Parliament does usually appoint to attend
upon their Commissaries on such occasions. The Officers of the City received
him with all honor, but not long after his arrival, the Baron de Couuonges,
Bailiff and Governor of Bar, came to meet him on the behalf of the Duke of
Lorrain, to entreat him to deliver him a Copy of his Commission, assuring him
in the interim, that the Duke had given leave to all the inhabitants and
Officers of the City, to obey such commands as he had brought from his Majesty,
it being the order of Sovereignty, that the weaker should obey the stronger.
This discourse did not at all surprise him, he knowing, that such an affair
could not be ended without some contest; and accordingly, be answered the
Baron de Couuanges without any alteration, that his Commission being to be
executed in public, and himself being to be there in the head of his Officers,
as Bailiff of Bar, to understand the King and Parliaments pleasure, it would be
unnecessary to give him a copy thereof, and that it appertained not to the Duke
of Lorrain, to give leave to the Officers and Inhabitants of Bar to obey his
Majesty's commands, seeing they having no other Sovereign but his Majesty, no
one could have the power to exempt them from that duty which they owed him. The
Sieur de Couuonges, upon this answer, withdrew; and the next morning, the Sieur
de la Nauve going to the Palace where the Officers of Justice were assembled,
took his place, and caused his Commission to be read unto them, which empowered
him to seiz the Duchy of Bar for his Majesty, for default of Homage, and to
reunite unto the Crown, the rights of Royalty and Sovereignty, which had
heretofore been alienated, and which a subject guilty of Felony could not
justly enjoy; that to this end, he was enabled to alter the Titles of Justice,
to ordain that all succeeding Acts should pass in his Majesty's name, that
they should be sealed with his Arms; that all the inhabitants of Bar should
have recourse to his Majesty, for Letters of Justice and Favor of Pardon and
Grace; that the money should be hereafter stamped with the Arms of France; and
that in general, the same Orders should be established among them, as were
observed in the other Provinces of France. Then he told them, he thought it
unnecessary to exhort them to be obedient unto his Majesty, seeing they were
his Subjects born, and that it could not but be glorious for them, to be under
a Prince who had taken Justice for the rule of his actions; who for his
Clemency, is beloved by his people; and who for his Valor, is honored of all
the World; that the seizure of Bar ought to seem the less strange unto them,
in regard the Duke of Lorrain his Majesty's Subject and Vassal, in relation to
this Duchy, which belonged in Fee to the Crown, had failed to do his Fealty
and Homage, though by the customs of France, none but his Majesty could
re-install him in it; that his Majesty had for ten years past, expected his
submission, though he might lawfully have seized it upon the death of the late
Duke; and that this Law of Fealty, should be the more vigorously executed, as
to the Dukes of Lorrain, in regard they had often failed to do their duties
unto his Majesty. As to that which concerned the reuniting of the Regal Rights
to the Crown of France; he added, that those Rights being, as it were, a
Flower, extracted from that Crown, by the importunities of the Dukes of
Lorrain, it was the more equitable to reunite them, and deprive the Duke of
them, because he has so far abused them, that he wanted little of a total
usurpation, without considering how our Kings have reserved the last appeal,
and Homage, as so many marks of Sovereign Authority, not to be alienated, that
there was little reason to suffer them longer in his hands, who had for so many
years together delayed and refused to do homage for them; and endeavored to
persuade the World, that those performed by his Predecessors, were but so many
visits and complements; especially considering, that bounty has its limits, as
well as Justice; and that it is taken for a dishonorable weakness in Kings,
when it is excessive, or when it persuades them to put up abuses offered unto
them. In fine, he ordered that the Duchy of Bar should be seized and delivered
into his Majesty's hands, and that the Royal Prerogatives should be reunited
to the Crown of France, by the Messengers of the Parliament, who accompanied
him to be enjoyed by his Majesty, until he had received satisfaction in the
causes of the seizure. This was the substance of his discourse at the Palace.
In the following days, he cause his commission to be read in the Bailiffs
court, in the chamber of Accounts, and the Townhouse. The Messengers of the
Parliament executed the Decree, all the Officers took the Oath of Allegiance
unto his Majesty, He did several acts of Justice, required the Clergy to make
public Prayers for his Majesty and the Royal Family, inhibited all Gentlemen
and inhabitants of Bar, to bear Arms for the Duke of Lorrain, regulated some
disorders committed by the Provosts of Mareschals, in the exercise of their
Office; and in general, settled every thing which he thought conducing to his
Majesty's service.

That Kings never ought to alienate their Demesnes, especially their rights of
Sovereignty.
THough Liberality be so becoming Kings, that it is no less beseeming them to
give, then to command, yet ought they never to extend their bounties so far, as
to alienate their Demesnes. The Revenues of the crown, do chiefly contain two
things, the rights of Sovereignty, and the lands which they have reserved to
themselves, or acquired by any other way whatever. The rights of Sovereignty,
consist in the power of executing Justice, coining of money, granting of
Pardons, making Peace and War, establishing Laws, imposing Taxes, creating
Magistrates, and sending Ambassadors. As for Demesne Lands, as it is
impossible to support the charges of State, without a certain income, Kings
have always reserved some of this sort, beside their Sovereignty, to serve
their occasions. This Demesne, though of less honor, has ever been esteemed
so sacred, that Kings at their Coronations have sworn to preserve and defend
them to the utmost of their powers. Indeed it is impossible, as Tacitus
observes, to keep a people in quiet without Arms, Arms without Money, and
Money without Revenue or Tribute. Hence it was, that Nero having deliberated
how to abolish all the Tolls of the Kingdom, the Senate though they approved of
his Magnificence, yet could not give their assents unto that; because the ruin
of the Empire would be inevitable, when the Nerves of it should be so
destroyed. If the alienation of ordinary Lands and Tributes, be so prejudicial
to States, those of Sovereign rights are incomparably more considerable and
dangerous. These latter Rights are like the Rays of the Sun, inseparable from
the Royal Family, and like the most noble parts of the Kingdom, without which
it cannot be preserved in that strength which becomes it. That of the Law,
which inhibiteth the alienation of royal Prerogatives, ought to be understood
more in relation of those, then of Lands; and thereupon has ordained, that if
any thing be alienated or dismembered, it shall notwithstanding be reunited to
the Crown, as so many distracted members to their body, to restore it to its
former strength. This has been always so exactly observed in this Kingdom,
that in the very Pensions of the Sons of France, the Demesnes of the Crown are
never alienated, but with express reservation of reverting to the Crowns, when
the Males fail, and that without any right of Sovereignty; so that to grant
such royal Prerogatives to a Forraigner, were to treat them more favorably,
then the Princes of the royal family; and withal, to endanger a loss of their
Sovereignty. Ambition has no bounds, and a Prince who has obtained the
privilege of some Soveraignties, may be easily wrought upon, at least his
Successors, to pretend to them, without and depending upon others; so that who
so is peccant in this excess of Liberality, what does he but raise a power
against his own, and sow the seeds of division in his Kingdom. Besides, States
be not so much for Kings, as Kings for their States, they are no less obliged
to preserve them in all their dependances, then the State is obliged to
preserve it self in the obedience they ow them; from whence it is, that to
alienate such rights, or any notable part of their Demesne, is one of the
causes of their deposing, in those Kingdoms where it is permitted by the
Fundamental Laws, as is observed by all those who have written on that Subject;
and indeed, he seems to be unworthy of a Crown, who neglects to preserve it
in its entire luster.

How the Cardinal de Lorrain came to meet the King at Chasteauthierry, where
his Majesty stayed to demand Nancy in Deposite.
IT had been not only commendable but advantageous to Monsieur de Lorrain, to
have been more concerned at the seizure at Bar, and to have waited upon his
Majesty to do him homage, and satisfy the just discontents conceived against
him by his submissions; but fortune contriving to destroy him, had cast her
Mantle before his eyes, so that the continued immovable in his first designs.
Whereupon his Majesty, about August, found himself obliged to go to
Chasteauthierry, from thence to meet the Army, which he had recalled from the
Country of Treves, and to carry them before Nancy, the better to hinder the
Duke of Lorrain's Levies; and in case he persisted in his late Procedures, to
reduce him to such a pass, that he might be no more in a condition of giving
any jealousy to France, or interrupting the forces of its Allies. Whiles his
Majesty was at Chasteauthierry, the Cardinal of Lorrain came to meet him, and
after some complements and excuses, beseeched his leave to make some
Propositions unto him. He told him, that he did much condemn his brothers
actions, and that he had never had any hand in them; both in regard of the
respect he owed his Majesty; as also because be foresaw the issue could not but
be disadvantagious; that if his Majesty should continue in the resolution to
drive this affair to the utmost, he concluded his Brothers ruin inevitable,
and that for his own particular fortune, he should seek no other refuge but
that of his royal bounty, beseech'd him to receive him into his protection, and
to permit him to retire into France. His Majesty received him very favorably,
and told him, that he should always know how to distinguish betwixt his and
his Brothers actions; that he was sufficiently informed, that he had no hand in
his Brothers deport; and that he should willingly afford him all the proofs of
as hearty a good will, as the interest of his affairs would permit; that he
assured him of his protection; and that amidst his Brothers disgrace, he should
be sure to find all the advantage which could be justly desired from his
protection. The Cardinal de Lorrain, would have made hereupon certain Proposals
to his Majesty for the accommodation of affairs, which his Majesty remitted to
Monsieur the Cardinal. The same day the Cardinal de Lorrain, went to visit
Monsieur le Cardinal, assured him of Monsieurs marriage, proposed to him to
break it, to put his sister, the Princess Marguerite into his Majesty's hands,
and to cause the homage of the Duchy of Bar, to be paid unto his Majesty in
the Duchess of Lorrain's name. The Cardinal answered him, that the King could
not give ear to any proposition, seeing the breach of that match was not in the
power of Monsieur de Lorrain; that besides his so little fidelity in observing
the three Treaties lately made with him; his Majesty had particular information
of his evil conduct, and could no longer trust him without some more potent
means to oblige him to keep his word; that his faltrings, had three several
times constrained his Majesty to raise great Armies, to the great and trouble
expense of his Subjects, which made his Majesty resolve to put a final end to
the War, that there might be no more trouble in it; that the Duke his Brother
might not have the boldness to intermeddle in any factions of his State, as he
had formerly done, even to the engaging of Monsieur in a match, which did
equally offend the dignity of the Crown and Person of his Majesty, being
managed without his consent, against the Laws of the Kingdom, and to the
countenancing of his invading France; and that the only means which could
induce his Majesty to trust the Duke his Brother, was to Deposit Nancy in his
hands, that this was the best course he could take, seeing it would preserve
his Country; and that Nancy it self, should be assuredly restored unto him, if
he carried himself for the future, as did become him; that in case he intended
fairly, he need not fear any thing; but if on the contrary, he was resolved to
persist in attempts against his Majesty, it would be to no purpose to treat;
that his Majesty was positively resolved, to admit of no other conditions; and
that Monsieur de Lorrain ought to make the less difficulty to consent
thereunto, in regard he was despoiled of all his Estates, excepting Nancy it
self, the loss of which would be unavoidable, unless he gave his Majesty
satisfaction; that this place indeed was strong, but that the Duke being unable
to keep the field, and without Revenue, his Majesty would the more easily force
him to surrender it, in regard he might manage the War against him at his own
charges; that to ground his hopes upon the alteration of times, was a counsel
very pernicious, seeing his Majesty was young, absolute in his Kingdom; and
that his cause being just there was reason to hope that God would continue to
prosper his Armies with the like happy success, as he had hitherto done.
Hereupon the Cardinal of Lorrain, represented to him that this condition was so
hard, that he could not advise his brother to accept of it; but at the last
extremity, seeing the chance of War could not reduce him to a worse pass then
to see his Captal City taken from him, and forced to depend upon another Will;
That he doubted not of his Majesty's intention to perform the trust of a
Deposit; but that the state of affairs being subject to change, his enemies
might by their ill Offices make his Majesty believe that he had broken the
Treaty; and consequently, give him occasion to detain Nancy; that he beseeched
the Cardinal to consider what a shame it would be for his brother to deliver up
one of the best places in the World, in the sight of all Europe, without
resistance, and not being forced thereunto; that he confessed his Majesty's
Power was great, and that it would be difficult for him to withstand it; and
that finding himself between two great Princes, he ought to be the more
cautious of his deportment, in regard if he should satisfy the King by
delivering Nancy, he should contract the Emperor's displeasure, from whom he
holds his Duchy, which doubtless he would declare to be forfeited by
Proclamation of the Empire, with a resolution to seiz upon it as soon as ever
the affairs of Germany would permit him; That indeed he might reasonably expect
his Majesty's protection, but that then it might so fall out that his Majesty
might be so far engaged in other Wars, as not to be in a condition of assisting
him, by which means his ruin would then be inevitable; and moreover, that he
thought it impossible to persuade his brother to Deposit Nancy, unless at the
last extremity of his affairs. Whereunto the Cardinal answered, that he found
it not strange that he should allege his holding of the Empire, and the power
of the House of Austria; but besides that, the King did not consider such
pretensions, he thought that if the Duke of Lorrain did well weigh it, he would
find no great reason to build upon it, because he well knew that those whose
interests he alleged, being the chief Authors of his evil conduct, had not
been very solicitous to assist him: That he confessed indeed Monsieur de
Lorrain was under the P^otection of two Crowns; but that the Laws of the very
protection, obliged him to deserve it from the King, by his respects and good
deportment; and to conclude, by the desires which his Predecessors had
testified, that his preservation entirely depended thereupon: That instead
thereof he had provoked his Majesty, broken his faith by infringing of
Treaties, taken part with Spain, run into all acts of Hostility, and to
complete all the rest of his breaches of promise which might offend his
Majesty, had ravished a son of France, and engaged Monsieur to marry his
sister, whereupon his Majesty had but too much reason to invade his Countries;
and that if he did more fear the power of the Emperor, then that of France,
then at his Gates, he might choose what party he pleased to defend himself by
force; but that in case he would prudently avoid his ruin, which was
inevitable, he could not take a better course, then by depositing of Nancy,
which would secure his States without any loss to him.

As for matter of his holding of the Empire, the King was far enough from
admitting it, seeing he himself claims the Sovereignty of Lorrain, and that
the Homage was due unto him; that the Empire had heretofore usurped it from
this Crown, but that length of possession could not prejudice a Sovereigns
right, because great Princes, who acknowledge no other Tribunal upon earth,
where they may claim their own, are always permitted to demand their rights
from Usurpers, and to enter them by force; so that no time can cause a
prescription against them; that the affairs of France had not heretofore been
in a condition to dispute these pretenses; but that now God having opened his
Majesty a way to establish his Monarchy, in its primitive greatness, Posterity
would have a just cause to reproach him with negligence, if he should not
employ his forces in the recovery of the most ancient rights of his Crown: that
Monsieur de Lorrain ought to have had those fears alleged by him in his mind,
at such time as he was running on to provoke his Majesty against him, but that
now having done the injury, his Majesty could not dissemble his resentment:
wherefore he was absolutely resolved to be revenged unless he received such
satisfaction that all Europe might know to be reasonable: that his P^edecessors
had ever well-esteem'd the friendship of France, and that he himself might have
rested secure in this protection, because his Majesty well knew how to defend
him against any man: But in fine, that the King could not admit of any other
condition then the Deposite of Nancy, seeing though he already had the best
places of Lorrain in his hands, they could not oblige the Duke to keep his
promise, and that his Majesty had reason to suspect he would not be much more
solicitous for keeping it in future, after so many changes of his resolution:
that his Majesty chiefly desired this assurance, that he might no more hazard
the receiving a new injury, or be necessitated (to his great expense) to raise
a new Army: a thing, peradventure, which might then fall out when the State of
his affairs would hardly permit him to attend it, whereas the present
conjuncture was such, that his Majesty could not wish it more favorable, there
being no likelihood of any thing to divert him; that the Duke of Lorrain might
be thereby the more readily induced to this resolution; his Majesty desired to
inform him of the present state of his affairs; that that of France was such,
that it was not only at Peace, but without fear of civil War, all ill Subjects
conspiring to be obedient, the Treasure being full of money to sustain the
charge; and on the other side, the Treaty of the Low Countries being broken,
without the least hopes of being brought on again, and the Spaniards being in
so much want of assistance from their Allies; that the Duke of Lorrain could
not pretend to expect any from them. As to Germany, that the Emperors forces
had enough to do, to defend themselves from the prosperous success of the
Swede, who was not likely to be stopped. As to matter of Italy, that the
Cardinal Infanta's forces; were not yet ready to march, and that admitting they
were, yet that they might meet with great obstructions in the Valtoline, the
Swedes being advanced thither to hinder their march; and that thus Nancy might
be besieged, and taken without hopes of any assistance to releeve it, unless
Monsieur de Lorrain, had rather Deposite it in his Majesty's hands. The
Cardinal de Lorrain found it an hard task to answer these reasons, and being
retired, all the course he took was to beseech his Majesty, to give him time to
confer with the Duke his brother; and in the mean time, not to make any further
progress. The King not only refused it, but assured that he would march before
Nancy, with the greatest speed that might be, resolved never to depart, until
he had reduced it to its obedience.

That there ought to be other assurances taken then bare words from an incensed
Prince, who has oftentimes broke his word.
IT is necessary to take other kind of security then bare words, from a Prince
who has often failed of his word, and especially, who is known to be incensed,
and passionately desirous of revenging the punishments he has received. His
apparent submissions in matters of accommodation, are effects rather of his
weakness then good will; and as Passion rather treads under foot the Laws of
honor and justice, it will afterward make no difficulty to break its promises,
if it find any overture to evade them, and reassume its lost advantage.
Asdrubal may serve for an example, who finding himself so blocked up in Spain,
by Claudius Nero, that he must unavoidably die with famine in his Trenches, or
fall under his Arms in a disadvantagious battle, sent him very fair Proposals
of Peace, and in the interim, found away to escape his hand. Nero indeed angry
for being thus surprised, for which he had been blamed at Rome, made him
afterward suffer in the Marquisate of Ancona for his Treachery; but besides,
that this was not without indangering his whole Army, yet had it been a shame
to suffer himself to be deluded by his enemy, under show of accommodation. Pope
Julius the Second, that he might amuse Lewis the Twelfth, sent his Nuncio's to
Treat a Peace, and conclude it, that he might gain time to make a League
offensive with the Venetians and King of Aragon aginst him; but let us look
back again into the examples of Antiquity. Mark Anthony, held Fraates besieged
in Priaspe with full assurance of taking it in few days. Fraates sent his
Ambassadors to him, that it was thought a Peace might easily have been
concluded between them. Mark Anthony gave them present Audience, and withal,
sent other Ambassador to Fraates to conclude it; but Fraates continuing his
Treachery, made great complaints unto them of Mark Anthony; and in conclusions,
added, that as often as he should withdraw his Army, from the place wherein he
was encamped, he would be content to make a Peace with him. Mark Anthony
hereupon presently withdrew his Forces, without breaking down his Treches, or
carrying away his Engines of War, he had not marched far from his Camp, before
the Medes sallied out of Priaspe, mastered it, and destroyed all his Engines,
which he had inconsiderately left there, though peradventure not without hopes
that he might be there soon enough to defend them, in case the Medes used any
Treachery. Besides, part of Mark Anthony's Forces were cut off when he led them
back again to the Camp, so that he was forced to relinquish that design with
shame and loss, and by his example, taught all Princes not to be
over-credulous of an Enemies promises.

How the Cardinal of Lorrain came to meet his Majesty at St. Dezier, and made
diverse Propositions which Monsieur the Cardinal refused.
THe Cardinal de Lorrain, took his leave of the King upon the 20. of August, to
meet his brother, and the same day, his Majesty, who seldom loses any time in
such enterprises, advanced toward Nancy; but being near St. Dezier, the
Cardinal returned to him, and offered in the Duke of Lorrain's name, to deliver
the Princess Marguerite his Sister into his hands, in order to the dissolution
of that marriage, and to surrender La Mothe unto him, one of the strongest
places of his State. The King carried him to St. Dezier, and had two hours
conference with him, at which Monsieur le Cardinal Duc, the Sieur de Brassac
Bullion, and Bouthilier were present to examine the Propositions; but they were
thought improper, because they did not deprive the Duke of Lorrain of the power
to reassume his former designs; so that his Majesty returned him no other
answer, but this, that he was resolved to have Nancy, as a place without which
he had no assurance for the performance of any Treaty; however, his Majesty
knowing that the Cardinals negotiations were very frank and affectionate to
procure an accommodation; he testified unto him, that his inter position was
not only acceptable, but that he had ever a regard to his particular interest,
notwithstanding the injuries he had received from his Brother; and withal,
offered him all sorts of honor and employments suitable to his quality, if he
thought good to reside in France. After this he returned to the Duke his
brother, to acquaint him with the Kings resolution; and having told him what
extraordinary testimonies of favor and good will he had received from his
Majesty; the Duke at last resolved to surrender his Estates into the Kings
hands, hoping by this means to evade the effects of his Majesty's just
displeasure, yet took assurance from the Cardinal his brother, to restore them
unto him. He discoursed of it with the Cardinal, who having assured him, that
he would therein do whatever could be desired; he beseeched him to return to
the King, to tell him, that seeing he was so unfortunate, that his Majesty
could not believe his promises, he had resolved to put his estates, into his
Brother the Cardinals hands; and that he hoped his Majesty considering his
deportment, whould the more readily consent thereunto, because then there was
no cause of fear, and that he could not receive a greater satisfaction from
him, then to see him reduced to the quality of a private person, by devesting
himself from that of a Sovereign. The Cardinal de Lorrain, returned to his
Majesty at Pont au Mousson, upon the 28. of the same month, and proposed this
to him, renewing his promised of delivering the Princess Marguerite into his
hands, and so to endeavor the dissolution of that marriage. The King desired
him to treat with Monsieur the Cardinal, relying upon this grand Minister, whom
he knew to employ most of his time in examination of what might be granted, and
in prevention of such inconveniences as might probably arise from their
Propositions. The Cardinal de Lorrain went to meet him, and made the same
Proposition unto him, and withal told him, that to give him the greater
assurance of his fidelity, and of his positive intention to keep his word; he
beseeched him to give him Made de Combalet his Niece in marriage, and to
procure the Kings consent unto it, professing that he desired it with a great
deal of affection, as a most certian gage of his good will, and a powerful
means to preserve him in his Majesty's favor, and protested totally to embrace
his counsels, and to have no other will then his, whereby he might absolutely
root out all subject of division between France and Lorrain. Monsieur the
Cardinal replied unto him, that as for matter of the surrender of the States of
Lorrain, he believed the King would not divert his brother from it, seeing his
particular actions gave sufficient ground to believe his behavior toward
France, would be such as would give his Majesty all kind of satisfaction; but
that this was not to cure the disease, because M. de Lorrain, might repent of
his surrender, and return into his states, either by open force, or underhand
dealing, and that then the whole business were to be begun again; wherefore it
were necessary to find out another expedient, and that the Deposite of Nancy,
was the only secure way which could be taken. This was sufficient to let him
know, that it was mistrusted, lest there were some collusion between them; but
that he might not exasperate him, and preserve him affectionate to the
accommodation, whereby some advantage might be made upon the conclusion, he
would not harp any more upon that string. As to his demand of Madam de
Combalet, he told him, that he took it for a very great honor, and did not
reject it, but that he thought it improper to treat of it at that time, to
avoid the report of having engaged his Majesty to come into Lorrain with a
great Army for his private ends, and entreated him not to insert this affair
with the public, though for his part he was not ways averse from it. These
words of agreement, were only an effect of his Purdence, which advised him not
to estrange this Cardinals good will, but to preserve it to be made use of as
occasion should require, for discoursing to the chief Ministers concerning this
Proposition; he told them, that neither the present, nor the future age, should
have cause to believe, that he had mingle his own interests in this affair,
where his only end was the Kings service, and the good of the State; that
heretofore the Cardinal de Amboise, had made Lewis the Twelfth undertake a War
in Italy, only upon an ambitious design of being Pope; but that for his part,
he should always shun the blame of managing the affairs of State by his own
particular Interest, and as to that which concerned the Princess Marguerite,
he assured him that the King would willingly accept thereof; any that the
executing of it would give a great stroke to a conclusion, seeing she might
much dispose his Majesty to relinquish somewhat of his resolution, because he
could not but receive her as a pledge of Monsieur de Lorrain's good inclination
to be at peace with his Majesty; but he told him, that his Majesty believed it
was not in their power, for that he was informed of what had past. The Cardinal
de Lorrain made himself ingnorant, and assured the Cardinal she was in a place
where they could dispose of her; but that only served to make the Cardinal
distrust his intentions, who knows, that in matters of Treaty, an enemies
actions are more to be regarded them his words. After this, they brake up their
conference, departed each from other, and the next morning the Cardinal de
Lorrain took his leave of the King.

That a wise Minister ought to foresee the inconveniences of all Propositions
made to him in Treaties.
It is the property of a wise Minister, to foresee the inconveniences of such
Propositions as are made in Treaties to surprise him, and to be careful that
an enemy who has not been able to get any advantage by War, should not gain it
by an accommodation. It is to this end that many have thought Prudence to be
more necessary for him then valor, because the occasions of fighting are but
seldom in War, whereas Propositions of Peace are daily made, which if he should
admit of to his Masters detriment, would be no less prejudicial to him then a
defeat. To speak truth, this virtue is as needful for him, as Art for a
Workman, and as the ignorant Workman does only spoil that substance, which he
pretends to form; so the imprudent Minister ruineth the affairs of a State,
if he accept of injurious conditions for want of foreseeing the consequences.
Prudence it is which causes him to know the means by which he may attain his
proposed end, preventeth his being deceived, serves to regulate his counsels,
guides his actions, makes him speak in agreeable terms, conducteth all his
motions, teaches him what to do in all Occurrences, makes him clear sighted
amidst the Artifices of his enemies, and gives him address to obtain whatever
he desires. The Philosopher says, it is a virtue proper to him that governs,
not that it is unnecessary for private persons; but because it is so highly
necessary for Kings and Ministers, that without it they are no more able to
govern a State, than a Pilot to guide his Vessel without Steer and Rudder. He
who is Master of it, does easily master all others in matters of negotiation;
and if his birth has not made him a Sovereign, yet does it afford him the
means to work Sovereigns to what he pleases; so says the wise man in his
Proverbs, The pleasure of a King depends upon the Prudence of his servant. To
make a right use of this virtue, he ought advisedly to consider the parts which
are proposed to him, and to bring them to the Touchstone of those maxims
which he has laid down for the ground of the Treaty. To this end, the wise
Minister often retires in private, as knowing, that then he has full liberty
to discuss the Propositions made unto him, and is at leisure to consider them;
a thing, says Periander, able to overcome all things. He is not ignorant, that
who so takes resolutions without due consideration, is like those liquorish
men, who charging their stomachs over hastily, do repent it as soon as they
rise from the Table; wherefore he takes great care to weigh the Propositions
made to him, he applies the Hypothesis to the Thesis, particular affairs, to
general maxims; he recollecteth the Experience of things past, proportioneth
the means to the end, observes if by granting any thing, it may not serve the
enemy to obtain his pretenses, examineth what assurance he shall find of
performance, and generally all other circumstances: And lastly, being thus
secure from all surprises, he is not only in a condition of being not cheated,
but in a way of obtaining whatever he desires.

The King besieges Nancy, and presses hard upon the Duke of Lorrain.
DUring the Cardinal de Lorrains journying too and fro, and the diverse
Propositions of Peace by him made his Majesty's Army was not idle. The King
gave Order to his Commanders, that they should seize upon all principal places,
he summoned in person the Towns of St. Michael, and Ponto au Mousson, which
presently surrendered: Espinal surrendered to the Marshal de la Force; Charms to
the Comte de la Suze, and Luneville to the Marquess de Sourdis; besides these,
Halon du Chastel, and the Castles de Conde, la Chausset, Trognon, Malatour,
Pargny and Boucouville, received the Garrisons sent to them; so that his Majesty
had no sooner entered into the Country, but he became Master of the Field; but
that which was most of all, was, his Majesty having cause his Army to come to
him from the Country of Treves, under the command of the Marquess de St.
Chaumond, and ordered diverse other Troops to draw thither, which so invested
the City of Nancy, that nothing could get in or out without a good passe-port.
The Regiment de Florinville, designing to get in by night, was led by M. de
Lorrains Huntsmen though Woods, and by unknown ways; yet they could not carry
it so secretly, but some French discovered them, which struck them into such
fear, that flying back again through the same Woods, they totally routed
themselves. On the other side, the Comte de la Souze, kept the Field with seven
Cornets of horse, and some foot, so that nothing durst appear against him: and
to reinforce the Dukes fear, at the advantages which the Kings army took, his
Majesty commanded the Marshal de la Force to pursue him, with 6000 foot, 1500
horse, and six pieces of Canon, and to invest him in any place where he should
retreat; and withal, to treat those as enemies who should receive him, if they
refused to deliver him, as an enemy of France; so that he was constrained to
retire about Espinal, where he quartered with such Forces as he could get
together, and to draw a little nearer to the Franche-Comte, where they who had
persuaded him to take the Field, gave him encouragement to hope for certain
Forces, which never came to him. To be short, that nothing might be omitted
which might shake him, whom necessity alone was able to reduce to reason; his
Majesty coming before Nancy, and quartering at Neufville, went in person to
view the most advantageous Posts for his Army. The Cardinal likewise rid the
round without Musket shot of the City, the better of judge of the order of the
Siege, and then his Majesty personally drew out the circumvalation, which was
four Leagues about the Forts and Redoubts, and set the Pioneers to work. He
dug first himself, and caused the work to be followed with such care and
diligence, that in five days time the Camp was finished, and his under shelter.
At the same time, they began a Bank thwart the River Meurthe, which stopping
the Current, would not only have drowned the neighboring country, but in a
little time have forced in into the City, and compelled the inhabitants to quit
it; insomuch, that the Duke seeing the unhappy condition of his affairs, knew
not where to hide his head. Every one, in the interim, admired the happy
successes of those counsels which the Cardinal gave his Majesty, with so much
the more astonishment, in regard they admired upon what ground his Majesty
should resolve to besiege one of the strongest places of Europe, in a season
somewhat forward, without any likelihood of taking it before Winter.

That an Enemy in disorder, ought to be pursued, especially after he has
received a Foil.
ONe of the best effects of military Prudence, is to know how to take advantage
of time, how to prosecute an enemy in disorder, when he has received some
foil; and has so much to do in several places, that he is, as it were,
necessitated to submit and consent to whatever is desired. A Prince thus
disordered, will easily grant whatever is demanded of him; and assent unto
conditions, which at another time he would not. Wherefore it is very expedient
in such a conjuncture, to fall upon him resolutely, and to pursue him so hard,
that he may not know which way to turn himself. Had Hannibal known how to have
played his Game after the Battle of Cannes, he had forced the Romans to receive
such conditions as he would have imposed, it being the greatest blow their
Empire ever felt; but he trifling away his time to refresh his Soldiers, and
enjoy the commodiousness of his Quarters, drowned his Fortune in delights, and
made no advantage of his good success. A Prince never ought to let good
Fortune so blind him amidst his happy successes, as to despise his enemies, or
to forbear from prosecuting them to the utmost; not that I would advise to
drive an enemy to extremity, who flies with a great Army, because it might make
him courageous, force him to turn about, and as oftentimes it has happened, to
recover the advantage he had lost, rather he ought to set open the Gates, and
make a Bridge for him to run away; but otherwise it is, if most part of his
Towns he taken, if he cannot relieve those that are besieged, if his Forces be
not in pieces, and routed in several places; and if he be so ill attended as
not to be in a condition of defending himself if assaulted, then not to
prosecute him, were a great oversight to be satisfied with half a victory, and
to give him time to rally his forces again, were to break all the rules of War.
Caesar by his example, showed all Captains how they ought to behave themselves
on such affairs; never did any thing hinder him in the prosecution of his
Victory; but as if Fortune had lent him wings, he flew after his enemies till
he had quite defeated them, or obtained such conditions as he demanded. He
cannot be sufficiently commended for his good conduct in Afric, after the
defeat of King Juba, Scipio and Afranius, where such was his good fortune, that
he routed them all three in one day, and pursued them so smartly, that he left
neither of them nor their Officers, who was not either killed or taken
prisoner, nor any of his Towns, which he did not reduce to his power.

The Princess Marguerite leaves Nancy, and go^th to Bruxels.
THough the Cardinal de Lorrain had assured his Majesty that the Princess
Marguerite was in his disposal; yet it was well known that the Princess de
Falsbourg her sister, unable to endure the Propositions of delivering her into
his Majesty's hands, in order to the nulling of her marriage by Law, had found
an invention to save her, which she had made use of with the better effect, in
regard Ambition and Love make all things feasible to women. It was known that
she had habited her self like a Cavalier with Boots and Spurs, well horsed; and
in this equipage she left Nancy, about four of the clock in the morning,
attended by a Gentleman, named Davise, who had heretofore belonged to Madam de
Remiremont, together with two others, that she passed through diverse Sentinels,
and that at last being stopped by one, Davise made him believe that they
related to the Marquess de St Chaumont, and that by this means she had got
thirteen Leagues on horseback; that meeting with certain Swedish Troops, she
had been compelled to hide her self in a very thick Copse Wood, where she much
scratched her hands, and that the next morning she got to Thiomville, where at
first they would not open the Gates, and indeed had absolutely refused her, But
for the charms of her beauty, which moved great compassion in those who beheld
her lying on the ground wrapped up in Clokes, whiles Davise treated for her
admission; and that at last being got in, the Governors Wife of the Town had
changed her habit. From thence she writ to the Sieur de Puy-Laurens, to entreat
him, to acquaint Monsieur with the manner of her escape, and that she should
stay in those places to expect his commands; but afterward thinking it more
proper to go to Namour, for fear lest the way might not be open after her
escape, she resolved to advance thither. His Majesty receive this news with
some regret, foreseeing that her flight might be succeeded with troublesome
consequences, and make the dissolution of the marriage more difficult: He much
blamed the Marquess de St. Chaumont, for suffering himself to be surprised,
especially after he had been advised by the Cardinal, to have a great care of
all those who should travel upon the Road, because she might probably pass by
him in some disguise; to which he returned this answer, that they should rely
upon his diligence. Monsieur Duc d'Orleans, received no great satisfaction from
it, foreseeing that this Princess would be a new Obligation to tie him to the
Low Countries; but the Laws of Civility, and the consideration of the
Spaniards, who he was forced to content, persuaded him to seem very glad of it.
He presently dispatched the Sieurs de Fontain Chalendre, de Rames, and de
Lavaupot to Thionville, who were followed by the Duke d'Elboeuf, and the Sieur
de Puy-Laurens; they met her upon the way, and Monsieur, in person, went with
much affection to receive her, as far as Marshe, and accompanied her from
Namour to Bruxelles, with all the honor and endearments she could desire. That
day that she was to go into Bruxelles, the Infanta, with the whole Court went
to receive her, half a League from the Town, and meeting, they both alighted
from their Coaches to salute her; the Infanta kissed her, and then taking her
by the hand, led her into her own Coach, where she always gave her the right
hand. Coming to the Gate of Bruxelles, the Companies of the City gave her a
Volley of small shot, and the Magistrates went to welcome her; she alighted in
company of the Infanta at the Queen-Mothers, who testified much joy for her
arrival, and kissed her, and after half an hours entertainment, the Infanta
carried her to her own lodgings, which she had prepared two days before, with
very rich Furniture, her soul being no less replenished with Magnificence then
Piety. The Princess Marguerite could not forbear the expressing her content,
so sweet it is to attain any eminent point of honor, after the running of
great hazards; but often repeated, that she could never have believed what
History relates, concerning fugitive Princesses, had she not her self
experimented it. The Infanta did daily endeavor to augment her joy, by her
great care, and the Presents she sent her, in which the quaintness of her
fancy, was no less admirable then her liberality.

Nothing is more ingenious then Women to attain their Designs.
Women of all creatures are the most dexterous in contriving their designs,
their natural sprightlinesse of imagination, furnishes them with a thousand
expedients, and proposes all kinds of overtures, with such probabilities of
happy success, that they are easily inflamed with a desire of trying them.
This desire makes so great an impression upon their Passions, that in case any
obstacle present it self to divert them, they never want anger; which so
disturbeth them, that they admit of no rest, until they have surmounted it,
and obtain the ends which they propose to themselves. This their violent
apprehension, augmenteth the fruitfulness of their conceptions; and as the
heat of the air does every day disclose new productions in the bosom of the
earth; so their ardent desires beget new expedients in their minds, carries
all their thoughts, conducteth all their motions, guides all their affections,
and so disposes of all their power, that they neither think, desire,
discourse, or do any thing, but what tends to their ends; they sleep with the
consideration of those means which may conduce to their own ends, the desire of
executing them, awakeneth them in the morning; and as they have little
diversions in the day time, they have no greater delight then to discourse with
them, in whom they put their confidence. Men who are employed in great affairs,
have their imginary faculties more barren, and granting them to be as fertile
as those of Ladies, yet the diversity of their employments does so divert them,
that it is impossible for them ever to be ruminating upon the same Subject; but
otherwise it is with Ladies, especially those of quality, who have nothing to
do but to please their own fancies. I might likewise add, that the defect of
Prudence, which is evident in most of them, is in some sort to their advantage,
because it gives them more courage to execute, than the wisest of men, whose
judgment makes them foresee many inconveniences, which women do not at all
apprehend. Besides, the respect which every one bears to their Sex, seems
to take away al^ ^ear from them, by persuading them that the worst that can
befall them, is but to discover their Sex and quality; and that once known, not
any person of quality will use them uncivilly. Amongst the many inventions
which they have used to save themselves by flight, or to obtain their desires,
that of changing their habits is one of the most frequent. So Laodice, the wife
of Mithridates, unwilling to forsake her husband, when vanquished by Pompey,
clothed her self like a man, and followed him a long time, as if she had had
an indefatigable body and courage. Semiramis knowing most people impatient of
the Government of women, left off her usual habit after her husbands death, and
assumed that of the Kings, the better to preserve the government in her hands,
during the nonage of her son Ninus. Does not History record the same of diverse
Persian women, who in the habit of Soldiers followed their Husbands to the
Wars, between the King of Persia, and Selim the Turkish Emperor? We read that
diverse Germans went to the Holy War with the Emperor Conradus, clothed and
accoutred like Cavaliers, with as much valor as Amazons.

The Treaty made with Monsieur de Lorrain, and how after all his difficulties,
he was forced to put it in execution.
THe advantages which the Kings Army had obtained upon the Duke of Lorrain
produced those effects, of which the Cardinal had given his Majesty great
hopes. He disposed himself to grant all that could be desired, according as the
Army made its progress. He was forced to send to Cardinal of Lorrain to his
Majesty at Neufville, to offer him the new Town of Nancy; but his Majesty being
not ignorant that leaving the City in his hands, would give him the occasion
and means to re-commence his imbroyls, when ever those who had engaged him,
should send him a powerful assistance, would not be persuaded to assent
thereunto. He then sent again the same Cardinal, with full power to deliver him
both the Towns of Nancy in Deposite, upon such conditions as should be resolved
between him and Monsieur the Cardinal. This was as much in appearance as could
be desired; but Monsieur the Cardinal, too too well informed of the Dukes
wavering humor, to trust him, was not backward to tell the King that he
thought it not fit to rely upon it, or to be certain of any thing, until the
Gates of Nancy were opened, that his forces might take possession of it; so
that the works of the Siege were prosecuted with all diligence; yet at last,
the Cardinal having full power from the King to treat, entered into conference
with the Cardinal of Lorrain, and concluded a Treaty upon these following
conditions.

1. That the Duke of Lorrain, should renounce all new Alliances, it prejudice
to that of France. 2. Thatt he should oblige himself to serve the King, with,
and against all. 3. That he should not make any Levies of War, during the
present troubles of Germany, without his Majesty's consent. 4. The he should
disband, as soon as his Majesty should receive notice from the Chancellor
Oxenstern, that he would not attempt any thing, but withdraw the Swedish forces
from his Countries. 5. That he should deliver the City of Nancy, both old and
new, in Deposit to his Majesty's hands, within three days, until such time as
his good behavior, or the pacification of the trubles of Germany, should take
away all cause of suspicion of the like enterprises as he had heretofore made
against his Majesty, and his Allies, and also until such time as the pretended
marriage between Monsieur and the Princess Marguerite, were declared null by
Law; and that the differences between the King, and the said Duke were decided,
each of them in the mean while, enjoying their rights, without prejudice of
this Treaty; yet however, that in case the War of Germany should last four
years, the conditions of this Treaty being first accomplished, his Majesty
should restore Nancy into the hands of the said Duke or his Successors. 6. That
the Princess Marguerite should be delivered into the Kings hands within fifteen
days; or at least, that the said Cardinal and Duke of Lorrain, should use their
utmost endeavor to recover her from whence she was, and to deliver her into
his Majesty's hands; and should so order the business, that her retreat should
not hinder the dissolution of the marriage. 7. That the Duchy of Bar should
continue sequestered until such time as his Majesty should be satisfied for the
homage thereof. 8. That the Revenue of Lorrain, and the States thereupon
depending, should be received by the said Duke, with all sort of liberty. 9.
That he whom his Majesty should place in Nancy, during the Deposit should have
the absolute command of the Arms, without other obligation then that of
receiving the word from the Cardinal of Lorrain, in case he would make his
abode there. 10. That Order should be taken that the Garrison might not offer
any distaste to the Inhabitants.
This was the conclusion, made in the Camp before Nancy, the 6. of September:
Whereupon the Cardinal went to the Duke, to procure his ratification. He
brought in, and the Cardinal accompanied by Janin his Secretary of State,
coming to give his Majesty assurance thereof; there were three days time
allotted for execution of the Treaty, and for his Majesty's entering into Nancy:
But the day being come, the Cardinal de Lorrain fell off to delays and excuses,
pretending that his brother had sent order to the contrary, by a certain
Gentleman, named Giton; so that the whole business was to be begun again.
However, the Cardinal sensible of his own power, and not ignorant of the
advantages he had upon the Duke of Lorrain, would not totally break off the
Treaty, but sent the Marquess de Chanvalon to Nancy, to the Cardinal of
Lorrain, with charge to tell him, as from himself, that the King found himself
by diverse reasons, forced to carry his affairs to the height, yet had however
some unwillingnesse to put that resolution in execution; because of the
franknesse and affection he had testified to contribute his endeavors for a
reasonable accommodation. The Cardinal testified, that his good will was no
whit diminished, and that he would once again see what he could work upon his
Brother, to induce him to adhere to the Treaty; in order whereunto, he sent a
Gentleman to him, with such effectual expressions, persuading him to settle his
affairs, then in a declining condition, that he at last hearkened to his advice,
and sent the Sieur de Contrisson to his Majesty, to desire a safe conduct to
confer with Monsieur the Cardinal at St. Nicholas. His Majesty granted it; but
the morning following, thinking it more fit that the Cardinal should go as far
as Charms to treat with him, for fear lest he might have proposed this
conference at St. Nicholas, that he might the better get away into Flanders,
where once being, there was no l^k^lyhood of his depositing Nancy; it was
signified unto him, that Charms would be a place much more proper for the
Treaty, which he accepting of, the Cardinal, and he came thither upon the 18.
Monsieur le Cardinal, came first thither, about five in the evening,
accompanied by the Cardinal de la Valette, the Popes Nuntio, a great many Lords
and Gentlemen, and a good party of Horse and Foot. The Duke came not until
about eleven at night; so that finding the Cardinal in bed; and not willing to
permit his people to wake him, according as he had commanded, they met not
until the morning following. That day they had two long debates without any
conclusion; so that every one thought there would be no agreement; but in fine,
the Duke persuaded by the Cardinal's eloquence and address, submitted just as
his eminence was bidding him adieu at his Lodging, and passed his word to
conclude the Treaty which his brother had made, by his Order, without including
any other condition, but this, that he might make his abode at Nancy, with all
honors due to his quality; as also, the Cardinal his Brother; and that the
Treaty being within three months particularly, that which engaged him to
deliver the Princess Marguerite into the Kings hands; his Majesty should
restore him the City of Nancy, without more ado then demolishing the
Fortifications, if his Majesty should so think fit. Monsieur le Cardinal, did
the more willingly consent unto these two Articles, in regard he pretended only
to put things into a way of reason, not to extend the bounds of France, which
was of it self large enough to obtain as much glory, as his Majesty could
desire; so that both of them having signed it, there wanted nothing but the
execution of them. Monsieur le Cardinal was not ignorant how important it was,
not to abandon Monsieur de Lorrain, or to leave him to his own honesty, which
possibly might have been shaken by the natural inconstancy of his humor. So
that he earnestly labored to persuade him to meet his Majesty in person, in
order to the performance of his promises. He represented to him, that it would
be the more glorious for him, in regard it would testify unto all Princes,
that he had not Deposited Nancy upon compulsion; as also of great advantage, in
regard it would be an ample demonstration of his real intentions of submitting
his, unto his Majesty's Will: Who would thereupon be the more indulgent of him,
and surrender Nancy unto him, as soon as ever he should be assured he might be
confident of his good deportment. Such were the charms of his words, that they
persuaded him to resolve thereupon, that upon the 21 they departed together to
wait upon the King. Approaching near Nancy, the Cardinal hasted to acquaint the
King, before the Cardinal de Lorrains coming, with the secret of the affair,
and to advise him of such things as were most conducing to his service. All
that appeared, was that Monsieur de Lorrain, saluting the King, bowed himself
very low made his excused with a great deal of submission, assured him of the
inclination he had to obey him; beseeched him to forget what was past, to
pardon him, and to believe that he would punctually perform the Treary. The
King embraced him with a cheerful countenance, and told him, that he willingly
accepted those proffers of his service and friendship, that he should forget
what was passed, and that he forgave him. Afterward, he led him into his
Cabinet, where the Cardinal was with the chief of the Council. Their
entertainment was for some time upon ordinary discourse, and many things were
said concerning the Dukes courage and inclination to Arms, which he did not
unwillingly hear. The King told him, I must confess, I have had an ill opinion
of you, and when I found you performed not the Treaties, made by the Cardinal
your Brother, which your self had ratified, I shaid you had neither faith nor
honesty; but now in confidence of the promises you have made me to perform all,
I begin to be of another opinion, and shall be ready to testify the desire I
have to love you. Monsieur the Cardinal took up the discourse, and said, Sirs,
I shall willingly pass my word for the affection which Monsieur de Lorrain
has for you service; and for the desire he has to live otherwise than
heretofore. You ought to forget the occasions of discontent which your Majesty
has received, and to believe, that his deportment for the future will be
satisfactory; he must fight under your Colors, and in the head of your Troops.
Hereupon Monsieur de Lorrain made great complements, beseeching the King to
receive him into his favor. The King re-interated the assurances of his good
will; and it being Supper time, his Majesty caused him to be conducted to
Monsieur le Duc de la Valette's lodging, who his Majesty had commanded to
entertain him. Notwithstanding all this, and these several prot^^tations made
by the Duke of Lorrain, to live otherwise then he had for the future, yet the
knowledge of his humor, obliged the King to cause him to be watched by diverse
trusty persons; nor was it without reason, seeing the very next morning there
were many probable conjectures that he intended to save himself without making
good any thing that he had promised. The reverend Father Joseph, and the Sieur
Bouthillier, went to wait upon him, to conclude upon the Orders for his
Majesty's entrance into Nancy; but he entertained the motions with so much
coldness, that there could be no more doubt of it; however, because it was not
absolutely certain, his Majesty did forbear to seiz upon his person. The course
he took by an admirable piece of Prundence, not to break the Laws of
Hospitality, yet to prevent his getting off which would be much to his
Majesty's damage, was the commanding of diverse trusty persons to be near his
Lodging, who without show of mistrust, might watch that he escaped them not.
Indeed it had been a shame for the King to have suffered the Duke to have
mocked his Majesty by an escape of that nature; and it had been as much
weakness as inconsiderateness not to have stopped him in his flight. It was
absolutely necessary indeed to observe the promise of security given him, for
his coming to execute the Treaty; which in case he refused to do, the King was
not obliged to his word; and the Duke relying only upon the faith of his
Treaty, might and ought to be stopped; seeing the nonperformance of it made him
an enemy as before, and he could not be arrested until he had openly declare
himself; but his evasion discovering him sufficiently, it had been imprudence
to have suffered him to pass into Flanders, without securing his person.

That Prince who after a Treaty attempteth to break his promise, may be secured
as an Enemy.
THat Prince who after a Treaty made, either resolves or indeavoureth to be
worse then his word, declares himself an enemy to him with whom he treatted,
and as such he may lawfully be accounted; for the breach of promise is one of
the greatest indignities which one Prince can offer another. Amongst Gentlemen,
it is a just ground for the cutting of Throats in Duels, and Sovereigns look
upon it, as one of the most lawful occasions of War. By Treaties of Peace they
are made friends, the breach of which makes them enemies; and consequently,
they may freely be taken by the same Law, whereby it is permitted to secure an
enemy where ever he be found. It is without reason that the infringers of them
should allege their security, seeing themselves have broke it. The Duke de
Bourgogne who seized upon Lewis the Eleventh, in the Castle of Peronne, is
commended for it in Hisstory, as an act of Prudence, because the King had
provoked him to it. They had appointed that City to treat a Peace, which was
concluded between them; but Lewis the Eleventh, too little sincere in his
proceedings, having sent Ambassadors to the Liegeois, to persuade them to take
up Arms against the Duke, upon a great many fair promises which he made them;
and the Liegeois revolting upon his Majesty's first motion, the Duke fully
informed, that this rebellion proceeded from his endeavors, set guards upon
him to hinder his escape. The truth is, if any misfortune befall those that
break Treaties, they may thank themselves, and it had not been amiss for their
own securities to have remembered the counsel of Ecclesiasticus, who faith, The
sin of him which deceives his Brother, shall fall upon himself. He who
disse^^leth, sins doubly, and who so swears in vain, shall not be
justified, but his house shall be filled with dishonor.

His Majesty's entrance into Nancy, and the Orders therein established.
THe Duke of Lorrain seeing his Artifices availed little, and that he must
think of nothing but performing his promise, did at last, upon the 24 of Sept.
command the Gates of Nancy to be opened for his Majesty's forces. The Marshals
of his lodgings went to prepare his Quarters, and the Garrison of Lorrain being
marched out, in number 2300 foot, and 230 horse only, which was not enough, by
a third part, to make good the fortifications: His Majesty's Army entered the
place, and divided themselves into the several quarters of the City, according
as they were commanded. The 25 the King accompanied by the Cardinal of Lorrain,
and all the persons of quality, who had followed him in that expedition, made
his entrance. The people indeed at first, seemed but ill satisfied; but when
they saw the admirable Order which his Majesty had prescribed, to prevent their
receiving any injury, they made Bonfires before their doors; the morning
following, the Queen came thither to partake of the Kings joy, for having
mastred one of the strongest places of Europe in so little time, and without
loss of blood. The King went to receive her, at the Port of St. John, where
the Regiment of Picardy was imbattelled; and shortly after her arrival, the
Duke de Lorrain, accompanied by the Cardinal his brother, and the Princess de
Falsbourg, went to do their devoirs to her, with more civility then joy: And
thus was Nancy the Metropolitan City of Lorrain, whom the force of her
Bastions, and the largeness of three great Motes seemed to render impregnable,
taken as soon as besieged. It might have held out at least two years; but his
Majesty assisted by the sage advices of the Cardinal, as he himself has
testified, took it in fourteen days. The address of this grand Minister, forced
the Duke to keep his word, and to Deposit Nancy for some time, fearing lest he
might have lost it for ever. Hardly had fame published this siege, but she was
obliged to make known the taking of it, confirming the custom of Poets and
Painters, who represent victory with wings, to signify that the actions of
fortunate Princes, are as swift as the wings of birds. Conquests have been
achieved beyond hope, and the dispatch wherewith the King has obtained, some
renders those example of History now credible, which before were thought
miraculous. Nor was the Order which his Majesty took to keep this place, the
least considerable thing in this expedition: He committed the Government of it
to the Sieur de Brassac, a Gentleman of quality, newly returned from an
Embassy from Rome, whose sweetness and modesty was as capable of persuading
the Inhabitants not to mislike the change of their Master, as his fidelity and
vigilance of assuring his Majesty of his well keeping it. He assigned him
between seven and eight thousand men to guard it, chosen out of the best
Regiments of his Army, with express command to keep them in such order, that
the inhabitants might receive no discontent from them. He commanded the
Magazeens to be stored with Ammunitions of all sorts, he converted the
fortifications which served for a Communication between the new and the old
Town into a Citadel, where the Garrison might be secure, in case the
inhabitants should mutiny, for the preventing of which he disarmed them. His
Majesty's presence being of no longer use in that place, he returned toward
Paris, not with that State and Pride, wherewith the ancient Emperors caused
themselves to be adored by the people, at least honored with costly triumphs,
after the obtaining of their victories, but with much modesty, though it was
his glory never to have undertaken any expedition, so without acquiring new
Palms.

What Orders ought to be taken in a place newly conquered.
THe affection of the people being the strongest chain wherewith a Sovereign
can bind his Subjects to his Empire, it cannot be doubted but that the
testimonies of his bounty and clemency, ought to be the chiefest Orders
established in a City newly conquered, seeing they do most of all serve to
excite that Passion. If they be not affectionate to him, his Victory will be
like a Plant without a root, and as a small wind does easily blow down a Tree
not well fastened, so the least occasions of revolt transport them to shake off
the yoke of their obedience. Interest is the most potent charm to captivate
their spirits; and if a Prince can but once win them into his government, by
making them taste any sweetness or advantage more then in that of their former
Prince, there is then nothing to be feared. The French in the time of one
Vesp^rs lost Sicily; and in a small time the Kingdom of Naples, and the Duchy
of Milan, and all because their government was so rigorous, that the Princes
had no encouragement to be loyal to them, or to defend them. The conduct of the
Romans being full of sweetness and moderation, begot them the affections of the
Sagentines and Italians, after they had conquered them, who had preserved them
in their Sovereignty, whereas the harsh usage of Hannibal caused him to lose
them, almost as soon as he had vanquished them. I will add some few particular
Orders fit to be established in a City, or among a people newly conquered to
hold them in allegiance. It will not a little conduce thereunto, to render them
exact justice in their affairs, and to procure them plenty of all kinds of
provision, to countenance Piety, to caresse the Nobility, and to gain the
learned. Religious men ought not to be neglected, they ought rather to be
courted and honored by bestowing Alms on them, and preserving them in the just
enjoyment of their privileges; for they have the conscience of the people in
their hands, and the credit which they have acquired by their good life,
procures them so much authority, that whatever they do or say, is thought well
done, well said, and fit to be followed. But especially it being not in the
power of the best and wisest Princes, to work by all the testimonies of their
goodness, upon the afflictions of a people naturally brutish, unreasonable,
and insensible of benefits, there ought to be no small care taken in leaving a
strong garrison among them that may aw them, and curb them in case of
insurrections; not but that their Commanders ought to be charged to keep them
in such order and moderation that the Inhabitants be not oppressed by them.
Besides they ought to be disarmed of all those things which may tend to
insurrections by Arms, I mean soldiers, warlike Engines, such men as are
capable of making parties, and the command of all Towers and strong places.
Thus did Caesar upon the surrender of any City, he commanded their Horses and
Arms to be delivered; and that all men of any valor or credit among the
Inhabitants, should be given him in hostage, knowing that this was the true way
to secure them from any insurrection, it being not enough to disarm them,
unless they be deprived of men of credit and counsel, such as are able under
hand to procure others, and all such Soldiers as are likely to be active. The
Carthaginians made it appear by experience, when the Romans had totally
disarmed them, they finding a way to forge every day in their City an hundred
Targets, and three hundred Swords, besides Darts and Engines for throwing of
Stones, and to make ropes of their Wives hair for want of Hemp. To conclude,
men of spirit and War, are more to be feared then Weapons, and there ought to
be more care taken to secure such men in a City, then all the Muskets, Pikes,
and Pistols.

The endeavors of Feria and Aldringuer, to secure Nancy, rendered vain by
Monsieur the Cardinal's Prudence.
AT the same time that the King disposed his Armies, to hinder the unjust
enterprises of Monsieur de Lorrain; the house of Austria provided Aldringuer in
Germany, and the Duke de Feria in Italy to meet near Constance, and from thence
to march into Alsace, and Lorrain, to secure him from ruin. The Duke had
intelligence thereof; and for this reason it was, that he used many delays and
endeavors to get into the Low Countries', hoping that if Nancy could hold out
six weeks or two months, these two Armies might come in good time to defend
his interest. Upon this score it was, that the Cardinal who knows how to
remedy inconveniences before they happen, pressed so hard upon him, that he
forced him to conclude the Treaty, persuaded his Majesty to send the Swedes to
come to meet Feria and Aldringuer to hinder their march into Alsace, and to
leave the Marshal de la Force in Lorrain, with an army of twenty thousand men.
He had order to hinder any insurrections or enterprises which might be made by
the Dukes endeavors; as also to send such assistance to the Swedes as they
should desire, the better to give a check to the proceedings of these two
Generals. The strict intelligence between the King and Swedes, obliged Marshal
Horn to march toward Feria's Quarters; and as there is nothing seems
impossible to Conquerors, he used his utmost to get into Constance, a place by
which the Duke of Feria must of necessity pass into Germany; but the approach
of his Army, and the irruption which he might have made into Wirtenberg;
together with the strong assistance which the besieged had received; as also
the improbability of cutting off their Commerce by the Lake, forced him upon
the Duke de Rohan's, pressing him on the Kings behalf to draw off; so that
Feria and Aldringuer joined their Armies together. In the interim, Bernard Duc
de Wimar, to divert them from entering into Alsace, besieged Ratisbone and took
it, as also Stroubinguin, with some other places upon the Danube: However Feria
and Aldringuer prosecuting their design, passed the Rhine, and marched into
Alsace, by the Territory of Basle. The Marshal Horn, and the Palatine de
Birkenfield, receiving intelligence thereof, followed them so close, that
having passed the Rhine at Strasbourg, they soon got before them near Colemaer,
with a resolution to fight them; but their Generals who had no other design
then to assist the Duke of Lorrain, would not engage, but drew off the further,
when they heard the Marshal de la Force, had sent to offer the Swedes some
Forces. Aldringuer seeing there was no good to be done, re-pass'd the Rhine at
Brisac; and the Marshal Horn without losing any time, repassed it likewise, and
pursued him so briskly, that he defeated part of his Army; so that finding
himself too weak, he got into Brisac; where the Duke de Feria, who remained in
Alsace, infested by the Palatine de Birkenfield, and the Rhingrave Otho, came
to rejoyn with him, and both together passed over the Svave to seek a better
Fortune, but found it not; for the Duke de Feria died some months after,
without effecting his design, and the most of his forces disbanded for hunger,
cold, and diseases: This was not the only advantage the King made of the
Swedes, the interest of his Allies, being no less dear to him than his own;
for he employed them to succor the Duke de Wirtenberg, and the Comte de Hanau,
who had put themselves under his protection, into whose countries those two
Generals of the House of Austria, who take all for enemies that favor not
their designs, had a great desire to enter to refresh their Soldiers, by
giving them leave to plunder it, but they assisted them with such good
success, that they received no damage that year. They were not indeed alone
employed in the defense of those two Princes, for the Marshal de la Force sent
by his Majesty's order, part of his Army into some of their Towns; the
Marquess de Bourbonne, one of the Marshals de Camp, marched with six hundred
men into Morbelliard, belonging to the Duke de Wirtenberg, and secured it from
all violence, by his valor, prudence, vigilance, and zeal for his Majesty's
glory, four fortifications able to secure any place. The Marshal likewise sent
other Forces into Buswiller, Suswiller, and Neuwiller, belonging to the Comte
de Hanau, who knew how to defend them. Thus were the Allies of France
protected, the Duke of Lorrain unreliev'd, and Monsieur le Cardinal, acquired
the glory of having by his counsels and management of the Allies of France,
stopped the course of those two Armies, which were marching into Lorrain, to
trouble his Majesty in the possession of his conquests.

That it is wisdom to assault an Enemy with the forces of allied Princes in his
march.
A Prince who sees his enemies Army resolute to assault him amidst his new
conquests, does a great deal better to prevent him by meeting him, than to
expect him. I have in other place given the reasons. This course did the Romans
take in all their great expeditions, excepting in the War with the Gauls and
second Punick, which they could never terminate until they had passed the Sea
and Alps with their Armies. He who would spare his Troops, or employ them in
other designs, shall do it best if he send to stop his march, and so to divert
him either in his own Country, or in the passages by the interposition of his
Alleys, that he may not be able to advance. Thus Hannibal despairing to
overcome the Romans in Asrick with Antiochus to go fight them in Italy, which
succeeded very fortunately. Thus likewise Gensericus King of the Vandals being
routed by Basilius Patricius in a great Sea Fight, persuaded the Ostrogoths and
Visigoths, to invade the Roman empire, by which means he secured himself from
the imminent danger of being taken. To add some reasons to examples, is it not
true which Craesus said to Cyrus, when he exhorted him to assault Thomyris in
her own Country, if you expect your enemy to come to you, he will commit a
thousand devastations, and in case you should loose a Battle, he will not be
content with the Victory, but will prosecute it to the overrunning of your
whole Country? Besides there is little hazarded by causing him, to be assaulted
in his march by Allies or in his own Country, for it preserves an Army entire
against a time of need. Besides if he be assaulted by his neighbor Allies, they
will be always better acquainted with the ways and passages, and may easily
be assisted with provisions and recruits. An Enemies Army likewise marching
through another Country where he sindeth opposition, must necessarily diminish
his forces by sickness, fighting and the like, whereas his will remain in its
full vigor, and consequently the better able to resist him. Thus will he be
able to obtain his design, which is to prevent his coming into his Country, a
thing of the more advantage, in regard he may effect it without danger, and
preserve his Army fresh to assist his Alleys, in case they are unable of
themselfs to make good the passages.

Diverse journeys made for the accommodation of the Queen Mother and Monsieur.
THough the Queen Mother and Monsieur le Duc d'Orleans, had for the two last
years run into great extremities, by the persuasions of some people, whose
advices they too much credited; yet such was the Kings tenderness for them,
that he took great care to bring them to themselves, and to persuade them to
return into France. The Queen Mother had been for some time sick, and the King
to testify how much he was concerned in her health, upon his first hearing of
it, presently dispatched the Sieurs Rioland and Pietre, very famous Physicians
to use their utmost care and industry for her recovery; and also often sent
several Gentlemen to visit her. The Cardinal did not a little contribute to
those his cares, nor did he omit any opportunity to testify unto the
Queen Mother the earnest desire he had to serve her, so that at last she was
forced to yield her self, in so much that it was verily thought she would
quickly have re-assum'd her former sentiments of love for the King, and
confidence in the Cardinal; but for those damnable counsels which those whom
she honored with her ear, infused into her, especially Father Chanteloupe who
unable to make himself considerable, unless in broiles did always prefer a
storm before a calm. He could divert her from oftentimes sending unto the King
to assure him of the inclinations she had to be near him, and of the passion
she had for his, though he wanted no artifice to prevent the effects of it,
glory and welfare. There need no other proof beside the instruction under his
own hand, which she gave unto the Sieur de Laleu when she was sent to the King:
nor was he deficient to second the affection which this great Princess had for
the King by his fair words, as also to suffer her to write unto the Cardinal to
assure him that she would honor him with her good opinion, it being only the
better to cover his designs; but he well knew the King unless he had lost his
judgment, which rendered him so admirable in all affairs could not suffer him
to return with her, to be of her counsel after the discovery made by Alpheston
and Chavag^ac, of his design to murder this grand Minister. He not only
confirmed the Queen Mothers inclination by those of his cabal, in the
resolution of keeping him near her as a faitful very fit servant, and one whom
she could not forsake without prejudice to her reputation and affairs; but the
instruction which he gave the Sieur de Laleu obliged her to give security in
that behalf. It is true indeed that thinking to cover his malice with a
specious veil, he beseech'd the Cardinal to exclude him as unwilling, that his
person should hinder a good accommodation, but that only served the better to
set him forth, seeing it was most certain that his exclusion would hinder the
Queen-Mothers return, and that on the contrary it was only to make the Cardinal
more odious unto her, whom he knew not to be so imprudent, or disaffectio nate
to his Majesty's service, as to suffer his return. He knew distrust to be the
greatest obstacle in the Accommodations of Great men, who were never to be
reconciled, but by a mutual confidence, whereupon he labored nothing more,
then to infuse it, into the mind of this Great Princess, as the very same
instruction of the Sieur de Laleu testifies, which required him to say, that
her Majesty's returning into France, would hazard all, that the Cardinal would
destroy her when he pleased, without her being able to prevent it, or to hurt
him, in case she had a mind to it, and that she doubted whether the Cardinal
had not some-distrust of her, though he had above twenty times declared unto
her, how passionatly desirous be was of her return, so that it was easy to be
known by this Procedure of Father Chanteloupe, that with one hand he did
prosecute the accommodation, and with the other obstructed it, and that he
could not better be compared then to him, who calling all people to quench a
fire does underhand endeavor to make it burn the more. This was not the only
testimony that the Courts of Brussels made evident of the misfortunes,
whereunto Grandees are exposed, when they suffer themselves to be transported
by ambitious Ministers, who prefer their own before their Masters interest.
There were no less eminent proofs hereof in the treaty, which was negotiated by
the Sieur D'Elbene, whom the King permitted to come often from Brussels to the
Court, to consider of the means to draw him out of the Spaniards hands. Had
Monsieur known he might have been secure in France, that the King desired
nothing with more passion, than to see him partake of his glory and recreation,
and that his Majesty loved him like a Son; he would not have slaied 24. Hours
in the Low Countries, but would have forced through all obstacles to have got
away, however the Sieur Puy-Laurens who had a greater interest upon him than
any other, fearing belike to receive the punishments due, for his rashness in
carrying Monsieur 3. several times out of the Kingdom, and unwilling to lose
the advantages which he expected from his affection, had artifice enough to
persuade him the contrary, and to transport him into extream-distrusts. He made
him believe that there was no assurance for him in France, that he should no
sooner he there, but he would be clapped up in the Bois de Vincennes, or his
house filled with spies, which would make it worse than a prison to him, that
the King did not much care to withdraw him from the Spaniards, but only for
fear lest he might enter with an Army into France, that his Majesty had no
other passion for him; but that of jealousy, Sovereigns being not well pleased
with the sight of their Successors, and that he never ought to permit the King
to place any persons about him in his counsel, who might give an account of his
affairs, making him to look upon all of that quality, as so many spies who
would keep him in perpetual vexation, and to make themselves considerable, with
his Majesty, would raise continual distrusts upon him, and would in fine so
work, that he must be laid up in some Castle, ^ill such time as he was to
receive the Crown. He was not ignorant how importantly necessary it was for
Kings, to be absosure Masters of the wills of the Princes of the blood, and to
be informed of all their designs of concernment; he well knew that if a person
of understanding should have been placed near his Master, he would in a little
while insinuate himself into his confidence and favor, and with all that such
a man might discover to his highness, how he had only brought him, and kept him
so long in the Low Countries for his own private interest, which would quickly
expose him to an absolute mine. What likelihood was there that he would give
Monsieur any counsel, ^ending to peace or sweetness, knowing most assuredly
that he oftentimes egged him on to such discourses as offended the King and the
Cardinal, even to threaten him, as is well known to those who treated with him.
To say the truth, if there was no great trust to be reposed in Chanteloup,
considering the extremities into which he had run, and the inalterable
resolution wherein he had fixed the Queen Mother not to forsake him; surely
there was not much more confidence to be put in Puy-Laurens, upon the score of
his inclination, and for fear lest he might once again make use of Monsieurs
person, to raise another civil War in France, or lest he might a fourth time
carry him out of France, upon the least cause of mistrust. There was the less
reason to trust him, because his Soul was possessed by Ambition, a Passion
which imboldneth men to undertake any thing; and Monsieur honored him with
such extraordinary favor, as empowered him to carry him where he pleased; so
that thus to recall Monsieur, with one from whose presence he would never be
persuaded to depart, were to raise a fire in the bosom of France, which was at
that time the more heedfully to be preserved in a strict union; in regard
Forraigners had raised great advantages, from the divisions by them fomented,
in the royal family. In short, what likelihood was there to permit him to
continue near Monsieur, unless he changed his procedure and humor, so long as
he had the boldness to treat with the King in that manner as he did, rejecting
the conditions upon which his Majesty desired Monsieur should return, and
proposing others, as if he had treated between Sovereign and Sovereign,
presuming to drive on his own interests, instead of casting himself at his
Majesty's feet, whom he had so highly offended? Surely this could not have been
done, without a great blemish to the Kings honor, by discovering so much
weakness in the sight of all Europe, as to be compelled to receive the Law
from a Subject, who deserved rather to be punished by the rigours of his
justice. The common people who had not insight enough to dive into these
consequences, seemed to wonder that Monsieur, and the Queen-Mothers
accommodation, could not be ended after so many journies to and fro; but all
wise men well satisfied with the reasons of it, could not sufficiently admire
the Kings Prudence, in making use of that authority, which the Laws give all
Sovereigns over their Parents, when the interest of their State is in question,
and in not precipitating their return; which, considering the ill inclination
of those whom they honored with their confidence, could only serve to trouble
the Kingdom, and hinder the prosecution of the Lorrain expedition.

That it is great discretion not to precipitate accommodations, where there is
any danger in the State.
IT is great wisdom not to hasten any Treaty wherein there may be any danger
to the State, It is most certain in general, that precipitation is an enemy to
wise counsels, that instead of ending affairs it imbroileth them, and that it
has always been received for an ill servant, because being blind and without
foresight, it seldom makes any Treaties which are not disadvantagious; but most
particularly true it is, in such Treaties as are concluded where the parties
are not well disposed to keep a Peace though they seem very plausible at first
sight, yet are they seldom of long continuance, by reason of the sharpnes
remaining in their minds when they are concluded, which coming to increase by
some new discontents, division presently re-assumeth her first place, and thus
instead of any satisfaction from it, there oftentimes arise more causes of
repentance. In effect they ought to be the further from ending affairs, because
the easiness of concluding them, has often begotten more distrusts among
great men, than if there had been great difficulties in the making their peace.
Hatred does easily revive among Princes, and they sooner forget any thing then
injuries they pretend to have received, which though for some time they
dissemble, yet are they never deficient to testify their resentments, when
they find opportunity proper for it. There were heretofore diverse
accommodations made between Lewis the Eleventh, and Charles Duc de Borgogne,
which seemed to settle their States in peace, but as they were oftentimes made
more by necessity on the Dukes part, which rather forced him then inclined him
to live in friendship with the King; the main business was still to be begun
anew; nor was any thing but death able to give a period to their divisions. How
often has the house of Orleans and Bourgogne been reconciled, yet always to
little purpose, because the Princes not laying by the hatred which was between
them, did presently fly out again upon the least cause of suspicion. Henry the
Third, wrought nothing upon the Duke of Guise by pardoning him, for he forbore
not to prosecute the enterprises which his Ambition suggested. They who are
little acquainted in State Affairs, are not very solicitous of the great
trouble which is in making Peace between Princes, but think that it is enough
so they are made friends; yet it may so fall out that great inconveniences may
arise from want of care, when civil Wars break out again, which they
re-ingaging in may endanger the whole State, at least afford Forraigners great
advantages. It is much better that Grandees should continue out of the Kingdom
in discord and impotency, that in the Court or in some Province, where they
might easily raise Cabals and insurrections I think that rash considerations
may not more fitly be compared to any thing then to too quick a digestion,
which as Physicians say, replenisheth the body with many crudities, the cause
of diverse diseases; and it often happens that such considerations like
jealousies and new differences, serve only to sow the seeds of civil Wars; so
that better it is to defer the resolution of them for some time, than to
precipitate them into a short continuance, and a production of new broils.

Differences between the Archbishop of Bourdeaux, and the Duc de Espernon.
ABout the end of this year there happened great disputes between: Messieur
Henry de Sourdis Archbishop of Bourdeaux, and the Duc de Espernon, Governor
of Guyenne. The Arch Bishop whose Genius is capable of all kind of employments
had charge during the siege of Rochel, of some men of War in this Province, by
a particular Commission exempted from all other dependances; and the Duke who
was of an humor never to let feathers be plucked out of his wings, did not a
little resent it, though for the present he dissembled it, expecting an
opportunity to show it with the more advantage, which did not so soon offer it
self, the Arch Bishop being employed at Court, and at Poiton in his Majesty's
service; but as he had no less memory then courage, he preserved the memory of
it until the latter end of this year, at which time the Archbishop returned
to Bourdeaux. The custom of this City, is that the Jurats go to wait on the
Archbishop at the Bridge as often as he comes from the Country. The Duke to
prevent him of this honor, sent for them that afternoon, that he should come to
Town, and entertained them either upon some affairs which he was willing to
conclude or by some other devices, until the Archbishop was arrived at his
Palace. The Jurats endeavored to make their excuses to the Archbishop for
their not receiving him, but he was not very well satisfied with it, no more
then with a trick the Duke put upon him, some days after, Which is an Of^ice
that ^ath Precedence to buy before and in the Market.
in the quality * Capital de Buch, who by virtue thereof may take the first
Panier of fish, which he pleases, paying for it in the Market called la Clie,
where all the fresh fish is sold, and is opened and shut by particular Officers
who have the charge of it. Now the Master of the Archbishops Palace coming to
the Clie to buy fish, was refused to be admitted, upon pretext that the
privilege of the Capital de Buch, had not as yet been served. This affront was
more prejudicial to the Archbishops table, then person; however he complained
of it with formalities of justice, which served to exasperate the matter. For
the Duke moved at it, put the same affront on him some few days after, upon a
time when he had designed to entertain the Jurats and other Officers of the
Town, by sending his Guards to hinder the opening of the Clie, and the
Archbishops servants coming to force it were beaten. It was further reported,
how that the Duke to prevent the Archbishops receiving fish from any other
place, had set guards upon the Passages which led to the Archbishopric, with
order to search those who should go in, and to take away their fish if they had
any about them. The Archbishop provoked at this procedure re-iterated his
complaints to the Attorney General, and the Jurats, and made them sign diverse
instruments protesting to complain unto the King accusing certain men clothed
in Coats of sad green, with white crosses, but without declaring them to be the
Dukes guards. These second complaints were no more to his advantage then the
former; on the other side, the Duke commanded Naugas Lieutenant of his guards,
to take an occasion to meet the Archbishop in the streets of Bourdeaux, and to
present his guards unto him, beseeching him to take notice of those who had
displeased him, and assuring him that he had never given any command with
design to offend him, or to stop the Passages to his Palace. Naugas wanted not
a fair opportunity to execute what he was commanded, and going with twenty of
his Masters guard, met the Archbishop in St. Andrews Cloister, as he was
returning from the City in his Coach. He stopped the Coachman, and took the
Horses by the bridles; and told him confusedly in the uproar that was then
made, that he came in behalf of the Governor Duke, to present to him those men
clothed with a sad green, and white crosses, and to tell him they belonged to
him, to the end he might know those whom he pretended had offended them;
assuring him in the interim, that he had not commanded any one to displease
him. This passage made a great noise, being of great scandal to some, though
others laughed at it. The Archbishop seemed highly ^o resent it, and having
assembled his Clergy to propose the injury offered his person, and to take
their advice upon it; it was concluded that Naugas should be Excommunicated;
but before the Publication of it, to send two Canons, two Curates, and two men
in Orders to the Duke, to complain unto him of his guards; and to understand if
it had been done by his command. The Duke received his Deputies with civility,
but that he might not transgress in his answer, he desired that they would give
him their desire in writing. The Archbishop was acquainted therewith, who
thereupon assembled his Clergy the second time; and the result was to to
publish the next morning, being All Saints day, the censure of Excommunication
against Naugas and his adherents. Naugas advised of this censure, appealed
against it as an abuse, gave notice of his appeal to the Archbishop, and the
Duke having assembled in his house all the Professors of the Canon Law,
together with a great many religious, to have their advice upon this censure,
where he proposed to them the matter in his own form; whereupon the most part
of them were of opinion, that there was some exception to be taken against the
censure; and said that all the forms being not observed, they thought that
those against whom it was pronounced were not obliged by it. The Duke presently
published their opinion by sound of Trumpet; at which the Archbishop was so
angry that without considering the impossibility for those religious persons,
not to wait upon the Duke being sent for, that they had not given their
judgment; but upon the fact as he had proposed it unto them, and that this
their advice was not definitive, only a bare testimony of their opinions, like
those of Lawyers, which are usual in all affairs, and upon judgments wherein
his Majesty himself is concerned, he resolved to chastise them withrigor. This
advice was conformable to that which the Bishop of Nantes, a Prelate whose
reputation is clear, his life without blemish, and whose conscience is without
compare, gave the Duke upon the same fact proposed unto him by his Letters,
sent to him for fear lest those Doctors and religious men, might be led by
complaisance to incline too much to his interest; however such was the
Archbishops discontent, that he issued out a sentence whereby all those who
had been of that opinion which the Duke had published, were condemned as guilty
of his person and dignity, were interdicted their charges and Ecclesiastical
functions, prohibited to Preach the Word of God, to hear confessions,
administer Sacraments in the Diocese of Bourdeaux, commanding the superior
Provincials, to chastize them, and expel them out of the Covents of Bourdeaux.
The heat of his discontent was such, that it transported him so far as not to
have any respect to the privileges granted to Religious Orders, by the Holy
See, by which all Prelates are inhibited to make any censures against them,
upon penalty of drawing that Excommunication their own head, which they intend
to inflict upon others. The Religious hereupon appealed from this sentence to
the Pope, alleging that it had been decreed against them without authority;
but the Archbishop unwilling to put up the lie, assembled the superiors of the
Religious houses in his Palace, to condemn that opinion which they had given in
favor of Naugas. The Duke having notice hereof, designed to prevent this
assembly; to which end, he commanded the Chevalier du Guet of the City of
Bourdeaux to beset the Archbishops Palace with his Archers, and to hinder any
Religious person from entering in, pretending it might disturb the public
Peace, for which by his charge he was obliged to provide. The Archbishop was
very sensibly displeased to see his designs so forcibly countermin'd and not
resolved so to relinquish them, he went in person to the Religious, to carry
them to his Palace, a resolution which was the cause of all the misfortune that
happened, what had passed till then being looked upon by most people, only as a
gallantry of spirit. The Duke having never learned patience enough to suffer
the Archbishop to incroach upon his power, by any Ecclesiastical privilege,
went to meet him in person with his guards, and some other Gentlemen, at the
entrance of the Cathedral Cloister, and the Archbishop coming thither, he went
up to him, spoke some angry words, struck off his Hat and Cap, and as some
witnesses deposed in the information taken, by authority of Parliament, put the
end of the stick which he had in his hand, to his breast. This Procedure made a
great noise in the City, and the Archbishop losing no time, the very next
morning, being the eleventh of November, assembled those of his Clergy, and by
common consent Excommunicated the Duke and his Assistants, interdicted the
Cities and Suburbs of Bourdeaux and Cadillac. The Parliament seeing this great
trouble, did what they could to make an accommodation; but it was to little
purpose, all they could obtain was that the Parliament might hear mass in the
Palace Chapel. He likewise sent to the King informations of what had passed,
whereupon his Majesty sent order to the Archbishop to take away the
interdiction, and to the Duke to go to his house of Plassac, which is out of
the Diocese of Bourdeaux, to expect the Popes resolution, to whom the decision
of that controversy properly belonged, seeing they had appealed to his
Holiness, which hung in suspense about five or six months, nor was it ended
until the year following, till when I forbear to say any more of it.

That much respect has been always given to Prelates and Bishops.
THe Function of Prelates and Priests is so eminent and holy that all people,
nay Emperors themselves, have been obliged to respect them. Plutarch alleging
the cause, says, it is because they pray to the Gods not only for themselves
and friends, but for all mankind. The Romans in the times of Paganism, did so
much honor them, that the Priests of Jupiter going in the City, had a Lictor,
and a cella curulis, and condemned Cneux Cornelius Praetor of Rome, for having
injuriously disputed with Aemilius Lepidus the High Priest. Alexander Severus
had so great a respect to them in such causes where religion was interessed,
that he was not offended when their judgments were contrary to his; and how
respectfully did Alexander treat the High Priest of the Jews, when in his fury
going to Jerusalem with a design to ruin it, he met him coming in his
Pontisicalibus, he was not only appeased; but as the History says, worshipped
God in his person with a great deal of reverence. All Pagans in general have
next to their Kings ascribed the chief place to their Priests, and held it a
great crime to offend them. If the light of nature has induced them so to
respect them, Christianity obliges us to honor them much more, seeing Bishops
are received for Fathers and Pastors of the Church, for the Successors of
Religion, and the Pastors of Jesus Christ; they ought to be respected as the
Law of well-living, as certain rules of good works, as Angels who have
intelligence of the mysteries of our faith, and who are more purified by the
flames of the Holy Ghost; they ought to be respected as persons of an eminent
dignity, who ought to have their minds raised in the contemplation of heavenly
things, to live in a noble scorn of al earthly things, as so ma^y bright stars,
whose luster is never sullied by the Clouds of Vice, as heavenly men who have
familiar converse with God, as living books of the true Doctrine, as the true
Organs of Christianity, and the Idea by which the people ought to frame their
lives. Constantine the great, said, he did not consider them as common men, but
as so many Thrones where the Divinity inhabited; for which reason, he could not
endure that any should speak of them slightly, and threatened those with death
who offended him, as is to be seen in History, and chiefly commanded all
governors of Provinces especially to honor them. I shall likewise add, a
particular care in punishing those who injure them. History is full of examples
which the brevity of these maxims give me not leave to insert. I shall only
add, that Prelates to render themselves worthy of this extraordinary honor,
are obliged to contain themselves within the limits of their condition; because
as the shadow cannot be without the body, so it is unreasonable to pretend to
glory, without meriting it by virtue.

An Edict to abate superfluous expenses.
THough the Foreign Wars undertaken by his Majesty of late years consumed
great sums of money, and forced the King to levy great Taxes, which did not a
little diminish private men's Revenues; yet such was the fruitfulness of
France, that they found means to satisfy their natural inclination of going
richly clothed. His Majesty disliked the ill deportment of many, who
notwithstanding the great necessities of the State, did not cease to make
superfluous expenses in Stuffs, Embroideries, gold and silver, Laces
Bone-laces, and other like vanities, not to be permitted but in a full and long
Peace. It was the more needful to redress these disorders, because for the
satisfying of such excessive curiosities, there was a great deal of silver
transported out of France, which thereby was much impoverished, whereby his
Majesty was disabled at a time of need to raise moneys for the supplying of his
occasions, or to exact those contributions which the glory and interest of his
state did really require. These reasons obliged him to make an Edict in the
month of December, by which the wearing of any Stuffs, Embroideries, gold and
silver lace, or any bonelace of above nine Livres the Ell, was prohibited upon
pain of confiscation, and six hundred Livres to be levied on them, on them who
should wear it, and a thousand Crowns upon the Merchants who should sell it.
His Majesty knowing how powerful the example of a Sovereign is amongst his
people, taught the French by his habit how to follow this rule, and was so
careful in it, that this Edict was better observed then any of the like
quality had a long time been.

That Edicts inhibiting superfluous Expenses, are profitable both to Sovereign
and People.
EDicts which forbid vain Expenses, are no less profitable to Sovereigns than
the people, especially in times of War. Private men's plenty is the Princes
treasure, which he may make use of in time of necessity; and as it cannot be
preserved without frugality, which prohibiteth the use of unnecessary things;
so there is no way better to lay the foundations of it, then to establish it by
law. It is impossible he should make War without laying extraordinary
contributions on the people, at least for the maintenance of an Army in that
honor so long as is needful. How should the people assist him at a time of
need, if superfluous expenses should exhaust their Wealth. They may indeed be
so pressed that any thing may be extracted from them, but that must be by
force, whereby not only their ill will, but a thousand imprecations follow their
moneys. It may be objected that great men who are the most subject to these
expenses, do not pay any tax or aid to their Sovereign: But I reply that being
imploi'd in the War where a great mass of money is consumed, they contribute
more then the people to the public charge, and by consequence ought to live in
the more order and frugality. Nobility impoverished cannot serve when occasion
requires, but is forced to keep at home, whereas they who perserve their
wealth, by the means of a well regulated expense, may put himself in a equipage
to appear in an Army in a quality becoming their honor. Excessive expenses
are usually made in such commodities as come from foreign Countries, nor can a
Sovereign permit the use of them without enriching him, from whom they are
brought to the impoverishment of his own; which State, if it be an enemy, or
powerful enough to render it self suspected, it were not only to deprive his
own of the means to resist him, but to give new force to that Forraigner to
attempt upon him. In fine, the necessities of man are satisfied with so little,
that it were very unreasonable to make vast expenses upon commodities of no
use, and from which there is not that satisfaction to be received as in
convenience. Content your selves with that which is enough, says St. Austine,
the rest serves only to make the life more burthensom, instead of refreshing
it from care, and superfluous expenses, which are made for the obtaining of an
apparent honor, have very troublesome consequences.

A Difference between the Bishops and Religious, decided by a Judgment from
the Council.
ALthough the Cardinal had made up by his admirabl dexterity in the foregoing
year, some differences which were moved between the Bishops and Religious by
persuading the latter to condescend to some Articles, to which no man else
could have brought them; yet so it was, that some troublesome spirits published
books, some for one part, and some for another. The main ground of the quarrel,
was concerning a word which was found in some manuscripts of a Canon of the
second Counsel of Orange, and not in others. They who were for the Religious,
raised this consequence from it, That Confirmation was not absolutely necessary
after Baptism: Those on the other side, unable to salve the matter, maintained
the contrary. All that the Laws of History permit me to say, is, that the
consequence raised by those for the Religious, was very dangerous; because it
might be inferred that the Bishops in England, might be easily passed by,
seeing all the exercises of Christianity, might be practiced there by the
Catholics, excepting confirmation only. The heat of this dispute did sometimes
transport them beyond the bounds of Doctrine, and to fall foul upon some
Subjects, which could not but give some advantage to Heretics, and trouble the
Consciences of many tenderly affected, and disturb the public quiet. The
course at first taken was, to prohibit the Printing of Books of this nature,
without leave obtained from the grand Chancellery; but the Doctors of Divinity
of Paris not satisfied therewith, ordered in one of their Assemblies that the
books of Pere Sirmond, made to maintain that word, should be re-examined; so
that this was the occasion of publishing without privilege certian books
repugnant to that Christian peace and charity, which ought especially to be
between Ecclesiastics. The King took notice thereof, and not to leave it
unremedied, commanded Monsieur le Guard des Seaux to take care in it; who
ordered that the books printed and published under the name of Pere Sirmond,
and Petrus Aurelius; the two chief of the parties, should be examined by nine
Doctors of Divinity, prohibited them upon penalty of corporal punishment, to
determine any thing in their Assemblies concerning these books, and all
Booksellers to sell them without permission under the Great Seal. Some
Prelates more zealous then wise in matter of the Kings privilege, complained
of this Arrest, pretending it was not the custom for Kings to intermeddle with
the Doctrine of the Church; but they were not long unanswered; for Monsieur le
Guard des Seaux, was too well acquainted with the King his Masters power, and
too well versed in the reading of good books, to be ignorant how Kings and
Emperors have always taken cognizance of affairs of this nature, and
determined them in order to the good of their State, and the continuation of
the public quiet.

The Power which Kings have in Ecclesiastical Affairs.
THe Power which Kings have in Ecclesiastical affairs. Though God has chiefly
put the Scepter into the hands of Kings and Emperors to exercise a temporal
power over their people; yet custom obliges them to know that they have no
small authority in Ecclesiastical affairs. There need no more ancient example
then that of Constantine the first Christian Emperor. Does not every one know
that he called himself Bishop of such things as passed out of the Church, that
writing to the Bishops, he told them he took part of their ministry to be the
more careful of the Church? And in fine, he undertook the management thereof,
with so much zeal and Prudence that his actions acquired him the Title of
Founder of Law and Religion, as is to be seen in an ancient inscription. It was
with no little trouble and care that he quieted the Church in the time of
Arius, that he assembled diverse Counsels upon his Doctrine, and that he
prohibited the reading of his books. To show that his procedure was without
usurpation; every one may see in History that the Popes themselves, and
particular Clergies likewise, have from time to time, made their addresses to
Emperors to be by them countenanced in affairs which happened unto them. The
Clergy and Monks of Constantinople, beseech'd Theodosius and Valentinian to be
solicitous of the Church, and to suppress Heresies. Whereupon those two
Emperors commanded St. Cyril, to examine the Doctrine of Nestorius. The Bishops
of the Counsel of Constantinople, beseech'd Theodosius to confirm their Decree;
and Pope Bonisace acknowledged so great a power to the Emperor Honorius, in
Ecclesiastical affairs, that he entreated him to make a Decree to prohibit all
kind of underhand dealing in the Election of the Popes. I could easily prove
this custom by the examples of suceeding Emperors; but I had rather show that
our Kings have usually done the like: For Clouis the first of those that
embraced Christianity, made diverse Ordinances for the ministry of the Church,
as he himself has written in a Letter to the Bishops of France, to be seen at
this present entire and undefac'd for above eleven ages. He assembled the
Bishops of Orleans in a Counsel, where it was prohibited to admit any of his
Subjects to be Clerks, without his Majesty's permission, and at their entreaty,
he confirmed their Canons. I will go a little further, and say, that
Ecclesiastical persons being born Subjects of a Sovereign Prince; their Kings
have reciev'd power from God with their Crowns to determine their personal
causes, where the good of the State may be interessed, a thing not to be
doubted of; that the power of judging, is inseparably annexed unto that of the
Sovereignty; and that he who is a Princes Subject, is of necessity to submit to
his Justice; and that Ecclesiastiques cannot deny themselves to be Subjects,
seeing as has been already said, the greatest Poper themselves have not made
any difficulty to put themselves in this rank; as Gelasius in a Letter which he
writ to the Emperor Anastasius Pelagius the first, in profession of his Faith,
which he sent to Childebert one of our first Kings; and St Gregory to the
Emperor Maurice. What reason can they pretend to resist it, seeing Jesus Christ
himself and St. Paul have acknowledged themselves to be subject to their power.
Did not Jesus Christ tell Pilate by way of acknowledging his Authority, that he
could have no power over him but what he received from heaven? whereupon St.
Austine, and St. Bernard, expounding those words say, that Pilates sentence,
though very unjust was not usurped, because he had a lawful authority. So
likewise St. Paul thinking himself happy to walk in the steps of his Masters
humility, did not appeal from Festus his Tribunal, to that of St. Peter; but to
that of Caesar acknowledging his power and authority of judging in that affair
then in question. Nor are the Disciples greater then their Masters.

The End of the Second Part.

