A SERMON Preached at CLONMELL, ON SUNDAY the Sixteenth of September, 1683.

AT THE ASSIZES Held for the COUNTY PALATINE of TIPPERARY.

By JO. VESEY Master of Arts of Trinity College near Dublin, and Minister of
Abbylease.

O pray for the Peace of Jerusalem, they shall prosper that love thee. Psalm.
122.6. DVBLIN, Printed by Joseph Ray, at College-Green, for Sam. Helsham
Bokseller, at the College-Arms, in Castle-street. 1683.

To His GRACE, MICHAEL, By Divine Providence Lord Archbishop of ARDMAGH,
Primate and Metropolitan of all IRELAND, and Lord High Chancellor of the same,
etc.
May it please your Grace,
YOur Grace being so eminent a Minister of State in this Kingdom, the main
Pillar of the Irish Church, under the Government, and so great an Example of
Loyalty and Steddiness to the Crown, is the reason why this Paper flies to your
Protection, presuming your Grace will encourage the Principles of Loyalty in
others; because they are so signal in your self.

It is the joy of all good men to see those, who were found faithful in the
times of adversity, plentifully rewarded; to see those Jewels appendant on the
Crown, which formerly had showed their true value by sparkling in the dark; and
indeed who so fit to partake of the blessings of Peace, which flow from the
Fountain of Royal Bounty, as those who in the late times of Apostasy and
Confusion, durst be Orthodox and Loyal, though it was reputed the worst of
Crimes to be so? that which is a just Reward to your Grace, is an Encouragement
to others to follow your great Example, and the same Beams that shine on your
Grace, warm and enliven the Seeds of Loyalty in others.

Honor is not fit for a Malignant, nor does a Garland become the Brow of a
Rebel: It is unreasonable they should expect Favors from His Majesty, who are
disaffected to the Government, and with what confidence do they expect to drink
of a pure Stream, who cast Dirt and Mud into the Fountain; as if their grinning
at the Higher Powers were a sufficient reason for the King to through
Preferments into their Mouths.

The worst of your Graces Enemies cannot but acknowledge you to be Orthodox and
Loyal: and what can your best Friends, or even the greatest Panegyric say
more? since to be a Christian, and a Subject, to fear God and honor the King,
are the two great ends of every man's nativity.

Your Graces experience of the late times will tell you, that a Sermon of this
kind preached some years ago, would have made the Preacher to be pulled down,
and given occasion to an Insolent Officer to enter the Pulpit with a
Back-sword, and hold forth to the People in Buff. But God be thanked we now may
preach Peace and Obedience to our Superiors, without danger of Banishment, and
may exhort Subjects to Loyalty, and Allegiance to their natural Prince, without
fear of Imprisonment or Sequestration.

I do not pretend to any thing extraordinary in this Sermon: but the usefulness
of Discourses of Loyalty at this time, made some Persons of Worth and Sense
persuade me to publish it. I submit my self to your Graces censure, and however
mean the Piece be, I hope your Judgment will be favorable, because of the
honesty of its design. We find that the Heathen Votaries offered to their
Tutelar Gods, not only Irrational Creatures, as Birds and Beasts, but sometimes
even those that were most ridiculous and despicable; and as we cannot imagine
any Rational Heathen to be so sottish, as to persuade himself that such
Sacrifices were pleasing to the Gods for their intrinsic value (unless he
believed the Deities to be as stupid and senceless as the Brutes that were
offered to them) but because they were demonstrations of the inward affections
of the mind: so this I hope, though unworthy of so great a Patron, may find
acceptance, for this reason only, because it is an argument of a profound
acknowledgment of that Service and Duty which is due to your Grace, not only
from me, but from all the Sons of the Church of Ireland.

I humbly beg your Graces pardon, for detaining you from a better employment of
those few Minutes which free you from the weighty Affairs of Church and State.
It would be an argument both of want of sense and good manners in me, to
trouble your Grace with a tedious Dedication of so inconsiderable a work, which
yet humbly hopes to be accepted, because I have no other way of showing my self
to be,

May it please Your Grace, Your Graces most Obedient, and most devoted humble
Servant, JO: VESEY.

A SERMON preached at Clonmell, on Sunday September. 16. 1683.
O pray for the Peace of Jerusalem, they shall prosper that love thee. Psalm.
122.6.
WIthout troubling you with any manner of Preface, I will fall immediately upon
the Words of my Text, in which there are these three things to be taken notice
of; First, here is a Duty earnestly enjoined. Secondly, there is the thing to
be prayed for, and that is the Peace of Jerusalem. Thirdly, there is an
Encouragement to this Duty; they shall prosper that love thee. O pray for the
Peace of Jerusalem, they shall prosper that love thee.

1. There is a Duty earnestly enjoined, O pray for the Peace of Jerusalem, etc.
That Prayer is a necessary Duty incumbent upon all Christians, the Commands of
God in my Text, and in several other places of Scripture, may sufficiently
testify: yet because we are generally so disingenuous, as not to think our
selves obliged by the bare Commands of God, unless we reap some Benefit by
obeying such Commands; I will lay down two Reasons, in order to recommend the
Necessity of this Duty; and they are, 1. Our own Wants and Necessities. 2. The
Goodness and Mercy of God, in that he is willing to answer our Petitions.


1. The first Argument to press this Duty to our Practice, is our own Wants and
Necessities. It is one, and not the least, of those Miseries that attend the
whole Race of Adam, still to want something whilst we are on this side Heaven:
The poor man wants Food, the rich man wants Stomach, Health and Digestion? some
men would be liberal, but they have not wherewithal, others are full of Wealth,
yet have not a Heart to make use of what they possess; some have all things,
yet enjoy nothing, for want of being contented with their Condition; the
greatest part of Mankind either wants Grace, or is in danger of falling from
it; or if some do persevere unto the end, yet they are not in this world what
they shall be; they want the blessed Vision of God, which is not to be had till
after Death: the best of us transgress every day, and therefore must needs want
the Pardon of our Sins for each day. The Wants of the prodigal Son were
occasioned by his own Riot and Excess, and the Disobedience of Adam is the
cause of all our Wants and Necessities; and although this be a sore Evil, and a
heavy Disease; yet he that laid on this Curse, and inflicted this Disease, has
not left us without Remedy. The Curse is indeed heavy, but the Remedy is light
and easy: the Disease is grievous, but the Medicine to cure it is pleasant,
easy to be had, and heals infallibly, the poorest man may purchase it. There
is not any of Adam's Posterity but always stands in need of something or other;
the greatest Wants may be supplied by Prayer, and there is no man but may pray,
if he please; and the Duty of Prayer is so necessary, that without it, we shall
not only want in this world, but we shall be miserably in want to all eternity;
without it we cannot have Remission of our Sins, nor the Gift of Gods Grace
bestowed upon us; we cannot expect to be fed by his Mercy, if we think it too
much trouble to implore it; we must have a very low esteem of Gods Blessings,
if we think them not worth the asking for; and we are very little sensible of
our Necessities, if we will not so much as pray to have them removed; he is
doubly guilty that commits a Fault, and persists in it, and will not so much as
ask Pardon for it. In short, whilst we are on this side Heaven, we are
continually wanting, there is none that can supply our Necessities, but God,
and there is no other way for us to be supplied, but by petitioning the Throne
of Grace: and therefore Prayer must needs be a necessary Duty. This is the
first Reason, drawn from our own Wants and Necessities.

2. The second Reason to enforce the Duty of Prayer, is the Mercy of God, in
that he is willing to hear us. There is nothing in the world so powerful as a
man in Prayer, and therefore it is called the Key of Heaven. What is there so
difficult, that Prayer cannot attain to? It gives Victory to the weak, and
overthrows the Armies of the mighty: it can make the Sun stand still for the
space of a day: it can bring a Drowth upon the Earth for three years and six
months, and afterward cause the Rain to fall plentifully upon the same: if we
are Enemies to God, it can reconcile us to his Favor: if we are in a state of
Sin and Death, it can renew the Image of God in us, and put us in a state of
Grace: it can purchase for us the Blessings of this Life (or, which is far
better, the Art of Contentment without them) and the Blessigns of the Life to
come: by Prayer we are not only in a condition of profiting our selves, but of
doing good to our Neighbor: by it every man is a Priest, and every man may be
a Moses, to atone for the Sins of the people; to prevent the Destruction of a
Nation, though it hang over us; and to bring down public Blessings from on
high; the Blessings of Peace and Plenty, the Liberty of our Religion, and the
Enjoyment of our Estates: there is nothing so good, but Prayer can purchase for
us: there is nothing so hurtful, but Prayer can avert: nay, though the Sword be
in Gods Hand, and his Arm stretched forth to strike, and the Judgment be ready
to fall upon our heads, yet Prayer is able to appease his Wrath, and withdraw
the Arm of the Almighty from confounding us, and yet all this is not to be
imputed to the mere force of Prayer it self, but to the Goodness and Mercy of
God, who is so much in love with this Duty, that he can deny us nothing we ask
for faithfully, he will certainly give us the very thing it self, or something
as good, or better, if the other be not convenient for us.

It has been objected by some, as an Argument against Prayer, That it either
supposes first God to be ignorant of our Prayers; for if not (say they) what
need we tell God that which he knows already? Or secondly, that he is not so
bountiful to us as he ought, in that he knows our Necessities, and will not
help us without so much entreaty. Or thirdly, that he is overcome by our
Importunities, and Solicitations, which is an argument of his Weakness, and so
would argue an Imperfection in him, this was urged by one that was once an
Atheist, but afterward died a great Penitent. But to this the Answer is
obvious. For, first, Can there be a greater argument of Gods Goodness to us,
than to give us not only the Blessings of this Life, but even Heaven it self
for asking? Secondly, We do not pray to inform God of our Necessities (that is
too gross a Supposition)* but to show our Faith, and acknowledge his All
sufficiency, and our Dependence upon him. Thirdly, We are not so conceited of
our Prayers, as if we thought the meet Force of them, or the Repetition of such
and such Words, though they come from a devout Heart, to be able to wrest a
Blessing from God, whether he will or no; but that God has ordained Prayer as
the means and method of making our Addresses to his Divine Majesty. It Is true,
we are said to wrestle with God, to prevail upon him, to take Heaven by
violence, etc. but these are figurative Expressions, and bold Metaphors, which
are no arguments of his Weakness, but of his Goodness, in that he has given us
so easy a method of addressing our selves, to him; not is it so much the force
of our Prayers themselves, as his infinite Goodness, which moves him to answer
our Petitions. Ask and ye shall receive, is a Promise that God will hear our
Prayers, and the Mercy of God prompted him to make this Promise; as an
encouragement to persuade us to this Duty; our Prayers are offered up since
this Promise: and therefore it is not so much their Force that works upon God,
as his own Goodness that made him promise; it is not any Power in us, but
Compassion in him. A Petition may be very well drawn up; but if the Prince, to
whom it is presented, be not of himself inclined to do good, he will never
answer it merely because it is well penned. How many do we see attending with
patience from day to day on the Persons of great Men for a Favor, and value
not the Slights that are put upon them, so their Requests be at last but
granted; but God is more merciful: he is more ready to hear than we to pray,
and does not only give us what we pray for; but does encourage us even to pray.
And therefore, if our own Wants and Necessities cannot awake us, let the
Goodness of God persuade us to this Duty, who is so ready to hear us. This is
the second Reason to enforce the Duty of Prayer. And so I have done with the
first thing considered in my Text; the earnest Injunction of a Duty, O pray.

2. The second thing to be taken notice of, is, the thing we are to pray for,
and that is the Peace of Jerusalem. This Exhortation is directed to those that
think Prayer a Duty, and usually pray for themselves; for they that are so
stupid, as not to pray for themselves, will never be persuaded to pray for
other: and he that neglects his own Advantage, will never be much concerned for
the public Good. There is nothing in the world more plain, than that the
public Peace and Safety of a Nation redounds to the particular Advantage of
every person in it: and therefore, if men are not so public spirited, as to be
concerned for the general Good of the Nation; yet methinks each man's private
Interest, and the Laws of Self-preservation, ought to persuade us to pray for
the Peace of Jerusalem, for the Good of the King and Country: He that is not a
Friend to the public Peace of that Kingdom wherein he lives, can never be a
good Subject; and he that is not a good Subject, can neither be a good
Christian, nor an honest Man: For the same God that bids us love the
Brotherhood, commands us also to honor the King: it is natural for every man,
to wish well to the place of his Nativity, or the place of his Residence; and
how he can do that, without desiring the public Good of such a place, I cannot
understand: every man's particular Advantage and Safety is a branch of the
public.

There is no person so inconsiderable, but may contribute to the general Good
of a Nation, either by his Endeavors or Prayers; nay, we commonly find, that
Insurrections and Civil Wars are often begun, but always carried on by the
Common people, (and therefore they may prevent such Disturbances) not but they
mean as well, and often times better, than those that persuade them to disturb
the Peace of a Kingdom; but they are persons usually of mean understandings,
and are very often cajoled and wheedled into Rebellion, by fine Words, and
gilded Pretenses.

The best way for the ordinary sort of men not to be caught in these snares,
is, to believe and consider that Rebellion is a most grievous Sin, it is as the
sin of Witchcraft; and you know the Law says, Thou shall not suffer a Witch to
live. And if Rebellion be such a Sin, it is not the pretenses of Defending
Liberty and Property, of Destroying Popery and Arbitrary Government, that can
make it not a Sin: for however advantageous these may be to a Commonwealth, yet
still Rebellion is a damning Sin; and we must not do evil, that good may come
thereof. Consider in what horrid Confusion we were not many years since, by our
Distractions, Fears and Jealousies, when there was no King in Israel, no
Church, no Law, but every one was setting up a Church and a Government for
himself, and every one did what seemed good in his own eyes. Nay, many of those
persons that were seduced into Rebellion, when they saw the Injustice and
Hypocrisy of their Ringleaders, were ashamed of their proceedings.

Are not these Miseries the greatest that can befall a Nation? And if they be,
is not every particular man obliged by the Duty he owes his King, the Love he
owes his Country and himself, to pray for the Peace of Jerusalem? He that can
prevent a Fire in the heart of a City, and will not, because he lives in the
Suburbs, may, for his neglect, have his own House burned to Ashes, and he
deserves it; and he that will not, to the utmost of his power, either by his
Endeavors, or Prayers, prevent a public Disturbance in the Kingdom where he
lives, because he is not a Statesman, does not deserve to enjoy the benefit of
public Peace and Plenty. Though we are not all born to be Statesmen and
Privy-Counsellors, yet every man in his station ought to contribute what he can
to the Peace of a Nation: he that is not fit to be a Privy-Counsellor, may not
withstanding contribute to the public Peace of a Kingdom, by being obedient to
his Superiors; by speaking well of the Government, if it be good; by
submitting, if it be otherwise; by studying to be quiet, and minding his own
business: He that is not qualified to sit at the Helm, may by sitting still
keep the Boat from tossing. Let Statesmen, whose Business it is, concern
themselves with the Government; but let not every private person, though of
never so mean Quality and Understanding, trouble his head with the Management
of a Kingdom. Must every private Passenger pretend to steer the Ship, that
knows not at which end of her the Rudder is? Our Superiors may, and often do,
order things for the public Good, which to our apprehensions may seem
otherwise; must therefore those not be done by our Governors, because we cannot
apprehend them? though the Sails of a Ship may make her lie on one side, yet
without them she can never reach the Haven; if therefore a few timorous
Passengers should cry out, We are all lost; would the Master of the Ship be so
great a Fool, as to take down the Sails, and not only hinder his Voyage, but
endanger his own and their Safeties, and let her be tossed to and fro by the
violence of the Waves, and all because they that knew not what belonged to a
Ship advised him to it? There are Secrets in all Arts, which are not to be
discovered to every person; and so there are Arcana Imperii, Secrets in
Government, which are not to be disclosed, but to those that sit at the Helm.
Some men are made to govern, others to obey, and we are bound by the Laws of
God to be subject to our Superiors, not only for Wrath, but also for Conscence
sake.

If we look into Church History, we shall find, that the primitive Christians
were so meek and submissive to the Government, though they lived under Heathen
Emperors, that they were the very best Subjects those Emperors had. Tertullian
in his Apology for the Christians tells us, that the Cities, Corporations,
Towns, Villages and Castles were filled with Christians; yet would they not
rebel, nor disturb the Government, though they were persecuted to death for no
other end, but because they were Christians. Shall then some different Opinions
in Religion make Christian Subjects rebel against their Prince, and disturb the
public Peace of the Kingdom: when the primitive Christians thought themselves
bound to obey, and live peaceably under Heathen Governors Submit your selves
to every Ordinance of Man for the Lords sake, says St. Peter, who lived not
only under a Heathen Emperor, but under Nero, the greatest Persecutor of them
all. If every single person would follow this Advice, and employ his thoughts
about his own Concerns, and not meddle with State affairs; we should be much
happier than we are; every man might live peaceably under his own Vine, and
under his own Figtree. How usual is it for men, upon a story in a Gazzet, or a
News Letter, to descant upon the Government, and censure, if not reproach the
Higher Powers; when it may be the story is false, or if true, they are not able
to discern so far, as to know whether that which seems to them to be a
Grievance, may not upon some other account then they apprehend, be a Benefit to
the public. Trust the Modelling of the Government to your Superiors* whose
Business it is to govern, and trust the Events of the Government to God
Almighty, who turns the Hearts of Kings as he pleases; and observe your own
Duty to your Country, which is to obey: and though you are not always in a
condition of giving a helping hand to the Welfare of Jerusalem, your King and
Country; yet your Prayers for Peace will be always acceptable to God, who is
the God of Peace. So much for the second General in my Text.

3. The third thing to be observed, is the Encouragement we have to be well
affected to the Church and State, in these words; they shall prosper that love
thee. Jerusalem in this Psalm is said to be the place of Worship, thither the
Tribes go up to testify unto Israel, and to call upon the Name of the Lord.
From which it is plain, that by Jerusalem is meant the Church. They shall
prosper that love thee; i. e. happy are they that live quietly and do not
disturb the Peace of the Church. And because Jerusalem was the Seat of
Judgment, it may also signify the supreme Power of a Nation, and then the
meaning of it will be, Happy are they that live peaceably under the Government
of their Superiors both in Church and State, whilst all they are miserable,
that bear Evil Will at Sion. That this is a sufficient Encouragement to be well
affected to the Government will appear, if you consider these two things.

1. The great Happiness of Peace. 2. The Miseries of a Rebellion, or a Civil
War.
1. For the first, as Health is to the Body, so Peace is to the Mind; it is the
Foundation of all Enjoyments: how insignificant are the best Meats to one whose
Palate has no Taste, and whose Body is disturbed by a raging Fever! and how
insignificant is even Plenty it self in a Commonwealth, that is sick of
Rebellion, which is the Fever of a Kingdom, and is commonly occasioned by too
high Feeding! the sick man's Head is full of Whimsies, which make him rave, and
speak of things, which neither he, nor any else can understand; he seldom
sleeps, or if he does, he is presently awakened with scaring Dreams; and his
very Bedcloaths, which in time of Health were a Blessing, and preserved his
Body, are a Grievance to him. So it is in the State, the Body Politic, when
disaffected people, which are the jarring Humors, disturb its Peace. They
perplex themselves with strange Fancies of imaginary evils, which no man else
can understand, nor they themselves: they throw off those Laws that should
protect them, and run into greater Miseries, than could have befallen them, had
they really suffered those evils they were afraid of. Happy is the man that
bears a loyal Heart to his Prince, and is obedient to the Laws, that is
orthodox and peaceable in the Church, and endeavors to preserve Unity in the
State; he is every man's Friend, and every man is a Friend to him; he honors
the Magistrate and Laws, but is afraid of neither, because he is innocent; he
has the free use of his Religion, and the enjoyment of his Estate; he eats his
Meat with Pleasure and Contentedness; the night is pleasant to him; he does not
dream of ill got Lands that are in his possession; he is not scared with the
Cries of Widows, or the Groans of Orphans; he is not haunted with the Guile of
innocent Blood; nor is he frightened with the Ghost of a murdered King. This is
the condition of the peaceful man, and if a whole Kingdom were made up of men
of this temper; how happy should we be? there would be no decay, no leading
into captivity, and no complaining in our streets. There could not be a greater
Emblem of Heaven, than such a Nation, where the only strife would be, who
should be most charitable, and who should be most loyal to their King, and
serviceable to their Country. This is the first Reason to show the Happiness of
those that love the Peace of Jerusalem, they shall prosper that love thee; for
they shall have the Blessings of Peace.

2. Secondly, they shall be free from the miseries of Rebellion, or a Civil
War. The Miseries of a Rebellion are twofold; First, either such as befall a
Kingdom in general: or secondly, such as befall every Rebel in particular.

1. First the public Calamities of a Rebellion are innumerable, I shall only
instance in some of them that are most obvious. When people are disaffected to
the Government of Church or State, and thence take an occasion to break out
into Civil Wars; the Subject can neither enjoy the Benefit of the Laws, (which
are our Protection in Peace) nor the Use of Religion, not the Profits of his
Estate with out fear and danger: there is no Administration of Justice, there
is no difference between Right and Wrong: Strength is the Lawgiver, and the
longest Sword the measure of Justice the Cornfieldsd are destroyed; the stately
Buildings are either void of Inhabitants, or are made a Garrison and those that
are strongest: the Houses of God are profun'd, and demolished, and are made a
Receptacle for Birds and Beasts; and the whole Land lies desolate: Grass and
Weeds grow in the Sreets of our great Cities, the Walls are beaten down, the
Houses burnt, and the Inhabitants fled or murdered: the Universities are
emptied: the Liberal Arts and Sciences must give place to the violence of the
Sword; and so Learning is nipp'd in the very bud: Pride and Robbery, Ambition
and Sacrilege, Oppression and Murder, Covetousness and Profaneness, or else
Hypocrisy, are the usual attendants of Rebellion. He that is in love with
Famine, Plague and Desolation, let him murmur and rebel; for they are the
effects of a Civil War. If there were no other Punishment for resisting the
supreme Power, after this Life; yet the Calamities I have mentioned may be
sufficient to terrify any one from it, that is not altogether void of Sense
and Honesty. Rebellion is punishment enough for it self. These are the public
Miseries of Rebellion.

2. Secondly, there are Miseries that befall private persons in Rebellion. The
several public Calamities that I have now reckoned, though they are not all,
yet they are sufficient to show, that whilst any Kingdom is in that condition,
no particular person can be happy, But besides all this, there is another
reason to terrify particular persons from it, and that is the Execution of the
Laws when the Rebellion is ended; for it cannot last always: what a Disgrace,
as well as Misery, is it for one to be marked for a Rebel, to be proclaimed a
Traitor, to lose an Estate, or an Employment for Villainy, to be hanged for
Treason, and to have his Head fixed upon a pole, as a spectacle of Shame and
Infamy! he is not only unhappy himself, but he intails Misery and Poverty on
his Family, and his Posterity shall blush to hear him named: but suppose
Success crowned his Endeavors, and that Rebellion had got the upper hand; he
may be great, but he cannot be happy: Fear and Guilt shall never let him enjoy
himself, nor what he has unjustly gotten: and besides the Hand of Providence,
which is ready to smite and pull him down; there is a natural desire in men to
destroy such a Monster, as being as dangerous as a wild beast: and if no body
else will, God himself usually makes such persons fall out among themselves in
dividing the Spoil, and so destroy one another designs; as it happened not
long since in these Kingdoms: and to complete the Rebels Miseries, when his
unhappy Life here is ended, he shall be thrown headlong into Hell, to keep
company with the first Rebel Lucifer. And so I have dispatched the third
General, i. e. the Encouragement we have to pray for the Peace of Jerusalem,
they shall prosper that love thee.

In the last place, I will reduce what I have said to practice. You see the
necessity of the Duty of Prayer enjoined in my Text, from our Wants and
Necessities, and from the Mercy of God, who is ready to hear us. You see the
thing we ought to pray for, i.e. the Peace of Jerusalem, the good of Church and
State, a public Blessing; and the Encouragement to this Duty from the third
General, they shall prosper that love thee. You see the Happiness of those that
live in peace and obedience to the Laws, and the Miseries of Rebellion, both in
this life, and that which is to come. Consider the Folly as well as Misery of
those that disturb the Peace of a Kingdom, and the Disgrace that attends such
resisting the lawful Magistrate. There is no pretense whatsoever, whether of
Liberty, Property, etc. that can make Rebellion not to be a damning Sin. There
is not any one Duty more plainly commanded throughout the whole Scripture, than
Obedience to Magistrates. There is nothing contributes so much to the Peace of
Jerusalem, to the public good of a Nation, and the particular good of every
person in it. There are many examples in the Old Testament of Gods Judgments
against Rebels; and the end of our Saviors coming into the world was to plant
a Gospel of Peace among men, and if the preaching of Peace was ever a Duty, it
is now, by reason of the Divisions among us. The great and general cause of
Rebellion is Ambition, though Religion is often pretended: and therefore the
best way to prevent a public Disturbance of the Peace, is, not to be ambitious
of any thing that cannot be attained to, without an Alteration in the
Government. Let us not speak evil of the Ruler of the people, nor murmur at our
Superiors, because their Actions do not please our Humors; and when we find
our selves oppressed, let us examine our own Lives, and try whether our own
Wickedness is not the Cause of Gods punishing us with such Rulers. Honor thy
Father and Mother, which is the first Commandment with promise, is not only to
be understood of our Natural Parents, but of the Magistrate, who is our, Civil
Parent, and length of Days is the Promise annexed to this Commandment. Saint
Paul exhorts us, in his first Epistle to Tymothy, to make Supplications and
Prayer for all men, and in the first place mentions Kings, and all that are in
Authority, that we may lead a quiet and peaceable Life in all Godliness and
Honesty. There is more Weight than Honor in Government; and therefore we ought
to be so much concerned for the public Good, as never to pray for our selves,
but at the same time to pray for the Peace of Jerusalem, for this is good and
acceptable in the sight of God our Savior: beware of aspersing the Government,
for there is a particular providence over Kings which will discover thy folly;
if by murmuring and complaining of the Supreme Power, thou art an Enemy to the
Peace of Jerusalem. Curse not the King, no not in thine heart, for a Bird of
the Air shall carry the Voice, and that which has Wings shall tell the matter.
Is there not more wisdom in busying our selves with our own concerns, in
submitting to our Superiors and the Laws of the Land, that we may enjoy our
Religion, our Estates, and our Liberties (which are all the effects of public
Peace) than to speak evil of Dignities, to promote a Disturbance in Jerusalem,
which does not only endanger our Happiness, and Estates, but even our Lives,
and the Welfare of our Posterity?

There is not any Church in the world, whose Principles are more repugnant to
Rebellion, than the Church of England: If therefore you would show your selves
to be true Sons of that Church you pretend to, you must be loyal to the King,
and submissive to the Government; it is a Principle not only honest, but
generous, and agreeable to the meek Spirit of the primitive Christians. They
may pretend to Religion; but they who, under that color, can resist the
supreme Power, have no more Religion than Mahometans. To contrive the Death of
a Prince, or the Subversion of a Government, for the sake of some Differences
in Religion, is not only unchristian but inhumane. Let this be a general
Observation, That they who put on a precise Countenance, and under the color
of Religion speak evil of Digninities, murmur against the Government, and, when
opportunity offers, endeavor to disturb its Peace, notwithstanding their
pretenses to Religion, and the Good of the Nation, cannot be honest men. Though
the Wounds of our late Civil Wars are healed up, yet there are Scars enough
remaining, to frighten any wise man from attempting to disturb the Peace of
Jerusalem a second time. There are no Subjects under the Heavens, that may live
more happily than we, if we, by our Divisions and repinings, do not make our
selves otherwise: have not we a gracious Prince, that is so far from oppressing
his good Subjects, that he is merciful and even indulgent to the worst? has any
Kingdom in the world better Laws than we have, to secure the Prerogative of the
Prince, and the Liberty of the People and have we not all the benefit of those
Laws to protect us? is there any one persecuted with Fire and Faggot for
Religion? is there any one that can complain that his Goods or Estate is
wrested from him by Oppression or Tyranny? and if we did groan under any such
Calamities; yet the Laws of God will not allow a Protestant of the Church of
England to rebel: though both the Papist and Presbyterian can make the
Scripture speak treason when they please. And if it be a damning Sin (as
certainly it is) to resist the Higher Powers, even when they persecute and
oppress us; it is much more heinous in the sight of God, to reproach or rebel
against so merciful a Sovereign as we enjoy.

I pray God remove all our Fears, Jealousies, and Divisions, and make us
sensible of the Blessings of Peace, which we enjoy, and may the Kings Enemies
be covered with shame, but on his Head may the Crown flourish.

FINIS.

