A Wise Virgins Lamp Burning; OR, Gods sweet incomes of LOVE to a gracious soul
waiting for him. BEING The EXPERIENCES of Mrs. ANNE VENN, (Daughter to Col.
John Venn, and Member of the Church of Christ at Fulham:) written by her own
hand, and found in her Closet after her death. Wherein is declared her
exceeding frequent Addresses to the Throne of Grace, and how speedily answered.

Written for the comfort of such as mourn in Sion, and quickening of Saints by
her blessed Example.

Psalm. 30.5. Weeping may endure for a night, but joy comes in the morning.

Psalm. 66.16. Come and hear all ye that fear God, I will declare what he has
done for my soul.

Psalm. 85.8. I will hear what God the Lord will say, for he will speak Peace to
his people.

Lam. 3.25. The Lord is good to them that wait for him, to the soul that
seeks him.

LONDON, Printed for E. Cole, and are to be sold at the sign of the
Printing-Press in Cornhil. 1658.

Christian Reader,
HEre may thou see the free, frequent and familiar intercourse betwixt the
Lord and a godly soul, her continual Addresses to him, and his gracious
Returns to her; doubtless she was one that (as it is said of Caleb) followed
God fully, and lay as much in the besome of Christ as any that I have heard of;
a rare pattern in these cold declining times, wherein so many either turn aside
from the truth, or else lose their first Love; but her pious soul (in an
eminent manner) kept Truth and Zeal warm her in heart even till she enjoyed
full communion with her beloved in Heaven. As she began to seek after God
betimes about the age of nine years) so she continued with her loins girt, her
Lamp burning, and her Light shining more and more till the perfect day. The
tenderness of God, the malice of Satan, her patience in waiting on God for
certain years t gether in her first conversion, were remarkable: The closeness
of her spirit (not opening her condition to such as might have relieved her)
her seeking to heal her self by duties and holy walking, for a long time kept
down her soul from looking up to the free Grace in Christ, till she was even
tired out (as Noah's Dove by fluttering upon the unsteady waters) but then the
Lord Jesus put forth his hand, and took her weary soul into the Ark of his
rest, giving her such a clear sight of himself, that now having with the Spouse
found her beloved, she took him, and caught him, and held him, and would not
let him go, often saying with the Spouse, Let him kiss me with the kisses of his
mouth, for his love is better then Wine; being able from that time to sing the
sweet Song of Simeon, longing to be at home with her Jesus. Oh the peace and
or! Oh the blessed revivings and quicknings! Oh the prayer, praises and
admirings her precious soul was filled withal from that day forward (though
now and then some secret withdrawings) to the last moment of her life! Her
conversation was in heaven; she walked with God; her heart loosned from this
world (as this Treatise fully speaks) so much of her strength, spirit,
affection, and time she spent in Closet-meetings with God in reading, praying,
meditation, self-examination, etc. that it was a wonder her poor weak body was
able to subsist; and doubtless, had not God renewed her strength, anointing her
with fresh oil, it could not have been. I marvelled (I confess) to see so many
of her writings found in her Closet as I did.

God gave her a quick wit, a large understanding, a considering spirit; and
looking much into her self, taught her to put an high price on ordinances, made
her very diligent in the use of all means laid her very low in her own eyes,
with much self-emptiness; and thus bespoko a la ge room in her heart that he
might bestow a great deal of Christ therein, and so made her a Vessel capable
of a greater measure of Grace then (I am persuaded) many others (though truly
godly) attain on this side heaven.

So exceeding tender was her heart in point of sin, that she would often and
deeply judge her self (as this Treatise abundantly shows) for pride, passion,
inordinate love to the creature, neglect of duty to her relations, etc. whereas
those that daily conversed with her (being of discerning spirits) could see no
such appearances, but the contrary frame of spirit eminently shining out in
her; she was so afraid of pride, that she dared not wear such Jewels and
apparel as she had by her, for fe^r her heart should be drawn from God thereby;
and so fearful of vain glory, that though she had this Treatise of the incomes
of God lying by her, yet not any (no not her dear Parents) ever knew thereof,
till they found it in her Closet after her death; her sell leaving this as the
reason, lest her wretched heart should be lifted up and others should think
better of her then was meet.

She was such an high prizer of Ordinances, that she forgetting the weakness of
her own body, the length of the way, and many other obstructons, would
frequently break through all to enjoy them; and when she was to hear she first
was full of prayer to God to meet her therein, and make out some discoveries to
her soul, which the Lord usually did; and she straightly observing Gods
incomes, returned with praise her deep acknowledgements of the same.

No small importunities of very many godly that knew her, have forced the
publishing of this Treatise; and others of long standing in Christ and eminent
Grace, who have seen some of it in Manuscripts, have freely confessed they
never looked into it but were much humbled to so how short themselves come in
such heart-searchings, self-judgings, close-walkings with God, and such
observings of the answer of their prayers as they read in this her daily
practice.

I hope it may be useful in these declining times to convince some Christians
of their slackness, and awaken others, and show them how to make more
heart-work by the example of one of the weak Sex; and if to thy knowledge it
should not add much, yet to thy spirit and practice it may conduce not a
little.

Thine in our dearest Lord and Head, THO. WELD.

To all that love the appearance of the Lord Jesus, Grace and Peace.
BEing called upon by the earnest importunity of many gracious souls, to give
forth my testimony of this blessed servant of Christ, Mr Anne Venn; and having
had many years converse about the great matters of eternal life with her, and
enjoying her society for some years in the holy fellowship of the gospel, I
could not but present to the Saints the sweet savor of her holy walking, in
which she was a lively example to all that knew her.

The Lord first brake in upon her heart by the frequent impressions of the Word
as they were instilled into her by her honored father, whose practice was to
reinforce the Truths publicly preached in his Family upon his Children and
Servants; and by this means this daughter and one of his servants were brought
home unto the Lord; and which I mention as an alarm to the Saints to the
practice of this duty, which seems in this licentious age to be so greatly
neglected. She had this honor to enjoy the indeared affection of all Saints
that conversed with her, as being eminent in these graces: First, in love to
all Saints though of different Judgments; where she discerned any characters
of Christ's image, her heart delighted in them, which grace shined the more
clearly because she lived in a time wherein the contrary evil most prevailed.

Again, she was eminently exemplary in that holy art of the Improvement of the
society of the Saints, by serious propounding of prepared questions about
matters of most infinite concernment, with such wisdom in searching out the
deepest of the Treasures God had laid up in others hearts; that she grew
abundantly in experimental knowledge of saving Truths, and was able and ready
to communicate richly unto others.

She was a most diligent Christian in attending all the Ordinances; and in
every administration did hearken what God said to her soul; and as her soul
waited for some discoveries of God, so the shining forth of God in his counsels
and comforts she did abundantly enjoy.

She was a careful Observer of the Lords day, and found such profit in the
ways of the Almighty, that his Day was her delight and she requently was filled
in her soul as with marrow and fatness.

She was a steady Christian in reeling times, and received nothing for truth
but what she would often weigh in the balance or the Sanctuary, and upon solid
grounds lay up in her heart, or put forth in her practice.

And for her diligence and industry about heavenly things she so far abounded,
that whoever has the sight of her labors would not easily conceive so much
could be done in one whose life was so short.

She wrote her daily Meditations upon the holy book of God, which she kept in
a book fair written.

She contracted all she heard in the public Ministry into a method, and in a
book in Folio has fairly transcribed some part of that work which would have
contained the substance of all the labors of the Ministers of Christ, whose
Ministry she was partaker of: And in another had written all the attributes of
God and Christ that she could find in Scripture for the strengthening of the
says of believers. The truth is, she was a soul wholly dedicated to the Lord,
and in her whole conversation humble, and holy, and tenderhearted.

One truly weaned from this world, weary of it, and often breathing out holy
longings to be with Christ, frequently saying, What is there in this dark
world that should cause a Christian to desire to continue in it? And as she
longed to be at home, so the Lord hastened the time, and in her tender years
gathered her to himself. And in her death she showed forth a gracious frame of
spirit, and with holy confidence in Christ resigned her self to him.

And such was het holy jealousy of any pride or hypocrisy that might arise by
discovering of her labor, that until she fell asleep in the Lord her
writings came not to the view of any.

Thus this blessed soul walked with the Lord, and these things are recorded of
her for our example, that we may tread in her steps, and be followers of her as
he she followed Christ, which is the hearty desire of him who is a servant of
Christ and his Church,

Isaac Knight.

O My soul, what has been the Method and manner of the Lords working that
effectual work of his upon thy heart, (which thou have some comfortable hopes,
is begun by him, and shall be carried on in thy soul to the glory of his own
grace) set them down as the Lord shall enable thee, according as he has been
pleased from time to time, and from year to year to make it out to thee, that
so if the Lord please, it may stand thee instead in an evil day, I mean a day
of inward or outward affliction; and the Lord help thee to do it as in his
sight, who is the searcher of all hearts, and knows better than thou do, what
work himself has wrought in thee; but so far as he has or shall please to
enable thee, to discern it in thy own heart, set it down, and let it lie upon
record, against all the temptations of Satan, that great adversary of thy soul.

IN the year 1635 when I was yet very young being not (at the most) full nine
years old, the Lord was pleased through the preaching of his word (as I
conceive) together with my fathers repeating and farther pressing it home upon
our spirits, to begin to work upon my heart, and to give in some kind of
desires after the best things; whereupon I began to take some delight in
hearing the word, but most of all in reading to my self, in which I then spent
many hours if not whole days: the Lord setting the one and the other so home
upon my spirit, as to convince me both of my sinful and miserable condition by
reason of my continual breach of his holy laws, and grieving the spirit of my
parents, the which was much set home upon me by reading Mr. Dod upon the
commandments and the like treatises, whereupon I had a temptation to curse the
day of my birth, which in some measures I consented unto, often wishing that I
had never been born, or at the least had dyed from the breast, as I saw some of
my Brothers, esteeming their condition to be much better than mine, they never
living to commit any actual sin, and therefore (as I then thought) should
without all doubt go to Heaven, but for my self I did really think and fear
that I should certainly go to Hell; then being put out to board for a quarter
of a year to one who pretended much skill and ability for the cure of some
weakness that I then lay under, which being a very profane family, although I
was yet very young, yet being so contrary to those ways I had been brought up
in (to come now to hear continual cursing, and swearing, and profaning the
Lords day, and being forced to be in their company not daring by reason of
those fears I then lay under to be alone, and so sometimes prevailed with (once
or twice) to play upon the Lords day,) I thought my self all this while to be
in the belly of hell, being thereunto condemned by my own conscience, so that I
could receive no contentment in all the fullness of those outward things which
I there enjoyed, but was restless until I got home again being yet only
convinced of my actual evils.

But when the Lord was pleased, by the ministry of his word, and other private
instructions going along with it to convince me in some measure of my original
corruption that I brought into the world with me; then did the Lord enable me,
to see that all my former desires would have been nothing, but that I might
even then have gone to hell as well as afterward: whereupon I was much
troubled, and very desirous to read and hear all the marks of a righteous man
that should go to heaven, and accordingly I got a book called Mr. Roger's
evidences, and an other called the Touchstone of true Grace, an other called
None but Christ, and diverse others; which I did daily read on for many hours
together.

Then came the Devil upon me with this temptation, that I should keep all this
my trouble to my self, and not discover it to any, although never so near or
deer unto me, which temptation I wholly yielded unto, and that for many years
together, until I even destroyed my bodily health with continual troubles,
fears and sadness, but not discovering any cause of it; so that all the support
I had, was what the Lord was pleased to hand out to me by hearing and reading,
which he was pleased to make effectual still to lead me on, though with much
trouble and sadness: then in the beginning of these troubles being in the year
1638. or 1639. I being some 12 or 13 years old, which being times of great
fears and sadness, the people of God met often and spoke one to an other, and
kept days of humiliation, and seeking the Lord in the behalf of the nation and
his poor people in it, my parents often going to these meetings, but not daring
to tell me it, the times being so dangerous; at last having often observed the
frame of their spirits at such times more especially, I began much to long and
desire to know whither they went, and being very importunate with my Mother to
that end, and at last prevailing, she was content to let me go along with them,
which was so pleasing to me that ever after I continued to go with them every
week almost, and sometimes oftener; where I found often much refreshment,
especially bearing up my heart under those eminent dangers, which in an
especial manner we lay open unto; which the Devil perceiving to be agreat
encouragement to me in the way I now desired to walk in, used many temptations
working together with the corruptions of my own heart, in this estate of my
childhood, to hinder me from enjoying these opportunities; as some times
sleepiness, being fain to go early in the morning and cold, it being in the
deep of winter, etc. with several other temptations, as the danger if we should
be taken, as some had been, and all this to discourage me: which sometimes he
well nigh accomplished, but pondering it sin my mind, and being enabled to
conceive it to be but a temptation, I durst very seldom, if ever, give way to
them but was still enabled to break thorough. Though truly I have much admired
since, how my spirit was carried out in those days in joining in prayer, etc.
how exceedingly sometimes my heart was wrought upon and constrained to pour
forth tears and groans, yea my heart was wrought up to such a frame, and I
found so much sweetness (as I apprehended) in the company of the saints, and
those enjoyments my soul felt in such duties, that I thought I could freely and
cheerfully lay down my life with them, more freely than I fear I could long
since.

Master Love then coming to London and sometimes meeting him at these private
meetings, and so having some knowledge of him, and being afterward chosen
Chaplain to my fathers Regiment, and so going to Windsor with us, about the
year 1642. and so living in the house with us, for 2 years a half, who at our
first going perceiving much sadness to lie upon my spirit, and knowing by
experience what a troubled spirit was; (he having formerly lain under it for
diverse years,) did at last seriously burden me with it, which coming upon me
in such a nick of time, (having but a little before been reading in a little
book that I had, wherein I was directed that if any trouble lay upon my spirit
I should reveal it that so I might receive satisfaction; which pondering with
in my self) I durst not deny it but tell him in some measure the ground of my
trouble, and he endeavoring to satisfy me from the word; which he had no
sooner done in any measure, but still the Devil begins with new and fresh
temptations, and when what had been said to me was a little out of my mind
(which he would soon find occasion to put out) then comes he over with the old
temptations again, working them fresh upon my thoughts, endeavoring still to
drive me to despair of ever receiving any mercy of God. Then stood I convinced
from the word and diverse instruction I met withal grounded thereupon, that it
was my duty to perform private duties as well as public, as prayer,
meditation, examination, and the like, which I knew not how to set about in a
serious manner being every way unfit for it and unable to it, so that often
through neglect and mis-performance this also added to my trouble and sadness.

Then hearing Mr. Love preach upon that Scripture, Mat. 5. 20. For I say unto
you, Except your righteousness shall exceed the righteousness of the Scribes
and Pharisees you shall in no wise enter into the kingdom of heaven. And
hearing how far the Pharisees went in the performance of duties and avoiding
of evils, etc. which I saw my self so short of, which made me conclude, I
should also be short of heaven, my eyes and understanding being then withheld
from the right understanding of the spiritual sense of that Scripture, (which
since the Lord of his rich grace has enabled me to see fulfilled in the Lord
Jesus, who is mine through faith.)

A while after he did also preach upon that Scripture, in Heb. 12. 15, 16, 17.
Looking diligently, lest there be any fornicator, or profane person, as Esau,
who for one morsel of meat sold his birthright. For you know, how that
afterward when he would have inherited the blessing, he was rejected: for he
found no place of repentance, though he sought it carefully with tears. Upon
the hearing of which it was suggested to me that I had never sought the
blessing so diligently, carefully, and importunately as profane Esau did, and
therefore should much more go without it; the thoughts of which scriptures among
diverse others, struck so deep in me that it much increased my sadness, so that
I could take little delight in any thing in the world, but as often as I could
refusing to go into any company, choosing rather a solitary life, yet still
endeavoring to keep all to my self, making nothing known but only those daily
bodily weaknesses, which did also accompany me in great measure.

In this condition I continued for that time I was at Windsor, being often
condemned in my own conscience, for my neglect of duties and commission of sin,
etc. And what ever had at any time been spoken to me in way of comfort (by Mr.
Love, who only was acquainted with my fears) it took no hold upon me at all,
nor abode upon my spirit save only in the minute it was spoken; for, the truth
is. I was then too remiss in taking notice or observing the passages of Gods
providence toward me, not being able then to believe that it was indeed a work
of God upon my soul, which since, through grace, he has been pleased more
evidently to declare.

Then coming from thence to London much about the year 1645. being now a little
instructed in the notional knowledge of many points in religion, I had now a new
temptation besetting me in this manner; that if I would but walk more closely
with the Lord and make more conscience of all known duties, whether hearing,
prayer, meditation, examination, etc. That then I might more comfortably look
up unto the Lord, and also find in my self diverse qualifications, annexed to
several promises, which might much comfort me, which work I began to set about,
endeavoring to tie my self strictly to it, and according as I was able,
desiring the Lords assistance, and withal making him many promises, that if he
would make out love to me I would be and do thus and thus.

But upon trial finding my self to fail in every thing, sometimes through
temptation to neglect or put off duties for a time, which was occasioned many
ways, sometimes being in company I could not well leave or the like, all
which, weighing in my mind, did still augment and increase my trouble, finding
this strict course (though yet I could not keep close to) to be a burden to
me, with many such wicked thoughts, whereby I came to apprehend my self, as it
were, still farther and farther from heaven, and happiness, in all which time I
could find little ground of any comfort, unless taken from my desires, which I
could not apprehend constant neither.

But endeavoring still to go on in this poor way of performances. I had some
small comfort, finding (as I thought) some qualifications in my soul which were
annexed unto diverse promises, where-upon I was somewhat at the present stayed,
and began to gather up some tottering hopes of the goodness of my condition
from Mat. 11. 28. and such like Scriptures.

Then living near unto Mr. Love, and the Presbyterian government being then
about to be set up, I had much strife in my self whether to join with them in
it or no, and so to partake of the ordinances whereby I might come to have my
interest in the Lord Jesus Christ sealed up unto me, being exceeding fearful
lest if I should slight or put off such an opportunity, it might be laid to my
charge another day, that I had it offered me but would not accept of it, so
that at last I resolved to join with them and partake of the ordinance, that so
I might come to have my graces strengthened, and my corruptions weakened, and
also come to enjoy more communion with Jesus Christ which I had some weak
distracted though no abiding hopes of.

Thus having been before the elders and there examined somewhat touching my
knowledge, etc. and the time of administration of the Lord's Supper drawing nigh;
I endeavored for some days before, in a serious and solemn manner to set my
self in the Lords presence, beseeching him to fit me for it, together with the
examination of my own heart both touching my duties and graces, as also
touching my sins and wants, which I desired a supply of; still begging of the
Lord, in all this time of my trouble, that he would not give me over to a
deceived heart (what ever he did with me) so as to think better of my condition
than indeed it was, but that he would please thoroughly to discover my
condition and heart to me; and thus with some small hopes, yet mixed with a
great deal of fear, I did that time partake of the ordinance, the which I had
no sooner almost done, but Satan begins to suggest to me that I had now eaten
and drank my own damnation, in receiving that whereto I had no right, (through
so many fears and doubtings in my own spirit) and that therefore now in stead
of receiving strength I should be everyday more and more hardened, and have my
damnation sealed up to me instead of my salvation.

But pausing here a while, and considering that I had endeavored to do my duty
according to my knowledge and power, in examining my own heart, what my ends,
aims, desires, and wants were, and according to my ability desired the Lord to
make it a strengthening and sealing ordinance to me, endeavoring to satisfy
my self with these and such like thoughts, that my desire was to serve and walk
with the Lord, though I could not do it; thus I continued between hope and
fear, about a month space, intending not to partake of the ordinance the next
time, fearing my self not to be fit for it, finding my heart (as I thought) in
a very unfitting frame, but, manifesting this intent to some friends, they put
me upon these thoughts, that the way to be fit for duties or ordinances is not
to neglect them; as also relling me, that if I were unfit for that ordinance, I
was as well unfit to live, and therefore that was no just plea: thus being
troubled, yet fearing to omit it, I again partook of it, where the Lord was
pleased, through the ministry of his word that day, to hint out to me that
amongst others there were two sorts of men that might safely and comfortably
partake of that ordinance, as

1. All those that had longing desires after the Lord Jesus Christ.

2. All doubting, fearing Christians, that come with doubts and fears to it; it
being ordained of God to be a strengthening, sealing ordinance, etc. which
though it afforded me some small refreshment for the present, yet did it not
abide, but my trouble still continuing, yea increasing, being thereby unfit for
any earthly employment, and yet weary of duties, reading, and writing, etc. In
which I spent my chief time.

Yet thus going on in a road of duties, and performances, sometimes finding
some affection and assistance, and sometimes not, which when I did find in any
measure, Oh! how was my wretched heart ready to be puffed up and rejoice in it,
and began to think that now I had done somewhat, and that surely now the Lord
would hear me: but beginning to consider more seriously what I had done indeed,
and how many wandering thoughts and distractions had passed by me, and that any
wicked wretch in the world might do, and did do as much as I, and yet the Lord
never regarded them, I began to be exceedingly troubled, that such wicked
thoughts should arise in my heart, imagining that it was just with the Lord,
for these wicked thoughts, to blast all my desires, which I really conceived he
did.

Then considering, that the prayers and all the duties of the wicked are
abomination, and things that his soul abhorred, and lying under the
apprehension of my self as one cast off by God whom he never regards, having
poured out my soul before him and begged a soft heart (and a renewed and
changed nature,) urging him often with that similitude of a child coming to his
father to beg bread, Mat. 7. 9, 10, 11. or rather in my apprehension finding
my heart grow more hard and my affections more cold and lukewarm, I lay under
another temptation from Satan, that sure I was but an hypocrite in all that I
did, and therefore should but heap up wrath against my self, (as in Job 36.
13.) and this was set home upon my spirit upon several grounds, as

1. Because as he told me I did not so much aim at the glory of God as at that
happy estate which is to be enjoyed in heaven.

2. Because I could not find my love working so strongly toward God as toward
my self, desiring to be freed from the torments of hell which I conceived to be
intolerable; as also

3. Finding sometimes a kind of secret desire that some body might hear or know
of my performances of duties, etc. Though I never durst act in any measure so,
as that it might be discerned, but always strove to my utmost ability to
conceal what ever possibly I might, yet finding sometimes some such desires of
vain glory in my spirit, that though I did do it thus privately, yet if it
could have been known and not by my means, I thought, I could be content, and
this also lay as an heavy weight upon my spirit, to think that there should
such wicked, vain, and sinful thoughts and desires, be suggested to me, or for
anytime, though never so small, lodge within me, Jer. 4. 14. Which when I began
to consider sadly of did but still renew and increase my troubles and fears,
being a discovery of the hypocrisy that was in my heart.

And for the most part of this my trouble I lay under such a sense of the wrath
of God, that I thought that all I had, and enjoyed was cursed to me, often
admiring that every bit of bread I eat did not choke me, or every creature did
not put an end to my life, often fearing that the company I was in should fare
the worse for me, in so much that if I went by water or the like, I still
conceived I might be an occasion of drowning all those that were with me.

Oh! how desirous was my soul, at this time, of the help and counsel of my
Godly wise friends, and Christians, but through many and sundry temptations
still deprived my self of it, and of the benefit I might have gained by it,
through my wicked silence in all companies, and loathness to impart my
condition to any.

Sometimes my wicked corrupt heart would basely suggest to me, that I was not
able to discourse or speak of any spiritual thing, and therefore I should but
only thereby discover my own ignorance, and no ways advantage my self, etc.
Which when I was enabled still to consider better of, recollecting my thoughts,
and calling them into question, as it were, then comes the Devil, and tells
me, that this did but note my hypocrisy; and farther, when I have been troubled
with it, to think that I should give way to such wicked thoughts as these, then
comes in Satan again, on the other side, and tells me, that if I should put my
self forward in any discourse, I should but thereby cause others to have a
better opinion of me than indeed I deserved, and so deceive others and delude
my own soul, and this latter temptation was that which indeed did oftenest
prevail with me, being ever most of all prone to fear the delusions of my own
heart, and so esteeming my condition to be better than it is.

This going on in this way of wicked, silence made many of my Christian friends
(I do really believe) not know what to think of me, but were, as it were,
estranged from me, which I soon perceiving, it was a most heavy affliction to
me, and such as (the searcher of hearts knows) lay very sadly upon my spirit,
which yet I could not, in any measure, make known to them, but between God and
my own soul condoled this my miserable condition, then being to remove out of
London, which was an exceeding trouble to me (to consider how we should by it
be deprived of those means which we there might enjoy, although indeed neither
my Father, Mother, or my self could enjoy our healths there.)

And removing into the Country about the year 1647. I found the ministry under
which I then was exceeding dead and spiritless, then when I came home (me
thought) I knew as much and no more, (to my edification in that condition I was
in) than I did when I went; the subject which was then, and for a long time
together treated on, was that Scripture, Genesis 2. 7. The Lord breathed into man
the breath of life, and man became a living soul. The main scope of the
minister being to show, what the natural soul was that God had put into man,
handling it (as I conceived) more like a Philosopher than a Gospel-preacher,
which notional things were not those which could satisfy my soul, which wanted
now some support from heaven, in this sad drooping condition I was in, but
meeting with nothing suitable to my present estate, and being here cast in a
place where I was deprived of all other means, I grew still into a more sad
condition every day.

Then did I lie under a very sad and strange temptation, to neglect the
ordinance of preaching, which was grounded upon the pretense, that I might
improve my time at home to my more spiritual advantage, which temptation I
often yielded to, and when I had any opportunity, or seeming excuse by reason
of any small bodily distemper, either the headache or the like, I still took
those occasions to stay at home, and so yielded to the temptation, and thus I
did often.

But when I came still at night to a review of what I had done, and how I had
spent my time in each of these days, as also what I had gained, I found it to
be so little, through one temptation or other, that I now began to conceive and
fear that it was only a temptation of the Devil to bring me out of love with
the ordinances of God, whereupon the Lord also enabled me to begin to take a
view of my own heart endeavoring to persuade my self that the fault was only
in me, and that surely I was some way or other pr^judiced against the man or
his preaching, not looking, (as I ought) to the power of God which was able to
bless that means to me that he had now cast me under (contrary to my desires)
and that it was therefore just with God to let it be to me according to my
unbeleef.

Whereupon I began again to examine my own heart, whether or no I had any kind
of prejudice against the man, which I could never find nor charge my self
withal (having always heard very good words of him from Godly people) only I
could not find that the Lord was pleased to speak any word suitable to my
condition by him, but rather to fill me with notions of natural things, and in
a natural way, whereupon I turned my examination into prayer, beseeching the
Lord that if there were any prejudice in my heart that lay hidden that I could
not discern, that he would be pleased to root it out, and not let it hinder me
from the blessing of his own ordinance, begging of him also that he would
please to put some word into his mouth suitable to the estate of my soul, and
give me an ear to hear and understand it, and so with some hope yet still mixed
with fear, I continued to hear him still, and thus I did often times, still
pressing it upon my self that it was my darkness, dullness and ignorance that
was the hindrance, but finding, after all this, nothing suitable to my soul to
answer the longing desires or satisfy the many doubtings of it, I at the last
told my father how unprofitable his ministry was unto me, who also concluding
and often saying the same, resolved to seek out where the Lord should direct us
and be pleased to make it more profitable to us.

So we attended on the ministry elsewhere about the beginning of the year
1649. Where I received some satisfaction, but still (upon examination) finding
little profiting in my spirit (though I could not but acknowledge that the Lord
was pleased sometimes to speak home to my condition) being not able to close in
a way of faith with what was delivered, I remained in a very sad condition, yet
continued waiting upon the Lord in that ministry above a year, and then
returned into the Country, being much solicited thereunto, where I found the
former Minister upon a more practical subject, I continuing still in trouble of
spirit, as concluding now the fault to be in my self; because when I enjoyed
such means as I could no ways except against, yet I found very little profit
or benefit by it, when I came seriously to examine my self; all which added
much to my inward trouble, but in all this space of time (for four or five
years last past) was I exceedingly tossed to and fro, and continually pestred
with diverse and sundry temptations, both from the Devil and my own wicked
heart; to instance in some;

I was often tempted to very hiddeous and blasphemous thoughts, as to think
that there was no God, and which temptations were always suited to that
matter which, at the present, my thoughts were working upon, wherein indeed it
appeared to be a mere plot of Satan that subtle enemy of my poor soul, as
for instance:

Sometimes when in the bitterness of my trouble and fears I had made any appeal
to God concerning the desires of my soul, or had put up any short ejaculation
to him, or had been meditating of any of his attributes, or the like, then
comes in such a temptation as this, Why who do thou pray unto? do thou
think there is any such thing as a God that thou appealest to? did thou ever
find any answer from him? with much more in this sort, and when any Scripture
has been brought to my thoughts, that might afford me any comfort, or that I
had been examining my heart from any Scripture, or the like, then (an hundred
to one) but I should have one temptation or other darted into my soul, to
question the truth of it (after this manner) how can it be the word of God more
than any other writings? and how shall I know them to be so? and which of them
are so, and which not; it being so many hundred years a go written, and having
gone through so many hands, and all writers in ancient times disagreeing about
it? etc.

And when my thoughts have been set or fixed to meditate of that everlasting
condition after this sinful life is ended, or endeavoring to attain some
assurance of an happy estate in the life to come, then comes in a temptation,
that it is impossible that ever there shall be any resurrection of the dead,
with many carnal arguments to back it.

But these temptations being so hideous and detestable even by the light of
nature (some of them) I durst not parley long with them, but endeavored still
to detest and abhor them, and to raise the best arguments against them which
I could, and in my daily course of reading the word, to gather out all those
Scriptures that I could observe to make against any of those temptations, and
so to answer them, but sometimes the more I reasoned against them, and
endeavored to argue it out in my own thoughts, the more they would prevail,
which when (after some time) I was enabled to perceive, I durst no longer parley
with them, but my only refuge was to throw my self before the Lord, and there
to tell him what a sad condition I was in, and how Satan did continually thus
torment me and throw such things continually into my soul, which he knew, (who
knows all hearts) was the burden of my soul, and that which I would gladly be
rid off, desiring him that I might be acquainted why it was thus with me, that
he did loose Satan upon me, as also that he would please to give me more power
to resist these his fiery darts; diverse other temptations was I also troubled
withal, as

I was then tempted to believe that it must needs be impossible for any one in
this life, to be assured of their salvation.

But when I began to consider, how many of Gods people, who I could not but
believe by their walkings, did enjoy much of this assurance and communion with
God, then did this temptation in some measure, vanish; and another arise in the
room of it, that sure, it was impossible that ever I should attain to any such
assurance, and that therefore I was none of his children;

Which when I had sought the Lord about, and also indeavored to attain unto by
searching the Scriptures, and comparing my heart with them, etc. Then would
this temptation also arise upon the neck of the other;

That I ought not to seek or labor too much to attain assurance, for surely
the Lord did not see it good for me, for should the Lord give it me I should
undoubtedly be so lifted up, and so filled with pride of spirit that I should
not be able to contain my self, but should much dishonor the Lord by it.

These, with many such like temptations, was I tossed up and down withal,
until my spirit was even overwhelmed within me, having no other refuge but
only to tell the Lord, and bemone my condition to him who, as yet, seemed only
to turn the deaf ear to me and to cover all my prayers with a cloud.

Yet, in all this time of my trouble and temptation, was the Lord pleased in a
secret manner to support my spirit, and keep it from utter despair, and giving
up so as to be wholly of Satan's mind, for though my fears and troubles were
great and indeed unutterable, yet did the Lord so secretly support me, that I
do not know that ever he suffered me peremptorily to conclude, that I should
certainly perish, as Satan continually suggested to me, though I still feared
it, which fears were so great that they came well nigh unto despair, which
notwithstanding the Lord enabled me (though in a poor, weak and low measure)
yet to follow him still, often telling him, that if I did perish; my desire was
to perish coming toward him, following of him, and begging mercy from him.

Then, (in the year 1650. June the 28) was the Lord pleased to lay a very sad
and heavy affliction upon me, in taking from me my dear and precious Father,
who was the chief comfort of my natural life, and this the Lord was pleased to
do it in so sad and so sudden a manner, which made it take the deeper
impression upon my spirit, and indeed add much to my inward as well as my
outward trouble, being also accompanied with many sad temptations and
suggestions; to instance in one to two;

It was strongly suggested to me, that the Lord had done this merely in just
judgment to manifest his displeasure against me, and show me that he was so
far from hearing my prayers (wherein I did often much beg his life of the
Lord) that now he would not only take him from me, but even in this sad severe
manner, not once permitting him to speak to me, or me with him, which was also
further aggravated with these thoughts, that it was the more just with the
Lord, thus to deal with me because I had not given him due praise for such a
mercy as I had in so long enjoying him, nor yet had made that use of his
fatherly counsel and advice, in this time of my doubts and fears, as I might
have done.

Thus being tossed to and fro, and as it were in a wilderness in my own
thoughts, to think what the Lord meant by this sad dispensation or would have
me take notice of, at the last desiring to satisfy my self that it was an
affliction of which all are partakers, and that to be without afflictions is
not a condition of Sonship, and also considering, that it was no other for the
matter than what I had for many years both expected and feared, and indeed a
wonder (all things being rightly weighed) that I should enjoy him so long as
through mercy I did.

Thus after some time of stubborn rebellion against God, in not submitting
quietly to his will, the Lord was pleased to enable me at the last to begin to
bethink my self, what that evil might be in me which the Lord had now struck
at, and would me have sensible of by this his dealing with me.

And, upon examination, finding nothing wherein I could more charge my self
than in immoderate affection to him, and so putting him in stead of God, I did
at last (though with much repulse in my wicked spirit) acknowledge it before the
Lord, and beg of him that he would show me, more and more, what his mind and
meaning was in this so heavy a stroke, and that as he had now by his own
immediate hand, brought me within the letter of the promise (being now
fatherless) that he would also make it good to me in revealing himself to be a
father to me in Jesus Christ.

And thus I continued, sometime tossed to and fro with diverse and sundry
temptations, having none to speak a word of comfort to me in this my distress
(I making none acquainted with this my condition but in this thing wholly
yielded to Satan to keep all to my self,) having no ease nor vent for my
spirit but only when I was in any measure enabled to pour out my soul before
the Lord, in which my spirit was also oftentimes much bound up, though
sometimes again enlarged.

Then, about 2 or 3 months after, being toward the end of September 1650. was
the Lord pleased to cast my Mother, as also my self, both at one time, upon our
bed of sickness, visiting us with very strong fevers, which being toward
Winter brought us very low, which meeting with the inward trouble of my spirit
lay very sadly upon me.

At which time, in the midst of all my weakness, I was brought to this
resolution in my own thoughts, being tossed up and down in my spirit as well as
in my body, so that now I did no longer desire any continuance of this natural
life of mine, nor yet promise the Lord any amendment of life, as I had formerly
done in all my other sicknesses, though I could never make good any of these
promises, vows, or covenants, by me so made; hereupon, I considered (though
with much trouble of spirit) that I had found by sad and often experience, that
if I should live never so long, I should live never the better, nor gain any
more assurance of my salvation and well-being, therefore the desire of life was
now wholly taken from me, the Lord enabling me at the last to take up such
thoughts as these, that from the bottom of my heart I did and had for a long
time desired to fear and serve the Lord, and that those many failings which
accompanied all my obedience were the burden of my life, and that if the Lord
would have been pleased to have given me more freedom of spirit, and set my
soul more at liberty to have walked after his will, it would have been as a
heaven upon earth to me; but contrarily, I saw, I was still pressed under with
a body of death, by reason of which I did nothing but offend night and day, and
that the longer I lived I did but aggravate my sin and condemnation, I did
therefore desire power to cast my self and the whole weight of my salvation
upon Jesus Christ, and although I could not confidently believe, that the Lord
would be good to me, yet I saw that there was no salvation any where else, and
therefore did desire to rely wholly upon him, acknowledging that I deserved
nothing but hell, and that, if ever he bestowed any thing else upon me, it was
infinite unspeakable mercy.

Thus I continued for many days often longing for the time of my dissolution
(wherein I should sin and dishonor God no more) which both my self and others
about me thought not to be far off yet was the Lord pleased, after some fevv
vveaks, in some measure to raise up my vveak body which was nigh unto the
dust, and after some time to go on by degrees perfecting of my health, all
which time being accompanied with many a sad thought, my trouble still
increasing as fast as my bodily health, at the last the Lord was pleased to
turn my thoughts upon those expressions of David in Psalm. 42. 5, 11. Wherein he
calls his soul to account, saying, Why art thou cast down O my soul, and why
art thou disquieted within me? hope thou in God. The Lord setting this home
with much power upon my spirit at this time, (having been all the vvinter
deprived of the enjoying of any public means) the Lord (I say) setting this
Scripture so home upon my spirit, I began at last to reason thus with my self,
and to demand of my soul the reason of this my trouble; the Lord being pleased
also to put me upon the veiw of some Sermons of Mr. Marshalls and others which
I had formerly heard, some expressions in them being brought to my mind,
wherein I found several answers to many things, which I alleged as the
ground of my trouble, I was also by the Lord I hope put upon a review of that
little book called the Marrow of modern Divinity (which I had formerly read
with much trembling) with a secret persuasion in my heart that those were
real truths, though formerly I neither could nor durst fully close with them,
which two means did through the blessing of God at the present somewhat settle
and quiet my turmoiled spirit.

Then in the beginning of the year 1651. going into the Country and staying
about a month within 4 or 5 miles where Mr. Stevens exercises, having heard
of him, I had a great desire to hear him, which also I did 3 or 4 times, with
much content; he being one of those times upon Gal. 3. 8. The Scripture
foreseeing that God would justify the heathen through faith, etc. Where he
showed us fully that God did not justify the righteous but even heathens,
ungodly men, which word added somewhat to my comfort, only I could not say I
had faith, and this stumbled me again.

Then coming to Colechester and resting only one Lords day there I heard Mr.
Archer, who, by the providence of God, was then upon that Scripture in Joh. 16.
8. Where the Lord promises to send the spirit and that it should convince the
world of sin, and of righteousness, where he fully showed, that it was the
office of the spirit to convince humble sinners of an all-sufficient
righteousness in Jesus Christ, thereupon still laboring to take men off from
all dependence upon their own righteousness or any thing in them or done by
them, which I now found I had been very guilty of, telling us also that all
those duties, graces or qualifications, that we so rested upon, were not the
righteousness of Christ, etc. therefore too scant and narrow to cover any soul,
at which time I must needs say (I do really believe) that the Lord was pleased
to strike the first and great blow to dependence on my own actings; although I
had yet much confusion and trouble in my spirit concerning this thing, being
yet very dark in the understanding of it.

But in this short time of my being in the Country, the Lord having (in some
measure) thus begun, as it were, to speak a word of comfort to my poor soul, I
was strangly in my own thoughts, (I hope by the spirit of the Lord) put upon
the desires of communion with the people of God according to the Gospel, and so
upon the search of the Scripture according to my poor measure, to that end,
accompanied with the experience I formerly had of that way called the
Presbytery, which I was now very much unsatisfied in, which dissatisfaction was
at the present only grounded upon the practice of them who walk in that way
(finding them generally so full of wrath, bitterness, clamors and evil
speaking even of Brethren, which I conceived not to be a Gospel-frame of
spirit,) compared with those who practice the contrary which was much set upon
my spirit to be more sweet, humble and Christian like, as also a way for more
growth and establishment, being more full of love, (which the Gospel is so full
of) and watching over one another, etc. Which I now saw I stood in great need
of and therefore much desired, finding my spirit then much drawn out to seek
the Lords direction in it, beseeching him more and more to clear up to me in
what way of worship I might most honor him and meet with and enjoy most of
him, as also when and where I might so join, begging of him also with much and
earnest desire to fit me for it.

Then coming home again my trouble renewed, to think how my lot was cast in
such a place where I had little society that I could reap any benefit from, and
under his ministry which I continually found very unprofitable to me, at last,
making this known to a friend how dissatisfied I was to hear him, she advised
me to go hear Mr. Knight, which accordingly I did, about Midsummer 1651. who
(through the assistance of God) did fully lay open the free and abundant grace
of God to poor creatures, who see their lost and undone condition out of
Christ: through whose ministry the Lord was pleased to go on to convince me
yet farther and more fully of my great unbeleef and deafness to Jesus Christ,
which had wrought so many sad troubles upon my spirit, being convinced of which
I would gladly have closed with Jesus Christ, and relied upon him, having
nothing to say against it but only my own wretchedness, which being so often
and fully by him answered I had at last nothing to say, but only that I was so
overpowered with unbeleefe, that though I would have closed with Jesus Christ,
gladly and with all my soul, yet I neither durst nor could do it (as I then
thought.)

Then having heard of the meeting at Mr. Knights house, we went thither toward
the end of Aug. 1651. being about a week before the fight at Worcester, at
which time they applied themselves much to speak to the present condition of
the Nation and the godly in it, but after some time frequenting this meeting
and finding much refreshment and satisfaction from it, (about a month or two
at the most after) the Lord was pleased to draw out my spirit exceedingly to
spread my condition before the Lord, and also crave the prayers of his people
in that meeting in the behalf of my troubled soul, and accordingly, (though
with much repulse in my self) I wrote a paper, wherein I did acknowledge before
the Lord that having been convinced of my wretched condition I did thereupon
labor and strive to walk more close with the Lord, etc. Which being no ways
able to accomplish, I durst not believe or go to God as a father, but being in
some measure convinced that I was all this while out of the way, (not being yet
thoroughly convinced of the righteousness of Christ, but going about too much
to establish my own righteousness,) I did then desire their prayers, that the
Lord would be pleased to reveal more of his mind and will in Jesus Christ to my
soul, and enable me to deny my self and rely wholly upon him, and having a fit
opportunity of privacy, coming there before any other company, I laid it down
upon the table, and it pleased the Lord so to order it, Mr. Knight being
absent, Mr. Barker came in that day, who was altogether unknown to me, who
taking a view of this paper among others did mention it before the Lord, both
in the entrance as also in the close of that days service, the Lord putting
into his heart and mouth a very seasonable word to my poor soul, which was then
spoken from 2 Pet. 2. 3, 4, 5. If so be that you have tasted that the Lord is
gracious to whom coming as living stone, dissallowed indeed of men but chosen
of God and precious, etc. From which Scripture and what the Lord was pleased by
him at that time to communicate from it, did my soul receive very much
refreshment and satisfaction.

Then did the Lord also direct the spirits of those that carried on that
meeting to treat much about temptations, from which there was many seasonable
useful truths set home upon my heart, finding by this discourse that Scripture
in 1 Cor. 10. 13. plainly made good to my poor soul that no temptation had
taken me but such as I now saw was common to others, that I durst not think but
to be the people of God, now hearing them complain of the same things which
together with the refreshments and supporting considerations under each of
these, which were held out to us, was my poor drooping spirit mightily
supported.

After this it pleased the Lord also to direct them in this meeting to treat
about that great grace of faith, and so afterward to answer many doubts and
fears that lay upon many souls, from all which (being too large here to
relate) my soul received very much refreshing, being in the close of that
service put again upon it, by the spirit of the Lord through these his
servants, to put the question to my soul at every turn, doubt, whence come
thou, or wherefore do thou doubt, and, truly, the Lord having spoken so
much to my soul by all these means and instruments formerly mentioned, that the
strength of my doubts and fears began so to scatter, that I could give very
little account of the cause or ground of them, being also now convinced in some
measure that I did by these doubts, fears, jealousies, and hard thoughts of
God, much provoke and dishonor him, so that though formerly I thought it as it
were a virtue in me to be doubting and questioning my estate, I came now, in
some measure, through grace, to see that it was a heinous sin, and therefore
to endeavor, strive and pray, and do all I could against them.

Yet did often I lie under many sad apprehensions arising hence, being
convinced by the word in reading in one of Mr. Burrows books, that there is no
worship acceptable to God but that which is tendered up to him as a father
and the father of our Lord Jesus Christ, now I not finding my self able at that
time to look upon God, or look up to him under this relation of a father, only
looking upon him as a gracious, merciful, and yet withal a just severe God,
this was a great trouble to my spirit, then did the Lord, by the ministry of
his word dispensed by Mr. Knight at the Chapel at Hammersmith, put me upon
the serious thoughts of that Scripture in Jer. 3. 1, 4, 12, 13, 14, 15, 19.
verse. Which at that times took much upon my heart in this particular, having no
power to gainsay the duty required in it, the Lord being pleased, by the
ministry of his word dispensed by Mr. Knight, and sometimes some others, to
come in, further carrying on this work that he had thus begun in my soul,
enabling me daily more and more to grow up toward a more full assurance and
confident rouling upon and giving up my whole soul to Jesus Christ; giving me
bodily to see more and more my own emptiness, and nothingness, and the
conrinual need I stood in of him, without whom I now saw that I was nothing,
had nothing, and could have nothing but only sin, as also that fullness that is
in him, together with a readiness to give forth and communicate out of it to
poor creatures, who see the need they have of it, and come to him for it,
which I now desired above all things strength to do, and that I might go
wholy out of my self, and come to him for life; then hearing that Mr. Knight,
and some fevv christians more were about gathering into a communion together,
I was much rejoiced in spirit at it supposing that, happily, the Lord might
please to make it a mercy to me, if I could but see him clearing up my way, and
opening a door for me to join with them, which work seeming for a time to go on
in their desires and intentions, yet there was much fear arose in my spirit
concerning it, how I should be enabled to make out my condition so as that I
might be approved of, being full of ebbings and flowings, sometimes hoping a
little, and sometimes again full of fears.

Thus being at a great stand in my self not knowing what to do, but often
seeking the Lord concerning it, who was pleased at last to enable me to take up
this resolution, that (through his grace assisting of me) I would put it upon
the trial, relying upon him to enable me to make out what himself had wrought
in my soul, though in much weakness, yet I hoped in truth, and this I was the
more willing unto, that Scripture or rule of the Apostle being then much set
upon the heart in the 1 Pet. 3. 15. Be ready always to give an answer to every
man that asks you a reason of the hope that is in you with meekness and fear;
and though I was very sensible of my own disability hereunto, yet rather than
to deprive my self of such a benefit I was enabled in some measure to submit,
yet not without many fears and that strong ones too, that I should not be
accepted of; the Lord now enabling me to take up these thoughts, that I would,
through his assistance, do my duty and offer my self, and if the Lord should so
order the spirits of his people to deny me, I did desire to see his mind, and
to expect strength from him to submit to his will, manitested through it,
acknowledging it no more nor so much as I had deserved, considering with all
that my desire was chiefly, and in the first place, to approve my self to the
Lord, and (if he saw it good) to his people also, but if otherwise my desire
was, (though I knew not how I should be enabled to do it) yet, however, to wait
upon the Lord, and follow him still until he should see good to make out a way
for me; then was there a day kept to seek the Lord on the behalf of Mrs. Arnal,
which, by providence, I heard of, and had a desire to be at, which accordingly
I did, at which time my spirit was much stirred up to crave the prayers of the
people of God, that the Lord would be pleased to pardon all the unbeleeving
workings of my corrupt heart, and those hard thoughts I had had of God, and
that he would please to give in such clear visions of himself, as might
mightily increase my faith, which desires of mine were spread before the Lord
that day.

But having received, at this time some little refreshings from those
instructions the Lord was pleased then to communicate by Mr. Knight, from Heb.
12. 5-13. From which Scripture I was also convinced that in most of the
chastisements the Lord had seen meet to lay me under, I had either despised his
chastisements, or else fainted under them, the Lord (I say) having this day
broke in thus upon my heart by his spirit, through his word, the Devil soon
begins again with me, taking this opportunity, I having set my self and
endeavored to lay my heart to the word, and see what comfortable grounds I
could take up, that the Lord had indeed afflicted me in mercy, etc. The Devil
now begins to endeavor to puff up my spirit with a conceit, that I was able
to speak more in this kind than many others, who were at that time also by him
presented; but through mercy, this did not pass many days before the Lord
sadly showed me my folly and weakness herein, for a little while after there
was an other day kept, to which meeting I went, and, truly, after I came
there, the Lord set home these wicked thoughts together with several other
things which wrought so upon my spirit, that my heart was even overwhelmed
within me, in so much that I could not keep it to my self, but was constrained
to discover it by my carriage, which Mr. Knight taking notice of spoke to me
after the exercise; at which time I was so far from that ability, that Satan
possessed me with thoughts of, that I was not able in any measure to speak my
heart to him, but was, as it were, one whom the Lord had given up to a dumb
spirit, and thought those three words, which was all that I could then speak
were, (through a mere mistake) sadly mis-construed by him, yet had I not power
to speak one word to clear my meaning, supposing it might possibly be that the
Lord had something to speak to me, even through that mistake; there was also
this day a word set home very much on my heart, from something Mr. Milborn
noted to us which also added much to my sadness; and it was this, that I had
prayed, and prayed again and again, but when I had done I never looked after
the returns of them, having never yet any experience made out to me, that I
durst acknowledge this or that to be a return of my prayer, nay though the Lord
had given in a mercy that I had begged of him, I was still, for many years,
tempted to believe that it had been so, though I had not prayed, and so it was
not given in as an answer to prayer, which did much eat out the sweetness of
those mercies which I did enjoy; in so much, that (me thinks) I do now even
stand and admire, what it was that did at that time support my spirit, and
carry me on in a continued seeking of God, being not able, then to record an
answer of prayer at all that I can bring to mind.

However the Lord had been pleased before this time to give me many gracious
answers to my poor desires, yet were mine eyes withheld from seeing them to be
so, and taking the comfort thereof, until a long after, yea sometimes some
years after some of them were given in, which yet afterward the Lord was
pleased to make out unto me, even before the writing hereof.

But after all this the Lord, by the acts of his providence, seemed much to
cross these hopes and desires of his people, in joining in fellowship
together, which when I heard of, it was a great trouble to me, who greatly
desired the accomplishment of it, sometimes thinking that it might be even for
my sake alone that the Lord had done it.

Other times being tempted to think, that if it had been the Lords acting to
work up my spirit to that pitch that I thought I found it wrought up unto, then
he would also have gone on to have perfected my desires, but being again
enabled on the other side to reason thus with my self, that it is my duty to
wait patiently upon the Lord and submit to him, as well for the time as for the
matter, I endeavored (the Lord assisting me) to quiet my spirit with such
thoughts as these, that the Lord might delay it in much mercy, that so I might
be the more fit for it, when he shall please to accomplish it, apprehending
that surely he saw me not yet fit for such a mercy, then did I again turn to
the Lord, and thus desire to submit to him, begging of him to fit me for such a
mercy, and if he saw it good to afford me the mercy here, if not, that he would
direct me where to join that might be more for his glory and my souls good.

Thus was the Lord pleased to go on well nigh a quarter of a year, still coming
in with more light and discoveries of his love to my soul, and clearing up to
me more and more that work which he had begun through his rich and free grace
in my Lord Jesus, in whom I did now desire only and alone to be found, and not
in any of my own righteousnesses, who had now enabled me to see, to be very
loathsome, and abominable, though formerly I had too much doted upon them.

Then in the third month in the year 1652. Mr. Knight being gone into the
North, the Lord was pleased by a mere providence (as I desire to look upon it,
not knowing, as yet, but that I may also say as a return of many of my former
poor desires) to send Mr. Rogers to the meeting at Mr. Knights house, having
preached one Lords day before at the Chapel at Hammersmith, which occasioned
very strong and earnest desires in me to hear him again, which now I did the
Lord directing him this time to speak unto us concerning Church discipline,
which I was yet very dark in, which the Lord enabled him to give me very much
and great satisfaction, which otherwise I have cause to fear I might more
inconsiderately have rushed upon.

Thus was the Lord pleased (I hope in answer to my poor desires) yet farther to
clear up this way of his to me, proving it clearly to be the way of the Gospel
and that which every one ought to be fully satisfied in before they enter upon.

This being now more cleared unto me, my desires and longings after the
enjoyment of God in this Sion, grew more strong and earnest, I continually
mentioning it before the Lord.

After this really I cannot tell but that I should rob the Lord of his glory in
this particular, if I should not also acknowledge him further by my poor
experience to be a God hearing prayer, for I found him now also (as I hope I
may to his glory speak) coming in very much as it were fitting me for this
mercy, by giving in (out of his own free grace to his poor unworthy creature)
yet, a more full and clear sight of his work upon my soul; and so of my
interest in him, by means whereof I might now the more comfortably offer up my
self into the communion of his people, without a sight of which, I should
hardly, I think, have presumed to have done, which work of his the Lord was
pleased to help on by several of his Servants in Mr. Knights absence, as Mr.
Sidrach Simpson and Mr. Rogers, whom he was pleased to make instrumental for my
souls advantage and comfort at this time, which the Lord thus carried on until
it was toward the end of the seventh month commonly called September in this
year 1652. at which time Mr. Knight being returned home and removing to Fulham,
where the Lord opened a door for his people to join in communion together
according to the Gospel, the Lord now offering me this opportunity which I had
so much longed for, and his servant Mr. Knight to whom I had formerly by an
other friend intimated my desires, he I say acquainted me with it I durst not
rashly deny to join with them, but what fears and tremblings there were upon my
spirit at this time is known only to the Lord, for indeed I am not able to
express it, in which trouble my refuge as formerly was only to go to the Lord,
beseeching and earnestly importuning him now to appear and give in direction to
his poor creature, who was now in such a straight as that she knew not what to
do.

But (so far as I know my own heart) leaning alone upon the Lord and waiting
for his direction, I went to the place appointed to meet in, not knowing what I
should do in it, taking little or no rest all the night before, but coming
there next morning and being still much oppressed in spirit; in the turning of
an eye as it were, I can not express how or which way my spirit was on a
sudden wrought over to give my consent, and so to join with them.

They being (as they conceived) well satisfied in the long knowledge they had
had of each other, and their frequent converses together, some whereof were in
order to this very work, which having been much desired by those few persons
that then joined and they so long interrupted, and having put up many petitions
to the throne of grace concerning it; Mr. Barker being then present and
carrying the intended work by prayer and counsel, we joined together in the
fellowship of the Gospel. But this work was not performed in so solemn a manner
as I (for my part) could have desired, both in setting more time a part to seek
the Lord together in it, and to have endeavored to have given more full
satisfaction to each other, of the work of God in each others hearts, which lay
as a burden upon my spirit which I often bewailed before the Lord, and also
moved it to some of our friends that we might yet meet and set a part a day to
this end, which was not thought meet at that time; upon which I besought the
Lord it might be no hindrance to his appearance amongst us, for my spirit was
oppressed with fears of Gods not appearing in the midst of us, which fears were
at the present heightened from the mighty rage of Satan, in the spirits of
many, yea of some good men at this our first entrance into communion, laying
many harsh censures upon us, which still put me upon a more narrow search into
my own heart.

Thus seeing the rage of some against us to be very great, and trembling in my
self to think lest we by our miscarriage might give them some ground to speak
evil of us, it wrought a great sadness upon my spirit, fearing lest we might
be an occasion of darkning his glory to the World, which caused me often to
pour out my soul to the Lord beseeching him that if he had any delight in us,
he would be pleased to afford us his presence.

But in the very depth of these fears did the Lord, by a mere providence, as I
was opening Mr. Burroughs's book, cast my eye unexpectedly upon the 13 p. of
the right manner of drawing nigh to God in worship, where I found this note,
that the beginnings of things of high concernment do meet sometimes with great
difficulties and interruptions; which he gives some instances of, and so
advises us not to be offended though we should have some sad accidents to fall
out, at the beginning of great things; for (says he) notwithstanding this God
may yet prosper it afterward; the serious consideration whereof did at the
present a little refresh my spirit, and support it with a desire to wait to see
what the Lord would please to bring out of it.

Thus having, for about 3 months space, enjoyed the ordinances and the society
of his servants, and thereupon beginning to examine my own heart, what fruit or
benefit I had found by them, it lay somewhat sadly upon my spirit, for being
able to discern very little, then was the Lord pleased by a letter from Mr.
Rogers to hand out something which for the present did a little support and
cheer my spirit, therein putting me upon the consideration of this truth, that
a Christian growth is not at all times sensible, neither does the Lord see it
meet they should always grow in one kind, but that they grow in all parts as
well in humility and self abasement, and in the sight of our own weakness,
barrenness, and unprofitableness, etc. which is as true a growth as that of
faith though not always so visible.

Yet some trouble still lying upon my spirit, wanting a full and clear sight of
my interest in Christ, which as yet I had only some good hopes of, but no such
settled assurance, but that I was often tottering backward and forward, the
Lord having formally and continually, through the ministry of his word
dispensed often by Mr. Knight and very powerfully to that end, and sometimes
also by Mr. Simpson, by both which the Lord was pleased strongly to convince me
of the dishonor that I had brought him by my unbeleef, which was now the great
burden of my soul, but finding much weakness of faith in me, and an inability
to roll so fully upon God and give glory to him by believing and taking him
upon his word, etc. often fearing that sin and Satan would yet prevail over
me.

But the Lord was pleased, about the 10 month 1652. to draw out my heart
exceedingly to beg of him a large measure of faith, even that I might be
enabled to honor him, as much by believing as ever I had dishonored him
through unbeleef, but this same month I had this wicked thought or temptation
thrown with mighty force into my spirit (to beat me off from that pitch of
faith which I then found my spirit breathing after) viz. that where the Lord
gives such great strength of faith, or any other grace, he gives also as great
trials, and that therefore if I had the one I must expect the other also, and
so should not only be a means to pull down sorrows, afflictions and trialls
upon my own head, but also in lying under them, and so sadly dishonor God, as
now I do, which at the present did somewhat take of the edge of my affections,
and weaken my former desires, until the Lord was pleased to discover to me,
that it was a mere temptation (whether from Satan or my own heart, my
deceitful, but subtle enemies) to skare me with such fears; which temptation
the Lord was pleased to enable me to overcome, (with grief that I should in the
least parley with it) and again to renew my former desires, and withal to beg
his continual presence with me in all whatever trialls and conditions he should
bring me under, that he would keep me from dishonouring him under them, and
manifest himself to me through them, and then to do with me as seems him good.

A few days after, as I was one Evening writing a letter unto a dear kinswoman
of mine, who at that time lay under some sad dispensation from the Lord,
whereupon I took occasion to urge that promise upon her in Romans 8. 28. And we
know that all things work together for good to them that love God, etc. which,
whiles I was endeavoring to press upon her the Lord was pleased to cause it
to fall with mighty power upon my heart, which was set home upon my spirit not
only as that which I should rest upon and expect the performance of, but as
that which I had had much experience, through all the dealings of God with me,
to have been continually made good, so that the experience which the Lord had
given me of his dealings with my soul for many years (in all the afflictions
and exercises I had lain under, whether in body, or mind, in loss of relations,
or comforts, etc. yea the very withholding ^he light of Gods face, which is
life it self ^ did restifie to the truth of this word, having been all of them
by the Lord brought and wrought about for my good, the Lord enabling me to
cleave the closer to himself and take the faster hold of him, from the
consideration of all which, there fell this farther hint, with some weight upon
my spirit, that it should also be even so with me, in respect of those
corruptions that I was still pestred with and groaned under.

But there being yet (especially at some times) many confused fears upon my
spirit which I could give very little reason for, upon the second day of the
eleventh month 1652. being the first day of the week, the Lord was pleased yet
further to appear with a very seasonable word to my soul, which did much
refresh it; it was thus, Mr. Knight being in the afternoon (in his ministry
at Fulham) upon that Scripture in Heb. 2. 1, 2, 3. stirring us up to hearken
diligently to Jesus Christ, and not to let any of his words at any timeslip out
of our hearts, whence also he took occasion to comfort the people of God upon
this account, that Christ should think their ears worthy of hearing his voice,
and that he should not always send his messengers, nor make use of instruments,
but should often rather as it were choose to speak himsel; at which words the
Lord was pleased to touch my heart, and to make it sweetly to melt before him,
with joy to think that Christ should thus speak to my soul, as I now saw he had
done by him 2 years before, who when he had visited me with that sore loss
of my dear parent, and cast me and my Mother both upon our sick beds, neither
of us being able to speak to each other, yea when no friend or creature, either
could, or did endeavor to speak a word of comfort to my poor soul, which was
in a most sad condition for want of a clear sight of God under all these
dispensations of his toward me, who having, as it were, by his own hand (as
I now really believe he did) shut up and stopped all other mouths, yet that now
the Lord Jesus should choose to speak himself, as I found he had done in some
measure, supporting my spirit, which was ready to sinck and give up under the
heavy burden it lay, both of the sense of guilt and wrath, all which being
put together, Oh! how did the sight of his love both melt and cheer my heart?

Then did the Lord also, the next day, being the second day of the same week,
bring to my mimd and thoughts those words that are recorded of Job, in Job 9.
11. which after I had paused a little upon, contrary to my intention or
thoughts, I went on still reading though but in a brief quick way (being
straightned of time for it was late in the Evening) but I took a view of the
whole book of Job, until I came to the end of it, and the thing in general
that was hinted to me, and fell upon my spirit from the whole was this, that
none of al Jobs friends who indeavored to speak to him could neither hint out
a word of comfort, or of conviction, to him in this sad estate, none of all
their words taking hold at all upon his spirit, until God himself came to
speak, and then one word of God does it, making him cry out Job 40. 45. Behold
I am vile, what shall I answer thee, I will lay my hand upon my mouth, Once
have I spoken but I will not answer, yea twice but I will proceed no further:]
and again Job 42. 5, 6. I have heard of thee by the hearing of the ear, but now
mine eye sees thee, therefore I abhor my self, and repent in dust and
ashes;] that was (as I conceive) when God spoke, which caused me strongly to
reflect upon mine own heart, thereby calling to mind how many instructions,
convictions, and comforts have been from time to time for many years past by
several friends and servants of God held out to me, which never took any hold
at all upon my spirit, but when God himself will take in hand to speak, he can
bring things past and gone quite back again (as he did the Sun upont he Dial of
Ahaz, 2 King. 22. 11.) and bring them fresh into memory and cause the soul to
see his hand and work in all, and so to abhor it self for those abominable
unbeleeving thoughts, and jealousies of God that have been upon its heart, when
as the Lord has (as it were) took all opportunities to beget in the soul good
and honorable thoughts of him.

Then hearing this same night, that Mr. Simpson was next morning being the
third day of this week to begin his lecture in Friday street, to which I had a
great desire to go, which accordingly I did, though with some outward
inconveniences and bodily danger, desiring of the Lord, that as he had begun in
some good measure to shine in upon my heart this week, so that he would please
to make this blessed opportunity letting my soul have a sight of himself
through that word that should be held out to me.

Thus waiting and depending upon the Lord for his appearance through this
instrument of his, I went to London, at which time Mr. Simpson contrary to the
expectation of most of his hearers (and as I was told) to his own intentions
the week before, had his eye and meditation turned and fixed upon that grand
promise in Genesis 3. 15. which I do not know but that I may look upon as a
special providence, in which the Lord might aim, even at the establishment of
my poor and unsettled spirit, which but the week before was exceedingly cast
down, the Lord having (as I conceived) much disappointed my expectation even of
his own appearance.

In the entrance upon which Scripture and opening of it he showed us, that
these words in Genesis 3. were spoken and denounced as a severe threatening to the
Devil, and not at all spoken either to the man, or to the woman, yet did they
contein in them a most blessed promise, yea all the promises which the Lord
left both for Adam and Eve to lay hold upon, from the consideration of which he
took occasion to provoke us to lay hold upon all the hints of God and to let
none of them slip in any dispensation of his to us, yea, to take notice of
every word of promise or comfort that God holds out though in the midst of
severe threatening, as this here was, in the further prosecution of which he put
us upon such thoughts as these, that that soul which is indeed made to hunger
and thirst after Jesus Christ would be ready to snatch and catch at the least
crum of mercy, yea were the soul indeed found of Christ it would be ready to
believe upon very small grounds: there was also at this time, that Scripture
cited by him which we find recorded in Esai, 50. at the beginning, where the
Lord (as he showed us) seems to be very angry with that people who though
they had played the harlot, and therefore deserved justly to be put away, yet
was the Lord wrath with them, because they said he had put them away when as
yet he had not, and therefore demanded of them where their bill of divorce was;
which together with several other precious truths then hinted to us, took very
much on my heart and greatly refreshed it, even upon after reviews also, but to
all this the Lord was pleased to add one blessed opportunity more that week,
wherein he speak abundantly and, I hope, effectually to my heart by that
servant of his Mr. Knight at that lecture at the Chapel at Fulham, the very
next morning (being the fourth day of the week,) sending his servant as it were
on purpose to speak to me in particular, and to open, unfold, and expound all
those gracious visits of Christ to my poor soul, when it sat even in the
valley and shadow of death, shut up as it were in darkness and in an estate of
nature, showing me how the Lord, even then, came in with light and life to me,
as also when I was under dark afflictions, and sad apprehensions of the wrath
of God, from whence I conceived them to proceed, in which estate also was the
Lord pleased sweetly to visit my soul, as also when I lay under darkness of
unbeleese being full of doubts, and fears, and jealousies of God, etc. at this
season and from this Scripture Luke 1. 78, 79, was the Lord pleased to unfold
my soul that which I never had such a sight of, how he had indeed visited my
soul in all these estates, as also what the issues of these his visitations
were, how he came in with light and life in all these conditions, which the
Lord now being pleased to open my eyes to see, my soul was even swallowed up in
the apprehension of it, not knowing how to bless and praise his name
sufficiently for these his appearances.

Thus did the Lord follow on with one mercy and discovery upon the neck of
another, which all depended upon, and as it were opened one another, for this
last day did the Lord discover in particular to my soul what those hints and
gracious visitations on my soul, wherein all these conditions which the day
before he taught me I was to take such special notice of; in the remaining part
part also of the week was the Lord pleased to go on to settle and farther open
these truths, and give me to see his mighty hand and outstretched arm all along
in it.

The next Lords day, being the ninth of this eleventh month 1652. the Lord was
pleased also to come in through that ministry he has placed us under at
Fulham, with a seasonable word to back all this which was spoken by our Pastor
Mr. Knight, from Heb. 2. 2. that the words of God they are steadfast words,
abiding words, words that shall certainly abide and be accomplished in their
season.

Thus in these eight days, now last past, has the Lord, through and by his
word and spirit, been pleased to give into my soul a discovery of his gracious
visitations of me for (...) many years past.

And truly I think, I should much rob the Lord of his Glory, if I should not
acknowledge him a God hearing prayer, who was pleased, even at this time, in my
apprehension so eminently to appear, that I was constrained in spirit to
acknowledge it and did, and do desire that he may have the glory of it.

The Lord having of late thus begun to manifest his loving kindness to my soul,
there was at this time, from Romans 13. 11. this truth set home mightily upon my
heart, that this time of Gods appearance in way of love and mercy, etc. was the
only blessed time in the world to that soul to whom he thus appears, and a time
which should of all times in the world be taken special notice of, and
carefully improved, from whence I had further many seasonable instructions, as

That I should walk in the sight of Gods countenance while I enjoy it, yea

And work in it whiles I had it, before or lest darkness come, Joh. 12. 35, 36.
and Joh. 9. 4. yea to do good in this time and opportunity, whiles God thus
shines upon the heart, Gal. 6. 10. yea and to improve it to this end, to lay up
in store a good foundation for time to come, even as men do in their tradings
in the matters of this world, 1 Timothy 6. 17, 18, 19. yea, to redeem this time,
Ephesians. 5. 16. to think nothing too much to buy it out of the hands of
hucksters, out of the hands of all other businesses what ever in this world.

And here I must needs say, that though our Pastor spoke much to this purpose,
and that sweetly, a while since from 2 Cor. 6. 2. Behold now is the acceptable
time, behold now is the day of Salvation; yet did it not take upon my heart in
that way, as these few hints did, for the Lord had not then appeared to my soul
in those manifestations of love, as he did afterward, and how ever these
Scriptures do chiefly refer as I conceive to the time of the Gospel, and Gods
love to the souls of men, in bringing of them home to himself, yet that truth
which was at this time chiefly set upon my heart was from the consideration of
this present hint of time, wherein the Lord through his rich grace in my Lord
Jesus Christ had been pleased to cause his face to shine upon my soul.

The very next day, being the 13 of this month, in the morning when I was
awaked as I lay in my bed I had that Scripture in Luke 13. 11. brought fresh to
my mind, (of that woman whom Satan had bowed these eighteen years, verse. 16.
whom Christ loosed) with a persuasion, before ever I began to count it that the
time of my Thraldom under Satan and sin would run parallel with this, as
also my condition, for says the text, she had a spirit of infirmity and was
bowed together so as she could in no wise lift up her self, and truly thus I
found it had been with me for many years, I had been bound by Satan under
unbeleefe, and the corruptions of my own heart, and so bowed together, as I
could in no wise lift up my self, so as to give glory to God by believing, and
as for the time when I came to count it, from the first time that the Lord was
pleased to touch my heart with a sight and sense of my wretched condition, and
thereupon to occasion much trouble of spirit, which was as I conceive, about
the year 1635. which reckoned until the end of the year 1652, which was the
first time that ever the Lord did, upon real solid grounds, speak any abiding
word of comfort to me, and so in any measure loosing me from those bands, and I
did find it to be just 18 years.

This same morning also a little while after there fell an other Scripture upon
my heart, which I found recorded in Psalm. 129. 1, 2. Many a time have they
afflicted me from my youth may I srael now say, many a time have they afficted
me from my youth, yet have they not prevailed against me; and has it not been
thus with my soul? many a time has it been afflicted with temptations, and
corruptions, but through mercy they have not yet totally prevailed over me.

There was also two other Scriptures immediately after this, set upon my heart
this morning, as first, that in Psalm. 34. 6. This poor man cried and the Lord
heard him and saved him out of all his troubles: even so this poor soul of mine
has cried unto the Lord in my fears, and he has (blessed be his name) heard
me and graciously delivered me out of all the fears and troubles that ever yet
lay upon me.

And to back this for the future, there was immediately that Scripture brought
to my mind in Joh. 5. 19. He shall deliver thee in six troubles, yea in seven
there shall no evil touch thee: the meditation whereof was exceeding sweet to
my soul, but whilst my soul lay under these enjoyments from the Lord, (which
for a time even swallowed up my heart in the admiration of him) yet
notwithstanding suddenly after, finding my heart exceedingly straightned to
bless and praise the name of this my God, in such a manner and measure as my
soul desired, for all these wonderful appearances to me, I had this persuasion
strongly darted into me, that the Lord had some sharp affliction suddenly to
lay upon me, which I was fully possessed with expectation of, which caused me
to pour out my soul before the Lord, beseeching him to fit me for it, and
sanctify it unto me, what ever it should be, not knowing in what way or manner
for to expect it, apprehending it to be some sorer stroke than a little bodily
affliction, and because I apprehended that the sadest outward affliction that
could come to me was the parting with my dear Mother, I did therefore
straightway apprehend this would be the trial; at the thoughts of which I was
at the present somewhat startled, but within a few days on the 23 of this
eleventh month was the Lord pleased to visit my poor body with much bodily
distemper, which seized so upon my vital spirits, and so over-poured them,
which together with other distempers lay somewhat heavy upon the flesh, in and
under which (if I know my own heart) the greatest part of my trouble was that I
could not find out what the mind of the Lord was in it, in which inquiry there
was some things the which were then presented to me as the ground of it; as for
instance;

The first thing that was darted into me was, that the Lord did it to put a
stop to me in this very act of recording the loves of the Lord to my soul, who
has carried me as upon Eagles wings, and as it were set me aloft, Exodus 19. 4.
so as no affliction or dispensation has been able to do me hurt, but have
born, yea forborne me and carried me all the days of old, as he did his people
Israel, notwithstanding all my rebellions, Esa. 63. 9, 10, 12, 15, 16. and this
suggestion for ought I know might come even from Satan himself, though I
confess it was presented upon a very fair account, insinuating into me that
it was out of the pride of my spirit, which put me upon this action, which
caused my soul to make its address to the Lord, beseeching him to search me and
try my heart and my reins, and withal begging of him, that if there were any
such corruption in the bottom which was not yet discovered to me, that he
would be pleased to reveal it, and so put a stop to me in any actings
whatsoever upon any such account.

And though upon the strictest search and inquiry that I was able to make into
my own heart, I could find little ground why I should altogether conclude with
Satan in this, yet the very fear of it did for the space of half a year at
least, (if I mistake not) cause this work to cease, until it was again set
with some weight upon my spirit, as that which might make for the glory of my
Lord, and perhaps (though weakly) stammer out his praise, when I shall be
gathered into into my dust, who was so unable to speak it out in my life; and
this I both did, and do the rather believe, to proceed from Satan, the great
enemy of Souls, because I find the Saints through the Scripture so ready to
declare what great things the Lord had done for their souls, Psalm. 34. 2. and
66. 16. 1 Timothy 1. 13, 14, 15, 16. Act. 22. there was also suddenly after this
presented to me, as one thing that the Lord might aim at in this touch of his,
even to mind, me that I had not that degree of compassion or fellow feeling, as
I ought, of that affliction which in some respect in the same kind (though in a
greater degree) lay upon our Sister Arnat by reason of a great fever, and
doubtless there might be something in this, though I should also wrong my self,
should I not acknowledge much and continued working in my heart for and toward
her, which often occasioned me to spread her condition before the Lord according
to my poor measure.

But upon the 25 of this 11 month, in the night, I had little or no rest, by
reason of the great distemper which lay upon me, and really I do not well know
wether the distemper of my body or my mind were the greater, but both meeting,
it lay somewhat heavy upon the flesh, which thought it self ready to give up
under it, but (my thoughts being continually working) I found in my spirit a
great natural reluctance against death, which seemed at times, as it were, to
approach, often thinking that it was not possible in natural reason that I
could continue until morning, yet said I nothing, for fear of affrighting my
Mother, yet had I also between times a great desire, together with a kind of
persuasion, that for all this I should be enabled to hear Mr. Knight next
morning, whose turn it was to preach at the Chapel at Fulham; thus (I say)
finding in my spirit, some kind of reluctance at death, of which considering a
little, (it being that corruption which I thought had now been in some good
measure crucified, but) finding it still to work up was no small trouble to me,
which together with many other fears that lay upon my spirit, as that I should
not be enabled to sanctify the name of God or honor him under this
affliction, which was indeed the ground of my trouble at the approach of death,
and (if I know my heart in any measure) that only, which I resolved in my self
to declare to some friend I should meet at Fulham next day, if the Lord should
please to enable me to go, and so beg their remembrance at the throne of grace;
but being enabled to consider better of it, I was given to see that it was
nothing but a mere temptation to distrust the power and love of God, to think
as if he should now bring me into that condition that he would not carry me
thorough; whereupon I was enabled to gather up my spirits a little and in some
better measure to submit to the hand and will of my Father, which I was now
assured should certainly end in his glory and my good: and to this end, I was
now also enabled again to call over that blessed promise in Romans 8. 28. That
all things shall work, yea work together for good to them that love God, etc.
which promise I had often found by experience had been made good to my soul,
and was therefore much troubled that any distrustful thoughts should arise in
me concerning it, diverse other promises also before mentioned were now brought
to my mind, and wrought afresh upon my heart, which did exceedingly refresh my
spirit, so that the first refreshment which I found was in my spirit, and after
that was a little quieted, I had a little short slumber, and did the Lord so
far mittigate my bodily distemper, as that it did not hinder me from that
blessed opportunity next day though accompanied with much bodily weakness.

But upon the 2 day of the 12 month 1652. I found my distemper of body much
abated, in so much as I thought it was now quite gone, but that very night was
the Lord pleased to return, yea to heighten it, constraining me to keep house
certain days, whereby I perceived that this work upon my soul was not yet
accomplished, nor I fully acquainted with his mind and will in it, which was
some trouble to me, whereupon I again besought the Lord to acquaint me with his
mind and will in it, and to sanctify it unto me, giving me an heart to submit
to whatsoever he had yet further to lay upon me, in which I also sought the
prayers of his people upon the 6 of this month.

But upon the seventh day of this month, Providence offering some occasion
whereby I was put upon the thoughts of parting with my Aunt Dogget, who was
upon remove into the Country, with many thoughts there abouts, which were now
brought to my mind, which occasioned such a heavyness to possess my spirit,
upon other accounts also which came in to add to the other; in so much that I
was even as it were overwhelmed with it, until I was enabled to vent it before
the Lord; at which time he was pleased to discover to me, that this was
merely to return as it were from the Lord to the creature, for comfort and
support, as if he were not able abundantly to make up in himself the want of
such a comfort, and relation, if he savv meet to deprive me of it; the thoughts
of which did much grieve me? then did the Lord also show me how I had
continually provoked him in this kind, by leaning upon such poor reeds, and
diging to my self such poor pits, such broken Cisterns, as could indeed hold no
water, and in the mean time too much neglect him the fountain of living
waters, Jer. 2. 13.

Yea while I was thus pouring out my soul before him, and lamenting my
miserable and wretched folly, he was pleased also to cast my thoughts upon that
part of Scripture, I find recorded in 1 King. 11. 9. How the Lord was angry
with Solomon because his heart was turned from the Lord God of Israel, which
had appeared to him twice; even so I saw, the Lord had just cause to be angry
with me, that I should thus again return to the creature, and as it were, make
a God of it, yea after such eminent appearances of his to my soul.

The same day did the Lord bring to my mind that severe threatening against
Moab, who had been at ease from his youth, and was settled on his lees, who had
not been emptied from vessel to vessel, neither had gone into captivity, and
therefore his taste remained in him, and his sent was not changed, Jer. 48. 11,
now finding this given by the Spirit of God, as the reason why his sent
remained, even because he had not been emptied, etc. I could not but stand and
wonder, what reason could be given of the corruptions in my heart, whom the
Lord had not left at ease, but had often emptied from vessel to vessel, as it
were trying always and means with me, and yet that I should still savor so
much of the earth, and of the old man, and should still so incline to depend
upon an arm of flesh, 2 Chronicles. 32. 8. Jer. 17. 5. and not the rock of Ages.

The next morning, as I lay in my bed, I had a secret persuasion darted into
me, that the Lord was even now answering a great desire of my soul, that I have
often yea a long time desired, that the Lord would be pleased to search and try
my reins and my heart, and to reveal it to my soul, that I might see what was
in the bottom of my heart, even as he saw it, and that to that end he would
please to turn the very inside of my heart outward, and anatomize it before my
eyes, and surely the Lord has been a long time, yea for many years, emptying
me from vessel to vessel, and turning me, as it were, upside down, laying me
under variety of conditions, and dispensations, sometimes under mercies,
sometimes afflictions, sometimes one affliction, sometimes an other, sometimes
under scoffs, scorns, injuries, wrongs from near relations, sometimes
sickness, weaknesses, pains, bodily trialls, spiritual exercises, under the
power of corruptions and temptations of all sorts, and in all conditions, and I
hope his end is in and by all to purge away my dregs, yea, I hope he is now in
this present affliction making a discovery of my own heart too, showing me how
apt it is to depart from the living God, and to seek fullness of contentment
and satisfaction in poor empty things, which the Lord grant I may so see as
never more to pursue after them.

Then did the Lord (the sixteenth of this 12. month 1652. being the fourth day
of the week, and our Pastors turn to preach) seasonably back this former
conviction which lay upon my heart, the Lord being pleased that day both
through him as also by his own spirit, to speak many seasonable words to my
soul, showing me that, indeed, the true reason why I had wandered so long in a
vast howling wilderness without the clear sight of his blessed face, (which as
he now showed me) was because I had not indeed given up my self to the guidance
and leading of Jesus Christ, but would be gadding about to find my own way and
paths of my own, Jer. 2. 33, 36. and therefore it was just with God to deal
with me as he did with Israel of old, and bring me back again, causing me with
sorrow to unravel all that I had done, and acknowledge it to be my folly and
madness to think to find the path of life and glory by any actings of my own
without a clear going out of my self, and by faith laying hold upon the
righteousness of the Lord Jesus Christ only.

Yea, as Israel of old, upon every new straight, difficulty, or danger, still
fell to murmuring against the Lord, and against his servants, even so was it
with my wretched heart, how ready was it upon every occasion or dispensation of
God to me, to repine, murmur, and cry out, why is it thus with me, surely if he
had any love to me it would not? etc.

Yea as they did many of them, in their hearts, return back again into Egypt,
after God had most eminently appeared to them, and gone before them and with
them, even thus I saw it was with my wretched heart: oh! how ready is it still
to return back to the creature for comfort? etc. yea, with Demas to return
again to this present world too much (and that after such appearances of God to
me) did not the Lord ever and anon put me in mind, and stir me, and show me
what was in my heart.

Yea, as Israel in their murmuring discontent cried out, would God we had dyed
in Egypt, even so did my wretched heart; seeing the difficulty and danger
which I apprehended did attend the way to heaven and therefore fearing I should
fall short and be overcome of Satan one time or other, and so brought to hell
for my sins, in a murmuring repining way at the various administrations of God
to me, often wished would God I had dyed in the womb.

And as they for this murmuring were caused to wander in the wilderness until
their carcases were wasted away, and never suffered to possess that good land,
or see it, many of them; even so how justly might the Lord have dealt thus with
me, and have caused me to wander in this vast desolate wilderness, in my self,
until not only my body, which in a great measure did, but until my very soul
should pine away in me; but that ever the Lord should give such an unworthy
wretch any sights of that good land, to see those bunches of grapes, etc. that
are there in abundance, and to have any small taste of them, oh! the riches of
that grace how unsearchable and unfadomeable is this loving kindness and mercy?
These and many other sweet discoveties of himself, and of my own heart, was the
Lord pleased to give forth into my soul this day, both by his word and spirit,
showing me my madness and folly in not staying in all my way, to see Christ go
before me, and guide and lead me, but running before him upon ways of my own,
which the Lord had justly and righteously, (yea I hope in the greatest mercy)
blasted to me, which the Lord grant may never more be seen in or found done by
me.

Then upon the third day of the first month 1653. being a day set apart by the
Parliament for a public fast thoroughout the Commonwealth, Mr. Knight and Mr.
Smalwood with one more kept the day at Fulham.

Mr. Smalwood began the day, and showed us that it was prophesied concerning
Christ, that he should come as a warrier amongst the Gentiles, and that the
chief seat of this his spiritual war (to let go that of his providential
Kingdom) is in the hearts of his people, there being the seat of the greatest
opposition against him.

Showing us that the principal thing that man sets up in his heart against
Christ is his own righteousness, and therefore Christ will come to wage war in
that heart where this is seated and set up against him.

Which, through grace, gave me a sight clearly of the true reason of all those
combustions, hurries, frights, and tumults in my heart for many years together,
that it was because Christ was coming there, as a warrier to pull down those
fortifications that I was making to keep him out, to wit, my striving and
endeavoring, might and main, to set up my own righteousness too much; and
blessed for ever be that grace that thus many ways both prevented it, and also
went on discovering the evil of it to me, many sweet refreshments also were
hinted out to my soul this day, by the Lord, through this his servant, which
came in with such mighty power upon my heart, as that I cannot but record them.

Having now thus shown us where it is that this seat of this war of Christ
is, he then came afterward to show what kind of war he does thus wage in the
hearts of his people, which he opened to be the same that he waged in the world
in his providential kingdom, that is, both an offenlive, and a defensive war.

First, an offensive war against sin, guilt, and Satan, ye against all
spiritual wickednesses in the heart, Col. 2. 15. yea in Romans 8. 3. he is said
to condemn sin in the flesh] that is, he has put it out of his office, he
has taken away the weapons of sin, sin was our ruler before Christ came,
but when he comes he puts it out of office, takes away not only the power but
the guilt, yea, makes a great deal of difference between a neighbor and a
master; as long as you are here below you will find sin a neighbor, it will be
visiting of you, and coming into your hearts often, yea and it is well if you
converse not too much with it; but if Christ rule over you sin shall not be
your master any more.

Yea, he brings down not only the rebellion of the heart, but also every
immagination and high thoughts into the obedience of Christ, 2 Cor. 10. 4, 5.

Christ does not war like men, they first take the outworks, and so go
nearer and nearer, but Christ begins first at the heart, and brings down the
pride of that and rebellion of that, and then the outworks these high thoughts
that arise he brings them down also.

Christ also, secondly, wageth a defensive war, defending that soul against
sin, and and Satan, Romans 16. 20. It is true, though Satan be conquered in
his dominions, and trodden down, and sin has its deadly wound, yet are they
still conspiring against us, and our defense is only by Jesus Christ, Zech. 3.
1. where we may see how God keeps his people from being overcome, Satan he
takes occasion and advantage from our unholiness and unrighteousness when you
come to appear before the Lord, what eve appears of sin in you he will accuse
you for before the Father, and were it not for Jesus Christ his accusation
would stand, for it is true; but Christ comes and says, the Lord rebuke thee,
O Satan, is not this a brand plucked out of the fire?] as if he should say,
these are a people redeemed by my blood, and in a day of hardship, therefore
take away these filthy garments from them] Christ will not only defend his
people, but take away that by which Satan takes occasion and advantage to
accuse them. Then he came to show us the nature of this warrier, the Lord
Jesus, which was opened in six things which afforded abundant matter of
consolation to my soul; if where he comes to rule he rules as a man of
strength, there is nothing too hard for him. Micah 7. 18, 19. He will subdue
our iniquities, thou will cast all their sins into the depth of the sea]
great sins, as covetousness, pride, and that cursed sin of unbelief, are
all subdued by Jesus Christ. Therefore, if sin do at any time bear sway in
thy soul, it is because Christ for a time suspends, and lets his power lie
still, and leaves you a while to see your own weakness, but when he comes
again and ingageth your soul to him then is the putting out of his power as a
strong man.

Secondly, he carries himself as a man of great authority; he has not only
power and strength, but a right to govern the hearts of his people. oh how
sweet is this to poor believers! Satan has power to destroy you, but he has
no authority; but Christ has both, and therefore it is you are kept by him: he
can say to the proud waves, to the pride and rebellion of your hearts, peace,
be still, such is his authority.

3. He rules also in wisdom; poor believers are ready to say the Lord has
forgotten them but there is no searching his under standing, Isa. 40. 27, 28.
he can find a way to deliver you from your pride, and urbelief; that you think
not of as he did Lot out of Sodom, Psalm. 147. 5, he is that great Counselior
that consulteth the safety of his people.

4. He rules in Justice, he ever wageth war upon a righteous account, and to
righteous ends; when he comes to war in your souls, it is because there are
enemies there: he never makes a quarrel, but fights because of a quarrel, he is
not like a man to come only to be master, no, Jesus Christ evermore finds
enemies or he would not war; he finds a poor creature unrighteous and unholy,
and he wageth war to leave them holy and righteous.

Fifthly, he carries himself as a man of constant resolution, who if he has
once begun to war and to subdue iniquity in any of your hearts, he will not
leave till he makes an end thereof: the guilt of sin is that which troubles
poor souls, now guilt is the obligation of the soul unto justice, it signifies
in the Greek to tie and bind; so when a man sins he ties and binds himself
over to justice, then God prepares himself for vengeance: now Jesus Christ he
comes and unties this, and sets his soul at liber^y, that sin shall not
again prevail; he will defend that soul to the end, and make it more then
conqueror over all its enemies.

Sixthly, where Christ comes as a warrier to conquer, there he also comes as
King to reign, he will rule over them and in them, to give laws to that soul,
and to give an heart to obey them: Christ has been (happily) a long time pulling
down in your souls, well he will come and reign also there and destroy all the
works of the Devil in you, and come and rule you, and give you laws, and a
heart to obey them, and that as your King.

Oh then see here the love of God in giving Christ thus to rule over us!
consider this love of his from Tit. 3. 3, 4. We our selves also were sometimes,
etc. Until the love of God appeared to a poor Gentile: see what he was, a poor
foolish man, that cannot understand what command is given; yet these Christ
comes to govern nay he finds them not only silly, but disobedient, sturdy,
stout, mutinous ones, such as will not obey, but Christ appears to make foolish
disobedient ones obedient, but that is not all, they are held under deceit, and
yet Christ of these makes faithful ones, yea, that is not all neither, but
they serve diverse lusts, not one lust but many, but when Christ comes to rule,
this soul shall have all subdued to him, oh consider then how free grace
appears in this! to whom then will you give up your selves if not to Christ?
This may also discover the perverseness of those that will not be ruled by
Jesus Christ.

And then has Jesus Christ taken possession of any of your hearts? ruled for
you in your souls? brought down the pride of your heart? laid low the tower of
your righteousness? governed you in any measure? then give him the glory of it,
and beg of him further to do it: you find much amiss, he only can mend all
who was given for a ruler and commander, Isai. 55. 4. Oh! behold him as s^h an
one, behold him above all, not only to help at a dead lift, when your own
righteousness cannot do it, but behold him above all as the only governor of
your souls, look on him with an eye of dependence, waiting for the
accomplishment of his work in your souls, and mourn to think that though he was
given to govern you, that you should be governing of your selves without him,
and so grieve him; and if Christ be appointed by the Father to govern the
Gentiles, then ask your own hearts who governs you? whose laws do you obey?
what rule do you walk by? what ends do you aim at?

And truly upon examination, finding that Christ of his own rich grace had been
thus at work in my heart, and this whole dicourse being as it were but a
declaration of his dealing with my soul, which I could not pass by without
setting down, and putting it upon record, it seeming to me, even as if the Lord
had spoken from heaven to my soul in particular; therefore I think I should
much dishonor him, if I should not, to his praise, in the desires of my soul
acknowledge, that every one of these marks of Christ have been in some measure
(some more some less) through grace, wrought by him in my heart, though I must
still acknowledge that there is too much opposition against him in my soul,
which I desire to wait and do expect according as has been expressed, the
utter subduing thereof, which time (I hope) hastes when Christ will come and
take up full possession of my soul, and rule in it and over it for ever.

The same day, in the close of it, Mr. Knight spent a little time upon Esaias 65.
24. from which there was also many gracious discoveries hinted out to my soul,
concerning Gods readiness to hear before his people call, where he puts us upon
warchfulness, what work Christ was about in the nation, which the Lord was
pleased to make as a spur to my dull spirit to look out what that work was that
God was now doing, or about to do in my heart, even I hope fitting of me for a
more full enjoyment of himself; then did the Lord also by his servant declare
out to us in these latter days, these Gospel times, wherein God hastens his
work: which thoroughly I found to be made good to my poor soul, the Lord having
been pleased exceedingly to hasten his work upon my heart, and the
manifestation of his blessed face to my soul, even faster then my scant heart
could imagine. Which appearances of this in his manner caused my soul to enter
into these serious thoughts and considerations, whether I might not hence
argue, that, sure, the Lord was nigh the accomplishment of it by putting an end
to to the sinful days of my Pilgrimage here below; yea, here did the Lord show
me that whatever it be that lies in the way when he comes to do this great work
he will remove, or down with it: and truly, this I saw through grace, to be his
manner of dealing with my soul, be it my own righteousness, be it mere
relations on whom I too much leaned, and conceived my happiness to lie much in,
be it what it will, Christ will remove it when he comes to do his great work;
therefore, as I was then taught, I ought to rely still upon Christ's readiness,
which the Lord grant I may. There was also hinted to us that nothing was
satisfactory to the Saints call, but Gods answer, where the Lord was pleased to
convince my soul of the evil that I had so long been guilty of, that I still
poured out my prayers before the Lord, but never regarded any answer,
concluding that God would never answer them, and truly now the Lord has been
pleased to show me that it is a great sin in me to content my self in pouring
out my desires, and never looking after the returns of them, until the Lord
was pleased suddenly, and in an unexpected manner and measure, as he has
promised to come in with an answer to my soul, even before I thought of it, or
expected it, though I had often begged it of the Lord.

Another thing was then hinted to my soul, which the Lord has been pleased to
give me much experience of, to wit, what a blessed thing it is, and comfortable
to the soul to have mercies come in as an answer to prayer, which is that which
makes them sweet indeed to that soul that enjoys them; there was also at
this blessed season that objection answered, that the Saints often pray and yet
God does not answer; showing, First, that many times they do not well
understand Gods answers, but his answers are very full though they understand
them not: Secondly, yea sometimes he answers by conversing with the soul at
that time, admiting them into his presence with that freedom; Thirdly, by
giving of them strength of grace for the attendance and waiting upon him;
Fourthly, sometimes by awakening of the soul by a due prizing of the mercies
begged; Fifthly, sometimes by giving in of mercies that are not in the same
kind the soul would have them: every of which ways I now see the Lord has
answered those prayers which formerly I thought had been covered with a cloud;
from all which did the Lord stir up my soul to a quick, lively, diligent search
into the answers of prayers that had been put up to the Lord by my poor soul
for many years past to this day, in the search of which I found many rich
answers that I had long robbed the Lord of the glory of.

The ninth of March did the Lord please to send that servant of his Mr.
Marshall to the Chapel at Fulham, who did from the Lord declare a most
gracious and comfortable word to my soul, which the Lord pleased to bless to
me, and may be ground for my faith while I have a day to live in this sinful
world, that which the Lord was pleased to hint from him 1 Ephesians. 22, 23. from
which he took occasion to show us that Christ do stand in that relation to all
his Saints, as the natural head does to the natural body; and that therefore
as in the natural body all those perfections that are in the head, are in it,
for the good and use of the whole body; and that if every limb and joint, if it
could speak, it might say, I am at ease, I can see, taste, smell, and the like,
therefore all these perfections in Christ the head are in him for the good and
use of every one of his members.

What ever can be spoken concerning Christ as undertaking the work of man's
salvation, they are these perfections of Christ the head; as for example, as
the fullness of Christ's person, his divine and humane perfections, all the
excellencies of his offices, all his merits, and all his satisfactions, gifts,
graces, every thing that can be truly spoken of Christ, since he was designed
of God for the salvation of man, all these perfections are purposely in him for
the good of his Church, he proved it from Heb. 7. 22. Where he is called the
surety of a better Testament; Christ's love is set out by a suretyship; now a
surety, as a surety, is wholly for the good of them whom he is thus a surety
for; if a man, as a surety, shall become bound to an other, when he seals the
bond he does it as a surety; when he is arrested for the debt, it is as he is a
surety; when he pays the debt, when he cancels the bond, he does it as a
surety, all he does; from the beginning to the end, is only his voluntary act
undertaking to be a pawn and pledge; Thus did Jesus Christ.

God the Father he enters into a covenant with lost man undertaking to be the
God of sinful man, and man covenants to be his people; he covenanteth to give
them this benefit, and they to yield him this obedience: now Jesus Christ he
comes and undertaketh to be a surety for both, he undertaketh to God, on man's
part, all that man owes shall be paid, every jot of duty to be performed shall
be performed; and on Gods part, he undertaketh all the good that God has
promised shall be made good to them upon their believing; thus he is a surety.

The like expressions you have Joh. 7. 21. when Christ prayed to the Father for
them, whom he undertook, first, to bring them home, then, to keep them in this
world, then, that they might partake of his glory with the Father; for their
sakes I sanctify my self: now to be sanctified signifies ordinarily to be
made clean from corruption, and endued with grace and holiness, but
sanctification in this place properly is nothing else but separation to God,
therefore, said Christ, I did separate my self, give up my self to God; and all
the work that Christ undertook he expresses in that word, he separated himself
for their sakes: so that if you do ask why was the Son of God made man? why
he lived? why he died? why he preached? why he prayed? all was for their sakes,
that is, for their sakes whom he there prayed for: and then in 1 Cor. 1. last.
Jesus Christ is said to be made unto us wisdom, righteousness, sanctification
and redemption, Christ was made all this, and he was made it of God, and made
it for us, wisdom to us, righteousness to us, all to us; nay there is no one
thing spoken of Christ through the Scriptures, but there are plain Scriptures
that do show, that it was for us: when he was made flesh, the Scripture says,
it is to us a child is born, and a son given; when he lived, he lived for us,
he is said to die for our sins, and rise again for justification; he ascended
for us, and sits at Gods right hand for us, for our sakes he returns to
judgment. Oh how abundantly did the Lord refresh my poor spirit from these
Scriptures! thinking with my self, oh wretched heart, why should thou ever
harbor one hard thought of God or Christ more? or give way to one doubt more?

Then, in the application he came to put this lively question to our hearts.

Whether do any of you rely on Christ for your Savior, and see the need you
have of him? has the Lord convinced you of your own lost undone condition
through sin, persuading you to go to Jesus Christ, and cast your souls on him
to undertake for you? does God witness with your souls, that really and
sincerely, above all things in the world you desire to be found in Christ? if
this be thy condition (to which my soul did, and does answer before the Lord,
Lord thou searcher of hearts know, by thy rich grace, thou have many years
ago brought my soul to this very frame) then what is it thou can want, if
Christ be thy Savior? why all that is in him is for thee, all that wisdom and
grace that is in him is for thee, and will not this answer all thy objections;
if thou could but understand it rightly, what is it thou can say thou
want but it is in Christ? I, says the soul, I know he is all-sufficient;
then this is in him for thee.

Then he came to answer a great objection? which (I must confess) has puzzled
my soul many a year, and laid me under very sad fears, which the Lord cleared
up in some measure to my soul heretofore, but much confirmed me at this present.

Object. I but (says a soul) if I could indeed partake of this you speak of,
oh! this would settle my poor heart; but this rather makes me fear that I have
no part in Christ, if all that he has be for his members; if I were one of his
members how come I to be so empty? could he then deny me that which I humbly
beg of him every day? the Lord is my witness (says the soul) that I have for
many years made my daily suit, that Jesus Christ would please to give me
pardon, and grace, and wisdom, and ability to serve him; if he be a friend,
yea, and trusty, and thus faithful, would he deny it me if I had a right to
it? therefore I rather fear, I am none of his.

1. Answ. Say not such a word (says he) for it may be, thou have a great deal
more then thou do take notice of; If Jesus Christ has tendered satisfaction
to the fathers justice, and the Father has accepted of it, and if he has
merited all grace for thee, and has already purchased it for thee, and will
give it out when thou have most need, thou art then more happy by having it in
his hand, then if it were in thy own keeping: even as if one were my surety,
happily I want much wherewith to pay all my debts, and to provide that for me
which I want; now if he goes and cancells all my bonds, and purchases in his
hands whatsoever I need, is not this for me, though not yet delivered into my
own hand? thou must by that eye of faith see what Christ has done to the
Father, and what in his own hand he has received from the Father: and if it be
in his hand for thee, is it not as good as in thine own?

2. Thou say thou have so little, It may be thou might have a great deal
more then thou have, if thou were indeed contented that Christ should be the
wellhead, and thou only the cistern; but we would feign have our portion of
grace to be in our own hands, and then we would look upon our selves to be as
somebody; whereas, if we could be but contented to let Christ have the honor
of all, and we think it enough to be but partakers of it by faith, we should
have much more committed to our hands then we have already. Oh how fully did
these two answers come in upon my heart!

3. There are no better arguments of a heart filled with grace, then to be
mourning for the want of grace; for look in the book of God, and there they
that make the greatest moan over their own hearts, and their want of grace,
they are the most eminent of all other, as we see in Paul and David; this I
speak (says he) not to encourage any in a careless lazy way, but to comfort
drooping spirits, and the rather, because there is no way under heaven so like
to make you really holy as to be emboldened thus to go to Jesus Christ, and the
soul seeing what full and free grace comes from Jesus Christ, the love of
Christ would constrain the soul to walk holily and thankfully toward him; thus
knowing there is all fullness in Christ as in the head for the use of all the
members, then, accordingly, as soon as ever you find any defect in your selves
in any kind to interrupt your comfort and peace, let the next question be, But
has he not sufficiency for this? then betake to Jesus Christ: as suppose a
poor woman were going with her pale of water which she had drawn out of a well
or living fountain, and on a sudden had a slip, and spilt it all out of her
paile, and there sits crying to think what she had lost, now whether were it
better, or a sign of more wisdom for her to stand gathering up of that which
she spilt, or to go and dip her paile into the Well again, and so fill it
presently? surely the last were her wisdom: so when we lose our peace and our
comfort, we ought to be humbled, but to think to recruit our selves by our
gathering up that which we have lost, this is not our wisdom; let us go to
Christ, our wellhead, and make it up presently.

From which the Lord did indeed convince me much of my folly, having been so
long at work to scrape and gather up somewhat of that I had lost, neglecting
Jesus Christ, where was fullness; then did the Lord, by this servant of his,
mightily provoke us to a diligent study of Jesus Christ, to bend our minds,
heads, and hearts and all, to come to know what ever there was that was
knowable in Jesus Christ, and that from the consideration of the excellency of
this knowledge above all other knowledge; yea further, what soever you learn of
Jesus Christ you learn but to understand your own wealth, and know your own
happiness; for instance, imagine two men coming by some delicate house full of
rich treasure, and an officer should stand by and say, Sir are you willing to
see all the riches of this house? happily you will say (for curiosity sake) we
care not if we do; but if he comes to one of them and says, Sir, all that is
here is yours, you are made whole executor, and it is all bequeathed to you,
oh! how would this man search the house? how he would study every deed, and
every word in it, and search every cabinet, and get an inventory of all that
was there; why, for they are all his: so, when we see the wealth, rarities of
others, we say, but what do they concern me? or if I should see the wealth of
Solomon, what am I the richer? but when I see the wealth of Christ I see my own
riches.

Oh my soul, the Lord grant that this may be thy study day and night! here
indeed is the difference you should make between Christ and others, when I hear
and read the excellencies of other Saints, it may be a discouragement, as when
I read of the patience of Job, I am discouraged, because I am so peevish; when
I read of the holiness of David, who prayed seven times a day, and many times
in the night rising to prayer, this discourageth me; but when I read of Christ's
patience or boliness, I look on him, not as abstract from me, but as my head,
as one that all he did was for me; oh, then who would not but know what is
knowable of him!

But then again, did Christ do all he did for us? then surely every thing, yea,
all that a Christian has should be for Christ, and then should we show our
selves Christians indeed, as Paul, 2 Cor. 5. 14, 15. for (says he) the love of
Christ constrained us, for we thus judge, that if Christ died for us, then were
we dead; then we that live should live to him that died for us; the love of
Christ overcame him, and carried him captive, as a strong stream would carry a
little cockboat: what was I dead, and did Christ give me life? then if by the
grace of God I live, I will give that life to Christ: never do you live like a
Christian till you come to this, to live wholly to Christ in all that you have
and do enjoy, your estate, Trade, and in all your outward comforts; and its
most certain that to a gracious heart there is no Rhetoric under heaven will
more prevail to the performance of a duty, or to the avoiding of what is evil,
then to persuade to the one, or to forbear the other, by the love of Christ;
this draws out the heart to be liberal for Christ, and serviceable to Christ;
oh how full did these convictions come upon my heart! the Lord having but just
before been pleased to give in a portion of the outward riches to me, which
wrought so upon my heart, and made me greatly to desire and beg of God, that
whatever I had or enjoyed might be wholly improved for Jesus Christ and for the
advancement of his glory.

The 18 of March, Mr. Knight being under some bodily distemper, not being fit
to preach, my heart was drawn out to go to London to hear, though with some
bodily prejudice, not being very well, and the weather falling out wet, yet did
the Lord provide a comfortable and refreshing word for my poor soul, both from
Mr. Simpson, whom I heard in the morning, as also from Mr. Rogers, whom I heard
in the afternoon, Mr. Simpson spoke from that Scripture, Ephesians. 1. 6, 7. verses.

The 23 of March, 1652. being the fourth day of the week, did the Lord go on
yet further to speak many comfortable rrefreshing words to my soul, from Mr.
Knights ministry, who then spoke to us from that Scripture in 1 John 4. 19. We
love him, because he first loved us; whence was observed, That as love beaming
out from God to his people takes them up into union with himself, so this union
occasions the reflection upon that divine love, whereby we love God again; so
that, being beloved we love the first lover which is God. There are two things
very pleasing to gracious hearts, the one is to take a view of God in his rich
love; and the other, to veiw our selves intrested in that love.

For the first, all sights of God are glorious, because his glory passes
through all his discoveries; but no sight more ravishing then that of his love,
and no love like his distinguishing love, with which he loves his people,
whereby he makes them both loving and lovely, for the beauty of a Saint is the
beam of his love, and the luster and glory of that love is, that it springs
from his love who loved us first.

And here he showed us, that in these words we had a loving and beloved
disciple of Christ, taking a due survey of the fountain of all saving operation
to be in God himself: and secondly, that from the light of that divine love he
looks into his own and other believers hearts, and finds a strange reflection
of the divine beam of love from God in his, and their loves to God again.

In the first was showed the glory of the person loving which is God: secondly,
the manner of his communicating of all saving good, its through love; and then
the object of this love (us;) and lastly, the priority of it, he loved us
first; where was further observed, that this is a communicative nature in the
goodness of God, it is not drawn forth, but puts forth it self in love, that
there is nothing in the creature to procure it, neither can any thing in the
creature hinder it; whiles we were yet enemies he reconciled us by the blood of
his cross.

This love in God is a nature not a passion.

And all he has, and is, and does to believers, issues through his love, his
wisdom, power, all is communicated through love, so that we were taught,

First, that the Saints are the blessed ones of God.

Secondly, they are beloved before they love.

Thirdly, that they that are beloved of him do love him.

Fourthly, that they love him because they are first beloved.

And by Application of these we are taught.

First to be like our heavenly Father in love, yea in loving where we are not
beloved; this was a singular thing required of the Saints, especially to love
men's souls, the stream of divine love it runs in the salvation of men's souls;
it loves to be like God.

Secondly, let no man glory in what he is, what have thou that is not an issue
of this love? this love makes the difference between thee and others, be not
high minded but fear.

Thirdly, consider your engagements to divine love, you owe all you have, and
are, and all you shall be to eternity to this love of God.

Fourthly, we were exhorted to look out for as much as love could yield us;
love in man sets the whole soul a work to search for some suitable thing that
may best please its object: so God takes up the best ways to make the glory of
his love shine most clearly toward us, and therefore unvailes it in the face
of Jesus Christ: as also fifthly, we were exhorted to walk answerable to this
love.

First, humbly, it is a free love that is the spring of all we have and are.

Secondly, look into all your ways, to see what fruit this great and glorious
seed of love brings forth in you.

Thirdly, be transformed into love, that you may be lovely as well as beloved.

Fourthly, as you look into Gods first love, so look into your own first love;
abate not of your love to him, for he abates not: what he ever was, that he
will be unto you.

Fifthly, if the Saints are beloved, let me take heed of abusing Gods beloved
ones, his darlings.

Sixthly, walk cheerfully, you are beloved from above, what if the servant
frown so the Master love?

Give God your first love.

Give God your self, in your lives, not only your duties but your selves; for
God gives you, in his love not only your pardon, and gifts and graces, but
himself.

Be not jealous of God, he loved first,

Be like God, be first in love to the Saints, look not for love to your self
but be lovely to others.

Love first, and that will draw love.

God lives where he loves, he loves us first, then God lives where he
loves, as the creature is said to do: if God loves us, then he is said to
live within us, and that continually; and therefore as sure as God lives there
is a real heaven in the heart of the Saints, for as God lives in heaven, so
he does in the heart of his Saints: therefore say not, who shall go into heaven
to see God? but if God loves thee, and his heart be set on thee, there is that
lovein thee that shall see Gods love to thee, which is a heaven to the heart.

Is Gods love to you? then look for as much as Gods love can afford; now what
will not love afford to a man's wife or children? it contenteth them not that
they have meat, drink, apparel, but that they have that which is suitable to
their relations and condition in this world: now all in God issues through his
love; therefore, oh Saints! raise your hearts to look for as much as this love
can afford, so as your hearts may stand and wonder at the height, depth, and
length of the love of God.

Oh how should your hearts rejoice! ye live not by what you have, but on what
is in the heart of your Father; oh! therefore go with open mouths, and enlarged
hearts to him, for if he can find any administration that may most fill and
satisfy your hearts, look for that, because he thought no blood could satisfy
you, but his Sons blood.

Because he thought no gift like that of his Son, oh therefore let not your
hearts be straightned! do not content your selves with little things, and say,
oh! if I can but scrabble to heaven I care not; but remember in what relation
you are set, even under the beams of divine love, therefore look for as much as
this love affords you.

Oh how abundantly did the Lord refresh my spirit from these precious truths
thus hinted out to me! and still he goes on confirming my soul in the
apprehension of his love; which does (in some measure) cause my soul to turn
back with love to him again, which the Lord increase.

The second of March 1653. having appointed a Church-meeting, every Wednesday
after the lecture at Fulham, and it being now to begin, and the brethren being
put upon it to exercise their gifts, the Lord was pleased much to draw out my
heart to beg his presence and pouring out of a large measure of his spirit upon
the brethren, fitting them for this work, taking special notice of one of
them, whose spirit did melt before the Lord into tears in the apprehension (as
I conceive) of the weight of the work, which (I confess) took much upon my
heart; and drew it out very much to seek the Lord on their behalf, as also that
it might be a blessed opportunity to all our souls.

The 28 of March, how many sweet refreshments did the Lord hand out to my soul?
(which I desire may abide upon my spirit) through Mr. Knights ministry at
Fulham, from 1 Cor. 11. 24. Take, eat, this is my body that is broken for you,
this do in remembrance of me; from the word [take] there are seven
considerations, full of abundant comforts, as they were set upon my heart, as

First, here observe Christ's heart, and see with what bowels of affection he
speaks, how freely himself offers the riches of mercy, [take] why what, or
whom should we take, but himself, possess himself? thus he stands calling and
crying, take me, love me, receive me, eat me, drink me; let me be yours, oh
high love! he does not bid the soul take wrath, vengeance, death, or hell, but
take me.

Secondly, his commands are more to pleasure you then himself, why should we
take Christ? why this is my body that was broken for you, my blood that was
shed for you, take me for your own sakes, for you need me, to refresh your
hearts, therefore take me not that I shall be the better by it, but that you
may have more pleasure and delight in me, that may do you all good: oh high
love!

Thirdly, observe, Christ sees our need better then our selves, there are
bowels of compassion in him; what, for a man that enjoys much to look out for
them that want much? yet so it is here, you have not the disciples crying, oh
Christ give us thy self, and blood, but here is a Christ who having it, and
knowing that we stand in need of it, offers it freely, [take] oh admirable love!

Fourthly, observe, he is not content till you be fully supplied, he sets no
bounds, but take and eat as much as your hearts will hold; take what? whole me,
all of me; my spirit, blood, mediation with the Father, all my righteousness;
take all, he stinteth no man, but opens wide the treasure of his grace.

Fifthly, observe hence, Christ is well acquainted with the fears of his Saints
hearts, therefore, says he, [take] imploing, as if the trembling heart would
say, O Lord, I dare not, these things are too great and good; I know thy fears
(says Christ) but I lay a law on thee that will make thee give over all, for
this law comes with power; take and eat, he bids you take, and that on pain of
disobedience to Christ, when Satan, and sin, and corruption say, eat not,
then remember what Christ your Lord says, [take and eat] and hearken not unto
the voice of of a stranger, if any say, eat not, Christ says, eat; though the
fears are great, and the tremblings many that are on a gracious heart, yet
still Christ bids them, [take and eat.]

Sixthly, Christ knew the Saints would tremble, on the point of unworthiness,
therefore he says, [take, eat] why what is it but my body that is broken for
you; will you throw away that which is for you? but you are unworthy, why this
is that which makes you worthy; because this is that out of which issues out
all righteousness to you: and though they may cry out, they were unfit, he
commands them to remember, how fit Christ is for them; for whom is bread fit
but for them that are weak, and need nourishment? for whom is that wine but him
that is of a sorrowful heart? for whom is that act of Christ, but for that
soul, that cries, Lord I am unworthy, thou should come under my roof?

Seventhly, he says [take] which is a giving a man a propriety and possession
of himself, and this is that indeed this ordinance gives forth, when a man so
takes Christ, as that Christ is his [take, eat, this is my body that is broken
for you] showing that the Saints ought, in the communication of this divine
mystery, to take Christ wholly, and by this to claim propriety, because nothing
can be more ours then a thing that is given us, and we sin against him, if we
take him not; O therefore take him as your own.

He says not only [take] but [eat] you take in order to eating, so that your
acceptance of Christ is that you might be satisfied with Christ, and filled,
for he is not only to gaze on, as the brazen Serpent was, but to feed on, as
the manna was, therefore (says Christ) [take and eat] rendering himself in the
most easy way of administration; nothing under heaven a man is more easily
drawn to then to eat, a hungry man need not be much persuaded to eat, yet
behold here,

First, That you had need to be entreated to eat and feed on Christ, else what
need this word, but to note, that the Saints were apt to stand still, when they
should be feeding on Christ, therefore says he [take and eat.]

Secondly, This is of all other the most easy way of partaking, being a
natural act, for that a man eats puts him to no pain, yea the pain within
is supplied, and the hunger satisfied.

Thirdly, He sets no bounds but [take and eat] it is a command that lies on
us, for the supply of wants and the cheering of our hearts, for so far we may
eat, and no further: Christ bids you take what you need, implying,

1. That there is enough in Christ for any Saint to eat, else it would not
become Christ to bid them, but he says [take and eat] implying that no Saint
can say, Lord I have a desire to eat, but here is not enough, they cannot say I
have sins and guilt, but can find no pardon, no, Christ bids you [eat]
implying there is enough to feed on.

2. He sets you no time neither, but eat as long as you live, yea until his
coming again.

O how abundantly did those hints take upon my heart, and even swallow up my
soul in the admiration of that love! the Lord grant it may abide upon my spirit
for ever.

March the 30, the Lord was pleased in some measure to give in an answer to
that desire put up March 25. for the pouring out of his spirit upon the
brethren through whom the Lord was pleased to appear lively in my apprehension,
and in a spiritual manner in him whose spirit seemed to melt under the thoughts
of the weight of that exercise.

March the 30 the Lord was pleased exceedingly to draw out my heart in the
behalf of my Mother, whom I apprehended to ly under some sadness in respect of
the want of the clear sight of her interest in God, beseeching him that he
would be pleased to wean her more from the world, and all things here below,
and that he would be pleased to manifest himself to her, and let down the light
of his countenance upon her, and show her his face, and not his back, that as
he had been pleased to shine upon my poor heart, and the hearts of others of
his Saints through prayer, so that he would also be pleased at this time to let
this request come up in remembrance before him, and give in a gracious answer
to it, as also that he would be pleased to pour out his spirit upon her, and
let it be a spirit of grace and supplication, in the sense of the want of which
her spirit groaned for before him, as also under the sight of her
unprofitableness under all ordinances, beseeching him, that as it was he, and
he alone, that causes his people to profit, so that he would please to give
out to this his poor servant a profiting spirit under his administrations to
her, which desires were not only put up before the Lord but are the issuings
out of my heart frequently before the Lord, on her behalf.

March 31 the Lord was exceedingly pleased to put it upon my heart to seek his
face in the behalf of my dear Brother, desiring above all earthly blessings,
that the Lord would be pleased to give me him in as a return of prayer, that
one so night me might not perish; in which desires he drew out my heart
exceedingly, insomuch, then and often since, so that I could willingly pour out
my very life for him, that the Lord would but touch his heart in mercy, and
that that work we hope the Lord has begun in him, he would finish, telling the
Lord withal that he had said, what ever we ask believing we shall receive,
beseeching him to increase my says, telling him further, that it was my desire
to believe, and expect the return of this poor desire in his own time, and how
it might make most for his glory, and that, if it were his will, to let me see
it: and that seeing he had given me thus much boldness, from the experience of
his richness in answering the desires of my poor soul both for my self and
others; that he would also please to give in this poor Brother, as a return of
prayer, and help me to give him the glory of it, and, truly immediately before
this duty, it was much set upon my heart to beg of God to manifest his pleasure
to me in this thing, and in drawing out my heart and the heart of others of his
people on his behalf.

March 31. In my morning-sacrifice I had this discovery or experiment hinted
upon my spirit, that if it were so good to be in the heart of Gods people, as
my soul had found by experience it was, being really persuaded that much of the
soul-mercies that I enjoy came in through the prayers of some of Gods people
for me: oh what is it then to be in the heart of God! for, truly, had I not
been in his heart, the being in their heart would little have advantaged me.

April the sixteenth, the Lord having been pleased two or three days before,
much to disappoint that expectation of my soul, providence casting me among
several godly persons, and finding little of God drop from them to my spiritual
advantage, as also finding my own heart exceedingly bound up whiles I was in
their company, when as I was going home, it so seized upon my spirit, that I
thought my very heart was overset, and would have burst within me, all which
put my soul, into a holy awe and trembling, for fear lest the Lord should also
at this present withdraw from me, which put my soul upon a more earnest and
importunate seeking of him to appear to my soul through every ordinance of his,
that I might see his face and not his back, urging of him very much with the
promise that he had said, that the seed of Jacob should not seek his face in
vain; beseeching the Lord that it might be made good to my soul at this time,
the next day, if he should please to add this one opportunity more to me:
telling him withal that it was true I might, (yea I had sought other things in
vain I but) should I seek his face in vain, now, that I come only to seek
his face, relying on his promise he had made me, that I should not seek in
vain, and therefore I did desire to roll upon it, beseeching him to increase
my faith that I might really and indeed expect the performance, and making of
it good at this present to my soul: and truly I dare not but (to his praise)
acknowledge and desire that the remembrance of it might dwell upon my heart, and
the Lord was pleased, in a wonderful manner to manifest himself this day,
being the 17 of April, to my soul, through which that whole day both in prayer
and preaching, every word in prayer coming as if it had been fetched from the
bottom of my heart, and every word in the Sermons, being of such spiritual
concernment to me, that I could not but acknowledge the Lord mightily present
through his servant Mr. Knight this day.

And truly this former appearance of God having so rasished my heart, and
refreshed my spirit, I was also imboldened to seek the Lord for his appearance
April 20. beseeching him that as he had begun his work in abundant measure in
mercy, that he would also please to go on and add this one mercy more and
trust me with it, and give me a heart to improve it to his glory, that as he
had given me this abundant experience of not seeking his face in vain, so that
he would strengthen my faith, even at this time also to call upon him, and
truly the Lord was pleased also to bow down and appear abundantly to my soul
this day also through Mr. Knight.

April 27. I gave up in a note this day that one desires to praise the Lord,
that, amidst all the trials he has been pleased to exercise her under in this
pilgrimage, he has been pleased to give her some tastes of the rest that is
only to be enjoyed in himself, beseeching him so to increase her faith, that
she may be enabled to live upon a promise; this was given up to Mr. Knight to
spread before the Lord, April 24. 1653. For one whom the Lord has been
pleased, out of his free grace, to set his first love upon, and continually to
follow with mercy upon mercy, and to give in one return upon the neck of
another, notwithstanding she had often in the rebellion of her heart, said,
that God had covered all her prayers with a cloud, and would never answer any
of them, which yet he has abundantly done, which she is not able any way
sufficiently to admire, or bless his name for, and therefore desires that
those whose hearts the Lord has more enlarged to this glorious heavenly work,
would help to bless and praise that name of God, whom there is none like unto,
who continually waits that he may be gracious; beseeching him that he would
also enable her soul to wait, to bless and praise his name, yea, wait for a
heart suited to all these wonderful appearances of his to her soul, that she
might be more and more dedicated and given up to him, and him alone in all she
has, is, or shall be enabled to do: this also was given up to Mr. Knight.

April 26. apprehending that one propounded to the Church intended to address
himself to the Church for admission, being before, much dissatisfied concerning
him, yet finding much inclination in the spirits of others to him, I was
exceedingly troubled about it, and besought the Lord to direct me what to do in
it, beseeching him also to appear among us, and give in his spirit, that it
might be to us a spirit of discerning, that he would be pleased to enable him
to make out yet more clearly, that work that he had wrought in his soul, if
indeed there were any, or else give us such a discerning spirit, as might teach
us what to do in it, that, if it were his will, there might no soul come in
among us that might any way darken his glory, but that those that were received
might be such as himself by his spirit, should receive, nor none be detained
but such as himself should, by his spirit, through his poor servants detain; as
also begging of the Lord, and that with much earnestness, that if there were no
real work of his upon his heart, that he would be pleased to find out some way
or other in his wisdom to keep him off.

April 24. 1653. was the Lord pleased graciously to convince me yet further of
my sinful passion and aptness to be angry, either without a cause, or upon a
light ground, and so to dishonor the Lord; which conviction was set home from
Mr. Knights expression of Mat. 5. 22. I say, if you be angry with your Brother
without a cause, you shall be in danger of judgment; and whosoever says to
his Brother Racha, (which word expressed their contemning of their Brethren;
that is, to have contemptible thoughts of them,) this is a greater evil, for
this is in danger of the Council: but whosoever shall say, thou fool, (that is,
one that has no understanding, but is even as a beast) this is in Christ's
judgment an heinous sin, for (says he,) he shall be in danger of hell fire.

From all which the Lord was pleased to set it home upon my heart, that I had
been exceeding guilty, (even to this day) in a great measure, of those evils,
which conviction I desire may abide upon my heart to make me (through the
strength of Christ) more watchful over my own heart in this respect, then ever
I have been.

There is one conviction more this day set upon my heart, from these words; if
thou remember thy Brother has ought against thee: (he does not say, if thou
have ought against him, but if he has ought against thee) do thou seek
reconciliation, yea, leave not till it be wrought out; from which the Lord not
only convinced me of this my duty, and told me I should not suffer any
prejudice to lie in my heart against any, but also much comforted my heart
under the sight of this, as that which (through grace) I found the Lord had
really wrought in my heart, and enabled me daily to practice.

The same day the Lord was pleased, in the ministry of his word, to convince
my soul, that it is not the performance of duties at set times, this is not all
required, but when the soul is indeed pained under the sense of its want of
inlargedness to Christ, and the like, (that it cries out as the infant after
the breast) and is not satisfied with any thing without it, but the soul
pants within it self, and wants some manifestation of Christ, and this
puts upon duty: from which the Lord was pleased to convince my soul, that I
had been sadly guilty of the misperformance of duty in this respect many times.

Which put my soul upon a search into it self, whether I were not guilty in
this respect, after which I found I had been often guilty of the misperformance
of duties, doing them many times, especially heretofore, without this strong
panting, and sense of my want.

April 27. Oh my soul! art thou not able to say, through grace, before the Lord
the searcher of hearts, that there was hardly that word came out of thy mouth,
or that action done by thee in any place or company, that passes by thee
without a reveiw, judging and condemning thy self for them.

The beginning of May, though I can find little fruit or growth in my soul, the
sight and sense of the works of God upon my soul, are, as it were, drawn over
with a cloud, yet, even then, oh my soul has not the Lord much refreshed thee,
by enabling thee (in some measure) to roll upon that gracious word which has
been at seasonable times brought to thy veiw, that in Hos. 4. 8. I am as a
green firr-tree, in me is thy fruit found: now this tree is always green.

Does not the Lord sometimes disappoint the expectation, (oh my soul!) even of
the sensible enjoyment of his own presence in a duty, or ordinance, or society,
that he might the more sweeten it to thee when he is pleased to appear, and the
more to draw thee out to seek his appearance, and to cry mightily after him?

O my soul why should thou say thou can not find love to God, when thou
do so frequently, and restlesly, desire the presence and appearance of God,
in every ordinance and duty! if it be not for his own sake, why does not my
soul sit down and rest contented with the ordinances themselves?

Two papers were given to Mr. Knight, to present before the Lord at a private
fast at Fulham Chapel in the behalf of the nation, May 4, 1653.

1 One who continually groans before the Lord under the sense of the body of
death, and the continual issuing of it out in the whole course of their
conversation, to the dishonor of that God that deserves for ever, even by
their souls, to be admired and praised, being a God that delights in mercy,
and in the manifestation of it to their poor souls, notwithstanding all their
rebellions against him; the desire therefore of their souls is that you (who
love and feat the Lord, would improve your interest in him in their behalf,
that the Lord would once be pleased to give them more power over all their
corruptions, that however he sees meet to deal with their bodies, though he
wounds, yet it is he that heals; though he lays sickness, weakness,
distempers, whatever he please upon them, that yet he would please to give them
more strength in their inward man, to subdue and mortify their corruptions,
and resist all the fiery darts of Satan, enabling them to walk with an holy
awe, and fear of his blessed self, in the whole course of their conversations,
in all their relations, and under the dispensations of God to them, that so, if
the Lord please, they might never prove by their uneven conversations any blot
or blemish to the glorious Gospel of God, and their Savior Jesus Christ; the
thoughts whereof was (if their hearts deceive them not) more bitter then death.

2 One who earnestly desires that those who fear the Lord would wrestle
mightily with him, in the behalf of some poor, dead, dark, soul, who is nearly
related to them, that the Lord would once be pleased to speak so effectually to
their hearts, that they might be caused to stand up on their feet, and Jesus
Christ might give them life; that, seeing he has said, the dead shall hear the
voice of the Son of God, and hearing live, that this blessed word might be
made good to their souls, that so they might have cause to praise him, even to
all eternity for this unspeakable mercy.

This latter was written in the behalf of one in near relation; afterward it
was exceedingly set upon my heart, not to do it only in his behalf, but also
in the behalf of other poor dark souls in relation to me.

May the 4. Oh my soul! must thou not needs acknowledge the Lord a God hearing
the very groans of thy soul, before they were effectually put up? putting in,
at the very time, a seasonable word into the mouths of his servants, suiting
to thy troubles, and fears, supporting thy spirit under them abundantly?

And did not the Lord, (that same day May 4.) by a letter, that, (as soon as I
came home,) came to my hands, gave my soul great hopes of a begun work upon
that poor soul, which came, (as it were,) as a fresh return of prayer, this
very person being in my heart in these desires that were then put up?

May 21. the Lord was pleased, one Evening, very much to draw out my heart to
beg his appearance to my soul in every ordinance in a more full and lively
manner then formerly, and next day (being the first day of the week) truly, the
Lord was pleased very much to appear, in the morning, to refresh and cheer my
heart, and so also in the ordinance of the supper; for which bless the Lord, O
my soul.

The fourth of the fourth month; In the Evening I found my heart very dead,
and dull to any spiritual service, yet the Lord was pleased to draw it out in
this request to him, begging a special presence of his the next day, both in
prayer and preaching, and the ordinance of the supper, begging the Lord to
appear through his servant that was to administer in his name, that there might
be such a lively presence and appearance of God through him, as might be a
token of good to my soul.

And truly the Lord was pleased the next day in a lively manner to appear, not
only suiting his appearance to that dead dull frame my wretched heart was in
to him, but doing abundantly above even my expectation, in some sense riding
triumphantly and gloriously in the charet of his word.

The 13 of this fourth month, in the Evening, the Lord drew out my heart very
much, amongst other things, to plead with him to discover to me what the
desires, the hungrings and the thirstings of my soul were indeed, after telling
him withal, that (as far as I knew my own heart,) it was not after the
world, the profits, pleasures, or any thing in it, beseeching him to search and
try me, and if I were deceived in this, to discover it to me, and to be so
far from satisfying any thirst of my soul after any thing besides himself, as
to blast it, and to make me sensible of it, and humble before him for it, but
telling him withal, that he had promised that he that hungers and thirsts
after righteousness, they shall be satisfied and filled, and truly if (I know
any thing of my own heart) this is it my soul waits for, and brayeth after,
to be made more like him, more conformable to him, to have the spirit of a
child put upon me, whereby I might be more like unto him, and more dedicated
and given up in all my ways to him: but that, if it were not thus with me, but
that I were deceived in it, I did then beg, above all things in the world, that
the Lord would discover it unto me.

The 25 of this fourth month, my spirit wasdrawn out to beg the Lords
appearance the next day, and suiting my heart to it, (which I found in a very
dead and dull frame) beseeching the Lord that his appearance might not answer
that wretched frame my heart was then in, but that my heart might be put in
frame to meet with him.

As also, that the Lord would be pleased to provide a portion for every poor
soul that desires to see his face, and to seek his presence, that they might
find some word suitable to their condition; and how richly and abundantly did
the Lord answer each of those desires, both in behalf of my own soul, and also
on the behalf of others? how gloriously did the Lord appear and ride
triumphantly in the Charet of his word? this day in the morning, presenting
very glorious useful truths, seasonable to my poor soul, which the Lord enable
me to practice and make use of, enabling me to improve the promises to this
great work of cleaning from corruption.

Yea, the Lord was pleased, in a further way, to answer my desires for others,
putting in a very seasonable word of his to my Cozen Jefferson, concerning
free will, who was much in my thoughts in my former requests, showing how the
promises were made in respect of our own weakness and nothingness; for had the
creature any power, God need not promise to do all.

The Lord having thus appeared this morning, there arose in my heart a question
at noon, whether I should not publicly by Mr. Knight offer up praises to the
Lord for this appearance of his, but through many fears that arose upon my
spirit lest it might be misconstrued, as if I did desire to appear to be
somebody, with the like temptation was kept off, yet (notwithstanding some
trouble to my spirit, for I was greatly desirous to have blessed the Lord
publicly for it,) yet how did the Lord appear in answer to this secret desire
of mine! For Mr. Knight himself, upon his own account, did largely bless the
Lord for his appearance in the midst of the day, and so throughout, with which
my heart did really close, and so did our Sister Arnal, as she said afterward,
as well as my self, greatly rejoicing that the Lord drew out his heart in that
wherein her heart and mind also did so abundantly join.

Our Brethen having made some entrance into the private conference, and
somewhat of God appearing from several of them, my heart was much drawn out to
propound some questions to them, having two or three things upon my spirit,
wherein I was much unsatisfied, and having resolved upon the thing in general,
there arose a great dispute in my spirit, which question to propound first,
(for they all left much weight upon my spirit) and amongst others, I had a very
strong desire to propound this, what means might be best available for the
subduing of pride; and strong debate had I in my spirit, before I could pass
this over, yet, at the last my spirit was overcome to propound another, which
proved very suitable to many other spirits, in which I saw some hand of God.

Yet did my heart earnestly long after some resolutions concerning that of
pride, but how gloriouly did the Lord a while after (the 26 of this fourth
month) appear in answer to it? showing me, that there is no way like to the
taking of the advantage of the ordinances, which the Lord enable me to do.

About the end of this fourth month, observing Mr. Knight somewhat astonished
at the passages of providence in the government, upon which, for some time, he
was very weak in praying for it, and seeking the Lord for them in place, which
was a great trouble to my spirit, whereupon I made a draught of a letter to
send to him, wherein I presented him with my scattered thoughts, desiring him
to take a veiw of what he delivered to us the last thanksgiving day, from that,
Isai. 65. 24. before they call I will answer, showing, that God was so quick in
his work in these latter days, that he often left his own behind, with some
other such hints, which letter I did not send, fearing to press too far upon
my own ability in that kind.

But how abundantly did the Lord answer those desires which were only upon my
heart, but not presented at all save only before the Lord? who was pleased to
draw out his heart to mention them before him, and afterward upon the 10 of
the 6 month, (upon the occasion of a day kept to seek the Lord for them) the
Lord was pleased again to cast in thoughts upon the same Scripture in Isai. 65.
24. before they call I will answer, which was a real answer of my poor desires,
wherein the Lord showed me, that the desires I had were yet upon his heart,
(for which bless the Lord O my soul) who, though thou did not press them,
(those desires being hindered by some thoughts arising in my own mind,) yet was
pleased to give me to see the desired issue which thou did aim at.

There was the 10 of the 6 month, at a private day of humiliation (we kept
with respect to the public affairs of the nation and our selves) four papers
of desires put up to the Lord to Mr. Knight, these two first the Lord has
begun graciously to answer the tenth of this sixth month: The first was this
one, (to whom the Lord has discovered from his word, what great advantages
there are held out in it, to the cleansing of the soul, and perfecting of
holiness in them, but the party not being able to discern them to be made real
advantages to their souls, although (if their heart deceive them not) it is the
great desire and expectation of their souls to perfect holiness, and the want
of the sight of it their continued burden, which makes them even cry out for
deliverance, and for the accomplishment of the time wherein they shall
dishonor God no more, but shall be made like unto him,) desires your
remembrance before the Lord to those ends, that seeing his will is in those
things, and that the promise is so full concerning the accomplishment of it,
that he would please to discover to their souls why it is that the work goes so
heavily on, and what shall be discovered to be the let, it may also by him be
removed whatever it be, though in things never so near and dear, and their
hearts supported and born up, and made submissively-willing to lie down at his
feet, to be made to do, to bear, to suffer, to forsake any thing for his glory.

But how graciously did the Lord (this same day being the tenth day of this
sixth month) begin to answer one main thing in this request, discovering to my
soul, that happily, one main end why he did not perfect this work of holiness in
me, but suffer corruption still to work, might be, that I might yet cry out
more mightily to him; happly, I have not been so importunate in my desires
after sanctification as after remission and pardon, and the sight of sin; and
that the Lord would have me yet to cry more mightily and wrestle it out with
him, and resolve to give him no rest, yet not that I should content my self in
pouring out those desires to him, and so rest there, (as was also hinted to me
the same day) but to be watchful over my heart and conscience, watching and
praying, calling and crying, until the Lord appears, and not to think it
enough to spread these desires before, the Lord, and then give way to sin,
and temptation, and corruption, and (as was the next day the eleventh of this 6
month 1653. hinted to me) what was Gods end in discovering the power and
strength of sin, but that we come more near to him, and by faith roll upon his
covenant and promise for strength against it? and, on the other side, what is
Satan's end in setting home sin with the aggravations of it but to make us
sit down in discouragement? now, (O my soul) is it better for thee to
accomplish Gods end, or Satan's end? oh therefore close in with God, and beg
power and strength of him to do it.

Nay, in farther answer, the Lord was pleased to enable me to expostulate with
that unbelief, and first of my own heart, this eleventh day, saying, O my soul,
is it not thy duty to believe; for is it not said, blessed are they that
believe? though thou see not lust and corruption subdued by the eye of sense,
yet, O my soul, roll upon the Covenant and promise by faith, for faith is the
substance of things not seen, and the evidence of things hoped for; therefore
when thou come to be fully rid of this body of death, then faith shall cease,
and be of no use; but now is the time to act faith, when thou can, by the eye
of sense see nothing, but thy self to be compassed in with a body of death and
corruption.

And for the want of the sight of holiness perfected in the fear of God, the
Lord does not only discover that his will lies in this work, that it is his
will even our sanctification, and that we may well remember him with it, and
pray as he teaches us, that his will may be done, so it shall certainly be,
but did the Lord discover to my soul (the eleventh of this month) that this
also was part of the prayer of Christ, sanctify them through thy truth, Joh.
17. and he says in Joh. 11. speaking at Lasazrus his grave; I thank thee, O
Father, that thou have heard me always, but I speak it for their sakes, that
they might believe; now, (O my soul) if this be Christ's prayer, and that as he
says, Joh. 17. not for the disciples only, but all that should after believe,
and if God hears him in what ever he asks, as (he says) he does; then, O
my soul, up and believe, for this work shall certainly go on.

The truth is, the Lord did herein not only answer to this, but to the other
request also that was this day presented, so that the Lord did answer them
both, even as I did at once present them both, (blessed for ever be his name)

Which gracious answer caused my soul the next day to present this short desire
also to Mr. Knight, to be put up to God in way of thanks, saying, one, whom the
Lord has been pleased (through rich grace and mercy) to hear, and answer since
our last meeting, desires to magnify the name of our prayer-hearing God, a God
that delights in mercy, and in the manifestation of it to his poor worthless
Creature, beseeching him further to increase my faith, and help me to act it
lively at this present in a plentiful feeding upon the Lord Jesus, that so my
soul may find abundant strength, healing and cleansing to issue from him in
whom all my hope and help lies.

The same tenth of this sixth month, the second paper that I put up this day
was in relation to our communion, which I thus expressed; One of this despised
handful desires, that the Lord would be pleased to humble our souls before him,
that we have been guilty before him of rashness, and inconsiderateness,
together with want of love and tenderness to each other, which the Lord make
every soul of us deeply sensible of, and help us to abound more to his praise
in every good word and work, that we might never by any of our weaknesses and
miscarriages be any occasion to darken his glory to the world.

In answer to which, the Lord was pleased in some measure, to draw out the
heart of Mr. K. to confess this iniquity before the Lord with it, a sense of
and to mourn for one, who came in at the first, without due trial, (which I
hope, not without some ground, the Lord has set it home upon many if not all
our spirits, with adeepsense of our miscarrage in it.)

The tenth of the sixth month, were the papers put up also to present to the
Lord by Mr. Knight at a day of fast, thus; One desires your earnest prayers
before the Lord, and to spread the sad condition of one in near relation to
her, that conceives himself in a happy condition, when there are grounds
enough to fear the contrary, she desires you together with her to beseech the
Lord to discover it to him, that so he may have no rest in his soul, till he be
brought home, and built upon the Lord Jesus Christ, that only foundation.

The same tenth of this sixth Month 1653. one who was compassed with such a
body of death and corruption, (under which the party sadly mourns) polluting
all that ever she puts her hand unto, therefore she desires your earnest
prayers to the Lord, that he would come and dwell in her soul, and be as a
refiners fire and as fuller Soap to cleanse her, and to burn up whatsoever is
contrary to himself, or any way darkens his glory.

The 13 of the sixth month, The Lord drew out my heart exceedingly to beg an
increase of faith, even beyond sight and sense, that though I could not see
corruption dead, yet that I might believe that it should be so in Gods time; as
also to beg for our sister Harris her Mother, and that the Lord would please to
cure her of the fear of death, who had been subject to this bondage, and help
her to commit her soul to him, as a faithful creator, and an everlasting
loving tenderhearted Father.

The fifteenth day of the sixth month; was discovered to me, that I had often
thought, that if I had but assurance of the love of God, then nothing could
trouble me, but I should be swallowed up with joy, and even overcome with it:
but (Oh my soul) has it been thus with thee since the Lord appeared abundantly
in way of refreshment to thee? or rather quite contrary, since thou have been
set free from from the fear of hell and wrath, oh how sad to think that ever
thou should live to rebel against such a God, a Father of so much mercy.

About the end of the seventh month, the Lord being pleased to lay some light
affliction upon my poor body, thereby drawing out my heart after this manner to
him: Blessed Lord, what might thy ends be in thy fatherly chastisements? oh
that thou would discover it! and rather let this affliction abide, continue,
yea be increased, and augmented what thou will, rather then that the corruption
should not be discovered, and purged out; which requests were still continued:
Then was the Lord pleased in some measure, in answer hereunto, to discover
those things following to me, which I know not, but that he might much aim at;
as might not the Lord have some respect to thy want of pity and compassion to
one in misery? Might not the Lord lay his hand upon thee, though not in that
kind? nay were he not righteous if he should lay the same stroke? have not thou
deserved it as well as she? might not the Lord do it to call thee home, and
quicken thee from thy sloth, deadness, and dullness, and the estrangement of
heart that was so fast a growing between thy soul and the Lord? (O blessed
father, says my soul, let my corruptions be wrought out, and thy poor creature
quickened.)

Was not thy heart and affections exceedingly running out from the Lord to the
creature? oh blened be that stroke that calls thee back so that this work were
but done by it.

The third day of the eighth month, being much oppressed in spirit with the
thoughts of the dishonor that would come to God, and scandal to the Gospel, by
the sad falling of one of our brethren, and the fear that is upon my heart
touching him:

The Lord was pleased to draw out my heart this evening, to beg of him to
discover to our souls in general, and to my soul in particular, what his ends
were in gathering this poor handful together, telling him, I hope, he did not
do it to make us the instruments of his dishonor to the world, and withal I
was put upon it (I verily believe by the spirit of the Lord) in that same day
to reflect back upon my own soul, what my ends were injoyning in that
communion, and as I was pressing the Lord to show me why or to what end he had
directed me to join in that society, telling him withal, that surely my
desires were to attend upon direction in it, and that if any other thing what
ever did byasse my spirit in the act, that the Lord would please to discover it
to me, whereupon I begged of the Lord that he would help me to examine my heart
about it, and that if I were biased by any wrong respect, that the Lord would
convince me of it, and humble my soul deeply for it, and pardon it in Christ's
blood: now (O my soul) deal impartially in this work of examination in this
thing, and spread it before him.

This Letter was given to Master Knight, what to seek the Lord about upon the
ninth of this Month 1653.
Dear Sir,
Satan having often beset my soul to endeavor to keep it from a present
participating in this holy ordinance, upon several pretenses, and having again
now attempted it, I durst no longer keep his counsel, but in the imparting of
it I crave that help of your prayers at the throne of Grace, that the Lord
would be pleased to disappoint him in all his vices, that wherein he seeks to
do me hurt may prove the reallest advantage of spiritual good to my soul, yet
fearing whether it do indeed come from him or no, causes some trembling upon
my spirit, how to act; if it be a plot of his, it is a fair one, arising after
this manner, having often found great appearances of God (as I hope I may say
to his praise I have in other of his ordinances,) but finding my heart
oftentimes very much shut up, as it were, and given over to deadness, dullness
and heaviness of spirit, which was no way suitable to a spiritual heart and
soul-quickning ordinance, and finding this very much to prevail, even at this
present, desiring your prayers, that the Lord would direct me what to do, by
discovering to my soul, whether indeed it does arise from a subtilty of Satan
yea or no, or whether it be a lively alarm from heaven to my soul; thus
trembling in my self, whether my forbearance may not be found a yiedling to
Satan, or whether on the other side, I may not attempt and provoke the Lord by
rushing unpreparedly upon his holy things: thus desiring to give up my self
into the hands of the Lord, waiting for the breathings of his spirit through
the help of your prayers.

I beseech the Lord alone to guide and lead my soul in all its motions and
actions in this present world, until he shall bring it to a full enjoyment of
himself in the perfection of holiness, which my soul waits and longs for,
where I shall fully enjoy what now my poor soul has but a transient taste of,
which the Lord accomplish in his own time, and make me willing to wait my
appointed time, until my change come, that when ever my Lord comes, I may be
found watching.

The 10 of this 8 month (oh my soul) did not the Lord give me a gracious
answer and return to this desire and prayer forementioned, even whiles thou
were pouring out thy soul before the Lord, wherein thou did lament the
corruption of thy heart, begging of the Lord, that he would subdue this wicked
frame of spirit, this deadness and dullness in his services, and continuing
issuing out of corruption; pleading and arguing it out with the Lord, after
this manner; that though thou were unworthy altogether to beg any mercy from
him, or this mercy, yet were there not others of his poor servants that were
pleading with him for my poor soul? nay was not my Lord Jesus now at his right
hand pleading for me, that I might not be pulled out of his hand? For how can
the Lord endure wickedness, any lust, or corruption to possess my heart, and
take the Scepter out of his hand, and so to rule and reign over me? nay could
my soul bear it to be thus over-powred, and to have my heart thus drawn from
Christ, and thus captivated by sin and Satan, when one word of his mouth
could set my soul at liberty? beseeching the Lord to search me and to try me,
for he knew whether those desires and tears and groans came from my heart yea
or no; yea I know thou do search me and know my heart, but Lord discover
also to me and if there be any hypocrisy in my spirit in this regard, oh that
thou would answer me so by fire to consume that dross and corruption in my
soul, yea whatsoever thyrighteous eyeseeth in me that is darkening to thy
glory; and withal telling the Lord how like a flood of mighty waters this
corruption come in upon me, one wave following another, that I had no power to
withstand it, though he had discovered much of himself to my sonl, and of the
riches of his grace, and emptiness of all other things, that yet my soul should
so run after vanity, beseeching the Lord to give a real turn to all the
affections of my soul, and to fix them upon the Lord Jesus Christ, where they
shall be sure to be returned.

This was in the morning of the 10. day, then did the Lord further satisfy and
quiet my heart in my Evening sacrifice; that same day his spirit breathed in my
soul after this manner: (dear Lord) oh that thou would suppress this spirit
of murmuring under thy hand, and if thou will have thy poor creature still to
wrestle and strive under a body of death and corruption, and temptations and
snares, and intanglements, oh that thou would help me in this work, that I
may not yield under it, but may hold out in a continual resistance, and
sighing, and never give over, or making any peace with sin; and though thou
do not see meet utterly to root out sin, yet (oh Lord) give it its deadly
blow, let it be still dying, and withering, and decaying, and work in my soul
growing and increasing, even until thou have fully perfected it.

About the tenth of this eighth month, this experience was given in to my soul
by the Lord, concerning Satan's dealing with my soul, and some refreshments to
support my spirit under it.

(Oh my soul) has not Satan dealt with thee concerning this great ordinance
of the Lords supper, even as he has formerly done concerning the great duty of
prayer? how often has he suggested to thee, that it is to no end to pray to
the Lord, reasoning thus with thee oftentimes, do thou think there is any
such God as thou prayest to, did he ever hear thee, or give thee any token of
answer? why then do thou continually appeal to him and pour out thy soul
before him? and has he not done just thus about this ordinance of the Lords
Supper? thou wicked spirit, how often have thou been proved a liar? what
eminent tokens has God given me of his hearing prayer from time to time, both
concerning my self, and others, and therein have proved thee a liar? and why
then (oh my soul) should thou not believe that Satan will also prove a liar
in this? is not the Lord yesterday, and to day, and for ever? is his arm
shortened, or his hand weakened, that he cannot save, and deliver and appear to
thee in as glorious a manner as ever? oh then wait for him, and what if thou
waitest until thy dissolution? it will be happiness more then thou do
deserve, to be found waiting, yet thou do not know how soon he may appear to
thee.

About the middle of the eight month 1653 (O my soul) what are thy continued
fears? are they not lest any thing should withdraw or steal away thy heart from
the Lord? do not thou daily beg of him rather to crucify all thy earthly
desires what ever, then any way to satisfy any of them?


A Letter to Mr. Knight the sixteenth of the eighth Month 1653. In Answer to
the former desire to him the ninth of the same month, to bless the Lord for
the Answer.
Dear Sir,
Having formerly, in the time of my sadness, desired your remembrance before
the Lord, who has appeared in prayer both public and private, as also many
other ways, thereby staying my poor spirit to wait upon him, even for the full
accomplishment of his own promise, who has said, sin shall not have dominion
over his, that are not under the law but under grace; as also that he would
tread down Satan under his peoples feet shortly, which my soul desires to wait
upon him for, and in the mean time, desires to bless his name; and that you
would bless him together with me, that he was pleased to open any fountains
of love and mercy in this vale of tears, so abundantly fulfilling to my poor
soul that word of his, which he was pleased no sooner to set upon my heart with
a persuasion, in some measure, that it should be made good, rouling though
weakly upon him for it, but that he was pleased so to do indeed, that word I
found, Isai. 56. 19. When the enemies shall come in like a flood, the spirit of
the Lord shall set up a standard against them, for which I desire to bless his
name, beseeching him that those impressions that he was pleased by his spirit
through several words of his, to make upon my heart, might never be forgotten
by me, but that they might continually be as supports to my poor weak faith,
that it may grow from strength to strength, even till I shall meet my God;
blessed for ever be that God that was pleased to know my poor soul in this hour
of temptation, and to take this poor lame soul, and lead, and carry it of being
not able to go one step in any of his ways without his hand, but that it
gets one knock or bruise or other; yea, blessed for ever be that God and
Savior, that will not suffer his poor creature to slip as he does others, but
was pleased, in rich mercy, to be ever awakening my poor drowsy spirit by one
affliction or another; the thoughts of which do much refresh my spirit, and
seems at present a special token of his love, for which I desire to bless
him; and, oh that I could praise the name of that God and Father, who is the
Father of all mercy and God of all consolation; for truly I must needs say, I
am persuaded, Satan had not now been let loose to buffet me thus, had I not
been so sleepy and drowsy in spirit; but blessed be that rod that awakned my
poor soul from the sleep of any sin, so that the Lord will but please to work
it out, (which I desire to wait on God for.)

I should (for some respect) have forborne this duty of praise, but that the
Lord has let in the clear sight of this mercy; as also lest I should prove
ungrateful for so large manifestation of mercy, though all I can do in it is a
mere nothing, the greater is the goodness of God that bows down to accept such
broken praises, which I have cause even to lament over, having too little
spiritual life in them, when as in truth, my whole soul and body should be a
holy and lively sacrifice to God, which the Lord enable me to do to that God,
whence all my enjoyments come, in whom I desire to rest your unworthy, but in
desire and hope real friend, for my Lords sake.


FINIS.
THE SECOND BOOK OF Manifold Experiments: Of Gods dealing with my Soul in
hearing Prayers, and other gracious incomes of Love.
THe Lord was pleased to help me very much in this search by Mr. Knight, who
spoke from this Scripture at Fulham, the ninth of this ninth Month.

In the 12 of Luke, 42, 43. from which he showed, We have the Lord setting out
the blessedness of that servant that is faithful in the work that his Lord
intrusteth him about; and whom his Lord when he comes finds to be so doing as
he appointed.

Now (O my soul) what comfortable hopes can thou gather out from the serious
examination of thy own heart, upon this point, that the Lord has made thee
faithful though thou art poor, weak, and unworthy every way to be the servant
of such a Lord: what can thou say to this? has the Lord indeed made thee
faithful?

Ans. 1. I gather some hopes of it, that the Lord has made me in some measure
faithful, from that sincerity that the Lord has put into my heart to aim
purely at his glory in all I do in this world: the contrary to which causes
much bitterness in my spirit; yet through the prevalency of the unregenerate
part in me, I am, many times, biased and carried aside to aim at other things,
in many of my ways; but the glory of my Lord is my principal aim. For (if I
know any thing of my own heart) through mercy, I do find it set to seek the
honor of Christ, and to walk in ways well pleasing to him, though I do too
often sadly wander from these intents and desires, which was discovered to be
the real burden of my life.

2. In that the Lord has been pleased to put into my soul (I hope) a real
desire te do his whole will, and therein to appear faithful, daily desiring and
begging of him, that I might not at any time in any command of his be found
consulting with flesh and blood, but that as soon as ever he discovers his
wills in any thing whatever to me, that he would also enable me to obey it
readily.

Finding the Spirit of the Lord (I hope) oftentimes breathing in my soul, after
this manner: Lord, if thou will but discover thy mind and will to me in all my
ways; that is it I beg of thee, and though it be never so contrary to flesh
and blood; yea, though I can see nothing, but that it is laid out for to
afflict me, and to be a trial, and exercise for me; and so have nothing to
induce me but thy will: yet, Lord, if thou will but discover thy mind in it to
me, what would I then beg of thee, but only a ready frame to yield obedience
to thy will, and leave the success and sanctifying of it to me, to thy self:
and if on the other side I think any mercy to be never so good, or for my
advantage, yet if thou see meet to discover to my soul that thy will is not
in it, would I not then (if I know my own heart) beg above all things, to have
my will to be wholly swallowed up into thine, Lord? And this hope is grounded
(in some measure upon the abundant experience the Lord has given me of his
goodness and mercy, and abundant kindness in his often denying me of my will.

3 I hope the Lord has (in some measure) made me a faithful Servant in that he
has set my soul upon the watch, to know his mind and will, endeavoring and
desiring to keep my eye upon him, and him only, that I might see what his mind
and will is, who has said, that he will guide his by his eye: which causes my
soul (though with much weakness) not only earnestly to desire, but also to
endeavor to reflect upon all my motions and actions, and thoughts, and words
in this world, to see with what countenance, my Lord looks upon this and the
other action, being (I hope) desirous, I am sure (if my heart deceive me not)
to see the will of my God, in every promise, providence, and administration.

4 The Lord has made me faithful, in that he has put into my soul this
earnest desire, that my ends in all I do might only be to seek the advancement
of him, my Lord, whom I desire only to serve, daily begging of him I might no
more live to my self, as I have too much, and have too long done yea, when I
find any thing of my self or self ends to appear or break forth, though but in
the buds, is it not bitter to my soul? and such as imbitters the best action to
me; though, otherwise never so good? And this desire of serving the Lord, I may
upon experience say, I find to differ not only from that slavish fear that is
in others, (I will not say so) though I suppose it to be true also, but from
that slavish fear that did too much predominate in my own poor soul, which did,
in the time of my bondage, cause me to fear rather then love him; but now the
Lord has (in some measure) been screwing up my obedience to an higher note or
pin, that it is now to a Lord and Father, whom at last, I would love. And I do
also lament before him, in the sincerity of my soul, that I can love him no
more, who have so much loveliness in him, yea nothing but loveliness: yea, it
is a service of a Lord who wills all, and makes the law, and makes it to be
just; because he can do no evil: and I would I could continually meditate upon
this his will, but this is it I daily press after, and mourn under the want of
the clear sight of this, that there should be so much fear in my heart
concerning the issue or event of any thing, wherein my Lord shall be pleased at
any time to declare his will to lie in.

Further discoveries of Faithfulness.

1. Faithfulness appears in the reality of the heart, serving the Lord with all
the heart, soul, and strength; and so faithfulness in prayer lies not in the
pouring out of words, though with some affection, but doing it with all the
heart, soul, and strength, and a full exercise of every grace to the utmost in
every service I do for Christ. And (O my soul) is not this that thou daily
pressest after, though thou can not fully attain unto it? what else makes
thee to mourn over thy prayers and duties, but that thou find no more of thy
heart and strength in them? Is not thy constant desire, that all thy soul and
strength might be offered up to God in every service thou do him?

2. They are faithful servants of Christ, that do all they do in order to a
trust from Christ, who intrusteth them with his Ordinances, with their health,
wealth, comforts, enjoyments, all I have is but a trust from Christ; now to be
faithful is to improve this trust to God, to do all the good that possible I
can by his Ordinances, to do every service to him, as they that indeed exercise
a point of trust, he intrusting me with his glory in this world: faithfulness
is to make the utmost advantage to raise up his glory in this world and make
him appear great; And so faithfulness in improving all the graces that God and
Christ intrusteth me with, by improving of them, to make the utmost advantage
for him; and so for health, and all outward comforts.

Now (O my soul) has not the Lord written this in thy very heart? that all
that ever thou have, and enjoyest, both spiritual and temporal, whether
ordinances, graces, comforts, all thy enjoyments that thou have by trust from
Christ, and must be improved for him, and not spent upon thy self, or this
world? and does not the thoughts of this make thee daily mourn before the Lord,
that thou can not improve them better, that he has so little revenue of
glory from thee, and by thee? but that so much of his stock lies as it were
dead, and unimproved, does not the sight of this cause thee to mourn daily
before him, that he should entrust thee with so much, and receive from thee so
little?

Now (O my soul) does not the thoughts of this make thee cry daily out to the
Lord, beseeching him to reveal his mind and will to thee, how he would have
thee improve this or that other mercy or trust committed to thee; and not only
teach thee his will in it, but also help thee to improve it to his glory
continually?

Yea (O my soul) is there not a continued fear upon thy heart, which causes
thee often times to pour out strong cries before the Lord, that he would help
thee to give him the glory of all the mercy and good things he betrusteth thee
with at any time; as also that there might never be found in thee any
backwardness or unwillingness to give up thy trust in any thing whatever into
his own hands, when ever he sees meet to call for it? which seems to note a
further degree of faithfulness.

Further discoveries of Faithfulness at the same time.

1 Faithfulness appears in the generality of it, when a man is faithful in all
that he has, though all that he has be but a little; and truly herein I have
great cause to lament before the Lord; for in the stead of being faithful in
all that I have, there is much unfaithfulness in me, that appears in all that
the Lord trusts me with, and yet (O my soul) may thou not also say, that
there is some degree of this faithfulness, or at least a desire after it in
thee; and may thou not say, By this law of thy Lord, as Paul does of the Law
of God in general; With my mind I even my self serve this Law of God in
faithfulness, though in my flesh I do too often rebel against it? which is my
daily burden, from which evil in thy own time, deliver me, oh my God, and this
I desire to wait for.

2. Faithfulness appears in being faithful, notwithstanding all difficulties
that accompany them in their services. Now (O my soul) have thou not abundantly
cause to give glory to God that has been pleased to make thee thus faithful in
any degree, or measure in this respect, who by his own hand and power has
carried thee through many a reproach, and scoff, and scorn, and by words making
thee like Isaac, who was still persecuted by Ishmael; and has not this been
thy Lot by some, ever reproaching thee, scoffing, deriding thee, backbiting,
speaking evil abundantly of thee, and yet falsely, doing their utmost to bring
thee out of favor with those whose love thou highly prisest, and have reason
for it? And how did the Lord make thee to lie down under this, when others
taxed thee of hypocrisy, and the like to search thy own heart, and bemoan
before the Lord the degrees of it, which thou saw through mercy by others
(though not visibly to them)? Thus did the Lord bring a good issue out of their
own speeches and words, causing thee to lie down at his foot, expecting the
punishment of thine iniquity. Yea, greater difficulty then these has the Lord
carried thee through when all the powers of Hell and thy own Corruptions have
combined together to keep thee from duties of Prayer, Meditation and
Examination, and the like; and yet the Lord has enabled thee to break through
all, and to pour out thy soul to him when thou were even in thy own
apprehensions at the Pits brink, and yet resolved to cry to him, and not to
give over crying, and calling whilst thou live, notwithstanding all
temptations to the contrary; yea, the more strong the temptations were, the
more speedily were thou fain to address to the Lord for his strength and power
to assist thee in grapling with them; yea, when some times overcame as it were,
and beaten down by Satan, and entering the very borders of despair; yet even
thence from this belly of hell in which thou did apprehend thy self already
entered; did not the Lord enable thee to cry to him, and resolve to give him no
rest? Yea, when thou foundest no advantage or profit of all thy Prayers, and
Tears, and Sighs, and Croans, but that the Lord seemed to turn a deaf ear; yet
did not the Lord enable thee to go on, and to tell him that all those comforts
and enjoyment here below they were poor mean things, such as thou could not
take for thy portion? and therefore did beg with submission to his will, That
if he had no other for thee but the portion of this life, that he would please
to deny thee them also, and never give them to be a snare, but rather let thee
end thy days in some desolate Wilderness?

3. Faithfulness appears in cheerful service: Now (O my soul) art thou not able
to say before the Lord the searcher of hearts, through his grace, that so much
faithfulness as thou can discern in thee in any service of thy Lord, is thy
very joy and rejoicing of thy heart; but on the other side, so much
unfaithfulness as thou can discern in any service; this is it that makes
thee go mourning all thy days, because thou art no more fruitful.

4. (O my soul) thy faithfulness in some measure appears, in that thou art
rejoiced really in spirit when any opportunity is put into thy hand, and thy
heart being enabled in any measure to improve it to the service, and for the
glory of thy Lord; and art thou not (on the contrary) grieved that thou have so
many opportunities offered before thee, but (like a fool) have not a heart to
improve them for the glory of thy Lord; is not this thy daily burden? Lord
thou know it is; and when, through the subtilty of Satan, and deceit of my
own heart, I fool away many rich opportunities by not improving of them, which
after proved a sad burden and affliction to me.

5. O my soul, does there not appear some degree of faithfulness to thy Lord,
in that thy endeavors do come still beneath thy desires; has not the Lord
really enabled thee through grace to say with Paul The good that I would do, I
do not: But, O that I could do it, that I could serve the Lord more and better;
but, oh! how low do I live? and how poorly do I walk? but oh that I could come
to Prayer, and read, and hear, and meditate, and do all private and public
duties, and walk in all my Relations in this world, as might honor this my
Lord; are not these the continual groans and breathings of my heart before the
Lord? (Lord thou know it) for I have none I desire to appeal unto, but to
thee the searcher of my heart.

6. Lord, does not some faithfulness appear to be wrought in my soul by thee,
in that thou have above all things made me to delight in that work that no eye
sees but thy self? Thou know what a fear has been upon my spirit, and is to
this day in a great measure to appear before others; thou Lord know how many
years this fear has been as a prison to keep in the workings of my heart; and
as doors to my mouth, to keept it from lamenting it self, not so much as in one
word in the hearing of others, lest there should any pride or hypocrifie act in
it; yea to this very day, how many services wherein perhaps thy Lord might be
honored; art thou prevented, and durst not to act in upon this very account
that it cannot be done in private; can thou not say before the searcher of
hearts, That such thoughts and apprehensions, and fears as these, least others
should esteem thee better then thou art, or thy own spirit be lifted up before
the Lord, or any false ends byasse thee in it? That such thoughts I say as
thief do often as it were tie up thy tongue, sow up thy mouth in all companies,
even whiles at that instant thy heart is even ready to split or break in pieces
for want of vent; sometimes apprehending that those discoveries that the Lord
was pleased sometimes to make to thee, and the rich grace he is pleased to
manifest in thee, in overcoming all the unkindness in thee, ought not to be put
unnder a bushel, but held out to others; and yet not daring to do it, finding
my wretched heart so prone to be lifted up upon all such occasions, and so
dishonor God that way; and so deceive others and my self also: And through both
these fears my soul often walks sadly before the Lord, fearing to offend him,
and not being able to discern it whether way I might most honor him, having
made trial of both, sometimes silent, and sometimes spoke; and finding the
wickedness of my heart appear sadly in both, I knew not sometimes which was
best; the Lord in mercy manifest and clear up to me.

(O my soul) Thus may it probably and hopefully appear to thee that the Lord
has made thee in some measure his faithful servant.

1. The Lord has given me some hopes that (I trust) I have no other Master
that I willingly call Rabbi, or willingly serve, but my Lord Jesus; nor have I
any other work that I do, upon which my heart is delightfully set upon, but
only my Lords work; and this appears farther to me, in that the Lord has (I
hope in some measure) wrought my heart to this frame of spirit, to desire above
all things to serve my Lord Christ in all the Relations he has set me in, in
this world; and to that end every failing in any of them, either as a child or
friend, or any Relation (though I too sadly fail in them all) this is that
(which if my heart deceive me not) above all things breaks my heart to think
that hereby I do dishonor my Lord Jesus, and that profession of being his
servant: It is not so much that I offend any Relation, as that I grieve the
spirit of God in all my actions, and in all my Relations in this world; I hope
that my soul is in the first place set to serve my Lord in the duties to them,
as that which he requires, and my be for his honor if done rightly; and though
I do often transgress the commands of my Lord Jesus, yet I trust I do not make
it my work, but it my daily burden.

2. My desires and daily groans before the Lord are, that I might be wholly
devoted and given up to Jesus in my whole inward and outward man; and I would
that all my poor parts, and strength, and time, yea all my inward and outward
Talents should be improved in his service wholly; how often does my soul breath
before the Lord after this manner! (Oh Father) is it not long enough, yea too
too long that I have been too too much at Satan's beck and the worlds, yea and
mine own? Oh that it might be thus no longer, and that I might no longer live
to my self, or seek or please my self in any thing, but that my whole soul may
be set to please my Lord Jesus; is it not my daily burden that I have too too
much sought and served my self, both in natural and spiritual things, that I
have had too many self ends and designs (which the Lord crucify, fully for my
Lords sake!) and as for the service of the world (if I know any thing of mine
own heart) it is my daily desire, prayer and endeavor, to throw the world
wholly out of my heart, That I might not do any service any longer to sin, or
Satan; and if at any time they do get any little from me, how grudgingly and
repiningly is it done? yea, is it not the grief of my soul, that I have had any
expectation or desires after any thing in the world, or of this world; that my
eye is not wholly and really upon Jesus Christ for expectation, provision, and
all what I need?

3ly. Though I have a wretched heart that has, and still would be picking its
work, thinking that other servants of Christ they have an easier work, and go
through this world filled filled with the joy of the Holy Ghost; yea, and have
their cups of earthly blessings overflowing; and hereupon my wicked heart has
been carried disorderly to long after and wish for such a condition; and think,
that I had a hard portion, to be always afflicted with inward and outward
distempers and weaknesses, trials in bodily afflictions of most sorts and
inward weaknesses, infirmities, temptations of diverse kinds, and in high
degrees, suffered my name, especially for my desire to walk in the ways and
services of my Lord; which my wicked heart thought very hard, and to this day
is too ready sometimes to murmr, though (through the goodness of my God) it
has not the power or strength that it has had, yet the very rising of it
causes my soul still to beg strength against it, and a through victory over it,
begging daily a submissive frame of spirit to the will of my Lord in all
things, desiring no more to pick and choose my condition, and work, but begging
the Lord to choose for me, who knows what is best for me, and if he sees meet
that I should serve him in the fire of affliction, inward or outward, that he
would but subject my heart to his will, and sanctify that condition to me, and
do with me what he please.

7ly. Does there not appear some degree of faithfulness in thee, in that thou
love most, whom thou esteemest to do most for Christ, and daily mournst that
others do no more for him then thou do? is it not a continual burden to
thee, that thou can do no more for Christ, and art employed no more by him?
May thou not say safely (before the Lord, who knows the truth of it) that
thy heart is not taken with any creature in this world, what ever it be? and if
upon any, yet upon no other account whatever, but only as they are servants to
thy Lord, and what ever their other adjournings were, whether beauty or parts,
or riches and honor, or whatever, none of all these did (to thy remembrance)
advance any creature in the esteem of thy soul.

8ly. Would thou not gladly (O my soul) be putting on others, yea and bless
the Lord, if he would please to enable thee to this work, that seeing thou
can do so little for him thy self, that he would enable thee to spur on
others to do more for him then thou can; and is it not thy burden, that
through one temptation or other, thou art so much prevented in this blessed
work also? To what end else are thy words and writings to others, and continued
begging of their remembrance of thee before the Lord?

9ly Is it not thy daily grief, that both thy self and others move so slowly in
this work, to see men lose their first love, and walk not so rightly and
faithfully with Christ, as formerly? is not this thy daily grief and burden,
and that which sometimes even overwhelmeth thy spirit?

10ly. (O my soul) do thou not desire continually to bless the Lord, that
he has made thee his servant to serve him in any work? for what art thou, that
the Lord should choose thee out to be his servant, when he might have taken
others, that might have done more service? yea, do not thou bless the Lord
(O my soul) more in that he has made thee his servant, then that he has given
thee riches, or honor, or esteem in the world? are these any thing in thy eye,
in comparison of being made his servant? did not the Lord bring thee to that
pass before he appeared in way of comfort to thee, to make thee beg of him,
upon thy knees, that thou may but be made a servant of his; whatever else
thou underwentest though thou should be made as the offscouring of all
things, or forced to beg thy bread in this world; yet that thou might but be
his servant?

11ly. (O my soul) may thou not say, that infirmities are more afflictive,
because impediments in the service of Christ, then because they are afflictions
upon thee? art thou not more troubled, when sick, weak in body, mind, or
understanding because these unfit thee for the service of Christ, then because
weak, sick, or low in esteem of others? Lord, thou know there is much
trembling upon my spirit about this, whether I may say this before thee or no:
but if it be not thus with me, (O Lord) I beg of thee to work this frame in me;
for it is that I desire to press after daily, and am grieved that I am no more
clear in; yet (methinks) sometimes it is in some measure evident to my soul,
that the defects that accompany my service are more grievous and burdensome to
me, then the want of success of comfort, though sometimes I am quite dark, as
to the clearing of this thing, fearing lest I have too much eye to my own
comfort and advantage, which I beg of God to crucify in me.

12ly. Though there be too much (if the Lord saw it good) of this wicked root
of pride and self-confidence in me; yet is the Lord pleased (blessed be his
Name) ever and anon to be pulling off those proud plumes, and put in me most
ferious and solid thoughts, to make me see, that all that I have done, or am
able to do is very little, and so making my soul (in some measure) to walk
humbly upon this twofold respect.

First, Considering, that my Lord is so worthy, and the service that I am able
to do so unworthy of him; now shall that Lord that has done so much for me,
have such service as this? Oh, how poor and low is it! the thoughts whereof the
Lord was pleased sometimes to make a means to abase me.

Secondly, Another thing the Lord was pleased sometimes to make a means to
humble my soul, was the consideration of this, That the defects in all my
services of him arise not so much from without, no, nor from all the powers of
Satan and Hell, as from within, as from the corruption of my own heart; and
this makes me often cry out before the Lord of the body of death; O wretched
creature that I am! the good that I would, that do I not; but the evil that I
hate, that I do?

13. (O my soul!) art thou not really glad if by any means thou may be made
faithful? and is not all that thou do almost in order to this? wherefore else
do thou read, hear, pray, meditate, converse with Saints, but still that thou
might be more able for, and faithful in the service of thy Lord?

14. Shall I say, I gather some comfortable hopes hence that my Lord has made
me (in some measure) faithful, in that I love my work more then my life? I
trust through grace I may speak something to this also. I confess often times
in my most serious thoughts (if my heart do not wretchedly deceive me) I could
gladly part with this wretched life, and desire to be with Christ, which is far
better; and oftentimes am ready to be impatient of delays, until the Lord was
pleased sometimes to quiet my heart with such like thoughts as these: Shall! be
willing hereafter to receive my wages, and should I not be as willing to do my
Lords work here, and in his own time. What though it be sad work to work in the
darkest Mines of Corruption and Temptation, to be continually fighting and
wrestling with those Enemies of my Lords, and of my soul; and shall I not be
willing to do his work as the Jews did theirs in building the Wall of
Jerusalem, that he will have me to work with one hand, and with the other to
hold a weapon, with my shield always by my side in a continual fighting
posture? Shall I not be willing to serve my Lord in his own way. O Lord (if I
know my own heart) I would do it; therefore Lord help me, and make me faithful
in it, that I may never make any peace with one Enemy of thine, or give them
any quarter, but continually seek their life, ruin and blood, who drew the
blood of my dearest Lord.

Lord, shall say that these things do hold forth in any measure my faithfulness
to thee? Or do they not rather hold forth thy faithfulness to my poor soul, who
have ever appeared faithful, though I have been unbelieving and unfaithful? yet
thou have been faithful, and it is thou that indeed workest all my works in and
for me, which Lord hasten the completing of making my soul such as thy soul
may delight in, even a Spouse fit for my Lord Jesus.

The next day being the 25. of the 10. Month, commonly called by English
people, Christmas, or the blessed time; but I am sure (through the rich grace
of God) it proved a blessed time to my poor soul; for though through the
temptations of Satan I went with a sad heart before the Lord this Lords day,
yet ever and anon was my heart filled with exceeding joy, w^ joy arose in part
from the refreshment the Lord gave me in communion with him over night, after I
had with some sadness attended upon him all the morning not finding so full an
appearance of his as I was filled with an expectation of: yet in that
afternoon how gloriously did the Lord appear through Mr. Knights Ministry, in
many sweet refreshments and seasonable truths to my poor soul? which came in
with so much the more life and power the Lord having but the day before given
me such a discovery of my heart, and of the workings of it before him; as also
of that full resignation that he has wrought in me of my whole self, and
by-ends and will to him; Mr. Knight spoke this day from 3 John 18. and finished
it; there was one word in a special manner set upon my heart from 1 Cor. 1.
30. Who is made unto us of God, wisdom, righteousness, sanctification, and
redemption: And oh how much need has my soul of all these? Of wisdom to guide
me; Of righteousness to plead for me? and of sanctification being a polluted
wretch defiled all over? yea of redemption out of the hands of Satan and my own
corruptions: and seeing Christ is made thus of God, and not only in himself so,
but unto us; Then up O my soul, and believe (as thou were then lively pressed
to, and had so many svveet encouragements, as thou had that day inwhich the
Lord was pleased in a great measure to answer thy desires over night, which
appearances of the Lord were so much the more glorious, and his condiscention
the greater, by how much he had three or four times before gloriously appeared
to my soul through our said Pastor; but through one temptation or another I was
still prevented from giving or returning public Praises for it, as I did
desire, but often provoked and occasioned rather to wrangle against my own
mercy, and fall to questioning how I might know whether they were appearances
of God yea or no; now that the Lord was pleased to pass by all this, and so
condescend to my weakness and folly, as to appear so gloriously as he did, even
as it were with an holy violence to force or constrain me to acknowledge it to
Mr. Knight, and desire him to bless the Lord for it; providence ordering it so,
that I was all alone at the Meeting House this day between the two Sermons, for
the space of two hours or more, I earnestly desired the Lord to show me what
his mind was, or what ends he might aim at in these trials and administrations
toward me: as I sat ruminating and considering what ends the Lord might aim
at, there were these things hinted with mighty power upon my spirit; as,

1. Truly I feeling my heart before in a very dead, listless, cold frame in the
presence of the Lord, who did by this hand of his in a lively manner quicken up
my spirit, and cause it to work up lively in his presence.

2. Yea, he did by it give me a clear sight of the workings of my own heart, of
its desire at the last to be fully resigned unto him, and be wholly at
hisdispose more then ever before; yea, I found my desire to be wrought up unto
that pitch to seek his glory first in all things.

3. Yea, the Lord by this means drew up, and drew out my heart to a longing,
earnest and vehement desire to be led and guided by him in all his ways;
telling him that I was such a poor foolish weak creature, that I was not able
to go one step in any of my ways, natural or spiritual, without him; and
therefore seeing that he had promised to guide the simple and lead the weak,
that he would now in an eminent manner appear to be my guide in all my ways,
even to the death, and not at any time leave me to my self, or the vanities and
allurements of this world, the temptations of Satan, or the wicked corruptions
of my own heart, (I being so ready to be drawn aside by them) and therefore
begging again and again to be kept by his mighty power.

4. Yea, I had (through this occasion a renewed token from my God and Father,
filling my heart with such joy and confident expectation of his appearance
(even before the duty wherein I sought it of him was ended) which made me beg
of him to increase and keep up my faith, and not suffer Satan to cause a damp
in it, causing me any more to distrust his love, who had so largely manifested
it from time to time to me.

5. Yea did not the Lord show me how righteous it was with him, that I who had
so often rashly said, that did not trouble my headvvith these things (though I
then saw it not) the Lord showed me, that it was righteous with him, that I
should now not only have my head troubled, but my heart also, so that all along
the Lord was pleased to outvvit Satan, so that what he thought to have made a
snare to entrap me in, the Lord made as great an advantage to my soul, as ever
any administration was?

The next Lords day, (being the first of this 11th. Month, 1653.) being filled
in the morning with very sad thoughts and apprehensions of my own darkness and
deadness, and the like, beseeching the Lord that it might be no bar or
hinderance to his appearance to my poor soul that day, but that he would appear
so much the more, by how much the darker I was, for by so much the more would
the glory of his grace shine forth upon such a a dark creature; O how
gloriously did the Lord appear this day in answer to these desires; and that in
a lively unexpected way, in guiding Mr. Knight in his Sermon, which was now
fixed upon John 3. 19. to begin with it that day that suited me; for I did
only expect (as himself had formerly intended) that he should only hold forth
the sadness of their condition, who love darkness more then light; but when he
came to meditate about it, he could not (as he told me afterward) get over the
first words, of light coming into the world, the Lord drawing out his heart,
that day, to treat wholly about Jesus Christ, being sent a light into the
world, to enlighten poor dark creatures, which came in so seasonably and
sutably upon my poor heart, that I cannot but much admire the grace of God in
it.

The next day (being the eighth day of the eleventh month, and the Lords day)
O how gloriously was the Lord pleased to appear to my poor distressed soul, in
answer to its desires and groans before him, making use of our dear Pastor, as
the instrument of his conveyance, (even throughout the whole service of the
day) the truth is, I am not able to declare the goodness of the Lord to my soul
at this time; O that I could admire it, for I cannot express it, what
seasonable truths, refreshments, counsels, and directions the Lord was pleased
to hint out to me this day.

A Copy of some desires, which I spread before the Lord, which were offered up
upon a day of Humiliation.

THere is one who desires a share in the Petitions that are this day poured out
in the spirit to the Lord, beseeching him, that as he sent his own son into the
world, to be a light to those who sit in darkness, and to guide their feet in
his ways, that he would be pleased to make him appear to be so to their souls,
by undertaking to be their guide and leader in all their ways; and to that end
that he would be pleased to reveal his will more fully to them, and go in all
their ways before them and enable them cheerfully to follow him, but at no
time to go before, without him, or stay behind him.

This was in relation to my self, and my present condition, desiring still to
see the Lord more clearly going before me.

Upon the reading this Bill in my behalf, they seemed all of them that read it
to be exceedingly taken with it; reading it over and over again, and pausing
upon it, finding it to take much upon them, upon which my wicked heart being
too ready to swell, how graciously was the Lord pleased to cast in such
expressions as these upon Mr. Blake's heart, which, after some time pausing
upon it, he uttered, which did much abase my spirit; It is an easy matter
(said he) to speak and present fine words in papers, and in prayers; but if we
should now enter into a serious examination of our own hearts, what we have
done toward the attainment of these things, which we thus desire that the Lord
may be petitioned for; perhaps our hearts may charge us of much hypocrisy and
neglect therein; in matters of bodily sickness and pains we do not only seek
the Lord, but we observe all means that we can for cure, and try all Physicians
and the like; but have we done so for the attainment of these spiritual mercies
or no? we could be content perhaps, if God would do it without us and our
pains; in the serious consideration whereof how sadly did my guilty heart fly
in my face! though not in reference to this present desire, I must confess, yet
in reference to many other desires that I have formerly spread before the Lord,
for the subduing of pride, and passion, and other corruptions, which I would
gladly have subdued; and yet in my course I gave too much way to them, and set
not so strict a watch over mine own heart, as I onght, and as I desire the
Lord to help me to do.

O my soul how graciously was the Lord pleased to appear this day (being the
second day of this tvvelsth month) through Mr. Knights Ministry at Westminster
Abbey, as a God hearing prayer, yea, answering thy desires, as to those
petitions put up over night? how gloriously was the Lord pleased to unvail
the Lord Jesus Christ to thee, as a Physician to poor sick souls; which
discovery of him, as it was very glorious so most suitable to the present
estate of thy spirit being (as I trust I may truly say) sick of its self, of
all its vvayes and doubts, and failings, to all my relations and conversations?
and O how svveet and seasonable was it now to hear of such a Physician, as
he was gloriously held out to be, from that 9 Matthew. 12. and for the other
suit, in causing my soul deeply to fall in love with him, and to be really
taken off from all things else; even for this I desire to wait, until the same
Lord shall please to give in as gracious an answer, which I trust he will also
do in his due time.

And for those requests put up this morning I could not but acknowledge, that
the Lord was pleased greatly to bow down, and give me a sensible token of his
glorious and gracious presence, through which that present mercy in prayer
(every word coming as it were from my very heart, in both the prayers before
and after Sermon, being the very groans and breathings of my soul before the
Lord) and every word in the Sermon, almost, being, as it were, spoken from
heaven to my heart, so fully, and in those very things, that my heart was, at
that very time, burdened withal; and I thought to have vented to Mr. Knight,
our dear Pastor, the day before; which, if the Lord had not prevented me in, I
really fear, that I should not have had so clear and gracious a sight of God in
this his appearance, but should have thought, surely, he had spoken those
things in relation to me; but blessed be that God that orders things so, as
to give his poor creature a more clear sight of the riches of his grace, even
as a prayer-hearing God; and all this, notwithstanding the rebellions of my
spirit, even under the hopes of his appearances, breaking out into that rash
and sinful word, (being exceedingly wearied, going up and down
Westminster Hall, and to White Hall, and to and fro up and down, then (as I
said) did the passion of my wicked spirit cause me to break out into this
foolish sinful expression, saying, If I had known this, I would not have come
out this day, when as perhaps the Lords intent by it was to try me, and make
the folly of my heart appear to me, and see how my faith could bear up against
those discouragements and bodily trials, (for my body was much distempered) and
in this my walking up and down, I had a pain took me under my side, that struck
through my breast to my heart, that I looked every moment when I should fall
down in the street as I went along, and as I came back; yet notwithstanding all
this my rebellion and repenting of my journey, was the Lord pleased not to do
by me as righteously he might; for he repented not of his intended kindness to
me, though I repented at my waiting upon him for it; and though I was full of
changes, yet he changed not; but when the Lord was pleased to bring me back
again to Westminster, and that in due time, I was glad, and began to recover my
spirit again. O how was my heart filled as it were with this exceeding
appearance of the Lord, and (in some measure) enlarged that evening to bless
his Name, who had so often appeared, and to all added the mercy of this day,
manifesting self to be a God hearing prayer! but O that cursed unbelief of my
wicked heart, that has had so much, and so manifold appearances of God, and of
his goodness, and should yet trust him no more! which also greatly drew out my
heart to beg of him to crucify my unbelief; but (I confess) this was it that
often gave the turn, and draws a cloud as it were before me, even the mighty
prevalences of corruption in my soul, which makes me often to cry out; Lord,
when shall I see this body of death and sin subdued, and crucified, and my soul
fully subjected to thee, this being the burden of my soul, (even then when the
Lord shines forth most clearly upon my heart) to think, what an unsuitable
frame of spirit is there in me, to all those wonderful ways of the Lord
toward me, that by all the sights he gives me of himself and his will. I am no
more changed into his likeness!

The 15 day of this twelfth Month, at night, the Lord was pleased exceedingly
to draw out my heart to beg of him the rooting out of those corruptions issuing
out of my heart to the creature, and gathering of it up into him self, and
ordering my affections, and the like; as also being greatly drawn out to bless
and praise him, beseeching him to enable me to it to bless him for his answers,
so often given me to the importunate desires and requests of my soul, when I
had so often tempted him; for it was not Israel only that tempted him ten
times, but I had often tempted him; so that he might have righteously given
that I begged of him, and a curse together with it; but I did now greatly
desire to bless him that hitherto he had denied me in it, beseeching him so to
do still, and subject my soul to him in all my ways, begging him earnestly
that he would once work my heart to such assurance, that I might be careful in
nothing, and in nothing thoughtful for, or studious about any thing here below,
and to give up my self wholly to be at his dispose, yea, more then ever I had
been to any bodily Physician, beseeching him now that he would undertake to be
my souls Physician, and to cure me of those soul-distempers in my affections
and practices, let the physic be what he will, let it but be of his
prescribing, and to support my spirit under his hand, and make it vvilling to
submit to his will, and then (Lord) do with me what thou vvilt.

And now (father) what are those requests that thou vvilt hear? have thou not
said, what ever we ask in thy Sons name thou will hear; why, in thy Sons name
I desire to come; for J have nothing else to plead, there is nothing in me, but
for thy Sons sake, the Son of thy bosom and love, who died for poor sinners,
such as thy poor worm is; for his sake, and in his Name J come unto thee; and
thou have said, whatsoever we ask according to thy will thou will hear: Now
(Lord is not this agreeable to thy will, to be conformed more to thee? and have
my will more subjected to thee? and my affections more placed upon thee? O
then (Lord) seeing thou say, What we ask believing, we shall have it, (Lord)
increase my faith, and help me to wait upon thee believingly.

The eighteenth of this twelfth month, having been these eight or nine days
last past somewhat distempered in body, which distemper prevailing more and
more upon me, J thought J should hardly be able to wait upon the Lord in his
administrations the next day, desiring the Lord to direct me what to do, and
submit my will to his; yet, very early that morning J had many reasonings in my
self what to do, being loath to distrust the power of God, that J had so often
found eminently held out to me, and yet unwilling to tempt the Lord to appear
to me in any extraordinary way, desiring much his direction: at last the Lord
was pleased to enable me to resolve to go, notwithstanding I was exceeding ill
of an extraordinary cold, beseeching the Lord to appear to my soul; and as he
was pleased to give me that probability of the enjoyment of him once more, that
it might be a blessed opportunity to my soul, and that his mighty power and
spirit might accompany every word and hint to my soul, that it might be of
spiritual advantage to me, such as I might have cause to bless his name for,
and also to mould me into whatever truth he should reveal to me that day; And
truly I desire to acknowledge that the nineteenth day of this twelfth month,
the Lord was pleased very gloriously to appear through his word administered by
our deer Pastor, both in the exposition of the end of the 14. of Matt. as also
in both Sermons this day, at which time he began to discourse upon the 45
Psalm; but did only handle the Title of it this day, from which the Lord was
pleased to hint out very precious, glorious, useful, yea seasonable
instructions to my soul, which I desire earnestly to beg of God to cast and
mould my heart into; yea, such truths as proved an answer to several desires of
my soul many days before, and to the groanings of my soul before the Lord,
even continually almost, to wit, that the Lord would be pleased to gather my
heart out of all things below Jesus Christ, and give me to the end such a sight
of my Lord Jesus Christ, as might indeed) take my heart from all other things;
now that at this time the Lord should thus seasonably cast his thoughts upon
such a Scripture as this, it did cause my soul to admire the riches of his
grace and condiscention to such a worm; yea, whereas my spirit has of late
been greatly troubled about my foolish conversation, being not such as may any
way adorn the Gospel, walking very unseemly in all my relations, and very much
offending therein with my tongue, which has occasioned many a sad thought
upon my heart, and many a sigh and groan, yea tears before the Lord, to set a
vvatch before my mouth, and subdue this wicked iniquity in me.

And now did the Lord this day lay open the spring, the root, the cause of it,
my eye was not as it ought upon my heart, nor my heart as it ought to be upon
Jesus Christ, nor when it was upon him was it in a boiling frame: for (as by
him hinted) were the heart boiling hot about the Lord Jesus Christ the tongue
could not issue out such vanities as it does; now (dear Lord) let not these
things be spread before me in vain I beseech thee, but do thou by the mighty
Power of thy spirit make them of singular use unto me.

The 11th. of this first Month the Lord drew out my heart very much (amongst
other things) to beg of him to manifest himself in that Relation of an Husband
to my soul, more and more letting me to find and feel what it was
experimentally to be embraced by him, and gathered up into more intimate
communion with him, and much more to this effect.

The next morning he caused my soul to breath out in this manner; That though I
was every way unfit for communion with him, yet beseeching him to appear to my
soul, and a sight of himself would much rejoice my heart, telling him that as
he had often appeared gloriously in this kind, so that he would please to let
my soul find once again by experience his mighty power to break out through
what ever instruments he shall please to make use of this day, that I might
through them have a glorious sight of himself. In which the Lord was pleased
greatly to bow down, appearing graciously through Mr. Price, who spoke to us in
his Name the 12. day of this first Month.

Upon the 26. day of this first Month, 1654. we went to James, expecting to
have heard Mr. Cradock; but when we came there, we heard there would be a
stranger, at which I was much troubled in my spirit; and after some debate in
my self I began to repine; but expecting the Lord might have some seasonable
Word for me; and truly (blessed be his Name) there was many seasonable things
hinted to my soul by him, which both refreshed and stayed my spirit.

The next day at night (being the 27 of this first Month) Amongst other things
when I was seeking of the Lord, he drew out my soul with some measure of
sensibleness of his hand upon our Pastor, what a sad stroke it would be if
the Lord should strip us of him, taking him from us; oh! What would become of
Gods glory? how would his and our enemies insult over us? though it is true
we have deserved it [I am sure I have] to be stripped of this mercy, and
scattered from each other, because we have been no more fruitful under all the
mercies, means, and appearances of God through him; and I begged to sanctify
his hand upon him, both as to him and us, and teach us all to improve it and
know his mind in it, desiring the Lord vvithal that he would please to hasten
and accomplish his Work through this dispensation, and in his own time to
command health and deliverance to us, and give in this mercy as a pledge of his
love amongst us, that he might come again amongst us filled with the spirit,
and ready to break out those discoveries of God upon his heart, and that we
also may be fitted for this mercy, and made more ready to receive impression
from God through him then formerly.

And for my own soul after many requests for the subduing of corruptions, and
regulating my affections, and taking off my heart from all things here below,
and placing it upon the Lord Jesus; after which and many other requests, the
Lord drew out my heart with desires, that if the Lord saw it meet to add
another night or another day to me, that he would together with it, give me a
heart to serve him in it, and that as he renews the light and raises from
sleep, so that he would inliven my heart in his ways, and quicken up my soul
to a more lively service of him, and if the Lord see it meet to give me one
opportunity more to hear his word, that he would please to fit me for, it and
to come in through whatsoever instrument he shall please, that my soul might
have such a blessed sight of him, that I might thereby be changed more into his
own Image.

The 2. day of the 2. Month, being this morning in some measure made sensible
of my own deadness and dullness to the things of God, and barrenness and
unprofitableness under all the means of grace; I apprehending it very righteous
with the Lord to deal with me according to my desert, and not to manifest any
thing to my soul, yet pressing him much, though I deserved the contrary, yet
for his own name sake, and for my Lord Jesus sake to be pleased to appear to my
poor soul, and let me have some sight of himself, telling him that he had
gloriously appeared formerly to my soul, and he was the same still; and O that
he would now break through and give me a sweet kiss from himself; and how
gloriously did the Lord, this day, condesend, and bow down to the desires of
his poor unworthy worm, through that servant of his (Mr. Bramble) by whom,
and through whom, many seasonable truths were hinted to my spirit, both in way
of further reviving of my deadness and dullness, and in way of comfort and
direction, for which O that I could indeed bless and praise the name of this
my glorious God.

The third day of the second Month.

Having extreme desire to go and hear Mr. Cradock the next day, I told my
Mother over night, persuading her to it, she having very urgent occasions; but
at last prevailing, I found my self very much distempered next morning with a
great cold which I had got; notwithstanding which, I got up, but before I was
quite dressed I had such a stitch took me in my back in such an extreme manner,
that I knevv not how to lean any way; it was in such an extreme manner which
held me for the space of two hours continually, almost until it was full time
to go; in all which time I reasoned still with my self what I should do, fearing
I should not hold out that journey, nor be able when I was there to sit to hear
because of it; yet at last having had such experience of God formerly, I did
desire now to roll upon him, and betook me to some short desires to him,
beseeching him if he saw it good, to give me so much inward and outward
strength as might at this time enable me to honor and glorify him; earnestly
begging his appearance to my soul, quickening and raising it, conforming it more
to himself; with many other desires relating to my spiritual condition; and how
seasonably did the Lord come in this day through Mr. Cradocks Ministry, both
conveying of Counsels, Cautions and Comforts? The Comforts were from Romans 8.
32. And for the stitch and pain in my back, I bless the Lord it went so away
that I felt it not all that while I was abroad, but did as it were quite forget
that it troubled me that day; so did the Lord appear to my body also.

Many blessed sights the Lord gave me also this day through that servant of
his, Mrs. Blackborn, whom I met at James hearing Mr. Cradock, who came home
with us, and related much to me how it was with Mr. Cradock, how sad his
temptations were, which came most seasonably to my consideration to take me
off from rash thoughts I was ready to take up but the day before concerning
others, still many other seasonable things she hinted to me of the fears that
often were upon her spirit touching self ends, fearing that she might desire,
beg for, and seek after good things; and yet all but out of self ends,
complaining of the strife she found oftentimes between her judgment and
affections; yet being drawn out to bless God for denying of her that which at
the very present her affections ran out after; all which jealousy and fears
lying sadly upon my own spirit, hearing her that was such an ancient Christian
complain also of the same, was to me a little refreshment.

Some scattered Meditations the second Month. 1654.
COnsidering the vanity of all creatures compared with the Lord, what is there
in the creature desirable? the best of men (which are the best of creatures)
are nothing else then vanity; they are but a shadow compared with the
substance; nay, they are but dark shadows; now what wise creature is taken much
with a shadovv? what is there in creatures, the best of creatures (man himself)
that is desirable? as for beauty, that is vanity of vanities; the rarest thing
in this vanity should no way take upon a gracious spirit that was raised up to
higher things; but (to go to the utmost hight) the best things and most
desirable in the best of men is their resemblances of, or likeness unto the
Lord; yet in this they are but like unto pictures, yea dark ones; now who would
be much taken with the Picture, that might at the same time enjoy the thing
that is pictured; yet some Pictures made by the hand of man, may in appearance
far excel in beauty and loveliness the thing pictured; and herein the best of
creatures are but dark, dead low resemblances, yea very poor ones of the
eternal God. Pictures are often desired because of the fading, uncertain
enjoyment of the thing pictured, which often times fades before the Picture;
but what creature comes near to the representation of God? the Picture quickly
fades and dies, but the substance is eternal.

Who then would desire, or be overmuch taken with such a Picture that perhaps
seems fair to day but fades to morrow, which is the condition of all finite
creatures? but that infinite God is an everlasting Father, the Lord Jesus an
ever-living Interceder, and the Spirit of Truth an abiding Comforter; yea, in
every Relation wherein the Lord is pleased to manifest himself, he is that to
his to all eternity.

Yea, as Pictures are poor, dead, useless things in comparison of the person
they resemble, only a delighting the eye; such are the very best of creatures
compared with the Lord; can they speak if he be silent? can they effect ought
if he withdraw? Can they smile if he frown? Can they refresh if he rebuke? Can
they heal if he wound? Can they raise up if he cast down? There is neither any
life or motion in them separated from him; they have eyes, but see not; ears,
but hear not; hands, but act not; feet, but walk not; tongues, but speak not to
any spiritual advantage, unless he that is the life of their lives puts life
into all these, and when he has done, acts in, through, by and with them.

The tenth day of the second Month.

The Lord having been pleased to hint out to me by Mr. Bramble (the 9th. of the
second Month, 1654.) that the Lord was pleased oftentimes in mercy to appoint
some wearisom nights and days to his people, wherein they could not take any
rest, that so they might call their own hearts to an account seriously before
the Lord, and the like; which I pondering upon, and thinking with my self how
eminent the Lord has appeared to my soul in former days, in the
Night-seasons, and how sweet my Meditation of him has been Night and Morning
upon my Bed; and how barren my heart has been for some time of late in these
Meditations, and how the Lord has seemed to withdraw; these thoughts did put
me upon it (the tenth of this second Month) in the Evening to beg of God, that
as he had formerly appeared in such seasons, that he would please to return
that mercy even by those torches of his hand, whereby my Nights are very
wearisome to my body by reason of my extreme Cough; and truly I did the more
press it upon the Lord in my desires, having much groaned to think that Night
would be very wearisom to me more then any formerly by reason of my distemper;
but my good God, who works all things after the counsel of his own Will, and
not according to our thoughts, or fears, or hopes, so ordered it, that what I
had reason most to fear, he gave me least to feel, and though I was much
distempered in my head, when I went to bed by reason of my cold that was so
great, yet did he give me very good rest, all the forepart of the night;
which when I avvaked toward morning and began to consider, Oh, I could not
but admire; but vvithal began to think that though my desires about this were
ansvvered, and though I had rest of body, yet no communion with my God, or
reasonings with my own heart (which I intended to have parlyed a little with;)
while I had these thoughts and the like, lying in a slumbering way, there was
this thought brought to my mind, which Mr. Cradock (the fourth day of this
second Month) mentioned upon another occasion; the words were these, That vain
man would be wise that was born like a wild Asses Colt: These words ran much in
my mind, and some thoughts were given in upon them, with a great desire I might
not forget them, but might in the Morning see and find out that place of
Scripture; but the Lord giving me (as I thought an opportunity) and so much
strength as to go and hear Mr. Cradick, I hasted, as soon as I could get up, to
prepare for going; but when we came there, having prayed to the Lord in some
few words, that he would please to give me some sight of himself, some
transforming sight, and some kisses from his lips this day; but going there we
were disappointed; for that exercise was for some occasions put off to next
morning, and so we came home again; and coming home, being a little sadned in
my spirit, thinking of my Morning-desires, and when an answer should be of
them, or how looked for, I sat me down, and fell to reading a little of Mr.
Cradocks Sermon before mentioned; and meeting with these words, Oh vain man
that would be wise, put me again in mind of my Night-thoughts, and fell to
looking the Scripture, and found it in Job 11. 12. For vain man would be wise
though man be born like a wild Asses Colt; some hints there were that fell upon
my heart this night from these words, Vain man would be wise: (Good God!) has
not this been my condition? this poor vain creature, would I not fain be wise,
and thought to be so, and often prided my self in the thoughts of it, for which
the Lord righteously shows me now and then my folly; yet how fain would I be
wise in chalking out Ways for the Lord to walk in toward me, even as if I
knew better what were good for me then God, or how to accomplish that Work in
my soul better then he, and therefore am I so ready to prescribe to him Ways;
yea and if he refuses and rejects them (as for the most part he is pleased in
mercy to do, blessed be his Name.) Oh! how sadly does it often lie upon my
spirit, and how apt am I to think hardly of the Lord, that truly he does not
mean me any good in denying me this or that I desire.

And for the later words, though man be born like a wild Ass Colt; concerning
which I had some scattered thoughts, but not so composed as afterward. But
after I had come home from James next day, and had looked this Scripture, and
found it, sitting and pausing a while upon it (my spirit being very much
sadned and unfit for any serious spiritual meditation) at last I betook my self
to some short requests to the Lord, telling him, That as he was pleased thus
to disappoint my expectation of the public enjoyment, yet in him there was a
fullness of all power and ability, thereby being as able to speak to me by his
own spirit something that might be of spiritual advantage, some transforming
words which he is able to do as well in private as in public, which I did
now beg of him, and to that end besought him to lead me by the hand this day,
and guide me into the Way, and put me upon the Work, and that he would please
to appear to me, with many other requests both for my own soul, and others in
relation to me. But not knowing what Work to set upon this day, or what to
take in hand, but waiting upon the Lords direction, having many things in my
thoughts to do, but desirous of some word from God to my poor soul; but this
word in Job 11. 12. following me still, I fell to some further thoughts of it,
and ruminating on the latter clause, of being like the wild Ass, I began to
think what that Scripture did record of this creature that I saw did resemble
me fully, and there these words of the Prophet brought to my mind that it went
up and down snuffing up the Wind, and is ready to be found in her month; which
words I found in Jeremiah 2. 24. A wild Ass used to the wilderness that
snuffeth up the wind at her pleasure, in her occasion, who can turn her away?
all these that seek her will weary themselves, in her Month they shall find
her. In which, as also in most part of the chapter, I find many things that
sat very close to me, the Lord began: thus it was with me, for in v. 2. I
remember (says he) the kindnest of thy youth, the love of thine espousals,
when thou wentest after me in the Wilderness in a Land that was not sown; In
the time of thy darkness, sorrows, and tears, and bondage; when thou wentest
after me, and often in the bitterness of thy soul resolved to follow me through
this Wilderness, though thou should perish in so doing; yea, resolving so to
follow me as that thy heart was then fully, as it were, taken off from all but
me, thou did desire nothing but my self.

But ver. 5. What Iniquity have your Fathers found in me that you go from me to
follow after vanity? How righteously may the Lord say thus to me, was he not
better to me by far then ever I expected, or could have believed? v. 6. Neither
said they, Where is the Lord that brought us up out of the Land of Egypt, that
led us through the Wilderness, through a Land of Deserts, and of Pits, through
a Land of drought; and of the shadow of death, through a Land that no man
passes through, and where no man dwelt. and ( v. 7) Brought you into a
plentiful Land, to eat the fruit thereof, and the goodness thereof; but you
entered, you defiled my land, and made my Heritage an abomination. And was not
this my condition? How did the Lord with a strong and mighty hand bring me out
of the Egyptian Bondage, that sad slavery that I was in under Satan, and those
cruel Taskmasters he set over me in my own heart and conscience, my
corruptions and guilt, which laid insupportable burdens upon me both ways,
commanding me to make brick, laying the Law before me, but giving me no
strength to do it; nay, continually hindering and pulling me back from it, and
yet scourging me for all the neglect of it; yea, through a Wilderness, through
a Land of Deserts did he carry me; in which I thought I savv my self wholy
deserted of God (which was no small trouble to me) through a Land of Pits, yea,
Pits on every hand, into which I was ready still to fall; through a Land of
Drought, wherein my soul was ready to faint in me for thirst after the Lord;
yea, through the shadow of Death: And oh how then has the Lord brought me into
the shadow of death time after time, laying me on my sick bed, and pale death
still looking me in the face with dreadful terrors and amazement; yea to the
very Pits brinck of hell (in my own apprehensions) which is the worst of
deaths; yea through a Land where no man passes, or dwells, having none to
condole my misery, none being acquainted with it, or me; but wandering as it
were by my self, thinking and deeming that no soul was in half so sad a
condition as I was, but on the contrary, has not the Lord since (oh that I
could but bless his Name for it!) brought me into a plentiful Country, shined
upon my soul, given me some tastes and glimpse (I hope) of the good Land, which
whiles I was thus entering into, I did sadly wax careless and remiss after some
time, and too much taken with the vanities of this World, and letting out my
heart too much to the creature comforts. ( v. 9) Wherefore says the Lord, I
will plead with you, and with your childrens children will I plead; has any
Nation changed their gods which are no gods; but my people have changed their
glory for that which does not profit. (v. 13.) They have committed two evils,
they have forsaken me the Fountain of living waters, and hewed ont to
themselves Cisterns, broken Cisterns that can hold no water: Oh! may not the
Lord righteously complain thus of me? have not I too much declined from him,
and run out after creatures in my affections and desires? and placed too much
happiness in other things, which have been made appear to be broken Cisterns
that could not hold any Water. ( V. 14, 15, 16) And now says the Lord, Why art
thou speiled? have the Lions roared upon thee? and is thy Crown spoiled? (v.
17.) Have thou not procured this to thy self in that thou have forsaken the
Lord thy God whon he led thee by the way? Oh! may not the Lord rghteously say
thus to thee? Are the Lions let loose upon thee? do trouble and sorrow come in
again upon thee? And is Satan let loose in any measure to torment thee? May
thou not thank thy self? Have thou not brought it on thee? Is it not righteous
with the Lord to do so by thee? ( v. 18.) What have thou to do in the way of
Egypt, i.e. to return from the Lord to the creature, to seek any good what
ever? What have thou to do to drink the waters of Shiloh, or the waters of the
River, or in the way of the Aijyrians? (v. 19.) Thy own wickedness shall
correct thee, (oh Lord! and have thou no^ made it to do so?) and thy back
slidings reprove thee; know therefore, and see that it is an evit thing, and
bitter, that thou have forsaken the Lord thy God, and that his fear is not in
thee. (V. 20) For of old time I have broken thy Yoke, (blessed Lord thou have)
and burst thy bands, and thou saidest will not transgress; yea Lord, it is
very true, yet I have so done again. ( V. 23.) How can thou say, I am not
polluted? see thy way in the valley know what thou have done, thou art a swift
Dromidary, traversing her ways. Do but consider with thy self, and thou shall
see what thou take, and how unwearied thy wicked heart is in its continual
traversing, that by being frequently carried out after other things then me. (
V. 24.) A wild Ass that is used to the Wilderness that snuffeth up the wind
at her pleasure in her occasion; who can turn her away? all they that seek her
will weary themselves, in her Month they find her; Blessed Lord, how clearly
do thou point as it were at my wicked heart, which like a wild Ass, a rugged
thing, and wild also, very untamed, and unruly, unwilling to endure to be held
in by any bridle, or made any way ferviceable to thee: But used to the
wilderness -- frequently conversing and running out after the things of this
wildering world: (Yea, snuffing up the wind) And is not this a righteous
judgment from thee, that what ever my heart runs out after, but thy self it
should be but as vvind, that for the present fills, but satisfies not;
nourishes not, but in the end tormenteth and causes pangs, and tearing in the
bowels; oh! this is the misery of my wretched heart, that it can take and fall
in with the World, but hardly taken off [VVho can turn her away?] Oh Lord! how
hard is it to give a turn to this wretched heart running out after any vanity
here below, who can turn it? Thy Messengers may come, and come with thy Word in
their mouths, and cry, Stop and stand, and make a parley, but they are not able
to give a real turn; yea, thou art pleased often times to come in with many a
sweet motion by thy spirit, and yet this gives not an effectual turn neither;
yea, thou come in often times, and many ways, sometimes by mercy, sometimes
by afflictions; and yet these neither can sound a retreat. Oh that thou (who
only can do it) would once please to give such a real turn to my heart in
the pursuit after any thing but thy self; that it may never be so any more. [
V. 31.] Have I been a Wilderness to Israel? Oh Lord thou have not been so to
my soul. [ V. 32.] Can a Maid forget her Ornaments, and yet my people have
forgotten me. Oh Lord! Must not I cry guilty before thee here? for did I
remember that I should not so often sin against thee? [ V. 33.] Why trimmest
thou thy way to seek lovet [V. 36.] Why gaddest thou about so much to change
thy way? to run from one thing in the world to another; thou also shall be
ashamed of Egypt as thou wast of Assyria. [V. 37.] Thou shall go forth from
him, and thy hand upon thy head; [in a posture of lamentation] for the Lord
has rejected thy confidence, thou shall not prosper in them.

The Lord persuade thy heart fully of these truths, and work thy soul to a
frame suitable thereunto.

The 18. day of this second Month, 1654. This Afternoon, being somewhat
burdened at the wretched out-going of my wicked heart, which was like a vvild
thing ready to break out upon every occasion, even in reading the Scripture its
self; how sadly does it take occasion to fly out! the thoughts whereof very
much oppressed my spirit; whilst I was seeking the Lord about it, it was darted
into me, that the Lord might be even now answering my own Prayers and desires,
though the answer of them seemed thus dreadful to me; for oh how often have I
formerly begged and desired of God that he would discover my own heart to me,
that he would anatomize it, that I might see and know it, even as he sees and
knows it, and the like; and for ought I know, this sad working up of corruption
may even be to give me a sight of what filth there is within my heart; yea, may
I not in some measure have provoked the Lord to suffer, and permit sin to work
in me by so vehement desires.

Oh good Lord! What need then had we poor creatures to seek of thee to teach
souls what and how to pray? for truly we know not what to pray; nay when thou
come in answer even to our own importunate desires; how unable are we to bear
the answer of our own Prayers? Oh the vvretchedness of my heart! is it not
polluted in all that ever it does and says?

Is not self, and some by and base ends, or other at the end of every thought,
word and action? does there not still step in some thing of self, yea too
often something of sin; yea, when in company I speak best? yea, such things as
others seem to admire at such expressions and experiences; but alas, is there
not much sin in it? Am I able to do, to live or practice what I speak? Nay, is
there not most an end some base end either in the speaking of it, or that comes
in headlong after it? Oh cursed frame of spirit!

The 20 day of this second Month, 1654. having sought the Lord that he would
breath in by his spirit upon my soul, and give me some sights of himself, some
communion with him, and some discoveries from him this Afternoon.

There were these hints fell upon my heart soon after, that I had been very
remiss in improving those precious and glorious appearances of God to my soul
(through our dear Pastor) that so nearly concerned me from that 45. Psalm, and
that therefore the Lord had justly laid him aside for a time, even whilst he
was entering into it. (O blessed Lord) have thou watched over me in the time of
my childhood, vanity, unregeneracie, when I knew not my right hand from my
left; and have thou been with me ever since to this day? and should I now
distrust thee, or fear that thou should now leave me to my self? (O cursed
unbelief!) have thou vvatched over me these six and twenty years, and suffered
no evil to overtake me, but made all things to work together for my good; and
should I now fear and mistrust thy love?

Have thou provided for me to this day that no good has been wanting to me?
and shall I now distrust thee, or think thou will withhold any thing thou
see good for me? Nay, Have thou not vvith-held me from evil that would have
hurt me? and must I now murmr, repine and cry out of thy want of love to me?
and that thou should bear all this and go on further to make out thy love to
me; and shall I yet distrust thee?

Have thou overcome death and hell for me, that I am not now in that slavish
fear of them as formerly I have been? and shall I still fear that thou will not
overcome my corruptions for me? (O cursed unbelief!)

The 23. day of the second Month, 1654. In the Morning being much discouraged
in reference to any hopes of Gods appearance, having heard but slender
commendations of him that was to speak this day; yet being desirous to look up
to the Lord, I besought him that he would please to give my soul some sight of
himself, and communion with him; and that as I had former experiences from him,
that the instrument was nothing if he would please to undertake the work; and
therefore I besought him that his power might so appear that my soul might
have a sight of him, and there might be some seasonable word spoken that might
do my soul good; and truly I must needs acknowledge the Lord was pleased
graciously to bow down and manifest his presence exceedingly beyond my
expectation this day.

The fourth day of this third Month, 1654. being to take a portion of Physic,
I besought the Lord that it might accomplish his will and pleasure upon me; and
if that lay in health, that it might be sanctified to me; if in sickness, that
my will might be bowed and submitted to his will.

The 7. day of this third Month, at night the Lord drew out myheart to beg of
him amongst other requests, that he would pardon all my misspent time, and
help me to improve what ever time he should see mete to give me, more to his
praise and glory; and to that end, if he should see mete to give me to enjoy
another day, and see the beginning of a new Week, that he would also give me a
new heart, and a new spirit, and help me to walk more to his praise, improving
time better then formerly.

The next Morning, (being the 8. of this third Month) I besought the Lord for
his presence that day, notwithstanding all my unprofitableness and unworthiness
of it, with much to that effect: And truly the Lord was pleased greatly to bow
down, and spoke many sweet and seasonable things to my soul, both through that
servant of his Mr: Bradshaw, that preached that day at Fulham, as also by his
spirit, through some Scripture then hinted unto us, which caused my soul that
night to breath out before the Lord, desiring to bless him for it, yet
lamenting my unprofitableness under such glorious appearances of his, and
mis-improvement of them; lamenting also the great iniquity of my tongue,
beseeching the Lord now to set a Watch before my mouth, and to keep the door of
my lips, as also my heart.

The 13. of this third Month, in the Morning as I was going down, I had a
strong repulse upon my spirit to speak a few words unto the Lord before I went
down; at which time my heart was greatly drawn out to speak to God to curse,
and blast, and root out of my heart these bitter Roots. Pride, Passion, and
inordinate Affections, in a special manner that of Passion; he first drew out
my heart in this address to God, finding it so sadly prevailing, telling the
Lord that he had often showed me the evil of this both from the Scriptures time
after time, coming sometimes with mighty power upon my heart, and yet going off
again; yea, he had appeared against all these evils in many experiences of the
folly and vanity of them, especially those of Pride and inordinate affections;
how often had he showed me the emptiness of all creatures, yea in the very
things I expected most from? And how often had he blasted my pride by these
continual scoffs I met Mithal, and by all those infirmities upon my body, for
all which I desire to bless his Name, beseeching him once to speak effectually
to my heart, to the utter ruin of these evils in me.

The 24. day of this fourth Month, being in my Closet, the Lord drew out my
heart to pray that he would please to manifest his presence, and drop something
upon my heart that might be for my spiritual good and advantage; in answer
thereunto the Lord was pleased unexpectedly to cast me upon this Scripture, the
40. of Isaiah.

1. Where the Lord begins with a command to comfort his Church, yea, to comfort
them at the very heart; but thou may say, What does he comfort them withal?

2. First, Tell her, Her warfare is accomplished.

2. Her Iniquity is pardoned; yea, he adds, She has received of the Lords
hand double for all her sins, twice as much mercy as she had sin.

3. He goes on with a gracious Promise, That God would have a way made for him
in the Desert.

4. And that Every Valley should he exalted, and every high Hill made low, and
the crooked made strait, and that the glory of the Lord should be revealed, and
all flesh see it, which glory of his should so darken all the creatures glory,
that he adds.

6. All flesh is grass; nay it shall now appear to be but withered grass.

7. All which shall wither away, and the Word of God only abide. Then

8. The Lord calls upon his people to rise from these withering things.

9. Get you up (says he) to the Mountains. Secondly, Lift up your voice. And
thirdly, Be not afraid; as if the Lord would secretly intimate that he savv his
people too apt to grubble upon the earth, and take content in these fading
Flowers of the Field, not having their hearts raised to so glorious an
expectation of his appearance and revelation of his glory; therefore it is
observable, he doubles it, Lift up your voice; they being much averse to it;
yea, (says he) Fear not; but why should we not fear? Why, Behold your God; a
word of application and admiration.

10. Yea, He double it, Behold the Lord God, behold he will come [and how] with
a strong hand, and his arm (the strength of his hand) shall rule for him: Then
he adds:

11. His reward is with him; he shall feed his Flock like a Shepherd: yea, He
gethereth the Lambs with his arms, and carries them in his bosom, and gently
leads those that are with young. Then

12. He goes on the 27. verse, showing the mighty power of his God above all
creatures;

15. How creatures are to him but as a drop of a Bucket, and as the small dust
of the Balance:

17. Yea, As nothing, and as a thing of naught; When he had thus abundantly set
forth his mighty Power, he challenges all that unbelief in the heart of his
people to come forth and meet him.

27. Why say thou O Jacob and Israel, My ways hid from the Lord? And have
thou any reason for such thoughts?

28. Have thou not known, neither heard, that the everlasting God, the Creator
of the ends of the earth, (see what glorious titles here are to strengthen
faith) he faints not, neither is weary? Poor creatures are apt to think
surely they have wearied the Lord with their continual backslidings and
revoltings; but says h^ Have you not known that I am an everlasting God, yea,
that I faint not, neither am weary; and he adds, That there is no searching
his understanding; and not only was he thus glorious in himself, but

29. He gives power to the faint, yea to them that have no might he increases
strength. (O blessed encouragement!) Poor souls may say, Well, be it so; that
notwithstanding all my rebellions the Lord was not weary nor faints in his
arm or love to me; yet I am a poor feeble creature, and am ready to faint, and
not able to hold up the head; but he gives power to the faint also; yea, he
eacreaseth their strength, even

30. The youths shall faint and be weary, and the young men utterly fall; i.e.
They that trust in their own strength shall utterly fail.

31. But they that wait upon the Lord shall renew their strength, they shall
mount up as Engles, they shall run, and no be weary; walk, and not fain^; when
they that can do nothing, that have no strength or might, but only wait upon
the Lord for strength from him, shall have this glorious Promise made good to
them: (O my soul) vvait thou only upon the Lord, because thy expectations are
only from him; wait I say, upon him.

Isaiah 41. 8.

8. He goes on with rich encouragement to poor weak souls, Thou O Israel art my
servant, Jacob my chosen, this Seed of Abraham my Friend; (sweet familiar
titles!)

9. Whom I have taken from the ends of the Earth, and called thee from the
chief men thereof, and said, Thou art my servant; Blessed Lord, have thou not
done this for my poor soul? have thou taken me when I was running, even to the
ends of the earth, from place to place, and thing to thing, bewildered in all?
yea, have not thou called me from the chief men thereof, from the chief
desirable things of this world? O Lord, enable my soul to follow this call of
thine, and make me indeed thy servant; yea, the Lord adds, Thou art my
servant, I have chosen thee; he does not say, Thou chosest me, but, I have
chosen thee; yea, I have not chosen and turned thee away again; no, I have
chosen thee, and not cast thee off; then he goes on with more blessed
encouragements:

10. Fear thou not, why? might they say, why? I am with thee; be not dismayed,
for I am thy God; adding withal, I am not only present with thee, and that as
thy God, but, I will strengthen thee; yea, I will help thee; yea, I will uphold
thee and that with the right hand of my righteousness: A blessed encouragement,
answering all Objections in the soul, as if the Lord had said, Art thou a poor,
feeble, weak creature, unable to any spiritual service? Well, I will strengthen
thee: art thou still afraid? Why I will help thee, and as it were, work
together with thee; and is not this enough? Why I will uphold thee too, and
that with my hand, yea, with my right hand; yea, with the right hand of my
righteousness; secretly hinting, that there is a fear in a poor soul in point
of righteousness; then he goes on to tell them what shall become of their
Enemies, and he ushers it in with a Behold!

11. Behold what I will do with thine Enemies, Behold, all they that are
incensed against thee shall be ashamed and confounded; yea, they shall be as
nothing; yea, they that do but strive with thee shall perish; thou shall seek
them, and shall not find them, even them that contend with thee; it comes in
with an Emphasis, Them that contend with thee; they that war against thee shall
be as nothing: Oh what a consummation is here determined from the Lord against
those Enemies of his poor people and weak servants that strive, contend, and
war with them! they shall be first ashamed and confounded but that is not all,
they shall perish also, they shall not be to be found, for they shall be
brought to nothing: Oh what a destruction is here determined from the Lord upon
them they shall vanish so suddenly that the poor soul shall not be able to
think it, but shall seek them, and not find them; they shall be as nothing; and
why so? why, because they are in the hands of such a powerful God; and though
his servants be weak, and poor, and low, he has said, I will help thee in all
hard services, and in all thy strong conflicts I will help thee, and uphold
thee with my arm; also he adds it again in the next verse, even the same he
had newly spoken in the tenth verse; but now he goes on again, applying it;

For I the Lord thy God will hold thy right hand, or, as he says elsewhere, I
will teach thy hand to war, and thy fingers to fight, yea, I will not only help
thee, but I will encourage thee also, saying to thee, I will help thee; yet
least this should not be support or strengthening enough, least the soul should
object and say, Alas! I am a poor creature, a poor despised creature, a worm,
the most despised creature that is, even trod under foot of all; the most
useless of creatures; the most feeble creature; the most unable to help its
self; against which the Lord bovveth down gloriously to add yet further:

14. Fear not; yea fear not thou Worm Jacob, and ye men of Israel, though you
be but Worms, but men, and are to grapple with all the Powers of Hell, inward
and outvvard Enemies; yet fear not you men of Israel, I help thee; thus says
the Lord, ye the Lord will help thee, thou worm, thou man, I will that has
command of those thy Enemies.

27. And it is the Lord thy Redeemer, and the Holy One of Israel; and as if the
Lord should say, Thou shall not only come against them that are thy Enemies,
and cause them to fly away, but thou shall thresh them; Behold, says the
Lord, I will make thee a threshing Instrument, and not a dull one neither, but
a new one, yea a sharp one, having Teeth or Mouths to grate them withal; Thou
shall thresh them; What shall thou thresh? The Mountains, yea the Mountains,
thy Enemies, the Land it self; thou shall thresh those Mountains, and beat them
small, and make the Hills as chaff, not small, but great and strong Enemies
shall thouuse thus.

16. Thou shall fan them, and the wind, (which none knows whence it comes, or
whither it goes) that wind shall carry them away, yea that Whirlwinde (the
most dreadful of Winds, and the most quick and fierce) shall scatter them; and
what shall be the issue of all this? Thou shall rejoice in the Lord, and shall
glory in the Holy One of Israel: He does not say, Thou shall glory in thy
Victory over those Enemies in what thou have done, or the like; no; Thou shall
glory in the Lord, and rejoice in him; how gloriously does the Lord go on to
prevent all the Objections of his servants? Well, suppose all Enemies be
destroyed, what is this if I dye for thirst, etc. Well, says the Lord, to
prevent this, when the poor and needy seek Water, i.e. seek soul-refreshment as
well as Victory over Enemies, and they find none, and their Tongue fails for
thirst (intimating the depth of want, and extremity of thirst) yet then I the
Lord will hear them; i.e. when they are hardly able to cry unto me, but are
even ready to give up, then I will hear the very groans of their heart, and I
the God of Israel will not forsake them, though they be brought into that
condition that they can hardly speak, because their Tongue fails, yet I will
not forsake them.

18. But I will open the Rivers in high places, they shall have abundance, and
they shall have it in the most unlikely way, Rivers in the high places, and
Fountains in the Valleys, all as it were by contraries; yea, I will make the
Wilderness and the dry Land pools and springs of water, which is even a
Miracle, which I will rather work then those poor souls shall not be satisfied.

19. I will plant in the Wilderness the Cedar and the Myrtle Tree; I will set
in the Desert the Fir Tree, the Pine, and the Box Tree, things very rare and
wonderful.

20. And this shall be that they may see, know, consider, and understand
[hearty Expressions!] that the hand of the Lord has done this, and the holy
one of Israel created it; as if he had said, should I do this great Work in an
ordinary way, and by ordinary means, they would not see so much of the power of
God in it; but that they may see it was a creating or created Work, therefore
will I do it in this unusual way.

Isaiah 42.

V. 1. Where the Lord shows to what end he gave our Lord Jesus.

4. As also, how gloriously he would be with him, and support him in his Work.

6. And first, he says, He gave him to be a Covenant, or the Covenant, and
that to the Gentiles; yea.

7. To be a light to them, to open the blind eyes, and loose the Prisoners out
of the Pison-Houses.

He confirms it with a Declaration of his own glorious Name, 8. [I am the
Lord] Oh! therefore sing to the Lord a new Song, praise him through the earth;
you that go down into the Sea, you that are as the Wilderness; i.e. though
never so desolate, or in greatest danger, however do you praise him.

16. Then he adds glorious promises, to bring the blind by the way that they
knew not; to lead them in the paths they have not known; to make darkness
light before them, and crooked things straight; yea, to do all this, and with
all adds, I will not forsake them.

17. But they shall be greatly ashamed (says the Lord) that will now trust in
any thing besides me, and so make a god of it, when as I do all this for my
people.

19. Then the Lord seems as it were sadly to lament even over his own people,
as if they were the most blind and deaf of any.

22. You are a people robbed, and spoiled, and Prisoners.

23. But who (says God) will give ear and hear for time to come?

24. Who gave Jacob for a spoil, and Israel to the robbers? did not I the
Lord? he against whom we had sinned; for they would not walk in his way, nor
were obedient to his Law.

25. Therefore he poured upon him the sury of his anger, and the strength of
Battle, and set him on fire round about; yet he knew not, and it burned him,
yet he laid it not to heart: A sad senceless estate under such a hand of God
poured out with fury and anger; and yet behold, in the next Chapter how full of
grace, mercy, and kindness the Lord appears to such a people as this; I say,
Behold, and vvonder at the admirable Expressions of love that immediately
follow upon the rehearsal of this:

Isa 43 which is brought in with a (but.)

V. 1. But, thus says the Lord that created thee O Jacob, and that formed thee
O Israel, Fear not: Why? what could such a people do but fear if once made
sensible of this their rent and miserable estate? But behold how the Lord comes
in to support them notwithstanding all this; says he, I have redeemed thee,
though thou be robbed, spoiled, and imprisoned; Yet fear not, I have redeemed
you, I have called thee by thy Name, thou art mine: Oh what words are these!
able indeed to comfort a poor soul in the saddest hour; Thou art mine; what I,
might the soul say; one on whom thou have poured out thy fury and anger, not by
drops, but poured it out, both fury and anger; what am I thine? what I? Though
I have been set on fire round about, and that by thee too, and been burnt, yet
I have been altogether insensible of it, and so not laying it to heart; and
what am I thine? O incredible love! Thou art mine; and what then? I will
proceed to give thee a further testimony of it:

2. For, When thou passest through the water I will be with thee; yea, though
it be through a River it shall not overflow thee; yea, when thou walk
through the fire thou shall not be burnt, nor shall the flames kindle upon
thee. A clear demonstration of love! But what is the reason of this? How comes
this to pass? Why, I am the Lord thy God, thou art mine; yea, I am thine, and
not only thy God, but thy Savior; and that thou may believe it the better,
I gave Egypt for thy ransom, and Ethiopia and Sheba for thee: Yea, thou art
not only mine, but thou art precious in my sight, and have been honorable; and
I have loved thee; therefore will I give men for thee, and people for thy life,
for no other reason but even because I loved thee: One would think, where so
much love is manifested, there could be no room for fear; but the Lord (who
knows how apt his poor creatures are to be jealous of his love) adds yet
further, Fear not, for I am with thee, and will gather thee from all parts,
even every one that is called by my Name, for I have created him for my glory.
Well may the Lord summon all the Nations of the Earth to produce such
manifestations of his love as these are, and give witness and testimony to it,
or else (says he) let them believe this, and say it is truth; You are my
witnesses (says the Lord) of my dealing with you of old, will they not
testify to thee the truth of this, that so you may (out of former experiences
of me) believe the truth of what I now speak, for I am he; what ever has been
done of old for you, it is I am he that did it; For before me there was no
good, nor after me shall there be any; I am the Lord, and besides me there was
no Savior, our is there any that can deliver out of my hands; I will work, and
who shall let it. Yet farther to confirm their Faith, the Lord boweth down, and
tells them:

14. Thus says the Lord your Redeemer, For your sakes have I brought down the
Caldeans, etc

15. I am the Lord your Holy One, the Creator of Israel, your King; as if the
Lord should say, All that I am, I am as thine, for I am thy Holy One, and thy
King and thy God, and thy Savior, and the like.

16. Thus says the Lord that makes away in the Sea, and a path in the mighty
waters: What will thou fear that have such a King, such a God, such a Redeemer
to be thine that can make a way in the Sea?

17. Which brings forth the Charret and Horse, etc?

18. Remember you not the former things, nor consider that of old? as if the
Lord should say, Have you forgotten what a mighty God I am? how gloriously I
appeared for you at the Red Sea, making a way for you to go through, and
drowning of your Enemies; remember you it not? Must I be fain to put you in
mind of my old love to beget new trust and confidence? why then fear not, but
roll upon me for the time to come.

19. For behold, I will do a new thing, now it shall spring forth, I will even
make a way in the wilderness, and Rivers in the Desert, and this work shall be
so glorious, 20. That the very Beasts of the fi^ld shall honor me, the Dragons
and the Owls, because I give drink to my people, my chosen.

21. This people have I formed for my self, they shall show forth my praise. O
blessed for ever be the Lord that has undertaken this work, and put an issue
to it; oh Lord! let it be so then: Oh what glorious things are here proceeding
from Gods heart! but when he comes to look upon his people, and their frame of
spirit, he finds matter of sad lamentation, which is brought in with a sad
black [But.]

22. But thou have not called upon me, O Jacob, [but] again; thou have been
weary of me, O Israel, thou have not brought me the small Cattle for
Burnt-Offerings, nor honored me with thy Sacr^fices; I have not caused thee to
serve with any Offerings, nor have I wearied thee with Incense.

24. Thou have brought me no sweet Corn with Money, nor filled me with the fat
of thy sacrifi^s.

Then comes in another sad [but] But thou have made me to serve with thy sins,
thou have wearied me with thine Iniquities; I, even I am he that blotteth out
thy Transgressions for my own Names sake, and will not remember thy sins; as if
the Lord should say, When I look upon thee, I see nothing but provocations, and
I am weary to bear it; nevertheless I will blot out thy sins, though not for
thine, yet for my own Names sake, and will not remember thy sins, and (that he
might yet hold to all more abundant expressions of love) he adds in the next
verse, spoke, put me i^ remembrance; a blessed word of Encouragement, as if the
Lord should say, You shall see that my heart is in this Work, that I will not
only do it, but I greatly desire to do it; and therefore if it were possible
for me to forget it, yet I give you this liberty and freedom, to come and put
me in remembrance; nay, I lay it as a law of love upon you, that you do thus
come and mind me of it, Put me in remembrance, let us plead together: Oh the
admirable condiscention in this high God, who has so much power, as he has
before expressed, that he can work and none can let it, and yet will suffer his
poor Worm to plead with him.

About the beginning of this fifth Month, there were these hints given me, and
hopes from the Lord, which I do not yet know, but I may take as an answer to
several Petitions put up to him: As, first, That I had not lived answerable to
that counsel the Lord was pleased to hand out to me by Mr. Cradock; i.e. Not to
speak evil of any one or other behind their back; but I have often cried out to
others, not to themselves, of the pride of this body and that body, and the
passion of this or that person; and yet, behold how sadly it reigns in my self!
may not the Lord righteously suffer it in me; and show me the evil and folly of
it, beholding the Mote in another eye; and behold, a beam in my own, at this
time also was that brought to my hands in Jam. 1. 2, 6. If any man among you
seem to be reli^ious, and bridleth not his tongue, but deceives his own heart,
this man's religion is in vain. A sad word. Also in the 4. 5. 6. Verses of this
same Chapter.

4. But let patience have her perfect work, that you may be perfect, and
entire, wanting nothing.

5. If any of you lack wisdom, let him ask it of God that gives to all men
liberally and upbraideth not, and it shall be given him.

6. But let him ^sk in faith nothing wavering; for he that wavereth is lik a
wave of the sea driven with the wind and tossed. A gracious promise to those
that lack wisdom and ask it; and in the 4. chapter of Iam. v. 2, 3: you ask and
receive not, because you ask amiss, that you may consume it upon your lusts;
And truly what do I know but that the Lord does suffer this lust (as he did the
Canaanites of old to trouble the Israelites, so this lust) to humble me, and
prove me, and know (or make me to know) what is in my heart. O my soul, how
have thou need then to set all the force of thy soul a against this bitter root
of pride? which (for ought I know) was the cause of all other evils. O the
ways that the Lord has taken to pluck up this root out of thy heart! has not
all thy afflictions of inward and outward man been directed, as it were,
against this sin! what delight else has the Almighty to lay sickness and
weakness upon thee, why, does he (think thou) permit all the mocks and jears
thou daily meetest with why, it was for that continued working up of thy pride,
notwithstanding all his dealings with thee, to pull down when thou art lifted
up too much, so that thou may thank thy own pride for all.

Some hints from the Lord at Mr. Thorns about the end of the 5 Month 1654 which
I know not but may be an answer of former petitions.

May-be thou would honor God in one way and condition and he would have
thee to honor him in another; yea, may-be he would have thee honor him by
living by faith, rouling upon him for the subduing of thy corruptions, and in
the mean time will be honored by continual struggling and fighting with them. O
my soul! have thou not often (yea, oh how often!) tempted the Lord sadly
concerning this; and the Lord grant it may be the last, after many solemn
resolutions, and promises unto the Lord, never to provoke him thus any more,
and yet to do it again; yea might not the Lord do this even in answer to
prayer? thou having begged of him that morning to give and order all thy words
and actions that day: oh that God would at last make thee wise, and so order
thy spirit, and subdue this rising of corruption, so as thou may never more
provoke him in this kind!

Upon the 6 of this 6 month, 1654. The Lorddrew out my heart in the morning to
seek of him that he would be pleased to bow down and appear gloriously and
graciously to, and through his servant, Mr Knight, who had but the day before
at Fulham Chapel so exceedingly pressed us to seek the Lord for him, which
wrought upon my heart greatly, to beg of God that he might find the fruit of
the prayers of his people on his behalf: As also, that my poor soul and others
that did appear to meet that morning might have a gracious visit from him that
none of all my unfittness to attend upon him, or unfruitfullness under former
appearances might hinder his gracious presence with, and to my soul this day;
but that though there was nothing in me to move him to it, yet that he would
do it for his own name and glory sake that my soul might have such a light of
him as might conform me more and more to him.

And how graciously was the Lord pleased to bow down this day as a God hearing
prayer! and that first on the behalf of his servant, Mr Knight, that was to
speak this day in his name? how gloriously did he appear, not only through
his Poor worms, but even in him also, greatly drawing out his heart both in
prayer and preaching: In prayer, and therein begging of God, in the entrance of
his services, his presence, and mightily (in a way of faith) rouling upon him
for an answer of prayer even at this present season.

The 27 of this 6 Month being the Lords day, and finding my heart very dead and
cold all the week, and also now very unprepared to meet the Lord or expect any
appearance at all from him, I did yet in a few short desires present my request
to him, beging his mighty presence, unvailing the Lord Jesus, (both to and
through his servant) to our poor souls, beseeching him also that I might have a
clear sight of his goodness in it, and that he would please to appear a God,
nay and not a God a far off, telling him withal that my poor soul had found him
to be so, notwithstanding all my unfitness and unworthiness, beseeching him
even now to make it appear to my soul, that he is a God hearing prayer, and
that he would give my soul a very glorious sight of my Lord Jesus, and not only
discover him to me, but cause these discoveries to work with mighty power upon
my heart, really taking it off from all other things whatsoever, and fix it
wholly upon himself: with many other requests of this nature.

But yet notwithstanding, my heart was somewhat (I thought) affected with those
desires before the Lord, yet (oh with what sadness, I may speak it,) how soon
were they out of mind even before I got to Tulham; in so much that I quite
forgot my own desires, and not at all looking after any answer of them; but how
did the Lord raise and rouse up my dead heart, even upon the nameing of the
psalm that was called to be sung in the morning, which was the 145. psalm,
which at the first nameing of, my heart leaped as it were thinking, what! shall
we sing that psalm Mr Knights text is in? though for the present I mistook; for
his text is in the 45 psalm, but this was the 145. psalm and the two last
staves, which as soon as we began to sing my heart was exceedingly altered
with it, in which I found many suitable expressions to my former desires, even
in the very words, which did as it were raise my heart in a kind of contented
expectation of a glorius appearance of God that day, as a return of prayer,
which methoughts the Lord did even then give to me by hinting this scripture so
put to my condition and desires; and how gloriously did the Lord appear the 27.
of this 6. month through his servant, Mr Knight in both parts of the day, whom
he was pleased to come in, even beyond his own expectation, as he acknowledged
to me in discourse the next day, telling me that he did only intend to handle
in general the 3 things concerning Christ, as his svveetness, fitness, and
faithfulness; but when he came to speak to them the Lord was pleased so greatly
to enlarge the thoughts of it upon his heart, and made it so svveet unto him,
that he could not but declare what the Lord gave in unto him; and truly not
only was it svveet to him, but as fit and seasonabe to my poor soul as any
thing that could have been spoken; the Lord give me but a heart to make
improvement of it, so as may be to his praise, and eternal good of my poor
soul;

The 7 day of the Month; how abundantly was the Lord pleased to bovv down to
this rebellious wretch, who has great cause to fear, that my heart was set
more to seek and see a poor vain creature and to meet with them, then to see or
meet the Lord, and yet that the Lord should, even now, bow down and give forth
gracious visites to my soul through many sensible convictions hinted to my
heart this day, both through his word, and through his other administrations,
this day going early enough to hear the morning sermon, though I much fear,
whether it were so much out of pure love to it, as out of self ends, yet what
sensible convictions did there from the Lord fall upon my heart from these
instructions M. Blond hinted out to us from the expression of David, I kept my
self from mine iniquity! where he showed us that it was our great duty to
watch chiefly against our own particular sins, showing us, how we might know
them, hinting also that it was Probable that this sin of David was
tongue-sin, from which how secretly did the Lord check my poor soul!
afterward Mr Nie spoke from psalm the 50. 26: this thou did and I kept
silence, where he shevved that by silence was meant a refraining from motion
or action: whence he observed, that words and actions are all one with God
it was as easy with God to do as to speak; it was but for him to speak and
the work was done; yea it is as easy for God to do as for us to speak, and
beg of him, and much more; and what a mighty encouragement is this to thy
faith, O my soul! which was the improvement he made of it by application, and
also hinted more, that as all Gods words are actions, and so pardoning actions
and administrations are as so many words; and oh of what use is this to my
soul! what things has God spoken to my soul from, and by his various
administrations to thee for these many years! how has the Lord by his
providence often as it were convinced thee, and yet thy base heart will not
leave to go on to tempt the Lord, though he has so evidently appeared in
crossing thee, and this day was a sign of it, that thou would put on thy
best clothes in that pride and vanity of thy heart, thou know; did thou
not by a strange providence as it were, get a spot in thy coat to check thee,
and did not the Lord by it show thee thy pride, vanity, and folly? but, Oh how
gracious is the Lord that he will please to show thee this in so mild and
gentle a way!

The 10. of this 7 month, being the Lords day, I sought the Lord in the
morning, (but in a formal way) that he would please to appear to me that day
through his servant, as also to give in a gracious answer to these desires that
Mr. Knight put up to him the last day, namely, to unvail the grace of our Lord
Jesus to him that he might so taste and feel it, as might enable him to declare
it to his praise, which I did now also beg of the Lord, and that, though I was
altogether unworthy of this mercy, or of any more appearance from the Lord,
which have made so little improvement of so many gracious favors, yet that he
would please to overcome my rebellion and unfruitfulness with his love, and at
the last overpower my soul, an^ bring it to a more full subjection to
himself; and that which I desire now to record to the Praise of the Lord, is
before him, and that yet the Lord was pleased most particulary to unvaile the
Lord Jesus Christ in the riches of his grace; the Lord help thee, O my soul to
improve all those wondefull appearances of his praise and glory.

The 13. of this 7 Month appointed by this new Parliament, for a day of
humiliation and seeking the Lord, I sought the Lord in the morning that he
would please to put my heart into some measure of suteableness to that
business, and to make me really sensible of all my rebellions, unfruitfulness,
and unthankfulness to him for all his glorious appearances, and that he would
pour out his spirit upon his servants that were to be his and our mouths this
day, as also begging the Lord to let some hints from himself fall with power
upon my heart this day, and there abide; And (blessed God) how graciously were
thou pleased to appear, and with what sensible and suitable truths, pressing
my soul to get into Christ, and dwell there, then which there is no truth more
needful to be pressed upon my vvretched heart, being so miserably shattered
about and upon other things, and my affections so sadly divided, that (in
truth) I do not dwell in the Lord Jesus Christ as I ought, which the Lord was
pleased in great mercy to my soul, to press very much upon me this day, which
blessed counsel, my desire and prayer was that the Lord would frame and
mould me into gathering up my soul more into Jesus Christ, and out of all other
things whatsoever.

The 24. of this 7 Month being the Lords day, I was in expectation to have
heard Mr. Knight; but when I came to Fulham there was a stranger, and when I
heard him to pray so strangely, I was struck with an exceeding damp, wishing my
self somewhere else, yet desiring to still my spirit, and to wait upon the
Lord, who is able to hint out somewhat that might be of advantage to me, he
spoke from Joh 5. 25. in which he showed us, that men might be alive naturally,
and yet dead spiritually, and so pressed us to the trial of our estates, which
I thought might be a call from God to check me for my neglect in this work, and
to put me upon that duty he tells us, that God was the life of the soul, as
the soul was the life of the body, and when God was departed from the soul, it
was dead, and that which makes God depart is sin, proved from Isa. 59. 2. In
which Scripture (me thought) the Lord did secretly hint to my soul, that my sin
was the cause of all the withdrawings of the light of his face, and
manifestations of his gracious presence from me, and of his seeming not to hear
the desires and prayers offered up to him, which discovery I looked upon as an
answer of my desires and prayers that day, and as an appearance of his, through
his instruction this day.

The 25. of this 7. month, The Lord in the morning drew out my heart to beg of
him, that he would please to be present that day, being to go to my Aunt
Doggets, to guide and direct me in all my words, and actions, being some what
distracted and disturbed in my own thoughts and mind, and not so contentedly
submitting to all the providence of God, as I ought to do; and after some
discourse and hot dispute at dinner, between Mr. Aldgate and my self (at which
time I dealt plainly with him according to my poor measure) after which Mrs.
Aldgate (very unexpectedly from me, and unusually from her) was very earnest to
have me go and read in a little book of hers, concerning content: Marvelling in
my mind at this strange and unusual thing in her, looking upon it as some
providence happily to me, who had seen the book before, but looked upon it in a
slight cursory way, and not with any valuation of it, yet now, I thought, that
happily the Lord might have some thing to speak to me out of it, and so I took
the book and went to reading therein, for an hour or more; and truly the Lord
was pleased to lead me to most sensible and seasonable things, to the frame of
my wretched spirit, by which it convinced me, that I did not contentedly submit
to his will in all conditions; for if I did, then there would be a silence in
my spirit, yea a joyful frame of spirit, yea a continued giving thanks to him,
and many such like things by way of discovery; together with many sensible
directions, and instructions, which I desire to acknowledge as a mercy, beging
that the Lord would make these hints effectual to my soul.

The 27. of the 7. month, expecting that our brother ^ental was to preach that
day, I had some discouragements whether to go or no; but at last the Lord was
pleased to give a turn to my spirit, and upon one account or an other I at
last resolved to go and see what the Lord would do for me there, desiring to
wait upon him, and withal telling him in the morning that he had graciously
appeared to my soul and given me eminent tokens of his appearance through weak
instruments, beseeching him to add one mercy more this day, and give my soul a
real visit from Heaven, through whatever instrument he should please to use.
But, oh my soul! how graciously was the Lord pleased to bow down, and
condescend to answer those poor scattered desires, and vouchsafe my soul a
most fit and seasonable word this day, by that our brother, who spoke from
Matthew. 6. Take no thought what you shall eat or drink, or wherewith you shall
be clothed; whence he showed the Lord Jesus did greatly forbid all carking
cares, or solicitude of spirit about present enjoyments, or future events,
together with many other seasonable instructions, reprehensions, and directions
to wait upon the Lord and rest on him, and cast all our burdens on him and the
like, most seasonable things to my wretched spirit.

The 28. of this 7. month being Thursday, and Mr. Knights day to preach at the
Abbey, I had strong desires to hear him, and yet somewhat discouraged from some
passages of providence, fearing whether or no I went out of desire only to
hear, which lay somevvhat heavy upon me, and greatly oppressed my spirit,
causing it to breath out to the Lord after this manner, That if he did see my
heart not to be set aright to seek him, and him only in this undertaking, that
he would please some way or other to hinder me, or cause some special
providence or other to instruct me and keep me from rushing on this undertaking
on any self ends or designs whatever, beseeching him to guide me, lead and
instruct me this day, and vouchsafe his glorious presence with my soul, and the
pouring out of his Spirit upon his servant that was to speak to us; And truly,
I desire to acknowledge to the praise of God, that he was pleased much to
deaden my heart to the creature, before I went out, and to put it into a frame
desirous to wait for any discovery from him when he pleases, expecting all the
way as we went, whether the Lord would please to suffer us to go through, yea
or nay, desiring not to murmr at him in it, but to submit quietly to his will
in what manner soever he should please to reveal it: But being not by any
providence prevented in the way we went, where the Lord was pleased greatly to
draw out Master Knights heart in prayer in such suitable things, as if the Lord
from heaven should say, I know thy wants and weakness, and will supply them;
Providence casting him upon the same thoughts spoken in the fifth Chapter of
John, and the five and twenty Verse, the Lord again by it checking me for my
neglect of examination of my spiritual life.

The End of the Second Book.
THE THIRD BOOK OF EXPERIENCES, Which the Lord has given my soul of the
gracious answers and returns of Prayer, etc.
These Records I desire to leave of Gods appearance to my soul from time to
time, which I trust (if my wicked heart deceive me not) was done upon this
account, that wherein I have failed in my lifetime in declaring how good the
Lord has been to such a wretch as I am, I might yet leave a good report of God
behind me, after my departure hence, he having so often made it appear that
he is a God good unto the unthankeful, disobedient, and rebellious.

This begins with the 8 Month, 1654.

THe 27. of this month, there being a great desire in several of us to have
some Church meeting set up amongst us, which had been long delayed, (my mother,
and my self having often very much pressed it,) at last I even resolved to urge
it no more, imagining that the Lord had no purpose that it should be, and
rather fearing least there should be any by-ends in my own heart, in this my
desiring of it; then did our brother Orpen and our brother M^rly again renew
the motion and spoke of it to us, and afterward went from us to Mr Knight (yet
being still by one means or other kept off,) there fell much discouragement
upon many of our hearts about it, notwithstanding at last there was a day
appointed to meet, and to consult farther about the settling of it, which
meeting was also sadly frustrated by a mistake of the day, and so no meeting,
but, after some time, there was another day appointed by joynt-consent to
beginn the meeting, yet somewhat discountenanced by one of our brethren, saying
it was vvinter time, and many other employments would not permit them to
enjoy it, yet there was a time set, but the very day before Mr Knight told us,
that he could not be at the meeting the next day, which was an other sad
discouragement; hovvever they that were present, agreed to meet to seek the
Lord together, whereupon the next morning being the day appointed for to meet,
I besought the Lord, though with much weakness, and in a poor scattered way,
that he would please to go forth with us and provide some help for us,
earnestly desiring him to make good that blessed word of his, that where two or
three meet in his name that he will be in the midst of them, beging that this
word might be made good to us this day, that he would put our hearts in frame
to meet with him, and be pleased to be present with us, and also with those
whom he should please to send amongst us, that there might be no soul of us
but might acknovvledge the Lords Presence amongst us and find some blessed
word hinted to their condition, and in particular to my poor soul, God
setting it home with mighty power upon my heart, even so as that I might be
molded into it.

And how wonderfully did the Lord (even beyond expectation) appear this day,
in sending Mr Knight and our brother Morly (neither of which were expected) and
putting into their mouths a most suitable and seasonable word, as also
povvering out his spirit richly on them that spoke in prayer to him, wherein I
saw a great answer to an other petition, this morning, which was that the Lord
would please to help every one of them in speaking to him and from him, which
he was pleased richy and gloriously to do, in so much that Mr Knight seemed to
be greatly affected with the presence of God, and in the close, did acknowledge
it, whereupon the meeting received great encouragement, and was resolved to be
kept up: O my soul, how did the Lord to thy short desires give in large
answers, together with seasonable refreshments to my poor drooping spirit,
from the words that our brother Morly spoke out of the 40. psalm. But I am Poor
and weak yet the Lord thinks on me; which poverty arises from the sense of
sin and corruption, yet the Lord thinks on me; whereupon he puts us upon
this thought, what if all other slight, and disregard a poor soul, if the Lord
thinks upon it? is it not better to be in the thoughts of God then of the
greatest in the world? together with many other precious and seasonable hints
to my soul.

The 8. of this 9. Month O my soul, how unexpectedly was the Lord pleased to
prevent thee with his loveing kindness and grace! thou having been very ill
all night with an extreme cold, not thinking I should be able to go in the
morning to Fulham, yet at last overcome with desire to wait upon the Lord, and
cast and roll my self upon him, and how gloriously did he appear to my soul,
and what a seasonable word was hinted out this day to me by our dear brother.
the 25 of this Month at evening as also the 26. day in the morning, (being the
Lords day) finding my heart exceeding dead, and dull, and altogether unfit to
meet the Lord, as also greatly oppressed at the sight of the prevalencie of
corruption, and temptation over me (almost continually) which occasioned my
soul to pour out its self greatly before the Lord, in sundry and various
petitions relating to my present condition, as also greatly begging his
presence, both in the preparing my heart to meet with him, and in fitting some
blessed word, wherein he might meet my poor soul, with many requests to this
purpose, too large to relate, and both touching my own soul, and also his
servant that was to speak that day, and behold how gloriously, O my soul, did
the Lord appear through his servant (our dear pastor) who spoke from the 45.
Psalm: thy Throne, O God, is for ever and ever; the Scepter of thy Kingdom is a
right Scepter, where he showed us, that Christ's Scepter, (by which he rules and
orders all his affairs in the world, and in his Church,) is a right Scepter,
and that all his administrations are managed by a right straight line, for the
Glory of his father and the good of his poor creatures and that, how ever
through the darkness of our hearts, and our unpeliefe, we could not see the
straightness of all Christ's administrations, yet, that they are so hovvever;
for God the Father who best knows them, says so of them, showing us also, that
however Saints are apt to think that there is none in such a sad condition as
they, so tempted, and so overcome by corruptions and vain thoughts, and the
like; and if Christ did indeed reign in them and over them and his Scepter thus
right, why is it then thus with them? in answer to which, he showed us, that
Christ's Scepter was right still, because his design was through all this to
raise up his own and his fathers glory; as his skill appears most that makes a
glorious piece out of a crooked thing, so Christ has some eminence of glory,
by working through all our afflictions and temptations to magnify his grace
and mercy toward such as we are; yea, to do us good through all: now, dear
Father, has not thy rich grace shined gloriously in this condescension, to
such a poor worthless wretch as I am? This day also did the Lord call us,
seeing his Throne and Kingdom is for ever and ever, to look after everlasting
things, a secret check to my soul in it, so eagerly persuing after fading dying
things; yea, if Christ's kingdom be everlasting, so also are those that are his
subjects, from whence we were farther exhorted to look out what it is that we
have that is everlasting, telling us that wives, and children, and estates, and
the like, they are not everlasting, they and you must part: Oh therefore do not
reckon these everlasting; but if you have a Christ, or grace, etc. that shall
be everlasting; if God has begun any good work in your souls, that shall be
everlasting; your infirmities, weaknesses, corruptions, they are not
everlasting, they shall die and wither, and Satan shall shortly be trod under
your feet; though Satan and sin has domineered, and made a stir in thy soul,
yet it shall not reign for ever there, but grace shall reign by righteousness
to eternal life; therefore though your pains be great, troubles sore,
temptations many, yet know they are not everlasting, and this may much comfort
the Saints; yea, if Christ raigns, this may comfort the Saints, that their
afflictions shall pass only from Christ, not from the sons of men, not from the
world, nor Satan, nor the Law without him; no, nor the restless motions of
your hearts that often misgive, and terrify you; your judgment shall pass
from Christ, whose Throne is for ever and ever. O my soul, how abundantly has
the Lord bovved down to refresh, as well as convince thee this day? the Lord
grant it may abide upon thy spirit, and help thee to live continually to his
praise.

The 29. of this 9. month, I sought the Lord to appear to my poor soul, and
speak some seasonable word that might be for my spiritual advantage; and truly,
though I was disappointed of him that I expected to hear, yet, did the Lord by
our btother Lemall, hand out a most seasonable word to my soul, which I desire
may abide, which was, not to quench the spirit, which the Lord did really
convince me that I had often done, even of late, which I desire the Lord would
help me against, and make this a blessed word to the end, unto my soul.

The 30. day of this 9. month, the Lord drew out my heart that morning, to beg
of him that he would please to prepare my heart to meet with him and to
manifest his presence to my poor soul, through his Word, that it might be a
blessed season, wherein my soul might enjoy communion with himself; and that,
to that end, he would please to remove out of my soul whatever might make me
unfit to meet with him, desiring much in my heart, and endeavoring to express
it before the Lord, that my heart might once be gathered out from all things
here below, and sixed only upon himself, and Jesus Christ, and that there might
be something added to this work this day And, O my soul; how gloriously did the
Lord appear, both for thy conviction and comfort, in sending his messenger, as
if it were on purpose with an errand from heaven to my soul? It was a stranger
that preached this day, and the Subject he was upon, was the loveliness of
Jesus Christ, Canticles 5. 16. He is altogether lovely; whence he fully
cleared, that there was nothing below Christ that can be lovely or desirable,
and whatsoever could be desired; it is abundantly in him; from whence the
Lord did really convince me of my folly in suffering of my affections to run
out so strongly on such vain objects, and so little on my Lord Jesus Christ:
and in the close, speaking by way of comfort, he had this passage, That when
ever any poor soul did come into the presence of the Lord in prayer, or
hearing, or any ordinance, with a desire to have such a corruption mortified,
(though for ends, best known to the Lord, he may for the present suffer it in
him, yet) would he record it in heaven, as if it had been mortified, for (said
he) it was in the desire of that poor soul, and though I suffer it, yet I look
upon it, as if the soul had mortified it really, and so for all other gracious
desires, the Lord looks upon them as his, and as done, though never attained,
as he did Abraham's offering up his son Isaac, and therefore he leaves it upon
record to posterity, that he did offer him up, though yet he did not do it,
because it was in his heart and intent to do it, had not the Lord prevented;
which together with many other precious hints the Lord was pleased to leave
with me this day, which I beseech him to bless me, and make me to improve them
to his praise and glory.

The second day of this 10. month, I sought the Lord that he would be pleased,
if he saw meet to add one other day to me, to vouchsafe his face and presence
to me, and give my soul some sight of him, and prepare my heart to meet with
him, emptying out of it what ever might unfit me to come before him, after
which there fell a great damp upon my spirit, considering that I had only in a
formality sought this of him, but could not expect that he should continue
always so graciously to a poor soul, as I had begged of him, being such an
unworthy, unfruitful creature that did so little improve all his appearances:
but, O my soul, how gloriously did the Lord break through all thy unbelief, and
go beyond all thy expectations, in providing a most blessed, glorious and
seasonable word for thy soul, answering the desires of thy heart; also on the
behalf of his servant, that was to speak in his name this day! shining forth
gloriously in and through him, insomuch that himself did bless the Lord for his
appearance that day; for which bless the Lord, O my soul, and oh that all that
is within me could bless his holy name! Oh the sensible truths that were
hinted to my soul this day, which I desire of the Lord I might never forget,
which were hinted from Psalm. 45. 7. from which our Pastor sweetly opened the
love of Christ to righteousness, which love (he showed us) was that that made
him lovely to God and to his Saints. Now that he does love as he showed us,
appears in that this love to it was his very nature, and therefore he is called
the righteous, and the Lord our righteousness; yea, it appears, in that he has
through all kind of difficulties fulfilled all righteousness; therefore with
desire I have desired (says he) to eat this passover, that so he might be
ready to suffer, and so to satisfy divine justice, which is one part of his
fulfilling righteousness; yea, he showed, that he loves righteousness in that
salvation that he has wrought for us, meriting by a full satisfaction to
justice, that so justice might glory in our salvation as well as mercy; for
hovvever wereceive all by grace, yet Christ wrought it out by justice and paid
a full price for it, which showed his love to righteousness and justice; so
that what ever God has promised believers in his word, it is a merited
promise, that Christ has bought and paid for; yea given the full worth of it
into the hands of God, so that justice can never say, that what we receive by
grace is not fully satisfied for, but that we have now a right by justice to
every promise in the book of God, as well as by mercy: (oh blessed word!)

Yea, he loves righteousness, because he makes all righteous, who are accepted
of him by his righteousness: And first,

1. By forming their hearts to his likeness.

2. By imputing to them his own righteousness; yea, he showed that he loves
righteousness, by the terrible execution of his displeasure on unrighteousness:
now all this, as it makes Christ lovely to the Father, so it must needs make
him lovely to his Saints, and that for these reasons.

1. Because they could never look on, or behold divine justice without being
confounded, if they did not behold it satisfied through the righteousness of
Christ, by which they are enabled to glory as well in the justice, as in the
mercy of God, and plead with God, as well as he is a righteous and just God, as
he is merciful.

2. Because all that is beautiful in the Saints, either in themselves or
others, is from this Christ; therefore, Christ himself must needs be lovely to
them, because that which often supports the Saints hearts is not so much their
actings in righteousness, as their love to righteousness; David cries not out,
oh how do I keep thy Law! but oh how do I love thy Law! therefore needs must
Christ be lovely for his righteousness.

4. Christ must needs be lovely, for his loving of righteousness, because
through this he has made a way for us to eternal life? how does he bring about
this way of life, or keep us in this path of life? but by a way of
righteousness? Romans 5. last. It is not so much that grace reigns as that
grace reigns now by righteousness (or justice) to eternal life.

1. That use that was made of all this was very precious, we being instructed
hence to take a due view of Christ, to behold him more; for we are said to be
changhed into his likeness while we behold him, so that the reason we are no
more like to Christ is, because we live no more in the sight of his
righteousness which would but show us our own unrighteousness, and nothing can
do it more then this beholding Christ's righteousness, and then reflecting back
upon our selves.

2, The beholding Christ would make us like Christ; for our assimulation to
Christ comes from our being ravished much with looking on Christ; the devil
has no greater design, then to keep the Saints from beholding of Christ, he
will let them pore upon their own lusts or any thing else rather then this.

3. The sight of Christ's righteousness is a ground for the strongest
consolation to Saints that can be, of which, when the Apostle had got a sight,
he cries out, who shall lay any thing to the charge of Gods elect, seeing
through Christ righteousness justice is satisfied, what can sin, the devil,
lusts, corruptions, or law do? they cannot condemn for Christ justifies.

Oh what refreshments were held out from this blessed truth of Christ his
loving righteousness! now if Christ does love righteousness, then he loves to
do justice; and to be righteous in all his administrations, both of grace and
punishment, yea, he loves fidelity in performance, which is another part of
righteousness; oh put this to the end of every promise in Scripture! that
Christ loves righteousness, and so loves more to perform it then thou can
desire to have it performed: as Christ loves righteousness, so he loves to
fulfill all righteousness, and that by doing and suffering, though it were a
hard work: then it may refresh us further, that all the grace you receive comes
from the hand of justice, how may the Saints then go boldly to the father and
ask no more then what Christ have already paid for? so that the Saints living
on the promise is no beggarly business, for there is not one of them but is
thoroughly paid for by Jesus Christ, and so may be pleaded for, not only upon
that account of mercy and grace, but even of justice and righteousness. O that
God would cause all these blessed truths to have an abiding power upon my soul!

The 6. of this 10. month over night, I sought the Lord that he would please to
provide some seasonable word for my soul, as also begging his gracious
appearance, through his servant that was to speak, with much to this purpose;
and (O my soul) how graciously was the Lord pleased to appear to thee this day!
the scripture he spoke from by our dear pastor, was the 2 Corin. 1. 12. whence
he showed us, what a ground of joy is the Testimony of a good conscience; when
it witnesses in sincerity: whence he showed us, that the work of conscience is
to witness to every action of a man, both religious and civil, and not only
does it bear witness of every act, but of the measure, and of the manner of
heart-workings in the act, and so witnesses either the righteousness and
sincerity of it, or the sinfulness of it, yea, and the spring of all our
sinfulness; our rejoicing (says the Apostle) is not that we preach, pray or
the like, but that our conscience witnesses, that what ever we do though never
so weakly and imperfectly, yet its done in Godly simplicity, i. e. with a
single intention, aiming purely at the glory of God, that there is no double
dealing, not a heart for God, and for our selves too; yea, we were shown, that
conscience was not only a witness, but a judge; therefore where it finds the
act good, but the principle naught, it tells that man (if he hearkens to it)
that all is naught, and that God will not be served with leaves, but with
fruit; and thus it passes sentence and judgment; from which how secretly did
the Lord check my soul? then he showed us, that conscience had a strong
memory, though we forget yet conscience will remember, not only acts, but
circumstances; which (O my soul) may thou not clearly testify the truth
hereof by experience? yea, it was hinted to us, that conscience was a just and
right witness, all the devils in hell and men on earth cannot make it speak
other then truth; the devil may, and does abuse conscience by imitating it, and
so suggesting this or that to a soul, as if it came from conscience, when it
coms immediately from hell: even Saints themselves may pass wrong judgment upon
their brethren as Jobs friends did; but conscience is a better witness then
Saints themselves, and it was so to Job, yea conscienc was held out to be a
convincing witness; where it does witness against sin, it witnesses
convincingly, causing them to groan under it; yea it was held out to be a bold
witness, that will not be daunted any way, and must needs be so because God
himself imboldens it to speak plainly, as that thou art an hypocrite, or afraid
to hear what conscience says; Oh how sweetly was this truth improved this day
by application! as first, to teach us to admire the goodness of God in placing
such a witness in every man's bosom, yea how good it was for the Saints that
this was set up in wicked men, for some times there are actions done by wicked
men against Gods people, that there is no winess but their own consciences,
which testify against them, of all their hard speeches and thoughts, and words
and the like; yea how good was it for the Saints also in this! for had they not
this witness in themselves, how bitter would the reproaches of the World be to
them? We were exhorted to take heed how we walk toward conscience, it being by
God set as a Watch over us; oh then take heed that we withdraw not from it!
Nay, it is true it will follow you; but labor to keep it in your sight, and
when you are to do any civil or religious Work, call it in, and say,
Conscience, What say thou to this or that action? Was it according to the
will and mind of God? and give it leave to speak out; yea and give time also;
for oftentimes the affairs of the World hinder, that conscience has not time
to speak its mind.

2 To take heed we grieve it not; for its complaints will be heard in Heaven,
therefore take heed of doing any thing against conscience.

3. Awe it as a Judge, and be content to be judged by it in all you do, for it
will be your Judge another day, and will be an immortal Witness either in point
of comfort or terror; oh therefore awe it.

1. Do you take of heed of slighting conscience or its Testimony; for therein
you commit great injury to God, it being his Ambassador, and by him set in you.

2. It is great folly also to stop its mouth: For,

1. All your hindering it, or endeavoring to do so, will but prove an
aggravation of its Witness another day against you; then it will tell you, That
it would have spoken plainly to you such and such a time, but you would not
hear, you were so busy in the World, or the like.

The reason why Saints do no more rejoice, is, because they walk no more in the
testimony of their own consciences.

We were also exhorted in the conclusion to be very tender of doing any thing
without a solemn Court of Conscience; rashness is the worst evil; Conscience is
Gods Witness, let it be yours; give it full liberty therefore to speak and say
all it can; ask it again and again what it says to this and that action, and
may be it will give thee that Testimony that through rashness and hastiness it
had not time to speak or thou to hear it.

Oh what sensible hints were these to my poor soul, if the Lord would but
please to bless them effectually to me, and help me to put them in practice
daily!

The Lord having seen meet to call our Brother Vilet ont of this World, I heard
that he was to be buried at Fulham this Afternoon, and our Pastor to preach,
which occasioned me greatly to desire to hear him; which also I did, though it
was exceeding late; at which time he spoke from 1 John 3. 2. Now are we the
sons of ^od, but it does not yet appear what we shall be, etc. from which there
were most seasonable blessed truths hinted to my soul. That which he pressed
was, That what the Saints shall be, it does not appear. Then he showed it did
not appear, first to the Saints themselves.

1. Because of the little light the Saints have of this glory; nay, if God
should reveal more, they could not bear it in this state.

2. In regard of our not improvements of the discoveries made of our future
estate.

3. Because their present estate is compassed with sin and affliction, both
which do obstruct the sight of this glory; but more particularly, the Reasons
why it does not appear he showed were these.

1. From the many diversions of the Spirit of Saints, that turn them aside from
beholding their glory to come; how do the toys and baubles of this World
divert them from beholding of this? and so their estate does not appear to them.

2. It comes from inconstancy of Spirit, because their hearts do not dwell on
those things; no man is excellent in that his heart and thoughts dwell not
upon: so here

3. From the weakness of our Faith; for we live now by Faith; but when Christ
shall appear, then you shall live by sight; so that whilst you are here, your
sight is according to your Faith; if your Faith be right and straight like
Stephens, then have you a strong sight of glory.

4. It appears not, from the remainders of corruptions that abide in us; every
sin vails the sight of this glory.

5. God himself is pleased sometimes to exercise his Saints not only under
darkness in the sight of their future estate, but also of their present estate;
and so they walk in the dark; and this God does for high and holy ends, and
gives great instructions through it no his Saints to look up to him for life,
and wait on him for the manifestation of his love and their future estate, and
to make them see that it flows from nothing in them, but from him only; eternal
life being not only the gift of God, but even the light whereby we see it.

2. This glory appears not to the World also, and that

1. Because the World sees only the outside of a godly man, his shell; but they
see not the glory of his inside; they see their poverty, and contempt, and
reproach, etc. but they see not the glorious working of God on their souls, or
operation of his spirit in them.

2 It appears not to the World, because the Saints have their Clouds upon them:
The best have their infirmities, and these the World look most upon; wicked men
are blind and cannot see; for spiritual things must be spiritually discerned;
because many times there are differences among the Saints themselves; and this
darkens their glory to the World who see them disputing about Religion, and the
like; the World judges of their future Estate by their present condition; if
men flourish here, then they judge well of them; if they lie under troubles,
they judge them hated of God; and thus God suffers this darkness about their
future estate,

To humble his Saints, and make them cry to him for light.

To manifest the sincerity of the Saints.

To set them a longing after Eternity, where they shall have full and clear
sight.

To make glory appear glory; indeed, if the glittering here be glorious, what
shall the full be? that it appears no, is out of just judgment from God to
this wicked World, who do hate and contemn them; therefore God will not let them
see their glory; they shall only know it by feeling the contrary, and the want
of it.

There were blessed discoveries given to judge our estate.

We were also instructed in all our present afflictions in this World still to
remember it appears not yet what we shall be; did you keep your eye on this,
how would it refresh you under all troubles!

Keep your eye then on Christ his appearances, for there your fullness shall be.

But further to refresh the Saints, they are at present the sons of God, but
know not the best of their estate; you may be now under clouds and temptations
but the best is behind; it appears not now what you shall be: And let this
cheer up your hearts.

The 8. day of this tenth month, the Lord drew out my heart in the morning,
being the day of our Church-meeting, to beg of him to go forth with us this
day, or else not to carry us out; and withal, That he would please to provide a
blessed word, a seasonable word for every poor soul that should in the
sincerity of their spirit wait upon him that day; and that he would please to
speak some seasonable word to my soul, that it may be a blessed testimony that
his presence was with me, begging also the pouring out of his spirit richly on
them he should please to send to speak among us, with much to this effect.

The nineth of this tenth month, at night the Lord was pleased often to draw
out my heart with some sense of his appearances, as also my unfruitfulness
under all former appearancs, beseeching him to sanctify all his appearances to
my soul, and help me to walk more watchfully, and hearken more to the testimony
of my own conscience in what ever I had done, and not to sin against it, with
many such like desires, begging this, That as he had so sweetly encouraged my
soul by these gracious hints the third of this month, so that now he would
please, notwithstanding all my unworthiness and unfruitfulness, yet to make
good these gracious words of his, wherein he has said, Sin shall not have
Dominion over his people; and that he would bruise Satan under their feet, that
he would never leave nor forsake them; for which gracious blessed word of his I
endeavored to plead with him this Evening, even upon the account of the full
satisfaction the Lord Jesus had made to him, that therefore these blessed words
might be made good to my poor soul; as also on the behalf of his servant our
dear Pastor, who the eighth of this eighth Month seemed exceeding sad, which
came with some power and sense upon my heart at this time beseeching the Lord
if he had convinced him of any evil in him, that he would also work it out of
him; and if there were any other oppression upon his spirit which was known to
him, that he would please to ease, refresh, comfort and fit him for the great
work he has called him to; and also pour out his spirit upon him, that he
might have a real and sensible sight of the answers of those desires; and that
the Lord would please to direct him what, and how to speak, so as might be to
the advantage of every of our souls, who sincerely seek his face and presence:
And oh my soul! how graciously did the Lord appear the next day, being his
Sabbath, and gave in a gracious answer to these desires, and gave forth far
beyond them?

The 10th. of this 10th. Month, being the Lords Day, in the morning I sought
the Lord for his most special presence in, and with me this day, that he would
please to prepare a seasonable useful word for my soul, and prepare my heart to
meet with him, that my soul might be enabled to bless and praise his Name for
it; and that he would please so eminently to appear, that it might be written
among the rewards of his love; yea, that it might come into my soul, even as a
special pledge of his love; yea, that he would please to pour out his spirit
upon his servant, and appear so eminently through him, as that also he might be
enabled to acknowledge it to his praise: And oh my soul! how richly, and
abundantly, and fully did the Lord answer all these desires, yea every of them
in particular, which were spread before him more at large then I am able to set
down! and truly, the answers of them were much more large and full, in which
the Lord bowed down greatly, even to the requests also, to do more abundantly
then I could ask or think; and so he did begin even as soon I came to the
Congregation, filling my heart with great joy and expectation of his mercy from
him, even in the Psalm before Sermon; the Psalm sung was Psalm. 22. 23. on which
my soul joyfullie ran out; and so both in Prayer and in Preaching how
abundantly did the Lord bow down and refresh my poor spitit, and the spirit of
our dear Pastor, who in a most solemn manner again and again blessed the Lord
for his appearances both in the dispensation of the Word, and also in the Lords
Supper that was that day administered The Scripture spoken to us was Psalm. 45.
7. Thou hate iniquity; whence he showed, That Christ was lovely to his Saints
for hating iniquity: In opening hereof he showed us what hatred was in man, and
what it was in Christ, which (as he said) was not an action or passion, but his
very nature and will, which puts forth all his other Excellencies, as his
Power and his Wisdom, etc. to repel all that is contrary to his Nature and
Will, which he further opened at large, showing us, That all the object of
Christ's hatred was only sin, which is truly evil, men hate that which they
apprehend evil; but Christ's hatred is properly neither against men or Angels,
but only against sin, and man only as he is under the power of sin; and this
hatred makes him repel that which he hates with all his power, putting out
all his Excellencies to the uttermost, either for the destruction of sin in us,
or of us: Thus Christ loved the nature of man, and took it upon him; yet when
this love was turned into hatred by reason of the over-powering of sin, which
fights against the life of Christ; and when this love of his comes to turn to
hatred, the hatred is the greater. Now that Christ hates sin, appears both in
the work of Redemption and Rejection: In the work of Redemption when he comes
to suppress sin in us, he seems by this action to speak in this manner,
Rather then sin shall live in thee. I will dye: my blood shall rather go for
it. So in the Rejection, the hatred of Christ shall kindle the fire of Hell
about them: But that Christ does thus hate sin, appears further by these things:

1. By his dealings against it in the Creation; Adam no sooner made but he
falls; and so boiling hot was Gods hatred against sin, that before he gives him
time for repentance, or any parley, he presently goes to his posterity, and
passes judgment upon him and them; Dying thou shall dye, temporally,
spiritually, and eternally; and there shall be enmity between thy seed and the
woman's, that most of thy seed shall take in with Satan, and perish eternally:
How many millions perish upon the account of that one sin? So the Angels they
fell presently and irrecoverably, for that one sin of pride, though such
glorious creatures, who could do more then thousands of men and might have been
so useful to the Church, being spiritual, had they stood, who could immediately
comfort when no other creatures could; yea, could have fed Eli ahs and Daniels;
yet these for that sin perished eternally.

2. It appears by the way he takes to repel it; sin having gotten the Throne,
and poor man brought into a perishing condition by it, and not able to oppose
it; now Christ hates it, so that the contest now comes between Christ and sin,
and he will dye to destroy it.

3. It appears by the dreadfulness of the doom of those that are overpowered
by sin, who are judged to eternal fite without pity or recovery

Then he came to show us how lovely Christ is to the Saints for hating
iniquity.

And O my soul! with what mighty power and weight did this fall upon thy heart?
As

1. He showed us, That Christ's loveliness in this attribute arose from the
unanimity and one-ness of mind between Christ and a believer in this hatred of
his; for as Christ hates the sin, but loves the believer, so the believer
hates iniquity, but loves Christ; so that the love of both persons center in
one and their hatred in one, and their love meets in each others person, and
their hatred also; and that Believers hate sin. so that nothing can breed more
love then this does, Christ says, I hate Iniquity; oh therefore, hate it more
ye believers, yea, pursue the life of it; and I appeal to the Lord if I do not
hate it with a perfect hatred.

2. Christ is lovelie for hating sin, because this attribute sets all his
attributes on work against all the Enemies of a Believer; the poor soul hates
sin, but is not able to deal with it: but Christ so hates it, that he is able
to conquer it: Oh what a blessed sight of Christ is this! that though the poor
soul be overpowered with sin daily, yet that Christ hates it, and is engaed
aginst it, as hating of him: So that now either Chriist or it must perish: Oh
what a lovely sight is this because out of this hatred of Christ comes the
ruin of the souls Enemies, Sin and Satan, which seek thy ruin daily: But
blessed be God, that Christ hates them and will certainly ruin them! either
he or sin must cown: Oh what comfort is this that we poor creatures have in
Christ, that when we come even to struggle with sin and Satan, Christ like fire
will consume and burn them? yea, as he showed, this hatred was an act of
Christ's will; and if he has not his Will, where is his Godhead? Therefore the
quarrel is between the Will of Christ, and the Will of sin: I will damn thee to
Hell, says sin and Satan: But I will kill thee, O sin and Satan, says Christ:
so as the quarrel is not so much for Believers persons, as for Christ's Will, and
Christ will certainly have his will: oh blessed word to my soul!

3. Christ is lovely in this, because the Saints see the glory of all Christ's
other excellencies through this; the wicked see and fall at the dread of
Christ's hatred, but see not the justness and righteousness of all Christ's
administrations, as the Saints do; they can see the justness and righteousness
of Christ in damning of men to Hell for sin; yea, the Saints can behold Christ's
love to them in this hatred of sin.

This 10th. of this Month, being the same Lords day, in the Evening, while I
was endeavoring to bless and praise the Name of this my glorious God, for his
eminent appearances this day, which I desire never to forget, it fell upon my
heart amongst other things to tell the Lord, That seeing he had cast such a
hint upon my heart, that the best thankfulness for mercy received, is to gather
in upon God for more mercy: I did therefore desire, That to all his abundant
appearances to my soul this day, he would please to add this mercy, which I
desired to plead with him for this Evening, That as he had gloriously unvailed
through his Word the hatred of my Lord Jesus Christ against sin, that he would
now also show its evil by experience, that it might appear that really he does
hate sin, yea every sin in my soul, by his pursuing the life, and drawing out
the blood of it; telling him withal, That if any sin were the object of the
hatred of my soul, then needs must this corruption of mine in a special manner,
being so diametrically opposite to him, as the setting up of any thing or
creature in his Throne; yea even at this present wherein he has so gloriously
appeared, that the consolations of God were not small to my soul, they coming
with such mighty power, praying him in a special manner to pursue the body of
this corruption, and let my soul find, that really it is the object of the
hatred of Jesus Christ, and shall certainly be ruined by him.

Having got a great cold which did somewhat distemper me, I was in a great
question whether I should the twentieth of this tenth month go to the Ordinance
or no; at last I desired to give it up to the Lord, bseeching him to direct me
what to do, desiring only to be led by him: At last I resolved (God willing) to
wait upon him this day at Fulham, and as for the next day, let the Lord do with
me what he will, whether to fit me to go, or disable me, having many fears upon
my spirit concerning my going, whether it were a right and pure aiming at God,
and seeking his presence, yea or no, being not able to satisfy my self in this
question.

Thus (I say) desiring the Lords appearances to my soul, and speaking some
words to him for my spiritual advantage, I went this day to Fulham, where the
Lord showed me what a blessed thing it was to have a sight of God from those
words in Matt. 13. Blessed are the eyes that see the things you see; and the
ears that hear the things you hear; whence the Lord showed me what an abundant
cause I had to bless him for them, those many sights he had given me of
himself, when he had left so many in the dark, and never given them one glimpse
of himself.

But being exceeding ill and weary this night, I went to bed betimes, waiting
what the Lord would do with me; and truly in the Morning I thought I found my
self unfit to go forth, considering also our meeting the next day, which happily
the Lord might make me more fit to enjoy; yet I must needs say, I really think
the trouble that lay upon my spirit about the straightness of my ends in going,
did more discourage me then the unfitness of my body; but what through the one
and the other, I durst not go forth this 21. day, and so my Mother and Aunt
Dogget only went, and I stayed at home; but when I arose, I found my self
pretty well, so as I begun to be somewhat troubled that I had stayed at home,
fearing that this may be only a subtle device of Satan to hinder me of this
opportunity; and so turning my self to the Lord, I besought him, that if it
were he that had this day prevented me, that he would please to make it up to
my soul some other way, by hinting out something by his Spirit to my heart that
might be for my spiritual advantage and truly, whiles I was endeavoring to
press this upon the Lord, immediately after there fell this apprehension upon
my heart (or rather the Lord was pleased to to drop it) which was this: Oh
Lord! how comes it to pass that my soul being so exceedingly taken with any
spark of thy gloous Image in poor mortal creatures should at the present rebel
and murmr at thy holy and blessed will, which is part of thy essential glory?
if the sight of thy image be so pleasing to me, why then is not the sight of
thy will, which is thy self, much more glorious then the Rays of thine that
shine upon thy creatures? why is not this as pleasing, as delightful, and
contentful to me? which hint I could not but look upon as a real answer of this
desire, the Lord make it of use to me, I am sure it was such a confideration
and meditation, that if the Lord will but please to set it home with power, may
be of abundant advantage to my wicked spirit: The Lord in mercy for Christ's
sake make it so.

The 22. of this tenth month, being a day appointed for our Church-Meeting, I
earnestly besought the Lord, That if he saw it meet to carry me forth this day,
he would also go along with me, and vouchsafe his gracious presence to me, in
speaking some seasonable word to my poor soul that might appear even to come
from himself; begging also his presence in and through all these his
instruments, which he should please to make use of this day.

And O my soul, how gloriously was the Lord pleased to appear this day in
chearing and refreshing thy poor drooping spirit! even so as thou were not able
to continue thy self in this wonderful appearance of God, casting them upon so
suitable a word, even to the estate of my poor soul at this present? and that
Scripture our brother O^ began with, and was after pursued sweetly by our dear
pastor, was the 73 ^sa.

The End of the Third Book.
FINIS.

