SIN, THE PLAGVE of PLAGVES; OR, Sinful Sin the worst of Evils.

A Treatise of Sins Trial and Arraignment, wherein Sin is Accused for being,
proved to be, and condemned for being exceeding sinful: And that, 1 As against
God; his Nature, Attributes, Works, Will, Law, Image, People, Glory and
Existence. 2 As against Man; his good and welfare of Body and Soul, in this
Life, and that to come: With the Use and Improvement to be made of this
Doctrine, that men may not be Damned, but Saved, etc.


Being the Substance of many Sermons Preached many Years ago in SOVTHWARK,

By Ralph Venning, A.M.

Prove. 8.36. He that sins against me, wrongeth his own Soul.

John 5.14. Sin no more, least a worse thing come unto thee.

London, Printed for John Hancock, to be sold at his Shop in
Bishopsgate-street, over against the Exchange, next to the White-Lyon, and the
corner shop in Popes-head-Alley; and by T. Parkhurst at the Golden Lion on
London Bridge, 1669.

Academiae Cantabrigiensis Liber.



To all that were Hearers, and to all that shall be Readers of what is contained
in the following Treatise.
THE Christian Religion (as it exposes to, so it) fits for, and is suited to
Suffering as well as Glory: Yea, the All-wise God has so ordered it, that
while we are on this side the Grave, such Graces (as suppose Suffering, and are
preparative to Glory) should be most exercised by us, which are to act their
part, and to have their continuance only in this world; and which indeed had
not had an actual being or existence, if Sin had not entered into the world;
viz. such Graces as are Faith, Repentance, Hope and Patience: There had been no
need of Faith for righteousness, if we had not lost our own; no need of, nor
occasion for Repentance, if we had remained Innocent; no room for Hope, seeing
we had been in a continual sight, enjoyment and possession of happiness, if we
had not sinned; nor any use or exercise of Patience, when there had been no
suffering, and none there had been, if there had been no Sin: The state of
Innocence (before sin was) being in the next degree like to the state of Glory
(when sin shall be no more) and that excludes these, and such like things; for
then sorrow and sighing shall flee away, and all tears be wiped from their
eyes; then Faith shall be turned into Vision, and Hope into Fruition, suffering
(and consequently patience) shall be at an end, as to good and holy men.

It cannot therefore but be hugely useful and advantageous toward the exciting,
exercising, promoting and perfecting of these Graces, to know what an exceeding
sinful thing sin is; not only that we may suffer well, as did Christ Jesus, 1
Pet. 2.19.-23. and make Moses's choice, Hebr. 11.25. and not that which is
charged on Job as his, Chap. 36, 21. But also because, if ever we be saved,
these Graces must be practiced, and that they are not in a capacity to be, till
sin appear to us, as it did to S. Paul, an exceeding sinful, deceitful, and
destructive thing. And truly, as Sinners are not like to be awakened hereunto,
till the Commandment come ( as it did to the Apostle) and discover it to them;
so they who are awakened and converted, are greatly obliged, and no less
provokt by it, to admire the love and mercy of God, and to pay him everlasting
gratitudes for their deliverance and salvation from sin. But of the usefulness
of this Doctrine I speak in the Treatise it self, and shall therefore forbear
to name any thing more of that Nature in this place.

As to the Book I have but a few things to say; this Treatise was began, and
almost finished, before the late Sore and great Plague began; and therefore
(though for a memorial of it) I have taken occasion to give it a Name or Title
from thence, yet it is not calculated particularly thereunto; but with a more
general aspect upon the universal mischief, that Sin has done mankind, as to
Soul and Body, Time and Eternity, it being the root of all evil, Corporal,
Spiritual, and Eternal, only in relation to that sweeping Beesom of
destruction, and the dreadful fire from heaven or hell, and in several senses
from both, which since consumed the habitations, as the Plague did the
Inhabitants before (both which I fear are (alas!) but too much forgotten) we
should consider the operation of Gods hand lifted up, to lay it to heart, to
confess our sin, and give him glory: For though God in the midst of judgment
remembered mercy, yet we in the midst of mercy should remember judgment, both
hands being to lead us to repentance; else, though the Plague be over and gone,
and that fire burns no longer, yet if the plague of our hearts, and not fiery
lusts (if our sins) continue, we are far from health and safety: If after such
deliverances as these, we sin, as if we were delivered to do nothing else; or
to speak as Ezra does, Chapter 9.13, 14. and after all that is come upon us for our
evil deeds, and for our great trespass, seeing that God has punished us less
then our iniquities have deserved, and has given us such deliverance as this,
should we again break his Commandments, and join in affinity with the people of
(with such and the like as our former) abominations? would not he be angry with
us, till he have consumed us; so that there be none (as hitherto through mercy
there has been) remnant, and escaping, but the fire of his wrath may burn to
(and we burn in) the lowermost hell! Oh, let us hear and fear, and do no more
so wickedly, Deuteronomy. 13.11. for sin is so notoriously, more then excessively and
intollerably evil, that as it is at present the reproach, 'twill be (hereafter)
the ruin of any people who repent not: And what is impenitency? but a
treasuring up of, and growing rich in sin and wrath together, Romans 2.4.-9. and
what is that but to be abundantly damned!

As to this Subject, I am well aware that several pious and learned men have
treated of it; but that is no discouragement to their Successors to do so too,
no more then 'twas to S. Luke (Chapter 1.1, 2, 3.) to write the Gospel, of which
others had written before him: And indeed, what is the Gospel of S. Matthew,
Mark, Luke and John, but the same Gospel published with some little variety.
The Apostle S. Peter wrote of the same things which S. Paul had done, 2 Pet.
3.15. and they both wrote of the same things over and again, Phil. 3.1. 2 Pet.
1.12, 13. And Jude the Brother of James, as v. 1. did transcribe, or at least
Epitomize a great part of S. Peter's second Epistle, almost (in terminis and
verbatim) word for word. I remember S. Austin somewhere gives his advice, to
have the same things published by several men, that (by the interest, relation,
and affection which they have in the world) truths may come to the more hands,
which else would be confined, and well high imprisoned. Beside, what Ausonius
tells us, ^^us plus alio invenire potest, nemo-omnia is a very great truth, one
may find out more then another, but none will or can find and speak out all, so
exceeding broad are the commands and truths contained in the sacred Scriptures,
beyond any others: Though therefore I think it no disparagement to me to
acknowledge, that I have perused others, and profited by them, yet I may
(without vanity or ostentation) say, that I have not only handled this Subject
in another manner, but that I have also spoken to other things, then any has
done that I have yet met withal; and do not doubt, but much more may be said
then has been by me, any, or all that have written on this Theme.

As to the sinfulness of sin (the Subject of the Treatise) I have indeed
handled it most largely, as it is against Man's good and happiness, it being most
properly the intent and scope of the Text; and God is so condescending, that he
is pleased to treat man as a self-lover, and so to gain him, and win him by his
own advantages; yea, he seems by his patience to have a concern for man's
Salvation, beyond his own vindication in this world, as the Apostle gives us to
believe, 2 Pet. 3.9. And truly, this vouchsafement, self-denial, and humbling
of himself, is so great and rich a goodness, that it most forceably leads and
draws us to repentance, Romans 2.4.

As to the style, I have not minded any curiosity, for I am still of my former
opinion, that that eloquence does injury to things, which draws us to observe
it, seeing words are only for the matters sake, and should not hinder but help
its promotion; fine expressions (according to what is said by a Learned and
Eloquent person) fine expressions are but like the gaudy and gilded frame of a
Looking-glass, which acquaints us not with our faces and features, The genuine
use of a Looking-glass: yea many times the richness of the frame, does so much
amuse and dazzle the eyes of some childish persons, that they are regardless of
any thing else: The Rhetoric diverts men from attending the more concerning,
the instructive part of a discourse; yea, many that pretend to be Critics,
make little other use of Sermons and good Books, then to censure or to applaud
the contrivance, and the phrase, without minding the Doctrine, or caring to
rectify what has been discovered to them to be amiss: It Is no commend to a
Preacher to be more sollicitous to make his expressions, then to make his
Hearers good: There must be no flattering of sinners; we must rather endeavor
they may condemn themselves, then applaud us; and 'twill be more joy to a good
Divine, to hear the peoples sighs for their sins, then to hear their praises of
his Sermon, and that they follow his counsel, then that they admire his
language: We must not speak against sin, to show an art of declaiming, a skill
of speaking Oratoriously, but to exercise our own, and to provoke others to
exert their hatred against it; and it is to be feared, that when the best of men
have done their best and utmost, there will yet be too many that read pious
books with less reverence and concern then a Romance, or a Play, being more for
the Rhetoric then Divinity, for the wit then worth (which is to say) the
shadow then substance of discourses; and (as the forementioned excellent person
significantly expresses it) If a devout book have not good store of witty
passages, some Readers will not mind it at all; and if it have, they will mind
nothing else. And this experience confirms. But whatever Readers this Book meet
with, I have endeavored that it may profit (and so far please) them, that I
hope they will find nothing worthy of their displeasure, but the thing I write
against. I have committed it to God, and begged his blessing, that it may be of
use, to teach men to profit hereafter by their hitherto loss, and get something
by reading, which they can never do by committing of sin.

But not to detain thee much longer, I entreat thee to remember, that this
world is but a glittering and pompous vanity, a thing that (...) using, and
will not reach beyond the grave, and perhaps will not last so long, for the
lust and fashion of it pass, yea, take them wings, and fly away. Remember that
sin leads no where but to hell, the place and Element of torment. Remember that
ere long Death will arrest thee, and carry thy body to the dust and Dungeon of
the grave, and (if thou die in thy sins) thy Soul to Hell and Damnation. I
entreat thee therefore to exercise thy self unto, and in the power of
godliness, and do not live as if the practice of Piety were nothing but a Book
of that Name. Alas, what is it to have Religion in thy Bible, in thy head and
tongue, and yet have none in thine heart and life! Do but think what thou will
say or do when thou come to judgment, as Solomon tells the young man, Eccl.
11.9. Take the course which thou can own, and justify in that day, and do
what thou will, and then I am sure thou will not dare to do any thing but what
thou ought; for who can answer for one of a thousand, or for but one sin!

As for any of them (yet alive) that were Hearers, and shall now be Readers of
what is contained in the following Treatise, I crave leave to tell them, that
they have it double, as Precept upon Precept, and line upon line, and God seems
to send it to them the second time, that it may do more good upon them then it
did at first, that the repetition and calling of it to remembrance, may do more
then the preaching of it did, though I know, blessed be God, that it was not
then delivered and heard without good effects on many, and, I hope, on more
then I know of. That God may be glorified, and the Readers may profit by it, is
much the prayer, as 'twill be much the joy and rejoicing of my Soul, whatever
censures may be past upon me,

Ralph Venning.

There are several mis-pointings, which the sense will help the Reader to
Correct, beside the following Errata, which are to be amended thus.
PAge 16. line 12. for destruction, read distraction. p. 55. l. 20. for joined,
r. enjoined. l. 23. for sociability, r. insociability. p. 74. l. 24. for join
with, r. join them with. p. 97. l. 2. for believe they, r. believe then. p.
126. l. 33. for no more, r. the more. p. 128. l. 2. for tell of God, r. tell
God. p. 141. l. 24. for have, r. leave. p. 145. l. 2. for when before, r.
before and when. p. 145. l. 33. for they call, r. they not call. p. 148. l. 27.
for iuch, r. such. p. 152. l. 4. for divisions, r. diversions. p. 156. l. 26.
for hundred, r. hardened. p. 157. l. 15. for exercise, r. excess. p. 255. l. 4.
for dying, r. discease. p. 262. l. 21. for command, r. commend. p. 273. l. 28.
after then? add these? p. 279. l. 5. for a may, r. a man may. p. 289. l. 10.
for i would, r. it would.

SIN, THE PLAGUE of PLAGUES; OR Sinful Sin the worst of Evils.
ROMANS 7.13. Was then that which is good made death to me? God forbid! But Sin,
that it might appear Sin, working death in me by that which is good; that Sin
by the Commandment might become exceeding sinful.


BEing to treat of the exceeding sinfulness of Sin, it is not only expedient,
The Introduction by way of promise.
but necessary that I preface and premise such things as these; viz. (1) That
God made all things very good, Genes. 1.31. they were all endowed with the
perfections which were suitable to their several beings; so that none of them
could find fault with, or complain of God, as if he had been wanting to them,
or had made them defective: yet (2) of these, the two most eminent and
principal degrees of creatures did quickly degenerate; for some of the Angels
sinned, and kept not their first estate, but left their own habitation, Jude 6.
And by giving way to their subtle and envious infinuations, the Man Adam (who
was a common person) sinned also, Genes. 3. And thus by one man sin entered into
the world, and death by sin; and so death passed upon all men, for that all
have sinned, Romans 5.13. And (3) as to the Angels that fell, God left them
irrecoverable, for 2 Pet. 2.4. God spared not the Angels that sinned, but cast
them down to hell; and Jude 6. has reserved them in everlasting chains under
darkness, unto the judgment of the great day. Christ Jesus the Mediator and
Redeemer took not on him Angels, or (as it is in the Margin) takes not hold of
Angels, Hebr. 2.16. but it pleased God to pity man; his saving grace and
loving kindness has appeared to man, Titus 2.11. and that in Christ Jesus,
Titus 3.4. whose delight was with the sons of men, the habitable parts of the
earth, Prove. 8.31. and therefore he took on him the seed of Abraham, Hebr.
2.16. And (4) this Doctrine of God our Savior, or the Gospel-doctrine, does
suppose man a sinner: It Is a faithful saying, (and worthy of the best and all
acceptance and reception) that Christ Jesus came into the world (on this very
errand and design) to save sinners, 1 Timothy 1.15. The Doctrine of Repentance
supposes also that man has done amiss, Mat. 9.13. The Doctrine of Faith in
another for righteousness and hope, concludes man to be without righteousness
and hope in himself, Ephesians. 2.12, 13. And the end of Christ's sending the holy
spirit, was, that he might in the first place convince of sin, Joh. 16.8.

These things being, beside others that might be considered, it cannot but be
hugely useful to let men see what sin is, how prodigiously vile, how deadly
mischievous, and therefore how monstrously ugly and odious a thing sin is; that
so way may be made by it: (1.) For admiring the free and rich grace of God.
(2.) For believing in our Lord Jesus Christ. (3.) For vindicating the holy,
just and good Law of God, and his condemnation of sinners for breaking of it.
(4.) For hating of, repenting for and from sin, thereby taking a holy, just and
good revenge on it and our selves. (5.) That we may love and serve God at a
better rate then we ever did, in the little and short time of Innocence it
self. And lastly, that this black spot may serve for a set off, to the
admirable, incomparable, and transcendent Beauty of Holiness.

And now to the Text it self, The Context and the Text explain'ds
which may have this for its title, The just vindication of the Law of God, and
no less just accusation and condemnation of the sin of man. As to its
connection, with what precedes, it is thus; at the 10. v. the Apostle had said,
that the Commandment which was ordained to life, he found unto death: Hence an
objection is raised, v. 13. Seeing the Commandment is good, how comes it to be
unto death? Was that which was good made death to me? To which he answers: (1.)
By way of negation and abhorrency, God forbid! absit I far be it from me or any
other to think so! no, by no means! to find fault with the Law, were to find
fault with God: The Law is not to be blamed: What is then? for something is to
blame: To this he answers; (2.) By way o^ affirmation and accusation, that sin
is the tru^ cause of death: The Commandment indeed condemns, or is death to
man, not of it self, but because of sin: and hereby sin appears (not only like
it self, but it self) sin, yea sinful, yea exceeding sinful sin; not in a
disguize, as when 'ti^ committed, but in its own lively colors, o^ (rather and
more properly) dead and deadly colors.

It Is, says he, (...), sin in the abstract, and that iterated and repeated (as
Pharaohs drea^ was) for the certainty and assurance of the thing; it is sin,
it is sin, and this sin is (...) sinful, or a sinner, nothing else but sinning
and sinful sin, it is masculinely and vigorously sinful^ for though Erasmus
conclude this to be the Attick Dialect ( viz. the conjunction of this masculine
and feminine) yet others think that the Apostle does dare personam peccato,
bring in sin as if it were a person; as v. 17. and 20. It Is not I but sin; as
if it were a person: unless we may read it thus, as Faius does, that the (...),
the sinner might become sin (in the same sense as the objection is made, v. 7.
Is the Law sin?) that is, criminal and guilty; However we read it, we are sure
of this, that it denotes the malignant, pestilent and pernicious nature and
operation of sin, its own name being the worst that can be given it; and yet,
as if this were not significant enough, it is so (...), i. e. supra modum,
Era^m. quam maxim, Beza: eximi^ Grotius: exceeding, above measure,
excessively, or in the highest degree, for an Hyperbole is at extraordinary and
the highest degree of speaking; it is as the Arabic Version has it, superans
excessum; it is extremely, and indeed, beyond all expression sinful.

So that upon the whole I may Illustrate the scope and meaning, by a familiar
example or instance: It Is as if it had been said by a Malefactor to the Judge,
thus; Oh my Lord, how cruelly unmerciful are you to condemn me to die? Nay,
says the Judge, it is not I, it is the Law, I am but the mouth of the Law: Nay,
says the Law, it is not I, it is sin; if thou had not sinned I had not
condemned, for the Law is not against the righteous, 1 Timothy 1.9. No, against
such there is no Law, no condenmation from it. Gal. 5.28. Thou may then in me
(as in a glass) see what a deadly destructive and killing thing thy sin is:
Bvery mouth must be stopped, there is no room for complaint against God or his
Law, for thou art (as all others are) by becoming guilty, sallen short of the
glory, and subject to the judgment of God, Romans 3.-19.-23. So that by the
Commandment sin appears to be a desperate malignant thing, the proper, true and
only cause of man's condemnation and death.

From this brief yet clear account of the Text and Context, these following
truths are deducible.

1. Observations from the Text.
That the Law of God in whole and every part is good; not only not sin i. e.
culpable or criminal, as v. 7. or only holy and just, v. 12. or spiritual, v.
14. but good, v. 12, 13. good, not only in it self, but relatively in its
institution with respect to man, for 'twas ordained to life. v. 10. Yet

2. This good Law transgressed makes man over to death: Patience, that
temperate and harmless thing, (if abused) turns to rage and fury; so the Law
(good though it be, yet) abused, it condemns and kills.

But 3. Though the Law condemn man's fault, and man for his fault, yet still the
Law is good, and is not to blame, nor to be blamed: The Law is as good as ever
'twas, it is to be justified by man, even then when it condemns man: As man had
no reason to break the Law, so none to sind fault with the Law, though it bind
men over to death for breaking of it. For

4. It Is not the Law but sin that works man's death and ruin; sin aims at no
less, and (if grace prevent not) it will end in no less; for the end and wages
of sin is death, Romans 6.21, 22.

Yet 5. Sin ('it is true) works man's death and destruction by that which is
good, scil. the Law: when sin has used man to break the Law, it uses the Law
to break man, to undo him by condemnation and death. And

6. Sin is therefore exceeding sinful and wicked, most unmeasurably spiteful,
poisonous and pernicious, because it kills men, and not only so, but kills them
by that which is good, and was appointed to man for life; it turns food into
poison: ut agnoscatur quam sceleratus peccator sit hoc peccatum, and quam
pestisera res, dum per mandatum, rem salutiferam, exserit virus suum, Clarius.
Like the horrid and cursed wickedness (our stories tell us of) so wickedly
committed, in poisoning a man, yea a King, by the Cup of Blessing, So that

7. And lastly, Sin by the Commandment appears to be excessively sinful: Vt
evidens sit quam perniciosum, quam grave, quam scelestum sit ipsum peccatum,
Zegerus. If we look on this through the Microscope-glass of the Law, it will
appear a most hideous, devilish, and hellish thing; the most wicked,
villainous, mischievous, virulent and deadly thing that ever was. Sinful sin!
worse then the Devil! etc. of which anon.

I may not prosecute any of these particulars apart, for I shall have occasion
enough to speak to every and each of them in handling the sinfulness of sin; in
relation whereunto I intend to observe this method, and to manifest thereby

1. What sin is, The subject and method of handling it.
the thing so much and so deservedly evil spoken of, whereof none can speak
well, but they that speak ill of it; for they speak best who speak the worst of
sin.

2. Wherein the sinfulness of sin does especially consist; and so to lay open
not only its effects, but its nature also.

3. What witness and evidence there is to make good this Indictment and Charge
against Sin, that it is so vile and abominable, so sinful as the Apostle calls
it. And

4. What use and improvement is to be made of the Doctrine of Sins excessive
sinfulness.

1. To begin with the subject, Wh^^ (...) is.
and to show what sin is: Sin is the transgression of a Law, yea of a good Law,
yea of a Gods Law: Sin supposes a Law in being, for where there is no Law,
there is no transgression, Romans 4.15. but where there is sin, there is a Law,
and a transgression of the Law, 1 John 3.4. whosoever commits sin
transgresses the Law, for sin is a transgression of the Law; and this is the
sin intended here in the Text, as appears by v. 7.

Now the Law not only forbids the doing of evil (whether by thought, word or
deed) but also commands the doing of good; so that to omit the good commanded
is sin, as well (or ill) as is the doing of the evil that is forbidden: against
the fruits of the spirit there is no Law, but against the works of the flesh
(as the opposition holds) there is Law, for they are all against the Law, as
the Apostle tells us, Galat. 5.19.-24. what ever then does transgress the Law
of God ( in whole or in part, James 2.10.) is therefore, and is therein a sin,
whither it break an affirmative or a negative precept; i. e. whither it be the
omission of good, or commission of evil.

2. Wherein the sinfulness of sin.
To proceed and lay open wherein especially the sinfulness of sin does consist,
which is easily and readily known from its definition or description just now
set before us: Sin being a transgression of Gods Law, which is not only holy
and just, as made and given by an holy and just God; but good also, as it
respects man, for whom God made it, according to the Text and Context, and as
it is in Deuter. 5.29. and 6.24: with many other places: I say, sin being a
transgression of Gods Law, which was made for man's good, the sinfulness of sin
must needs lie in this, that it is contrary 1. To God. 2. To Man.


These then are the two Heads I shall insist upon, to declare the malignity and
wicked nature of sinful sin; and both these are evident from the Law, for by it
(as our Text speaks) sin appears sin, and by the Commandment sin (clearly and
undeniably) becomes most exceeding, hyperbolically, or above measure sinful; i.
e. extremely guilty of displeafing and dishonoring God, of debasing and
destroying man; and on both accounts justly obnoxious to, and deservingly
worthy of the hatred of God and man; as to which I do heartily wish the issue
to be, that man may hate it as God does, who hates it, and nothing else but it;
or (to be sure) he hates none but for it.

Of sins contrariety to God.
1. Sin is contrary to God.
Then the sinfulness of sin not only appears by, but consists in this, that
it is contrary to God, yea contrariety and enemity it self in the very abstract:
Carnal men, or sinners, are called by the name of enemies to God, Rom 5.8. with
10. Col. 1.21. but the carnal mind or sin is called enmity it self, Romans 8.7.
and accordingly it and its acts are expressed by names of enmity, and acts of
hostility; as walking contrary to God, Levit. 26.21. rebelling against God, Is.
1.2. rising up against him as an enemy, Mich. 2.8. striving and contending with
God, Is. 45.9. despising of God, Numb. 11.20. it makes men haters of God, Romans
1.30. resisters of God, Acts 7.51. sighters against God, Acts 5.39 and 23.9.
yea blasphemers of God, and in sine very Atheists, that they say there is no
God, Psalm. 14.1. it goes about to ungod God, and is by some of the Ancients
called Deicidium, God-murther, or God-killing. And though all these things be
not acted by every sinful man, yet they are not only in the nature of sin, yea
of every sin, more or less, but are all of them in the heart of all sinners (in
their seed and root) Mat. 15.19. and what is acted by any man would be acted by
every man, if God did not restrain some men from it by his power, and constrain
others to obedience by his love and power; as 1 Cor. 5.14. Psa. 110.3. Herein
then is the desperately wicked nature of sin, that it is not only crimen laesae
Majostatis, High Treason against the Majesty of God, but it scorns to confess
its crime, it is obstinate, and will not that he reign over it; it is not only
not subject, but 'twill not be subject, no nor reconciled to God, Pa^ticular^y.
such is its enmity! Yet more particularly.

1. To his Nature.
Sin is contrary to the nature of God; Gods name is holy, and as his name is,
so is he and his nature, all holy, yea he is so, and cannot but be so: And
therefore God takes it more ill, that men should think him wicked like
themselves, Psa. 50.16-22. then that they think him not to be, Psalm. 14.1. Its
said to weary him, when men do but say that evil is good in his sight, Mal.
2.17. This is the thing God glories in, that he is holy, yea glorious in
holiness, Exodus 15.11. And Holiness is the Attribute, which freeth God from not
only evil it self, but from all appearance or suspicion of evil. Were not God
holy, many of the things which God does would look unlike him; his justice and
judgments would look not only like severity but Tyranny, were not it and they
holy; his love in its carriages and behaviors to some people, would look like
fondness and respecting of persons, but that it is holy; his patience would look
like a toleration, if not approbation of sin, but that it is holy patience, etc.
Thus many acts of God, were it not for holiness, would appear as seemingly evil
as they are really good, and be as much suspected by all, as they are unjustly
censured by some. He is holy, without spot or blemish, or any such thing,
without any wrinkle, or any thing like it; as they also that are in Christ
shall one day be, Ephesians. 5.27. God is so holy, that he cannot sin himself, nor be
the cause or Author of sin in another; he does not command sin to be committed
('twere to cross his nature and will) nor approve of any man's sin when it is
committed, but hates it with a perfect hatred; without iniquity is he, and of
purer eyes then to behold, i. e. approve iniquity, Hab. 1.13.

On the contrary, as God is holy, all holy, only holy, altogether holy, and
always holy, so sin is sinful, all sinful, only sinful, altogether sinful, and
always sinful, Genesis 6.5. In my flesh, i. e. in my sinful corrupt nature, there
dwells no good, Romans 7.16. As in God there is no evil, so in sin there is no
good; God is the chiesest of goods, and sin is the chiefest of evils; as no
good can be compared with God for goodness, so no evil can be compared with sin
for evil.

2. To his Attributes.
Sin is contrary to all the Names and Attributes of God; sets it self in
opposition to them all. (1) It deposes the Sovereignty of God, as much as in
it lies; it will not that the King of Kings should be in the Throne, and govern
this world which he has made: 'twas by this instinct that Pharaoh said, who is
the Lord, that I should obey his voice to let Israel go? I know no Lord above
me, I will not let Israel go, Exodus 5.2. It Is the voice and language of sin,
Psalm. 12. our lips are our own, who is Lord over us? and 'twas from hence that
the Jews of old said, we are Lords, we will come no more to thee, Jer. 2.31.
Thus it attempts to dethrone God! (2) It denies Gods All Sufficiency, as if
there were not content and satisfaction enough to be had in the enjovment of
God, but that vanity and wickedness had more of pleasure and profit then he,
whose ways are all pleasantness, and whose service is the whole of man: Every
Prodigal that leaves the Fathers house does practically say, it is better to be
elsewhere. (3) It dares the Justice of God, and challenges God to do his
worst, Mal. 3.17. It provokes the Lord to jealousy, and temp^s him to wrath.
(4) It disowns his Omniscience; Tush, say they, God sees not, nor does the most
High regard, (5) It despises the riches of Gods goodness, Romans 2.4. (6) It
turns his Grace into wantonness, Jude 4. It will make bold with God, and sin
because grace abounds! In short, it is the Dare of Gods Justice, the Rape of his
Mercy, the Jeer of his Patience, the Slight of his Power, the Contempt of his
Love, as one does prettily express this ugly thing: and we may go on and say;
it is the Vpbraid of his Providence, Psa. 50. the Scoff of his Promise, 2 Pet.
3.3, 4. the Reproach of his Wisdom, Is. 29.16. and as it is said of the Man of
Sin (made up of sin) it opposes and exaits its self above all that is called
God (and above all that God is called) so that it as God sits in the Temple
of God, showing it self as if it were God, 2 These. 2.4.

3. Sin is contrary to the works of God; To his Works.
as it works contrary unto God, so its contrary to Gods works, and is called
the work of the devil, 1 Jo. 3.8. all Gods works were good exceedingly,
beautiful even to admiration, but the works of sin are deformed, and
monstrously ugly, for it works disorder, confusion, and every thing that is
abominable: Sin may be impleaded for all the mischiefs and villainies that have
been done in the world; it is the Master of Mis-rule, the Author of Sedition,
the Builder of Babel, the Troubler of Israel; and all mankind. And so contrary
is sin to the works of God, that it sought and still seeks to undo all that God
does, that there might be no seed, nor name, nor root left him in the earth:
Every thing works according to its nature (operari sequitur esse) as the root
is, so is the fruit, and by that every Tree is known, whither it be a good Tree
or a bad, Mat. 7.17, 18. God is good, and does good, Psa. 119.68. Sin is evil,
and does evil, yea nothing else; so that sin and its works are contrary to God
and his works.

4. Sin is contrary to the Law and Will of God, To his Law.
yea to all the rules and orders of his appointment: There is not one of his
Laws which it has not broken, and endeavored to make void, and of none
effect; yea, it is not only a transgrestion of, but a contradiction also to the
Will of God: When the Son of God came into the world to declare and do his
Fathers Will, he was encountered by and under-went the contradiction of sinners,
Hebr. 12.3. who would have made men believe, that neither he nor his Doctrine
was of God. It Is an Anti-will to Gods Will; it sets it self to oppose
preaching, prayer, and all the Institutions of God, and that not only out of
envy to man, that he should not be the better for them, but out of enmity to
God, that he should not be worshipped in the world. Now to act contrary to the
will and Statutes of God, is to act contrary to God himself; as may be seen by
comparing Levit. 26.14, 15. with 21, 23, 27. and many other places. David in
fulfilling the Will of God, was said to be a man after Gods own heart, Acts
13.22. and they that obey the will of sin, are said to walk after the heart of
sin, Ezekiel. 11.21,

5. To his Image.
Sin is contrary to the Image of God, wherein man was made: God made man in his
own likeness, viz. in righteousness and true holiness, Ephesians. 4.24. Now sin is
clean contrary to this Image, as much unlike it as deformity and ugliness is
unlike to handsomness and beauty, as darkness is to light, as hell to heaven,
yea and more too: Sin is the Devils Image; as when God made man, he made him in
his own image; so when the Devil made man sin, he thereby made him his own
image and likeness: and so I conceive the Devil meant that phrase, Ye shall be
like Gods, Elohim, Genes. 3.5. He did not say, nor mean, that he should be like
the Elohim, (the Creators, as the word is, Job 35.10. Eccl. 12.1.) the God that
made them, but like Elohim Gods, viz. such as I and my Angels are, who once
knew good, but now know evil, both by doing it, and suffering the sad effects
of it. The word Elohim is used not only of God and good Angels, but of fallen
Angels, or Devils, 1 Samuel 28.13. And under the covert of this ambiguous and
dubious word he craftily abused our first Parents; for he well knew that by
sinning they could not become like Elohim, God above, but would become like
Elohim, the Gods below: And alas! are we not like Elohim-devils, knowing good
by loss, and evil by the sad and dismal effects thereof? Thus he that runs may
read the Picture, Image and likeness of the Devil in sin; sinners are as like
the Devil as any thing, for he that sins is of the Devil, 1 John 3.8. not
only a servant, but a child of the Devil; Ye are of your Father the Devil, said
holy Jesus to the sinful Jews, John 8.44. Never was Child more like the Father,
then a sinner is like the Devil; sin has the nature, the complexion, the air,
the features, and very behavior of the Devil.

6. To his people.
Sin is contrary to the people and children of God: It Is true, sin cannot hate
them so much as God loves them, nor do them so much hurt as God can do them
good; yet out of spite and envy 'twill do its worst, and hate them because God
loves them: Gods Children are his Darlings and Favorites, dear to him as the
apple of his eye; in all their afflictions he bears a part, and is afflicted,
and looks upon it as if he himself were treated as they are in this world, Acts
9.4, 5. Mat. 25.41.-45. Now the nearer and dearer they are to God, the more
Gods heart is set upon then for good, the more sin sets its heart against them
for evil: Sin is always warring against the Seed of God in them, the flesh
lusts against the spirit, Gal. 5.17. and warreth against their souls, 1 Pet.
2.11. So that by sins ill will Gods people should neither enjoy nor do any good
in this world; it is always provoking the Serpentine Race to make war upon, to
imprison and persecute (even to destruction) the little Flock and Remnant of
the holy Seed; it will not (further then rebuked by grace) let them have one
quiet day, it disturbs and interrupts them, that they cannot attend upon God
without destruction; when they would do good, a evil is present with them,
either to keep it undone, or to make it ill done; it endeavors to spoil all
they take in hand, and to turn their holy things into iniquity, by reason
whereof they cry out as greatly oppressed, wretches that we are! who shall
deliver us from this body of death? Romans 7. This evil and envious sin is bent
also to hinder (all it can) the comfort, welfare, and happiness of the Saints:
Sin, like the Devil, has not such an evil eye or aching tooth at all the
sinners of the world, as it has at the Saints in the world: it is true the
Devil is a man-hater, but more a Saint-hater; watch, for your Adversary the
devil seeks whom (of you) he may devour, as S. Peter tells us, 1 Pet. 5.8. And
this it does to cross and thwart God and his design, who and which is set upon
the happiness of his people.

7. To his Glory.
Sin is contrary to, and set against the glory of God, and all that should and
would give glory to him, or has any tendency thereunto: Confession of sin and
repentance gives glory to God, Jos. 7.19. and this sin endeavors to obstruct
and hinder: It began to practice it on Adam and Eve, and still keeps on this
trade among the children of men, Revel. 16.9. Faith would give glory to God;
now that men may not believe, sin imployes the Devil to blind their eyes, 2
Cor. 4.4. Good men would do all they do (but sin will let them do nothing at
all) to the glory of God, but is ever throwing one dead fly or other into their
most precious boxes of ointment: Sin is so malicious, that it will not only
displease and dishonor God it self, but labors to defeat and frustrate the
endeavors of all that attempt to do otherwise: Might sins desires take place,
there should not be a person or thing by whom and whereby God should be pleased
or glorified. It gives out false reports of God and goodness, lays prejudices,
and rocks of offense, and stumbling in men's ways, that they may be out of love
with all that is good, so desperately is it bent against the honor of God.

8. To his being.
Sin (as was hinted before) is contrary to and opposite against the being and
existence of God; it makes the sinner wish and endeavor that there might be no
God; for sinners are haters of God, Romans 1.30. And as he that hates his Brother
is a Murderer, 1 John 3.15. so (as much as in him lies) he that hates God is a
murderer of God: It keeps Garrisons and strong holds against God, 2 Cor: 10.4,
5. It strives with, and fights against God; and if its power were as great as
its will is wicked, it would not suffer God to be. God ^s a troublesome thing
to sinners, and therefore ^hey say to him, depart from us, Job 21.14. and ^f
Christ Jesus, let us break his bonds in sunder, and cast his cords far from us,
Psalm. 2.1, 2. And when the Holy Ghost comes to woe and entreat them to be
reconciled, they resist and make war with the spirit of peace, Acts 7.51. so
that they are against every person in the Trinity, Father, Son and Spirit. In
short, and for a conclusion, sin is contrary to God, and all that is dear to
him, or has his name upon it; and though it be against all good, yet not so
much against any good as against God, who is, and because he is the chiefest
good.

Before we pass on, let me beseech thee, who ever thou be that read, to
pause a little and consider of what is said; for (mutato nomine, d^ te) what is
said of sin (is to be considered by the sinner, and) is meant of thine and my
sin. Shall I not plead for God and thy Soul, and entrea^ thee to be on Gods
side, and depart from the Tents of wickedness? Poor Soul, Can thou fin^ it in
thine heart to hug and embrace such a Monster as this is? Will thou love that
which hate^ God, and which God hates? God forbid! Wi^^ thou join thy self to
that which is nothing bu^ contrariety to God, and all that is good? Oh sa^ to
this Idol, yea to this Devil, Get hence, wha^ have I to do with thee, thou
(Elymas) Sorcere^ thou full of all malignity and mischief; tho^ Child, yea
Father of the Devil, thou that art the Founder of Hell, an Enemy to all
righteousness, that ceasest not to pervert the right way of the Lord, and to
reproach the living God Away, away, Shall I be seduced by thee to grie^ the God
of all my joy, to displease the God (...) all my comfort, to vex the God of all
my content, to do evil against a good God, by whom I live, move, and have my
being? Oh no. Thus consider of these things, and do not go on to provoke the
Lord, least a worse thing befall thee then any hitherto; do not contend with
God who is stronger then thou art, who is able when he will, and he will be one
day found both able and willing enough, to turn the wicked into hell, the
Element of sin and sinners, who shall go into it as into their own place, as
Judas did, Acts 1.25. Oh learn to pity thine own soul, for he that sins does
(as offend and wrong God, so) wrong and destroy his own soul; or (as some read
the Text) despises his own soul, Prove 8.36. Oh think on it, what! have thou no
value, no regard for thy soul? will thou neglect and despise it, as if 'twere
good for nothing but to be damned, and go to hell? will thou be felo de se, a
self-soul-murtherer? shall thy perdition be of thy self? Oh look to thy self,
for sin (notwithstanding all its flattering pretenses) is against thee, and
seeks nothing less then thy ruin and damnation. And this brings and leads me
to the second thing to be treated of.

Sins contrariety to Man.
The second thing wherein the sinfulness of sin does consist, Sin is contrary
to the good of man.
is its contrariety to the good of Man, which is the thing that our Text does
especially meant on and intend, and is therefore to be the more copiously spoken
to: Sin is contrary to the good of man, and nothing is properly and absolutely
so but sin, and this results and is evident from sins contrariety to God: as
there is nothing contrary to God but sin, (for Devils are not so but by sin) so
sin in being contrary to God, is and cannot but be contrary to man; that must
he unavoidably evil to man, that is evil against God, who is the chiefest good
of man; communion with, and conformity to God, is man's felicity, his heaven
upon earth, and in heaven too, without which it would not be worth his while to
have a being: Now sin being a separation between God and Man, an interruption
of this communion and conformity, it must needs be prejudicial and hurtful to
him. Beside, the Commandment (of which sin is a transgression) was given not
only for Gods sake, that he might have glory from man's obedience, but for Man's
sake, that man might enjoy the good and benefit of his obedience, and find that
in keeping the Commands of God there is great reward. These two were twisted
together, and no sooner is the Law transgrest, but God and Man are
joynt-sufferers, God in his glory, and Man in his good Man's suffering follows
at the heel of sin, yea, as he suffers by, so in sinning; suffering and sinning
involve each other: No sooner did sin enter into the world, but death (which is
a privation o^ good did enter by it, with it, and in it, for it is the sting of
death; so that sin says, here its death, and death says, here is sin: No
soone^ did Angels sin, but they fell from their first estate and habitation
which they had with God in glory, not a moment between their sin and misery and
as soon as man had sinned, his conscien^^ told him, that he was naked and
destitute o^ righteousness and protection, and consequently an undone man, that
he could not endure Gods presence, nor his own, Genes. 3.7, 8. So apparent is
it that sin (and that in being contrary to God) is contrary to man, for what
crosses Gods glory, is cross to man's happiness. Now

To proceed more distinctly and particularly, In this life.
I shall evince that sin is against man's good, both present and future, here in
time, and hereafter in Eternity, in this life and world which now is, and in
that to come, against all and every good of man, and against the good of all
and every man: And herein lies the second instance of the sinfulness of sin, as
it is 1 Against man's present good in this life, and that 1 Against the good of
his body. 2 Against the good of his soul.
For on both it has brought a curse and death.


1 Sin is against the good of man's body; Against his body.
it has corrupted man's blood, and made his body mortal, and thereby rendered
it a vile body: our bodies, though made of dust, were yet more precious then
the fine gold; but when we sinned, they became vile bodies: before sin our
bodies were immortal (for death and mortality came in by sin) but now alas they
must return to dust, and its appointed to all men once to die, (and it is well
if they die but once, and the second death have no power over them) they must
see corruption, or death in equivalence, i.e. a change; for this flesh and
blood cannot inherit the Kingdom of God (as that wherein we were created might
possibly have done) 1 Cor. 15.50. Our body is sown in corruption, in dishonor,
in weakness, 1 Cor. 15.42, 43. and is therefore called vile, Philip. 3.21. and
before this body be laid in the grave, it is languishing, in a continual
Consumption, and dying daily, besides all the dangers that attend it from
without. And

2 Sin is against the good of man's Soul too: Against his Soul.
The Soul is transcendently excellent beyond the body, and the good of that
beyond the good of this; so that a wrong done to the Soul is much more to man's
hurt, then a wrong done to the body therefore says our Savior, Fear not them
that can kill the body, and do no more, (which is but little in comparison of
what God can do to the soul, if it sin) but fear him that can destroy, i.e.
damn soul and body in hell, Mat. 10. It Is not very ill with a man if it be well
with his soul, but it can never be well with a man if it be ill with his soul;
so that we can more easily and cheaply die then be damned, and may better
venture our bodies to suffering, then our souls to sinning, for he that sins
wrongs his soul, Prove. 8.36. Nothing but sin does wrong a man's soul, and there
is no sin but does it. Thus we see in general, that sin is against the good of
man's body and soul: But yet for a more clear and full discovery hereof, I shall
consider and speak of man: 1 In a Natural Sense. 2 In a Moral Sense.


1 If we consider man in a Physical or Natural state, In a natural sense.
we shall find sin to be 1. Against the well-being: And 2. Against the very
being of man; it will not suffer him to be well or long in the world, nor if
possible to be at all.

1 It Is against man's well-being in this life; And so 1 Against his well-being.
vivere est valere, well-being is the life of life, and sin bears us so much
ill will, that it deprives us of our livelihood, and that which makes it worth
our while to live, man was born to a great estate, but by sin (which was and is
Treason against God) he forfeited all: Man came into the world as into an house
ready furnished, he had all things prepared and ready to his hands; all the
creatures came to war on him, and pay him homage, but when man sinned, God
turned him out of house and home; all his lands, goods and chattels were taken
from him; Paradise was man's Inheritance, where he had every thing pleasant to
the eye, and good for food; (as for clothes he needed none while Innocent) but
when he sinned, God dispossessed him of all, and drove him out into the wide
world, like a Pilgrim, a Beggar, to live on his own hands, and to earn his meat
with the sweat of his brow, as you may read at large, Genes. 3. Thus by sin man
that was the Emperor of Eden, is banished from his Native Country, and must
never see it more but in a new and living way, for the old is stopped up, and
beside that it is kept against him with flaming swords. Ever since it has been
every man's lot to come into and go out of this world naked, to show that he
has no right to any thing, but lives on the alms of Gods charity and grace
(all ^^e have or hold between our birth and death is clear ^gain and mere gift)
God might choose whither ^he would allow us any thing or no, and when he has
given, he may take again, and none of us have cause to say any thing but what
Job did, Chap. 1.21. Naked came I into the world, and naked shall I return; the
Lord has given, and the Lord has taken away, blessed be the Name of the Lord.
All we have (our food and raiment) is but lent us, we are only Tenants at will,
and therefore seeing we deserve nothing, we should be content with and thankful
for any thing, 1 Timothy 6.7, 8.

2 To show that man by sin had lost all, when our Lord Jesus came into this
world for the recovery of man, and stood as in the sinners stead, he had not
where to lay his head; the Foxes had holes, and the birds of the air have
nests, but the Son of Man has not where to lay his head, Luke 9.58. Which
plainly shows, that the sin of man had left the Son of man nothing: Though
Christ were Lord of all, yet if he will come in the likeness of sinful flesh,
he must speed not like the Son of God, but Son of Man, and be a man of sorrows,
destitute, forsaken and afflicted: and though we fare the better for his
suffering, yet he fared the worse for our sin; and among other the miseries he
under-went, he had not where to lay his head. Again;

To add yet another discovery of the venomous nature of sin as to this that we
are upon, it is not a little observeable, that though God took not the full
forfeiture, nor stripped us so naked and bare a he might have done, but indulged
us, comperent subsistence and accommodation, and (as the first fruits of his
goodness) made the first suit of clothes which Adam and Eye wore, yet sin is
against that good which God left us, and fills it with vanity and vexation,
with bitterness and a curse: God left Adam many acres of land to till and
husband, but he has it with a curse, sweat and sorrow, many a grieving bryar
and pricking thorn stick fast to him, Genesis 3.17.-19. God left him ground
enough, v. 23. but alas it is cursed ground! so that sin is against man's
temporal good, either in taking it from him, or cursing it to him: Sin is so
envious, that it would leave man nothing; and if God be so good as to leave him
any thing, sins eye is evil, because God is good, and puts a sting in it, viz a
curse.

Yet more particularly: It Is 1 Against his rest.
1 Sin is against man's rest and ease, of which man is much a lover, and indeed
needs it, as being a great part of the wellbeing of his life: It Is a sore
travel which the sons of men have under the Sun; yea, what has man of all his
labor, and the vexation of his heart wherein he has labored? for all his
days are sorrows, and his travel grief, Eccl. 1.13.2.22, 23. (whither he
increase wisdom and knowledge, or pleasures and riches) yea he takes not rest
in the night, but is haunted with vain and extravagant, if not feared with
frightful dreams; and his fancies, which are waking dreams by day, are more
troublesome then them of the night: Man's ground is overgrown with thorns, that
he has many an aching head and heart, many a sore hand and foot (before the
year come about) to get a little livelihood out of this sin-cursedground: Man's
Paradisical life was easy and pleasant, but now it is labor and pain, such as
makes him sweat ( yea, Eccl. 2.1, 2. his recreations fall little short of his
labor for pain and sweat) The old world was very sensible of this, as may be
gathered from Genes. 5.29. He called his name Noah, saying, this same shall
comfort us concerning our work, and toil of our hands, because of the ground
which the Lord has cursed; sin, curse and toil keep company.

2 Sin is against man's comfort and joy, His comfort and joy.
Genes. 3.17. In sorrow shall thou eat all the days of thy life; not one whole
merry day! 'twere some comfort to a man, if after he had toiled and moil'd all
day, he could eat his bread with joy, and drink his wine with a merry heart,
but sin will not suffer him; if he laugh sin turns it to madness, Eccl. 2.2. or
else it is no better Music then the crackling of thorns, Eccl. 7.6. In Paradise
the blessing of God on Adams diligent hand made him rich, and there was no
sorrow with it; to allude to Prove. 10.22. but now man's sweet meats have sour
sawces, in sorrow shall thou eat, his bread is the bread of affliction.

Yea the Femaie (the She-man or Manness) the Woman, has a peculiar sort and
share of sorrow, for the time of conception, breeding, bearing, and birth, are
tedious; yet alas! many that feel the pain which sin brought, are not sensible
of the sin which brought the pain: though their sorrow and pain too be greatly
multiplied, as we find it expressed, Genes. 3.16. and the more for want of faith
and sobriety, 1 Timothy 2.15.

3 His health.
Sin is against man's health: Hence come all diseases and sicknesses, till sin
there were no such things: For this cause (in general) many are weak and sick
among you: Let a man take the best air he can, and eat the best food he can,
let him eat and drink by rule, let him take never so many Antidotes,
Preservatives and Cordials, yet man is but a crazy sickly thing for all this:
Verily every man in his best estate is a frail and brittle thing, yea
altogether vanity, Psalm. 39. which is spoken with reference to diseases and
sickness: take him while his blood danceth in his veins, and his marrow fills
his bones, yet then is he a brittle piece of mortality!

4 Sin is against the quiet of a man's natural conscience, for it wounds the
spirit, The quiet of conscience.
and makes it intolerable; a wounded spirit who can bear? Prove. 18.14. while
that is sound and whole, all infirmities are more easily born, but when that is
broken, the supports fail: and this has great influence upon the body; for
Prove. 17.22. a merry heart does good like a medicine, (no cordial like it) but
a broken spirit dries the bones, it sucks away the marrow and radical
moisture, Prove. 12.25. heaviness in the heart of man makes it stoop; a good
conscience is a continual feast, but sin mars all the mirth. When Cain had
killed his Brother, and his conscience felt the stroke of the curse, he was
like a distracted man and mad: when Judas had betrayed his Master, he was weary
of his life.

5 Sin is against the beauty of man; His beauty.
it takes away the loveliness of men's very complexions, it alters the very air
of their conntenance, Psa. 9.11. When thou with rebukes do correct man for
iniquity, thou make his beauty (or that which is to be desired in him, as
it is in the margin) to consume or melt away like a Moth; surely every man is
vanity, his beauty vain: Now there was no such thing as vanity or deformity,
till sin entered, every thing was lovely before, and man above any thing of the
inferior world.

6 The loving cohabitation of soul and body.
Sin is against the loving and conjugal cohabitation of soul and body, they
were happily matried, and lived lovingly together for a while, till sin sowed
discord between them, and made them jar; many a falling out is there now
between body and soul, between sense and reason, they draw several ways,
there is a self-civil war, even in this sense the flesh lusts against the
spirit, that poor man is hall'd and pulled this way and that, tossed to and fro
as with several winds: nunc hic nunc flectitur illic: man is full of
contradictions: Time was when the mind commanded the body, but now this servant
rides on horseback, when that Prince walks on foot: Man is inverted, his head
is where his heels should be; his soul is become a prisoner to the body (rather
then a Freeman) too too often; the beast is too hard for the man, and the
horse rides the rider, sense Lords it and domineers over reason!

7. His relative good.
Sin is against man's relative good in this world; man's comfort or sorrow lies
much in relations; the weal or woe of his life is as relation; are; that which
was made for an help, proves but too often an hindrance: Sin has spoiled
Society, that homo homini lupus, and diabolus, one man is a wolf, yea a devil
to another: Sin will not let Husband and Wife. Parents and Children to live
quietly, but sets them at variance, and many times a man's Enemies are them of
his own house and bosom; they who eat bread at our Table, lift up their heel
against us, and familiar friends become enemies. Lust makes wars, James 4.1.
and from pride comes contention, Proverbs 13.10. It breeds divisions, factions
in Church and State, that there is little of union or order, harmony, society
or friendship in the world. Thus does sin set it self to oppose man's
well-being. Yea

2 Sin is against the very being of man; It Is against the being of man.
sin does aim not only that man should not be well, but that man should not be
at all: How many does it strangle in the Womb? how many miscarriages and
abortions does it cause? how many does it send from the Cradle to the grave,
that they have run their race before they can go? others die in their full
strength, (beside the havocks it makes by war, etc.) as some do always eat
their bread in darkness, Job 21.23. Man no sooner begins to live, but he begins
to die; and after a few days, (which are but as a span, and do pass away more
swift then a Weavers Shuttle) sin lays all in the dust, Princes as well as
Beggars: Sin has reduced man's age to a very little pittance, from almost a
thousand to a very uncertainty, not only to seventy, but to seven; for among
men no man's life is valued at more; man's time is short and uncertain, he that is
born to day, is not sure to live a day: And what is our life, but as a vapor,
which soon passes away? I might enlarge here, but this may suffice, to show
that sin is against all the good man in this life, considered in a natural
sense; and now I proceed to show that sin is against the good of man.

2 In a Moral sense, In a moral sense.
for
1 Sin has degraded man by defiling him, and tantum non almost unmann'd him;
for as our Text speaks of sin as a man, so the holy Scripture speaks of man as
if he were sin, and every man were a man of sin (made up of sin) whither we
consider the outer or inner man: Man was a very noble thing, made little lower
then the Angels, Psalm. 8. But alas by sin he is made almost as low as Devils:
Man was once a companion for God himself, but sin has separated between God
and him, sin has robbed man of his primitive excellency; of a Lord he is
become a servant, yea a slave to creatures, to Devils, and lusts of all sorts.
Now this debasement came by defilement, which defilement cleaves

1 His body defiled.
To his body; for the flesh is silthy, 2 Cor. 7.1. and the body needs
sanctifying and cleansing, 1 These 5.23. the body is a body of sin, the members
are servants to uncleanness, and to iniquity, Romans 6.19. Take him from head to
foot, from the Crown of that to the sole of this, there is no whole (because not
holy) part in him, but all filthy and full of putrefactions and sores: If we
dissect and anatomize man, we shall find this but too true, for not to name
every sin that cleaves to the whole or every part, but in a more general way,
it is thus said of sinful men, their mouth is full of cursing and bitterness,
with their tongues they use deceit, the poison of Asps is under their lips,
their throat is an open Sepulcher, Romans ^, 13, 14. eyes full of adultery, 2
Pet. 2.14. the eyelids haughty, Prove. 30.13. ears dull of hearing, Hebr. 5.11.
yea deaf as the Adder, Psa. 58.4, 5. the forehead is impudent as a brow of
brass, Is. 48.4. both hands are imploid to work iniquity, Mic. 7.3. the belly
an Idol-God, Phil. 3.19. the feet are swift to shed blood, Romans 3.15. and if we
look within, their inward part is very wickedness ( Hebr. wickednesses) Psa.
5.9. the gall is a gall of bitterness, in a moral as in a natural sense; the
spleen is affected, yea infected with envy and malice; what part is there which
is not the seat of one or other evil? Yea this defilement cleaves

2 To the Soul, His soul defiled.
which is the principal subject of it; it is not only flesh but spirit that is
filthy, 2 Cor. 7.1. Gods Image was more in and on the Soul then body of man,
and sins ambition and envy is to deprive the Soul of this Image; righteousness
and holiness were stamped on man's Soul, but sin has blotted this Image and
Superscription, which on^^ told from whence it came, and to whom it belonged,
so that man is fallen short of the glory of God, and the glory of being Gods;
it must be new created or renewed till God will own it for his, because till
then his Image is not legible, if it (in this sense) be at all, for there is
none righteous, no not one, Romans 3.10.

It Is not any one faculty only that sin has defiled, but like a strong poison,
it soaks and ears through all; that whereas all was holy, and holiness to the
Lord, it is now evil, and evil against the Lord, Genes. 6.5. Every imagination
(figment or creature) of the heart is only evil continually; yea, the Flood,
which washed away so many sinners, could not wash away sin; the same heart
remains after the Flood, as before, Genes. 8.21. and as it was with the heart
of man from his youth, it has continued to be to this old and decrepit age of
the world; for to this day there proceeds out of the heart the same evil
thoughts, words and deeds, that then did, Mat. 15.20 And from this unclean
Fountain issues forth all that defiles the man.

Sin has made the heart of man deceitful, and desperately wicked, Jerem. 17.9.
and its hardened in impenitency through the deceitfulness of sin, Hebr. 3.12,
13. yea, though thereby man do nothing but undo himself, and treasure up wrath
against the day of wrath, Romans 2.5. It makes man obstinate, that he will not be
saved, but will be damned; you will not come to me that you may have life, Joh.
5.40. As for the Word of the Lord, we will not hearken, but we will certainly
do whatsoever thing goes forth out of our own mouth, Jerem. 44.16, 17. and
it is out of the abundance of folly and madness that is in men's hearts (and
bound up there) that they thus speak, not only vain thoughts and words, but
villainous ones bubble and break forth from this corrupt fountain, which sets
the tongue on fire of hell, that the devil could not broach and belch out more
horrid blasphemies against God, then the tongues and hearts of sinful men. It
has defiled and spoiled man's memory and conscience also; his memory, how
treacherous is it as to good, but alas too tenacious as to evil! The conscience
is become an evil conscience, and in many a seared conscience: Thus all over,
without and within is man defiled and polluted, of which I may speak yet more
in another place, only at present a little more largely, to show how sin has
almost put out man's eyes, and even extinguished the Candle of the Lord; how it
has dimned and benighted man's leading faculty, the understanding, which should
show a man the difference between good and evil, and guide him in the way
wherein he should walk, but is now too often an ignis fatuus, that leads men
into bogs and ditches, into errors and immoralities.

Sin has 1 Blinded man's understanding, and made him ignorant. 2 Depraved his
understanding, and made him a fool.


1 Sin has darkened man's understanding: I^h^h (...) Darkened man's understanding,
and made him blind.
Poor man is wise to do evil, but to do good has no knowledge, Jerem. 4.52.
yea there is none that understands ( viz. as, and what he ought) Romans 3.11.
All the workers of iniquity have no knowledge, Psalm. 14.4. Poor man is covered
with Egyptian thick darkness, yea said to be not only dark, but darkness (in
the abstract) Ephesians. 5.8. and (which is sad) is in love with darkness, Joh. 8.19.
and his light is darkness, Mat. 6.23. That man is in darkness by sin, is clear
as the light of the Sun by the light of Scripture truth, beside that of sad
experience; for in general when men are converted, they are called out of; and
turned from darkness to light, Acts 26.18. 1 Pet. 2.9. etc. And our Lord Jesus
came to be, and give light to them that sat in darkness, Luke 1.76.79. And
indeed none but he can open the eyes of them that are born blind, Joh: 9. He
was the light of the world, which without him is a dark Dungeon.

More particularly it appears that man is dark: As appears 1 By his groping.
1 By his groping, which is constantly attributed to blindness and darkness in
the Scripture: Be pleased to peruse Deuteronomy. 28.29. Job 5.14. and 12.25. Is.
59.10. Man had (like Solomon's wise man) his eyes in his head, and clearly saw
his way before him; the door and way of peace and happiness lay wide open to
him; but now (like the blind Sodomites) he gropes to find the door of hope, and
wearies himself in vain pursuits: Man has lost his way, since he lost his
eyes: Poor man catches at every straw, grasps every trifle, if he can but find
out what is good for him! Oh how did Solomon seek and search this and that, to
the tiring and vexing of himself, till the true light guided him into the true
way? How did he grope after happiness, but felt none, till he came to fear God,
etc. Eccl. 12.13.

2 Not comprehending the light.
Man's darkness is evident by this, That though the light shine, yet his
darkness comprehends it not, Joh. 1.5. Ah how blind is that man, who at
midday (when the Sun shines in full strength) sees it not! It was no great
wonder that the Law was darkness to man, for Mose^ had a veil on his face; but
that the Gospel, the clearest light that ever shone in the world; that Christ
himself, the brightness of his Fathers glory, should not be comprehended, Oh
mavelous darkness! In the innocent Golden-age man could have comprehended the
least hint that came from God, and have seen day at a little hole or crevice;
he could have looked on the Sun, and his eye not twinkle; but now the natural
man receives not the things of the spirit, nor can he discern them: No, the
Wisdom of God, the preaching of the Gospel is foolishness to him, 1 Cor. 2.14.
This Gospel (while revealed) continues an hidden thing to this blinded world, 2
Cor. 4.3, 4. and to know Christ Jesus requires as great a power as was in the
Creation, when God commanded light to shine out of darkness, as the Apostle
tells us in the same place, 2 Cor. 4.6, 7. Again:

3 Man's darkness is apparent, By walking in the ways, and doing the works of
darkness.
by his walking in all manner of wickedness, which are called the works of
darkness, Ephesians. 5.11. Good and holy works are of the light (and give light, for
they shine, Mat. 5.20.) but wicked works are from darkness; Who but blind men
would walk in dirt up to the ears, yea over head and ears? Solomon speaking of
wicked men, Prove. 2.13. says, that they leave the paths of uprightness, and
walk in the ways of darkness; which is a clear argument of their darkness,
especially if we add this consideration to it, the boldness of men in sinning
(who more bold then the blind?) that they rush like horses into the battle,
without fear or wit. Did men see the danger that attends sin and wickedness;
would they follow it to ^estruction? Oh no; he goes after her as a ^ol to the
Stocks, till a Dart strikes through ^s Liver; a^^ Bird haste a to the snare,
and knows not, or sees not, that it is for his life, Prove. 7.22, 23. For in vain
i^ the Net spread in the sight of any Bled, Irov. 1.17. or of a seeing man.

4 That he knows not whither he goes.
It appears that sin has blinded man, for he knows not whither he goes, Joh.
12.35. 1 John 2.11. Men are busy in this world (like a company of Ants)
creeping up and down from one Molehill to another, but are not so wise, for
the Ants know, but poor blind men know not whither they go, whither forward or
backward, from home, or to home, they are in a maze, and bewildered; they think
they are going to pleasure and profit, honor and happiness, but alas they are
mistaken, and are going to pain and loss, to disgrace and death; like the
Syrians, who thought they had been going to Dotha^ as Conquerours, but were
found in Samaria, at the mercy of their enemies; they were hood winkt with
blindness, 2 Kings 6. So men thin^ they are going heavenward, when alas sin
lead^ them to hell, while their eyes are shut, and they know not where they go.

5 By stumbling.
Man's darkness is seen by this; That he stumbles, and knows not at what, Joh.
11.9, 10. Pro^ 4.19 Sinners are ever and anon stumbling (...) Christ Jesus,
they are offended at him, but connot tell for what; something they would
complain of, and find fault with, if they knew wha^ but quaerunt nodum in
scirpo they seek faults when none are to be found; yet rather then not (...)
offended, this shall be his crime, that he is guil^ of none; and the reason why
they find so mu^^ fault with God, is, because he finds out the faults, and
finds fault with them: Man's waspishness and touchiness, his being so captious
and ready to take offense at God and godliness, are clear discoveries of his
darkness; for did they know him, they would never crucify, nor be offended
with the Lord of Life, light and glory: Blessed he that is not offended with
Christ.

6 Its evident that man (ever since the fall) has brnis'd his intellectuals,
Not knowing his time.
has a soft place in his head (laesa principid) for he knows not his time, nor
how to order (his thoughts, words and actions) any of his affairs in season,
which is the beauty of all* (...) could have said as Job. Chapter 29.3, 4. His
candle shined upon my head, by his light I walked through dirkness, the secret
of God was upon my Tabernacle: But alas now he must say, as Eccl. 8.6, 7.
because to every purpose there is a time and judgment, therefore the misery of
man is great upon him, for he knows not what shall be, and who can tell him,
when or how it shall be? And Eccl. 9.12. Man knows not his time, it is not in
man to direct his way, Jerem. 10.23. We cannot order our speech by reason of
darkne^^, Job. 7.19. We know not what to pray for (...) we ought, Romans 8.26.
Ah! What a poor sorry silly thing has sin made man!

7 And lastly, Bring content to be led by a (...), or by ^ bl^^d guide.
It Is evident that sin has blinded man, that he can be content to be led,
though but ^y a dog: Inter Caecos Inscus regnare potest, A ^alf-ey'd man may
reign among the blind: Would (...) man be led by a dog if he were not blind? he
would scorn it: Our Savior tells us, that the ^lind lead the blind, Mat.
15.14. and surely ^f men were not blind, they would never be led by blind
guides; but now being in the dark, suitable guides please them best; like
people, like Priest, as God complains, Jerem. 3.31. The Prophets prophecy
falsely, and the Priests bear rule by their means, and my people love to have it
so; falsehood and slattery was their business, and the peoples choice and
pleasure: God and godliness, righteousness and holiness were troublesome and
tedious, they must have smooth things, and soft pillows, and alas they were
fitted to an hair, this suited their tooth, and pleased their palate well: but
all this while, it argues undeniably that men are dark and blind, who can be
content with such dogs to lead them, yea not only dumb dogs, but blind guides,
yea and false Prophets too, who lead them into the Ditch of Sin, and Dungeon of
Hell! What does all this argue but man's darkness? and what does that infer but
sins sinfulness in darkning the understanding of man? Is not light good? God
that made it saw it so; but now, that the soul is without knowledge, it is not
good, Prove. 19.2. So that sin is against the good of man, in putting out the
sight of his eyes, which is worse (in a spiritual sense) then if it had put out
the eyes of his body. Man's eyes are very dear to him, God expresses the
tenderness he has for his people by this, that htey are to him as the apple of
his eye Zech. 2.8. And the Apostle sets out the love of the Galatians by this,
that they would have pulled out their eyes for him, Gal. 4.15. And to she^ love
to God, we are to pull out our right eye, i^ it do offend, Mat. 5.29. Israel
took great indig^nation at Naash the Ammonite, that he would have put out their
eyes, 1 Samuel 11. Herein then lies the malignity of sin, that it has so darkened
the eyes of man's understanding, and left it for a reproach. Yet this is not
all, but

2 Sin has depraved man's understanding, Sin has depraved man's understanding,
and made him a fool.
and made him a fool, a sot, a very bruit; ignorant, foolish, and beast, are
joined together, Psa. 73.22. folly is the common name of sin, and so is fools
of sinners in the Scripture, Psa. 94.8. O ye fools, when will ye be wise, i. e.
O ye sinners when will ye fear God, for the fear of the Lord is the beginning
of wisdom, yea it is wisdom, Job 28.28. yea the top of wisdom, Prove. 1.7.
Till a man fear God, he does but play the fool, he is indeed unmann'd, and
beside himself: for of the Prodigal, (the Representative of Sinners and
Converts) when he repented and was converted, it is said that he came to
himself, and then quickly went to his Father. And in the recovery of man, our
Lord Jesus Christ is made of God to us, not only righteousness, but light and
wisdom, 1 Cor. 1.30. we were without that our selves, which Christ is made to
us.

That this is the common case of Jew and Gentile, i. e. all men, the Apostle
assures us, Romans 3.9, 10, 11. yea men themselves declare it; and I may say of
man, as Solomon does of the sool, Eccl. 10 3. When he walks by the way, he
says to every one, that he is a fool; the way and course he takes, his
carriage and behavior shows him to be a fool; as a child (so a man) is known
by his doings, Prove. 20.11. as he that does righteousness is righteous, so that
does folly is a fool. And

His folly appears to be very great Man's folly appears.
1 With respect and relation to his end or happiness. 2 With respect to the
means which relate to the end. 3 By non or ill-improvement of means in relation
to the end.


1 As to his end or happiness.
Man's folly is but too apparent in relation to his chief and ultimate end, the
summum bonum; Man is exceedingly to seek for happiness, where to place it, as
how to obtain it. Oh the variety of opinions that men have had about
happiness! Varro tells us of a great many, but who can tell us of all? So many
men, so many minds; for when man goes from unity, he falls into multitude; he
has found out many inventions: Time was when man had light and wisdom enough
to know that God was the (...), the Supreme and chief good, and that his
happinosse lay in knowing and enjoying God; but since sin man is become such a
fool, as to say in his heart there is no God, at least no happiness in knowing
God; for if sin make not men such Atheists as to believe there is no God, yet
it makes them such as to wish that there were no God, and to say that it is no
happiness to know him, or profit to serve him: Let us eat and drink, etc. is
the voice of more men, then let us seek and serve God, who will show us any
good, viz. corn, wine and oil, is the voice of mary, Psalm. 4. yea of all till
regenerate: Man is become so sottish and brutish, that he lives by sense: Now
sense will never look to God who is invisible (that is for says) but to the
creatares which are visible, and the objects o^ sense. How did Solomon set this
out to the life, in his Ecclesiastes, viz. that sense seeks for happiness
below God; that man is fond of toys and trifles, and seeks contentment where
there is nothing but vexation, as if he could sind ease in the place, and
element of torment, viz. in hell; he sets his eyes and heart upon that which is
not, Prove. 23.5. The lust of the eye, the lust of the slesh, the pride of life
is (the Trinity) the God of this world, and excludes the love of God, 1 John
2.15, 16.

All things of sense are but for the one (and the worse) half of man, viz. the
body; and when all a man's labor is for this, with neglect of the soul (which
is the principal man of the man) what folly is it? to mind the less, and
neglect the greater; to be troubled about these many things, and neglect the
one thing necessary, is folly with a witness, and will be followed with a
vengeance! what is it to labor for the back and belly (as if it were God) to
mind earthly things, and neglect, yea despise heavenly, but folly in extremity!
it is to glory in shame, Phil. 3.19. He that bid his soul take ease, in eating,
drinking, and being merry, was called fool; and so (i. e. such another fool) is
every one that lays up treasure for himself, (his sensual self) and is not rich
toward God, as our Savior tells us, Luke 12.16. -- 21. on which Text to show
the folly of such men. I have discoursed elsewhere (which if God please may in
due time come to view) and therefore I shall wholly wave and omit to speak to
it here, though I did treat of it when I preached these Sermons on the
sinfulness of sin. Only

Before I proceed to the other discoveries of man's folly, in relation to the
way and means that lead to happiness, let me briefly evince by three things
(among many others that might be named) that man's happiness cannot be made up
of any, or all creature enjoyments, of having (though all) the world for a
portion. For beside what is newly said:

1 It was not so when man was in Paradise, when not only man but all the
creatures were in a better condition then, and not subject to vanity as now
they are: All that God made was very good, and Adam had all that God made, and
yet that was not his happiness. Now, if the creatures in their best estate were
not man's happiness, much less are they so in this their worse estate; so that
our sin in placing happiness in creature enjoyment now, is worse then Adams sin
was, for the creatures were then far more allicient, attractive and taking,
then now they are; for (as a worthy person expresses it) though the old walls
and ruinous Palace of the world stands to this day, yet the beauty, gloss and
glory of the hangings is soiled and marred with many imperfections cast on
every creature; what is without us only cannot be our happiness.

2 That cannot be our happiness which is below us; the design of Gods making
the creatures was, that they should serve us, and not be served by us^ God put
Adam (colere) to till the earth, not (colere) to worship the earth, and make a
God of it, as earthly-minded men do, for covetousness is ^dolatry: Not only God
placed them, but man reckons them below himself; below man; for skin for skin,
or skin after skin, and all that a man has will he give for his life; (a great
truth, though spoken by the Father of lies) by which its evident, that man
reckons all below himself; and though old Jacobs life were bound up in the life
of young Benjamin, yet he would part with him rather then starve: Now (without
further enlargement) it is clear as the Sun, that what is inferior to us, cannot
be our happiness.

3 That cannot be our happiness, which is not so much as a token of the love of
God: If you had all the Cattle on a thousand hills, and never so many thousand
bags of gold in your Chest, though all the beauty and honor in the world
centr'd in you, yet I must tell you what a very wise man has told me, Eccl.
9.1. Man knows not love by prosperity, no more then hatred by adversity. Indeed
the world is not (as great and good as it is, or 'twas) it is not good enough for
a Love-token: God sent his Son (and never any thing but him, and what is in him)
for a Love-token: Well then, upon the whole we conclude, that seeing happiness
is of an higher nature then the Creation, and is not in less then God himself,
that man is a fool in seeking it elsewhere, and that sin is very pernicious to
man, in making him such a fool. But

2 Man's folly appears to be great, As to means which relates to his end or
happiness.
not only in relation to his end and happiness, in his mistaking that, but in
relation to the means and way leading to happiness, in mistaking this also: The
enjoyment of God is our happiness; Religion, viz. right worshipping and serving
God is the means of enjoying God, i. e. of our happiness. Alas! here man is a
very fool! Though in the general men acknowledge that there is a God, and that
God is to be worshipped and obeyed, yet who this God is, and how to be
worshipped, man is full of darkness, doubt and perplexity about it: whence it
is that we have such expressions in the Scripture concerning sinners; ye
worship ye know not what, Joh. 4.22. Surely they that worship they know not
what, do worship also they know not how; as it there follows. The Athenian
Altar had this Inscription, To the unknown God, Acts 17.23. and the world by
wisdom knew not God, viz. manifest in the flesh, 1 Cor. 1.21. Though there be
nothing more knowable, yet nothing more unknown then God: It Is visible to all
the Creation, by the Creation, that there is a God; as Romans 1.22. but who, and
what he is, and what his will is, who has known the mind of God? 1 Cor. 2.16.

Sin has made men worship either 1 A false God, and that is Idolatry: Or, 2 God
falsely, and that is Superstition.


Man is become such a fool, In being 1 Idolatious.
that his worship (till enlightened and converted) is either a breach of the
first or second Commandment, and he fails as to the object or manner of
worship, and both speak man's folly, that his Religion is either Idolatry or
Superstition.

1 Idolatry is man's folly, to worship no God, or that which is not a God, but
an Idol, is folly; and therefore the Gentiles are called not only Atheists, but
a foolish people; and with this the Apostle upbraids them, Gal. 4.8. Romans
1.21.125. Man is such a fool, that he neglects to serve the God that made him,
and serves Gods of his own making, though that make proves that they are not as
their name is, but Gods (like their knowledge) falsely so called, as it is at
large imputed to them of old, Is. 44.14.-16. The world has been guilty of most
abominable idolatry; the Romans made diseases Gods, as the Fever, etc. and
sinners make not only creatures, as gold and their belly their God, but among
the forementioned Romans (theft and murder) sins were reputed and called Gods:
yea, the Devil himself has been made a God, and sacrificed to; he is called
the God of this world, 2 Cor. 4.4. and says the Apostle, they sacrifice to
devils, 1 Cor. 10.20. Deuteronomy. 32.17. and sacrificed not only their children, Psa.
106.37. but their souls; for in all services the soul is the sacrifice. Oh
sinful sin! But yet again;

2 Superstition is man's folly, as to Religion, Superstitious.
and this is younger brother to Idolatry, it is of the same (venture) womb with
Idolatry: Superstition is not worshipping a false God, but the true God falsely,
in a way that God commands not; but it teaches and practices for doctrines
the devices and commandments of men; or worships not according to the will of
God, but the will of man: This also is called the sacrifice of fools, Eccl.
5.1. They mind the matter more then the manner, and take up with the work done,
though it be not well done, and mind the outside more then the inside; yea,
and worship God more because they fear, then because they love him.

And this shall briefly suffice for the evincing of man's folly, or how sin has
befooled man as to his end, happiness, and the means to it, Religion. I proceed

3 To show man's folly, As to non or ill-improvement of means.
as to non or ill- improvement of means, when made known in truth and
clearness; though the Will of God as to worship be revealed, yet sin makes men
fools still, either in this that they use not, or in this, that they make an
ill use of the Revelations of God; a Treasure is put into their hand, but they
such fools as know not how to use it, Prove. 17.16.

God has been pleased in and by Christ Jesus to declare his mind to us, 1 Cor.
2.16. His Gospel and grace has appeared teaching us, Tit. 2.11, 12. But alas!
how do men pervert the Gospel, turn grace into wantonness, Jude 4. and sin
abundantly, because grace abounds? What strivings and struglings, reluctances
and oppositions against the Gospel? How do men stumble, and kick at, and
against Christ Jesus, instead of building on him as the Cornerstone, as a Rock
and sure Foundation? How angry are they when Jesus Christ comes by his Word and
Spirit to bless them, in turning them away from their iniquity? When God comes
in Christ Jesus, and the Ministry of his Gospel to reconcile them, and make
them happy, they take up arms, and make war against him! When the Gospel comes
with the weapons of its warfare, to pull down the strong holds, and to reduce
men to obedience, how do they fortify themselves? When God stands at the door
and knocks, and woes men for entertainment, how do they lock themselves up, bar
and bolt up their hearts against him, that the King of Grace and Glory may not
enter in? It Is no less a power then that which raised Christ from the dead,
that makes men willing to believe and obey the Gospel, Psalm. 110.3. Ephesians. 1.19.

Christ's Messengers make glorious reports, but who believes it? Romans 10.16.
they stretch out their hands, but to whom is the arm of the Lord revealed? they
beseech and entreat, but men harden their hearts: And among the many that seem
to profess the Gospel, how few practice it; in words they confess God, but in
works deny him; they are lovers of pleasures, and themselves, more then of God;
and though they have a form of godliness, deny the power thereof. All these
their ways of not, or of mis-improving the means of Gods vouchsafement, I say,
all these their ways are their folly.

It were next to endless (if 'twere possible) to enumerate the follies of man:
He thinks, More of man's folly
like a fool, unsteadily and rolling, independently and broken; inconsistently,
and to no purpose, at random and rovers, many run wast (like water beside the
Mill) He builds Castles in the air, his imaginations are like Vagabonds, See
Herberts Poem of giddiness.
his contrivances Romantic: not to mention the more wicked and sinful
thoughts, which if they were but known, would make one man ashamed and afraid
to converse with another; for not only vain, but vile, injurious, adulterous,
and murtherous thoughts lodge in the hearts of men, that when any comes to be
awakened, and to be made sensible of the sinfulness of his heart, it makes him
say as S. Paul of himself, I am the chief of sinners. Never was any heart such
a Shop of vanity, such a Den of thieves, such a Cage of unclean birds, such a
Newgate of Murderers, such an Inn and through fare of traveling lusts, such a
Court of flattery, ambition, pride and envy, etc. such a Sink and common
draught of filthiness, such an Hell of blasphemy as mine is!

As man thinks he often speaks quicquid in buccam, foolishly, idly, proudly,
etc. and as he speaks he acts; out of the abundance or fullness of the heart the
mouth speaks, and out of the heart are all the issues of life: All the
follies of his life are but the untying and letting loose of that folly which
is bound and bundled up in his heart, they are there in gross, and are retail'd
out (as he meets with customers, occasions and opportunities) in the course of
his life and conversation.

Let us view some instances (and but some) of man's folly; which appears

1 In man's being so heady, His rashness.
hasty and rash in his undertakings: There is nothing more becoming a man then
deliberation and consideration, it being his pre-eminence above the beasts;
beasts do act, but consider not: And herein is a great part of man's
foolishness, that he considers not the end of his actions: Oh that they were
wise and would consider their end, Deuteronomy. 32.28, 29. People often say, I never
thought of this, and (insipientis est dicere non putarem) it is the property of
a fool to say, I had not thought of this, which it may be most concerned him to
think upon: The simple believes every word (which he would not do but that he
is simple, a very fool) but the prudent man looks well to his goings: The wise
man fears, and departs from evil, but the fool rages, and is confident,
Prove. 14 15, 16. Did men consider what it is they do when they sin, they would
abhor it: who would run on his ruin? who would drink his bane? none but fools
or madmen, did men consider that the wages of sin is death, that wrath and
hell attended sin, surely they would be more wary: Men go on and on, and never
think what will the end of these things be; will it not be bitterness in the
latter end? non-consideration is an argument as great as it is clear, that man
is foolish.

2 Man's folly appears in this, Laughing at h^s sin and misery.
that he laughs at, and sports himself in his sin and misery: It is a sport to
a fool to do evil, Prove. 10.23. and this sporting and jesting at sin, shows him
to be a fool in earnest: Fools use to laugh at the shrewd turns and mischiefs
which they do: Sinners are such fools, that they make sin their trade (they do
(...), and are sin-makers) and make it their recreation too; it is their pastime
(fools that they are!) to pass away, to spend and lose their time and fouls in
sinning: Fools make a mock at sin, Prove. 14.9 when they have cheated others,
they laugh at them for fools, though themselves are the verier fools for
cheating others: They sport themselves in their own deceivings, 2 Pet. 2.13.
yea, though they know that they who do such things are liable to the judgment
of God, yet not only do the same, but have pleasure in them that do them, Romans
1.32. But they are fools for so doing; for v. 22. professing themselves to be
wise, they became fools; and v. 31. they were without understanding: But oh!
when God shall laugh and mock at these mockers, the^^ 'twill appear what fools
they were, who sporter at that which should have been their greates^ sorrow and
grief!

3 Sinful man's folly appears in this, Says its in vain to serve God.
that (...) says it is in vain to serve God: What greater fol^ly then to call
Religion and the Wisdom of Go^ foolishness, vanity and unprofitablenesse, be
side which, there is no profit under the Sun This is the whole of man, all the
rest is vanit and vexation of spirit. The Author of the 73. Psalm. for having
but almost said this, conclude himself a fool, yea so foolish, ignorant, and as
beast, v. 22. so much fool that he could not express it enough; what fools are
they then the say it with an open mouth? because Job had b^ glanced at such a
thing, Elihu reckons him among the foolish, Job 34.7.-11. Hearken to me (...)
men of understanding, for fools will not; far (...) it from God that he should
do wickedly; oh (...) the work of man will he render to him: the^ is a day
coming in which there will be a difference put between them that fear God, and
the^ that fear him not, (which is spoken on this ve^^ occasion, Mal. 3.) and
then it shall appear t^ no man's labor is in vain in the Lord; I spe^ to wise
men, let them judge what I say, and know they will conclude that it is notorious
a^ egregious folly to say, that it is in vain to ser^^ God.

4 Herein and hereby appears man's folly, His Ingratitude.
that he is so disingenuous and ungrateful to God, who has so infinitely
obliged him. Do a fool never so many courtesies, and it is but as throwing
Pearls before Swine, who return evil for all the good turns are done to them
(with this Moses upbraids Israel, Deuteronomy. 32.5, 6. do ye thus requite the Lord? O
foolish people and unwise! I, none but fools would do so) and once more are men
like Swine in this, that they gather up the fruit that falls, and never look
up: Were there not ten cleansed, where are the nine, said our Savior? Scarce
one of ten proves thankful: Alas! men take Gods corn, and wine, and oil, to
make a feast for Baal, for their Bell and the Dragon, for their belly and lusts,
and instead of giving God thanks and glory, they return him sins; they kick
with the heel when fat and full, yea, and say, who is the Lord? as if they were
not beholden to him, nor did owe him any acknowledgments: Oh fools!

5 Herein also is evident the folly of (by sins defiled and depraved) man,
Ang^y with God correcting him.
that if God correct him, or afflict him for his sin and folly, he presently
grows angry with God: Such is the nature of fools, that they cannot endure them
that chastife them: Though man be punished but for his iniquities yet he
complains, Lament. 3.^^. Though Gods judgment be just, yet the foolishness of
man perverteth his way, and he fretteth against the Lord, Prove. 19.3. Man's sin
brings Gods judgment, and then when God hedgeth up his way with (or teaches
him by) such thorns which prick him, then he frees and sames, whe^^ Job was
sorely afflicted, said his Wife, Curse God and die (oh cursed speech!) but
says Job, thou speak like one of the foolish women: Men or women never
speak more foolishly, then when they speak against God: They are fools who
quarrel with God, and charge him with folly.

6 Man's folly is apparent in and by this, Unteachable.
that he is so unteachable; one may better treat with seven men of reason, then
with one fool, who is not only ignorant, but conceited and stubborn: Fools
despise wisdom and instruction, Prove. 1.7. they scorn to be instructed, they
are in love with folly: How long ye simple ones will ye love simplicity? Prove.
1.22. A fool will not hearken to counsel. Prove. 12.15. yea though instruction
come from a Father, yet a fool despises it, Prove. 15.5. Though you add
correction to instruction, yet one reproof enters more into a wise man, then
an hundred stripes into a fool, Prove. 17.10. Yea though you bray a fool in a
Mortar, yet will not his foolishness depart from him, Prove. 27.22. Whence is
it, that though Christ's Messengers labor so much, yet profit so little, but
from hence, that sin has made men fools, and they will not receive
instruction. Yet

7 After some men have received the truth, Apostatizing.
and have gone far in the profession of it, yet they are such fools as to
Apostatize, which is no small folly: As a dog returns to his vomit, so a fool
to his folly, Prove. 26.11. compared with 2 Pet. 2.20, 21. The Word of God works
on some men like Physic, it gives them a vomit, makes them confess their sin
(which one of the Ancients calls vomitus animae) as if it lay hard and heavy on
their stomachs, and they were sick of it, but after a while they lick it up
again; they repent and sin again, as if they repented of their repentance: On
this account the Apostle calls the Galatians fools, Chapter 3.1.-3. O foolish
Galatians, who has bewitched you, that you should not obey, i. e. go on to obey
the truth, for they had begun to obey; and therefore he adds, are ye so
foolish, having begun in the spirit, to think of perfection by the flesh? this
is folly with a witness! An Apostate is a double fool, a tree twice dead, and
his latter end worse then his beginning. And thus alas! we see how sin has
befooled men! But yet

This is not all; sin has degraded man, Sin has beastializ'd m^
and made him a beast; it is true, he has the shape of a man, but alas! is
degenerated into a beastial and beastly nature! I may begin, as Ovid did his
Metamorphosis, in nova fert animus, (...) must show you a Monster, yea many
Monsters in one; a dog-man, a goat-man, a wolf-man, a soxman, etc. 'Twere
better to be a beast, then to be like a beast (so living, and so dying) 'twere
better to be Balaams Als, then such an As. as Balaam himself was. But to set
this degeneration and degradation of man by sin before you the more clearly and
fully. I shall speak to these three heads.

Sin has made man; 1 Like a Beast. 2 Like the worst of Beasts. 3 Worse then
the Beasts.


1 Sinful man is 1 L^ke a beast.
Sin has made man like a Beast, yea not only like to, but a Beast: The Man of
Sin, the great Antichrist, is called a Beast; and the great ones that Daniel
saw in his Vision, are called Beasts; and sinners are ten or eleven times in
Scripture called brutish; and what some men are, all would be, if left to
themselves, if common or special, if restraining or renewing grace did not
interpose and prevent.

Three things will evince this likeness.

1 And that 1 In ignorance.
Sinful man is like the Beast in ignorance and stupidity, Psa. 73.22. So
foolish was I and ignorant, as a beast before thee, Psa. 49.20. Man (though a
man in honor) that understands not, is like the beast that perishes, of no
more value nor honor, though he sit at the upper end of the world, as the
Antichristian Beast does, Psa. 94.3. O ye brutish, when will ye understand? O
ye sools, when will ye be wise? brutish and foolish are Synonymous and
parallel expressions, as was hinted before; an heart void of understanding, is
the heart of a beast, as is clear, Dan. 4.16. with 34.-36.

2 In sensuality.
Sinful man is like the beast in sensuality, as if he were only belly-wise, and
had no soul to mind, or a soul only to mind his body; he places his happiness
in sensual and corporal enjoyments and satisfactions; and in this sense some
understand that saying, Eccl. 3.18. I said in my heart concerning the estate of
the sons of men, that (oh that) God would manifest them, ^^d that they might
see (what they are, viz.) that they are but beasts: Solomon uses not a gentle
or courtly complement, but calls them (in downright and plain English) Beasts;
they live and die like beasts, make no provision for Eternity, mind not the
world to come, which is the world of eternal good or evil.

3 Unsociableness.
Sinful man's likeness to the Beast is and appears much by this, His unfitness
and unsuitableness for society and communion with God and men: Sinners society
is but societas bellu^na, the society of beasts, and good men are as shy of it,
as of conversing with beasts. In the state of Innocence, among all the Beasts,
there was not found a meet help, any one for man to associate himself to, and
keep company with; and since, sinful man is as unfit for pleasing and
profitable converse, as beasts were then: Jobs friends took it in great scorn
and disdain, that they should be counted as beasts, and reputed vile in his
sight, i.e. not fit for, nor worthy of his conversation: God and sinful men
walk not together, they are not agreed; and good men are joined by God himself
not to be unequally yoked, for what communion? etc. 2 Cor. 6. Thus by their
ignorance, sensuality, and sociability, are sinful men become like the beast;
yea and more.

2 Sinners are not only like to beasts in the general, but they are like the
worst of beasts, Like the wo^st of beasts.
such as in Scripture are called evil and hurtful beasts: Sinners are not
likened to the Dove or the sheep, the harmless creatures, but to Lions, Tigers,
Boars and Bears, etc. the ill-quality'd and ill-condition'd creatures: If he be
at any time likened to a creature that is harmless, yet it is not for that good
quality, but for some bad one which is in that creature; as Ephraim is likened
to a Dove, Hos. 7.11. not for Innocence, but silliness: So when sinners are
likened to Serpents, it is not for their wisdom, but their venomous and
poisonous nature, or the enmity that is in them against mankind; but usually
sinners are set and painted out like the worst of beasts, like a dog, an angry
dog, a creeping dog, an howling dog, a backbiting dog, a greedy dog, a dumb
dog; by Lions, devouring Lions, roaring Lions; by a raging Bear; by a deceitful
Fox, etc. So that man is like the evil and hurtful beasts, for as one Lion will
devour many beasts, one Wolf devour many sheep, so one Sinner destroys much
good, Eccl. 9.18. and his tender mercies are cruel, Prove. 12.10.

3 Worse then beasts
Sin has made men worse then beasts, more beasts then the beasts, and worse
then the worst of beasts: Sinful man is not only ignorant as, but more ignorant
then the beast, more sensual and more unsociable then the sensual and
unsociable beasts. This appears

1 By this, that the beasts transgress not the Law of their nature, but man
has done, and does do it over and over: the instinct of these creatures is
their Law, and they constantly observe it: The quality of a beast, which is
condemnable in man, is not condemnable in the beast; ignorance and stupidity is
no crime in an Ox or an Ass, but it is in man: it is no sault in a Eyon to be
devouring, but it is sin in man to be like a Lion in devouring; The beasts
fulfill, but men transgress the Law of their Nature, when they act like beasts:
so that sinful man is worse then the beast. Yea

2 Sinful man is worse then beasts in the very quality for which he is likened
to the beast: The Ox and the Ass which have no understanding, and to which
sinful man is compared for ignorance and stupidity, is yet more knowing then
sinful man; as it is Is. 1.3. And the like is spoken of the Stork, Crane, and
Swallow, by way of upbraid to man, Jer. 8.7. These foolish creatures have more
understanding then sinful man; so as to sensuality, man is worse then the
beast; for things of sense are the proper objects of a beasts appetite, but not
of the natural appetite and inclination of man; it is no sin in the beast to be
sensual, but it is so in a man, who (though ^reated to higher ends and purposes)
is yet so degenerated, as to be in many things more sensual and carnal then the
beasts are: Sin has made man so unsociable and cruel too, that Bears are more
kind to one another, then men are, saevis inter se convenit ursis, and 'twere
better for a man (safer) to meet a Bear in her rage, when robbed of her Whelps,
then to meet a fool in his folly, Prove. 17.12. Man is more hurtful to man, then
beasts are to man. I might now instance in a long List or Catalogue, what
beasts sinners are likened to, and wherein the parallel or similitude holds,
viz. the wicked tyrannical Rulers of the world are compared to a roaring Lion,
and ranging Bear, Prove. 28.15. They have no pity, but make a prey of all they
come near to: Hypocrites are like to Vipers, Mat 23.23. Herod was called a Fox,
not only for his craft and cunning, but for hunting after the life of the Lamb,
Christ Jesus. Thus some sinners are like to some beasts, and some to others;
but there are two beasts that all sinners are likened to; the Goat, and the Dog.

1 Sinners are called Goats, Mat. 25.32, 33. He shall set the sheep, i.e. the
godly on his right hand, and the Goats, i.e. the wicked on the left: And there
are two or three things which Naturalists observe concerning Goats, in which
the wicked are like them.

As 1. Goats are very lascivious, wanton and lustful; sinners are so too, the
lust of the flesh, and the lust of the eye, are the things they are taken with,
1 John 2.16. To these they give up themselves, says the Apostle, among whom we
all had our conversation in the lusts of the flesh, Ephesians. 2.3, and served diverse
lusts, Tit. 3.3. Thus are they like Goats.

And 2. Goats are stinking beasts, a Goatish smell is a stinking smell,
(Gorgonius Hircum) to smell of, or like to the Goat, is a very strong unsavory
and stinking sent; and in a resembling sense, the wicked are an abomination to
the Lord, a very stink in his Nostrils.

3. Goats are very bold and adventurous beasts, they climb Rocks and Precipices
to browse and feed on what they can get with hazard; and in this sinners are
like them too in running hazards, and many dangerous adventures for a little,
yea no satisfaction; they venture peace, conscience, life, soul and all, to get
that which is not bread, Isa. 55.2.

2 Sinners are likened to dogs: I shall not run division in this, nor persecute
the Metaphor in prosecuting the particulars, of which there was something said
a little before, but only to show, that though it were most usual with the Jews
to call the Gentiles dogs, (and our Savior speaks in their dialect and
language, when he told the woman, that 'twas not meet to take the childrens
bread and cast it to dogs, Mat. 15.26.) yet it is a common name to sinners,
whither Jews or Gentiles, to all without God and Christ, for without are dogs,
Revel. 22.15.

Upon the whole then it is but too clear and evident, what mischief sin has
done man in thus degrading him, by making him a fool, a beast, a Monster; and
yet this is not all, but

2 Sin has not only degraded man, Sin separates man from God.
but has also separated man from God in a moral sense; for Acts 17.28. though
by nature (...) we are his Offspring, and in him we live, move, and have our
being; yet morally and spiritually sinners are separated from God, and are
without God: This is a great injury, and I may call it the greatest, seeing God
is man's chiefest good, to be separated from him must be his greatest evil and
loss. There was ever a very great disproportion and distance between God and
Man; God the Creator, and man the creature, God Insinite, and man finite, etc.
but this was no misery to man; it is sin, only sin that has made a difference
and separation between God and man; and therefore sinners are said to be afar
off, Ephesians. 2.73. for they depart from God, and like the Prodigal, go into a far
Country, Luke 15.13.

More particularly sin has separated man.
1 From the sight of God.
From the sight and seeing of God: Man could talk with God face to face, as a
man converseth with his friend, but (woe and alas!) man cannot see his face and
live: One of the first discoveries of man's sinfulness and misery by it was;
that he could not endure (but hid himself from) the sight, yea and the voice of
God, Genes. 3.8. Our happiness lies so much in the sight of God, that it has
the name of Beatifical Vision, a sight which passes all sights: When our
Savior prays for the happiness of his, he does not only pray that they may be
where he is, but that they may see his glory, Joh. 17.24. And this is the glory
which does not yet appear, that we shall be like him, for we shall see him as
he is, 1 John 3.2. They that are regenerate, and enlightened from above, and are
refined and clarified, have some glimpses and gradual sights of God, and yet
it is comparatively called darkness; we see but darkly (as 'twere his
back-parts) through a glass, which is short of seeing face to face, 1 Cor.
13.12. We do live by faith now rather then by sight, as the Apostle does
express it, 2 Cor. 5.7. It Is true, faith is to us instead of our eyes, for it is
the evidence of things not seen, Hebr. 11.1. and by it we look (as Moses did)
to him who is, and to his things which are invisible, 2 Cor. 4.18. Seeing then
man's happiness lies so much in seeing God, what an exceeding great mischief
has sin done to man in separating him from the sight of God, that man cannot
see God and live, whereas the best life is in seeing God.

2 Sin has separated man from the life of God, From the life of God.
not only from living unto God, and with God, but from living the life of God,
viz. such a life as God lives, which is a life of holiness in perfection; and
therefore it is said of sinners, that they are alienated from the life of God,
Ephesians. 4.18. yea, and more, that they are dead in sins and trespasses, Ephesians. 2.1.
So far from living, that they are dead so far from living to God, that they
live against God; so far from living the life of God, that they live the life
of Devils: It Is according to the Prince of the Power of the Air, i.e. the
Devil, Ephesians. 1.2. Oh what an injury has sin done in separating man from the
Divine Life and Nature, and sinking him into the dregs and death of sin, viz.
made him dead in sin!

3 Sin has separated man from the love of God: From the love of God.
I speak not now of what love and good will there is in God toward man, but of
that love, and the actual communication thereof, which man once had and
enjoyed, whereof sin has not only deprived him, but made him the object of his
wrath; for God is angry with the wicked every day, Psalm. 7.11. and they are by
nature the children of wrath, Ephesians. 2.3, 4 and therefore said not to be beloved,
Romans 9.25. Man was once the object of his love and delight; when man came into
the world in the likeness of God, God looked on him with delight, and was
enamored of this his Image; but sin (alas) has made him the object of his
wrath: Oh injurious sin!

4 From communion.
Sin has separated man from communion with God; God and man kept company,
while man and holiness kept company, but when that and man parted; then God and
man parted (the redintegration of any is upon a new account) they could not
walk together, because of this disagreement, Amos 3.3. When man left walking in
the light of holiness, and walked in the darkness of sin, fellowship ceased, 1
John 1.6, 7. It Is true, there is reconciliation and recovery by Jesus Christ,
but sin did what in it lay to cut man off from all communion with God for ever;
Oh this spiteful and pernicious sin!

5 From Covenantrelation.
Sin separated man from the Covenant Relation wherein he stood unto God; so
that God had no obligation upon him to own him, or look after him, to have any
thing to do with him, but ruin him; and what sin did at first, it does (if not
repented of, and pardoned) to this day; and therefore sinners called Loammi,
not my people, which is worse then not to be a people, 1 Pet. 2.10. and they
are without God, Promise and Covenant, Ephesians. 2.12. Man can claim nothing of God
upon any right or Plea of his own, having sinned; and therefore are said also
to be without hope, viz. in themselves: Oh what a separation has sin made! in
robbing man of God, it robs him of all things, for all things are ours, but so
far as God is ours, 1 Cor. 3.21.-2.

From hence come two great miseries on sinners from God, as judgments upon this
separation.

1 God hides his face; and this follows on the separation, as it is express,
Is. 59.2. Your iniquities have separated you and your God, and your sin has
hid his face from you, or (as the Margin reads it) have made him hide his face
from you; his face which makes heaven, a smile whereof, or the lifting up the
light of which countenance upon us, refreshes us, more then corn, wine, and
oil, Psa. 4.6, 7. yea, his loving kindness is better then life; we had better
have parted with this then that: Man's sin is expressed by this, that he turns his
back to God; and not the face; and his punishment by this, that God turns his
back to him, and not the face; God carries it not like a friend, but a
stranger: And indeed this hiding of his face is significative of many more
miseries then I can now stay to instance in.

2 Another, and no less misery hereupon is, that God hears not his prayers, as
it follows in that forementioned Text, Is. 59.2. and so it attends the hiding
of Gods face, Is. 1.15. God is a God hearing prayers, but sin shuts out our
shouting, and the prayers of the wicked are an abomination to the Lord, and he
calls them no better then howlings, Hos. 7.14. Yet further.

There are two or three other miseries, not to name many more that are
consequent upon this separation, which continually attend poor sinful man.

1 That man is without strength: Man's great strength is in union with God,
separation weakens him; for without him, apart from him, out of him, separated
from him we can do nothing; to be a sinner, is to be without strength Romans 5.6.
with 8. Man was once a Sampson for strength, but having parted with his Lock,
his strength is departed from him, that of himself (as of himself) he is not
sufficient to think one good thought, 2 Cor. 3.5. He was strong, while in the
Lord, and the power of his might; but now his ^ands are weak, and knees feeble,
his legs cannot bear him up, having got the Spiritual Rickers.

2 Being separated from God, man becomes afraid of God, and ashamed to appear
before him; while Innocent (though naked, yet) man was not afraid nor ashamed
to approach to God, or of Gods approaching to him; but when he had sinned, he
was ashamed to show his face, and afraid to see Gods face, or to hear his
voice, Genesis 3.9, 10. When righteous, he was bold as a Lion; but now he runs his
head into a bush.

3 This separation and departure hardens his heart against God, that when God
comes to talk and treat with man about his sinning, he will lay it any where,
yea at Gods own door (as Adam did) rather then confess it: It Is three times
said in one Chapter, Hebr. 3.8.13, 15. Harden not your hearts, least any of you
be hardened, harden not your hearts; and all this in relation (...) hearing the
voice of God, as it is there: When God comes to convince man, he cannot endure
to hear on it, but hardens his heart; and as it was in the beginning, so it is
now among the sinful children of men.

Thus have I as briefly as so large a subject would permit, set out the
sinfulness of sin, as it is against the good of man (body and soul) in this
life, in a natural and moral respect, which was the first thing propounded. The
second follows:

2 Sin is contrary to, Sin against the good of man in the life to come; it
damns men.
or against the good of man in the life to come: It has brought on man that
eternal death, Damnation: In this life man by reason of sin is in deaths often,
but in the life to come, he is in death for ever. If sin had only wronged man
in this life (which is but for a moment) it had not been so considerable, but
sins miserable effects are everlasting, if mercy prevent not: the wicked die,
and rise to die again the second, and a worse death: There is a Resurrection to
life for the righteous, the children of the Resurrection; and for the wicked, a
Resurrection to condemnation, or death, (for it is opposed to life) John 5.29.
But

Before I show what (and wherein) damnation is, and consequently the mischief
and misery that sin has thereby brought on man, I shall premise a few things
which will make our passage smooth and easy. I say then:

1 That God damns no man but for sin: Damnation is a punishment, Mat. 25.46.
and all punishment supposes guilt and transgression: God the judge of all the
earth will do right, and he lays not on man more then is meet, that man may not
enter into judgment with God, Job 34.23. or quarrel and find fault with him;
which man would quickly do, if Gods judgment were not just, even sinners
themselves being Judges* Death is but sins wages, Romans 6.23. that which it has
merited; man's undoing, is but the fruit of his own doing; man's perdition is of
himself, Hos. 13.9. His own wickedness correct^ him, Jer. 2.19. and that not
only in this life, but that to come, Mat. 7.23. and Mat. 25

2 That by sin all men are liable to condemnation: We were all of us children
of wrath by nature, Ephesians. 2.3. and the wrath of God comes upon the children of
disobedience, Ephesians. 5.6. H^ that believes not, is condemned already; he i^ in a
state of condemnation, beside that which unbelief will bring upon him, Joh.
3.18. and he that believes not, the wrath of God abides on him: He was a
child of wrath by nature and continues still so in unbelief; Joh. 3.36. The
wrath of God seiseth on him, as its habitation an^ abode: Every mouth must be
stopped, for all the world is become guilty, all have sinned and fallen short of
the glory, and are obnoxious t^ the judgment of God, Romans 3.19.-23.

3 Some men have been, are, and will be damne^ for sin; all but them who have,
do and shall condemn sin, and themselves for sin: If we judge our selves, we
shall not be condemned of the Lord, else woe be to us! When our Savior sen^
his Disciples to preach, says he, Go preach, the Gospel (that is good news and
glad tidings) he that believes shall be saved, Mark 16.16. Ay^ but what if they
will not believe, what shall we say then? Why then tell them, he that believe^
not shall be damned: This is as great a truth of the Gospel, that he who
believes not will be damned, as this is, that he who believes shall be saved:
Heaven and Salvation is not more surely promised to the one, then hell and
damnation is threatened to, and shall be executed on the other: broad is the way
that leads to this destruction (there are as many tracts to it as there a^^
sins, but) impenitency and unbelief are the high road way, the beaten path
wherein multitudes go to hell.

4 Damnation is the greatest evil of suffering that can befall a man; it is the
greatest punishment that God does inflict: This is the wrath of God to the
uttermost, it is his vengeance: Oh who knows the power of his wrath? none but
damned ones: It is misery, altogether misery, and always misery to be damned.
This will yet more fully appear upon examination, and discovery of

What Damnation is. What damnation is, and that privatively and positively
considered.

Damnation may be considered:

1 Privatively, as (paena damni) a punishment of loss.

2 Positively, as (paena sensus) a punishment of sense.

An instance of both we have, Mat. 25.41. Then shall he say to them on his left
hand, Depart from me (there is privative damnation) into everlasting fire,
there is positive damnation: As sin is negatively a not doing good, and
positively a doing evil; so damnation is a denial of good to, and inflicting of
evil upon sinners. Salvation is ademptio malt, the taking away of evil, and
adeptio boni, an obtaining and enjoying of good; it is both ways expressed, Joh.
3.16. God so loved the world, that he gave his Son, that whosoever believes in
him should not perish, (there is negative salvation) but have everlasting life,
there is positive salvation: So the damnation of sinners, it is negative, depart
from me; and positive, into everlasting sire: In which Text we may observe:

1 Who are to hear and to undergo this doom, viz. them on his left hand, the
goats, the s^^ners, the workers of iniquity, as it is Matthew. (...) 23.

2 The Sentence or Doom it self, Depart from; woe unto you, says God, Hos.
9.12. when I depart from you; but woe, woe, woe will it b^ when sinners must
depart from God: The punishment (which i^ worthy of a remark) does answer to,
and is called by the name of sin; What is sin? but a departure from God: And
what the doom of sinners? departure from God; a^ if God should say to them, you
liked departin^ while you lived, now depart from me; yo^ would none of me, nor
my company, now I'^ none of you, nor yours; Depart from us, is the cry of
sinners to God, Job 21.14. Depart from m^ will be the cry of God to sinners.

3 Here is the state wherein sinners must b^ when they receive this doom
(Cursed) God wi^^ not fend them away in peace, or bless them before they go,
but away they must with a vengeance, and with a curse at their backs; they
loved cursing, and cursing shall be unto them; all the curses in the Book of
God shall light on them.

4 Here is the torment they are to undergo fire, yea everlasting fire, kindled
by the wrath and maintained by the wrath of God.

Lastly, the company they are to have, none but the Devil and his Angels:
Depart from me y^ cursed into everlasting fire, prepared for the Devil and his
Angels.

A little to gloss on this briefly; it is as if sinners should say to God in the
day of Judgment Lord have mercy upon us; Mercy! says G^^ mercy upon you! No,
no, I will have no mercy on you; time was when you might have had mercy without
judgment, but now you shall have judgment without mercy; depart, depart: If
they should then beg and say, Lord, if we must depart, let it be from thy
Throne of judgment, but not from thee: Yes, says the Lord, depart from me,
depart from that presence of mine, in which there is joy, depart, and go to
hell: Lord (if they say) seeing we must be gone, yet bless us before we go, let
thy blessing be upon us: Oh no, says God, be gone with a curse, depart ye
cursed: Oh Lord, if we must go from thee, let us not go into the place of
torment, but appoint some place, if not of pleasure, yet of ease: No, depart
into fire, burning and tormenting flames: Oh Lord, if into fire, let it be but
for a little while, let the fire be soon out, or we soon out of it, for who can
dwell in everlasting burnings! No, no, neither shall you nor the fire know an
end, be gone into everlasting fire: Ah Lord! let it be long then before we go
thither: No, depart presently, the Sentence shall be presently put in
execution: Ah Lord, let us at least have good company, that will pity us,
though they cannot help us! No, no, you shall have none but tormenting Devils,
they that you obeyed when they were Tempters, you shall be with as Tormentors.
Oh what misery has sin brought on man! to brin; him to hear this dreadful
doom, Depart from me ye cursed! etc.

But as to the particulars. I shall begin with the privative part, Paena damni;
or, privative damnation
the (paena damni) penalty of loss which will not be the least plague of the
sinner^ hell; he shall be deprived of all good, never to enjoy good day or good
thing more: when once a man is damned, he may bid adieu to all good, Luke
16.25. But to go on by degrees, and step by step: This then we say;

1 Parting with all the good things they had here.
That damned sinners will be stripped naked, and deprived of all the good things
they had in this life: Wicked men are called the men of this world, Psalm.
17.14. they have their portion and consolation in this life, Luke 6.24. and
16.25. Many of them fare well, and prosper in this world, they have stately
houses, spread Tables, full Cups, soft Beds, pleasant Walks, delightful
Gardens, filled with fragrant and odoriferous fruits and flowers; they sit at
the upper end, they have the grandeur and gallantry of this world; but when
they come to be damned, neither riches, nor honors, nor pleasures will descend
with them: Wicked men would be content with the good they have, if they might
have it always, if (Dives-like) they might be clothed with Purple, and fine
Linen, and fare deliciously for ever, they would say, happy is the people that
is in such a case! Psa. 144.12.-15. But this vain petty happiness, such as
it is, they must part with for ever, and bid adieu for good and all to all their
good: When Devils fetch away their soul, whose shall all these things be? Luke
12.20. none of theirs, all must be left behind; the^ cannot carry with them a
drop of water to coo^ their tongue: to have a portion of this world may be a
mercy, but to have the world for a portion is a misery; to have all good things
in this life, and but for this life, is a misery indeed! thou shall be clothed
with silks no more! eat the fat, and drink the sweet no more!

O^. But Saints themselves must part with these things t^^?

A. (...) But the best on it is, they shall have better things in lieu of them:
The impenitent sinner (...) from all his good to all evil, but the Saint g^^s
from all his evil (and but from a little good) (...) goods who would not part
with Coun^e^^ for gold? with a world for heaven? this the Saint does, and it is
a good exchange, I trow; but when a man must part with all his Jewels, all his
fine things, his wine and music, and the delig^ts of the Sons of men, and have
no good thing left him ^h how sad!

2 Though sinn^^^ will count this a great loss, Part with the comfort they had
from them.
yet it is the lea^^, for they must part not only with these things, but the
joy, pleasure, and delight they had from them: These things are most
considerable for the use and comfort of them: The rich man, Luke 12. cheered
himself not in having much goods, but that he expected ease and mirth from
them: The wicked spend their days in mirth, Job 21.12. and have a brave time
on it, as they think; they sing care away all the day long, and refresh
themselves with Requiems and Placebo Songs; they chant at the Viol, etc. and
though indeed this frolic joy be a misery of it self (for what truer misery
then false joy?) their laughter being but madness, yet it is the best they have
in this world: But this also must be parted with, these crackling of thorns
will go out, and their mirth will end in woe, their joy in sorrow, their light
in darkness! and 'twill add to their grief in hell, that they were so merry on
earth: When this evil day comes, they will say there is no pleasure in
remembering their good days: It seems Dives was loath to think of this, and
therefore Abraham says, Son remember, but 'twas a sad remembrance to remember
good as lost and gone for ever! they will say then as Adrian did, Animula
vagula, blandula, quo vadis? non ut soles dabis jocos! Oh my poor soul, thou will laugh, and joke, and droll no more!

3 Pat wi^h their peace and ^^cu^i^y, or their ins^^sibility.
They must suffer the loss of all their peace: It Is true^, the wicked here have
no real and solid peace, for there is no peace to the wicked, says my God,
Isa. 48.22. and 57.21. but they have that which they call peace, and which is
to them instead of peace, viz. security and stupidity, a seared and benumbed
conscience, and because of this they think they are in peace; but when they
come to hell, all this will be otherwise, Conscience that was seared as with a
red h^t iron here, will feel the flames there, and startle at it: They that met
with no trouble here, will be consumed with terrors there, Psalm. 73.13. There
are no seared consciences in hell, they are all tender and sensible there: Then
will Conscience awake, and rouse up like a Lion, or gnaw like a worm: That they
shall no longer have the little ease of dissembling their pain, as they were
wo^^ to do here.

4 With their hope.
Sinners then must lose the hopes they had of heaven: Wicked men have no reason
to hope for heaven, and yet they will hope, though against hope; as Abraham and
good men hope against hope when they have Gods promise; so the wicked hope
against hope, notwithstanding Gods threatening; they will be building their
hopes as high as heaven, though they build on the Sand, and without a
foundation; but this house must fall, and the fall will be great, from the
hopes of heaven into hell, Mat. 7.22. -- 27. The hope of Gods people keeps
their heart from breaking, and it shall never be ashamed, but this hope of
sinners will break their heart in hell, for there 'twill be ashamed, when the
wicked dies, his expectation shall perish, and the hope of unjust men
perishes, Prove. 11.7. Their hope shall be as the giving up of the Ghost, Job
11.20. The Hypocrites hope shall perish, and his trust is but as a Spiders web;
he shall lean upon his house, but it shall not stand; he shall hold it fast,
but it shall not endure, Job 8.13.-15. where will the hope of hypocrites be
when God takes away his soul, will God hear his cry, when trouble comes upon
him? No, no, he will not, Job 27.8, 9.

5 They must part from, From all good company.
and suffer the loss of all good company; they shall no more have the company
of one good man; in this world the wicked fare the better for Gods people being
among them; and though they despise, and scoff at them, and think them not
worthy to live, yet God himself assures us, that the world is not worthy of
their converse, they are too good for this world, Hebr. 11.38. yea, though the
wicked count good and holy men's lives to be folly and madness, yet when they
come to die, they would be glad with all their hearts, that their souls might
be in as good a condition as theirs after death. Balaam that wicked wretch, who
loved the wages of, and lived in unrighteousness all his days, yet could wish
to die the death of the righteous, and that his latter end (Hebr. his
afterward, or after state) might be as theirs, Numb. 23.10. Then they would be
glad to take hold of the shirt of a Jew (one that is so inwardly, Romans 2.28,
29.) and say, we will go with you, for God is with you; but they will find a
great Gulf fixed between them, Heaven will not hold any of the wicked, nor
shall Hell have any of the righteous to hold. The wicked shall not stand in
judgment, nor sinners in the Congregation of the righteous, Psa. 1.5. Here
below they may through in, the bad among the good, but hereafter God will find
them out, and separate them; and though now, many a sinner may separate from
the world to join with Saints, yet then God will separate them from Saints, and
join with sinners and devils, they shall be excommunicated from the society of
Saints, and be delivered up to Satan (the Executioner of Gods wrath and
vengeance) and shall have no company but the damned Crew.

6 They must be without the heaven they hoped for.
They must be not only without their hopes of heaven, but without heaven which
they hoped for; to have parted with their hopes for possession, had been no
loss, but gain; but to part with their hopes; and with heaven too, is a double
loss: Whatever shall be the Saints portion, they must go without it, and be no
sharers in it in the least degree: And though perhaps (as some think) the
wicked may be permitted to look into heaven, as Dives saw Lazarus in Abraham's
bosom, yet it will be but to heighten the depth of their misery, by letting
them see what they by their sin have deprived themselves of: To lose Heaven, is
to lose a Kingdom and glory, more worth and glorious than all the Kingdoms of
this world, and their several glories united in one; it is to part with Rest
(Sabbatisme) for so it is called: Sabbaths they cared not for while they lived,
and Sabbatisme, or rest, they will have none, when they die. They gloried in
their shame in this world, and they shall have shame enough, but no glory in
the world to come: The thoughts of their having been happy, though but in
conceit, and that others are really happy, and for ever, but they excluded from
any share in any happiness, 'twill cut them to the heart.

7 They must suffer the loss of God himself, They must be parted from God
who is the Heaven of Heaven: All good things are but as a drop to the Ocean,
in comparison of him, Psa. 73.25. whom have I in Heaven but thee, as if all the
rest were nothing: If a Saint were to go to Heaven this very day, he would say
as Absalom, why am I come up from Geshur, if I may not see the Kings face, 2 Samuel 14.32. This then will be the misery of miseries to the damned, that they
must depart from God, in whose presence only there is joy and pleasures for
evermore: This face of his they must see no more, unless it be as ever frowning
upon them in Hell. The good people sorrowed most for the words that Paul spoke,
viz. that they should see his face no more, Acts 20.38. This, this will be the
pricking, cutting, wounding of sinners to the heart, that they must see Gods
face no more, no more of his goodness, no more of his patience, no more of his
mercy. When Cain (a type of this) was turned out of, and banished from the
presence of the Lord, he cries out, that his punishment was intolerable,
Genes. 4.13.

8. This estate unalg terable.
They shall not only be deprived of all good things, but continue in an utter
incapacity of any alteration for the better. This makes Heaven so much Heaven,
that it is always so; and this makes Hell to be so much Hell, that it is always
so: In this world there is a door of hope, a day, an offer and means of grace,
space for repentance, a Mediator in Heaven, a patient God, possibility of being
blessed; but when once damned, the door is shut, it is in vain to knock; the
day, offers, and means of grace is at an end; there is no room left for
repentance; Gods long suffering will suffer no longer, the Mediation of Christ
Jesus is over, there is no possibility of mending their condition: Oh methinks
we should hear the words of the wise, Eccl. 9.10. Whatsoever thy hand finds
to do, do it with thy might, for there is no work (no working out salvation) in
the grave, whither thou art going: Think of it, poor soul, think of it betime,
till it be too late; for if thou die in thy sins, though thou should weep
out thine eyes in Hell, 'twill stand thee in no stead; God will not know thee,
nor hear they cry, but laugh at thy calamity, and mock thee in the midst of thy
torments, Prove. 1.25, 26.

Thus I have briefly shown the privative part of Damnation; wicked men must
part with all their goods, with their joys, their peace, their hopes, good
company, (all which stood them in great stead in this world) with Heaven, and
which is more and worst of all, with God himself, and be utterly incapable of
ever being in a better condition: And what think you now? Is not sin exceeding
sinful? that separates him from all good, past, present, and to come; if 'twere
only from past good, that which Adam enjoyed in Paradise, or only from present
good, what men have in this world, 'twere the better to be endured; if futurity
and Eternity were secured, 'twere pretty well; but sinful sin has cut off
Paradise, that none of us were ever in Eden since we came into the world; it
has spoiled, embittered and poisoned with a curse all present temporal
enjoyments, that they prove satisfactions to none, but vexations to all; and
yet so spiteful, and of so malignant a nature is sin, that it reserves its
worst till last, even Hell and Damnation, and 'twill be worse to us in
Eternity, then 'twas in time. And to make this appear yet more evidently and
fully, I proceed to the

Second part of Damnation;
Which the Schools (and justly) call paena sensus, Para scusus; or, posi^ive
d^^^nation.
the punishment of sense; if 'twere not for this, that men will be then
sensible of, and feel both their loss and their gain, viz. the pain which they
have gotten by their sins, Damnation would seem to be but a dream, or an
imagination; but their senses as well as their understanding, feeling as well
as fancy, will tell them what a dreadful thing it is to be damned; a thing which
I wish with all my soul, that none of you may ever know but by hearing of it,
and that the hearing may be a means to prevent the feeling of it. But now, what
shall I do? who that has not been in Hell, can tell what Hell is? who would go
thither (periculum facere) to try what it is? Surely, eye has not seen, nor ear
heard, neither has it entered into the heart of man to conceive, as what God
has prepared for them that love him, so for them that hate him, that is, for
sinners, impenitent sinners. It is sins design and work to make man eternally
miserable, to undo him soul and body for ever. Now the better to represent this
doleful state and woeful misery, I shall search the Scriptures, and endeavor to
fathom the depth of expressions used there, that we may learn from thence what
Damnation is, and from thence the sinfulness of sin, in relation whereunto I
lay down three Propositions in general.

1 All the miseries of this life not to be compared with it.
This punishment that sinners must undergo, will be such a state of misery as
all the miseries of this life are not to be compared with it, they are nothing
to it: Take the dregs of all the miseries of this life, and out of them extract
an Essence, the very spirit of miseries (as men do Strong Water from the Lees
and dregs of Wine and Beer) it will fall infinitely short of this misery
damnation: The gripings and grindings of all the diseases and torments that men
do or can suffer in this life, are but flea-bitings to it; to pluck out a right
eye, to cut off a right hand, were a pleasure and recreation, in comparison of
being damned in Hell, Mat. 5. o. A Burning Fever is nothing to burning in
Hell; nay, let me speak a true, though a great and big word, If all the
miseries that have been undergone by all men in the world, were all met
together and centered in one man, it were nothing to Hell; Hell would be a kind
of Paradise, if 'tw^re no worse then the worst of this world.

2. It Is contrary to what the Saints shall enjoy
This state will be a state clean contrary to that which the Saints shall enjoy
in Eternity; their differing states are expressed in contrary terins, as Mark
16.16. He that believes shall be saved, but he that believes not shall be
damned: Now damnation and salvation are contrary states; that is a state all of
evil, and of all evil, this all of good, and of all good. So Mat. 25.46. The
wicked shall go into everlasting punishment, but the righteous into life
Eternal: The life that Saints obtain, sinners go without; and the misery that
Saints are delivered from, sinners are delivered to; as different as grief is
from joy, as torment is from rest, as terror from peace, so different is the
state of sinners from that of Saints in the world to come, Romans 2.6.-10

3 This state, damnation-state of sinners, I admits of no relief
will admit of no relief, 'twill be punishment without pity, miscry without
mercy, sorrow without succor, crying without comfort, torment without ease:
The sinner can look for no relief from God, for God judges and condemns him;
none from conscience, for that accuses and upbraids him; none from the Devils,
for they torment him; none from hope; for that is departed from him; none from
time, for it is for ever; its a state of all misery, it has no consolation, not
so much as a little drop of water to cool the tongue; it is misery, all misery,
nothing but misery, as sin is all sin, and nothing but sin.

Damnation-state more particularly considered under six Heads.
1 The torments themselves, and the kinds of them. 2 The quantity and quality
of them. 3 The duration of them. 4 The Tormentors, or inflicters of them. 5 The
aggravations of them. 6 The effects of them.
By that time I have set these before you, I presume you will conclude and cry
out, Oh sinful sin! what a thing is sin! and who would sin at this rate, A he
torments of Hell.
and be at such cost and charges to damn himself! To begin with the torments
themselves, where I shall consider: 1 The place, with the names and appendices
of it 2 The thing it self, with its names.


1 The place, Hell is the place.
with its names: In general, and most frequently, it is called Hell, the place
and element of torment, Luke 16. This is the Rendezvous General for the wicked
after the day of Judgment; and to express the dreadfulness of any condition or
thing, the name of Hell is annexed to it (as to signify the excellency of a
thng, the name of God and Heaven is joined to it, as Cedars of God, etc.)

1 Therefore hell is a place and state of sorrow, Of sorrow
for the greatest sorrows are called the sorrows of hell, 2 Samuel 22.6. as the
joys of heaven are the greatest joys, so the sorrows of hell the greatest
sorrows.

2 A place and state of pains and pangs, Of pain.
far beyond them of a woman in travel, Psa. 116.2. The pains of hell gat hold
of me; there is no ease in hell.

3 Destruction is joined with it, Destruction.
to be in hell is to be destroyed, Prove. 15.11. Hell and destruction are before
him, and he can destroy body and soul in hell, Mat. 10.28.

So 4. It Is a place and state of five, Fi^.
of fiery indignation, Mat. 5.22. He that calls his brother fool ( viz. without
cause, and in rash anger) is in danger of hell fire, the worst of flames, Luke
16.

Yea 5. Damnation is in it, and spoken of it, Damnation.
Mat. 23.33. How can ye escape the damnation of hell?

6 Torment is attributed to it, Luke 16.28. Tormen.
It Is called the place of torment.

Thus you see what a kind of place and condition hell is; it is all these, and
much more than these words can express, or you conceive by these expressions.
Yet more particularly.

1 Hell is called a prison: It Is called 1 A prison
As heaven is set out by things taking and delectable, so hell is set out by
what is distastful and loathsome, among which a prison is one, and hell is
called a prison, Mat. 5.25. 1 Per. 3.19. Prisons, common Goals, are the worst
places to live in ('it is a noisome pestilential air) but hell is worse than the
worst of prisons.

2 A bottomless pit.
Hell is called the bottomless pit, Revel. 9.11. and elsewhere frequently: The
Devil is the Angel of the bottomless pit; it is a pit into which sinners must
fall, and be ever falling, for there is no bottom.

3 A furnace of fire.
Hell is called a Furnace of fire, and that is a terrible thing: Nebuchadnezars
Furnace was terrible, especially when heated seven times more than usually; yet
hell is a worse Furnace of fire, Mat. 13.41, 42. They that do iniquity (that
are sin-makers by trade) shall be cast into a Furnace of fire which shall not
devour them, but torment them, and make them wail and gnash their teeth.

4 A Lake, etc.
Its called a Lake which burns with fire and brimstone, Revel. 21.8. Such and
such (as are there named) shall have their part and portion in the Lake which
burns with fire and brimstone; always over head and ears in this Lake, yet
never drowned; always burning, but never burnt to ashes: They will in this be
like the burning bush, which burnt with fire, but was not consumed; as the
Church was so on earth, sinners will be so in hell.

5 Darkness.
This place, though it burn with fire and brimstone, is yet called utter and
outer darkness; those flames will administer heat of wrath, but no light of
consolation: Darkness is a dreadful thing, but to be in the fire in darkness
(to live in death always) to be tormented in flames, and yet in darkness, Oh
how dismal must this be? Mat. 22.13. bind him hand and foot, and cast him into
outer darkness, so that 'twill be in vain to think of making resistance, for
thou will be bound hand and foot, and be in darkness too; yea, it is called
chains of darkness, 2 Pet. 2.4. and blackness of darkness for ever, Jude 6.13.
This of the place.

2 Let us consider the thing it self, Hell is a state of damnation
with its names; for as its name is, so is it: The most common and usual name
of this punishment is Damnation, a dreadful word! who knows how much it means?
'twill make the stoutest heart to tremble, the most consident countenance to
fall, the most daring courage to fail when they feel it: If his wrath be
kindled but a little, it is terrible; how much more is it so, when it shall be
wrath to the uttermost? for it is contrary to being saved to the utmost. More
particularly it is called

1 Destruction (viz. Which is 1 Dest^^ction.
moral destruction) not of man's being, but well being, 2 Pet. 2.12. they shall
be taken, destroyed, and utterly perish: And 2 These. 1.8.9. they shall be
punished with everlasting destruction from the presence of the Lord. Alas! it
had been better for them they had never been born, or if born, that they had
never died; or if died, that they had never risen again, then to be thus
destroyed; (...), as Hicrocles, to be banished from God, and the Divine Life,
is the worst of deaths.

2 It Is a curse, an accursed state, A curse.
to be under the curse of God; as Mat. 25.41. not only depart from me, but
depart ye cursed: There Is no^ the least dram of blessing or blessedness in the
state: If so many curses were to wait on the J^ws on earth when they continued
in impenitency, as we read Deuteronomy. 28.16. -- 20. Oh what (...) cursed thing, how
full of curses is damnation (...) this valley of Gehinnom (this hell) is a
Mount Ebal, the Mount of curses, Deuteronomy. 17 13.

3 The second death.
Damnation is called the second death, Revel 21.8. 'twill be a mavelous
miraculous kind of death, a living death, a death that never dies, a^ immortal
mortality; they will live whose portion this death is, and death will be their
portion all their life.

4 Shame.
Its a state of shame and contempt; there is scarce any thing in the world we
are less willing to undergo then shame: The Thief, who is not afraid to steal,
yet when taken, he is ashamed: Shame, and confusion, and contempt, will be
their lot, Dan. 12.2, 3. Many of them that sleep in the dust of the earth shall
awake, some to everlasting life, and some to shame and everlasting contempt.

2 The quantity and quality of hell torments.
We shall take into consideration the quantity and quality of those torments of
hell and damnation.

1 They will be exceeding great and terrible. 2 They will be universal. 3
Without intermission.
1 Great.
They will be exceeding great and terrible, such as will make the stoutest
hearts to quake and tremble: If the writing of Mean, Mean, Tekel, etc. made a
change in Belshazzars countenance, and trouble in his thoughts, so that the
joints of his loins were loosed, and his knees smote one against another, Dan.
5.6. what a commotion and heart-quake will the day of Gods wrath and vengeance
produce? See an instance in type, at least, of this kind of speech and thing,
Rev. 6.15.-17. where not only bondmen (persons of little and puny souls) but
great and mighty men, chief Captains and Kings of the earth (persons of great
souls that have made the earth to tremble) shall hide themselves in Dens and
Rocks, and say to the Mountains fall on us, and hide us from the face of him
that sits on the Throne, and from the wrath of the Lamb, for the great day of
his wrath is come, and who shall be able to stand! For bondmen to be
faint-hearted and fly, is no great wonder; but for men of might and valor to
run away and hide, that is strange! I, but it is from wrath, though but of a
Lamb; What will they do then when he shall rise up, and roar like the Lion of
the Tribe of Judah? It Is the day of wrath, which is the terrible day of the
Lord; it is the day of vengeance, which is implacable; for God who is (now)
hearing prayer, will not (then) spare for their crying, no though they cry
Lord, Lord. God always acts like himself, like a God; when he shows mercy, it is
like the God of all grace, who is rich in mercy, and loves with a great love;
so when he executes wrath and vengeance, he makes bare his arm, and strikes
like a God: Who knows the power of his anger? none but damned ones. The sense
of it here, the receiving or searful reception of judgment (as it is in the
Greek, Hebr. 10.27.) and fiery indignation makes a kind of hell, so fearful a
thing is it to fall into the hands of the living God, when he acts like a God
of vengeance, as the Apostle there speaks, v. 30, 31. How dreadful then will it
be to be in hell it self, under the tortures of his executed wrath for ever? as
the man is, so is his strength; it is but sport to be whipped by a child, but to
be whipped and lashed by a man, a Giant, whose little finger is heavier then
another loins, how painful must it be! The rod is for the back of fools, but
when it shall be turned into Scorpions, and God himself shall lay on strokes
without mercy or pity, oh how tormenting will it be! A stone thrown from a
weak arm will not hit very hard, but when the hand and arm of God shall throw
down that wrath from heaven, which is now but threatened against ungodly men,
and turn them into hell, as a mighty man throws one over his shoulders, oh how
will it sink them deep into hell!

2 Universal.
The torments of hell will be universal, and universally inflicted.

1 The torments themselves will be universal; 'twill be not a torment two or
three, but all tormants met together; hell is the place of torment it self,
Luke 16 28. it is the center of all punishments, sorrow and pain, wrath and
vengeance, sire and darkness, all are there, as we proved before: If one
disease put a man so much to it, what would a complication of discases? If one
punishment, the Strapado, the Rack, or any other be so tormenting, what would
all at once be? Oh what then will hell be?

2 The persons on whom these torments will be inflicted; will be universally
tormented; not one or two parts, but all, and all over; whole man has sinned,
and whole man will be tormented; not soul alone, or body only, but soul and
body after the Resurrection and Judgment day: As for the body, all the members
of it have been instruments of unrighteousness, and therefore all the members
will be punished; as man is defiled, so man will be plagued, from the crown of
the head to the soal of the foot: The senses which men have indulged and
gratified, will be filled with pain and torment, that shall be clean contrary
to those pleasures wherewith they were gratified in this world. The eye which
took so much pleasure in, and was enamored of beauty, shall then see nothing
but ugly Devils, and deformed Hags of damned wretches, etc. What shall the ear
(that was delighted with Music and Love-songs, what shall it) hear? but
hideous cries and gnashing of teeth, the howlings and yawlings of damned
Fiends. The smell, that was gratified with Rose-buds, and sweet perfumes; shall
have no pleasing sents, but unsavory brimstone, and a stink. The taste, that
was refreshed with eating the fat, and drinking the sweet, must have nothing
but the dregs of the cup of Gods wrath: The touch and seeling shall be sensible
then, not of fine and silken things, but of burning flames, and scorching fiery
indignation.

Ann as to the soul and all its faculties, it and they will speed no better;
their understanding will be tormented with having the truth understood in
miserable effects; that which it laughed at as foolishness, it will then find
true by the loss of it, viz. Gospel happiness: The conscience will be like a
stinging Adder, a gnawing worm: The will will be vexed that it had its will so
long; Here men think it a Princely thing to have their will, but there they will
find it a devilish thing.

3 Without intermission.
Yet further, these torments will be without intermission; they shall be
tormented day and night, Rev. 14.11. and have no rest: Here our sleep is a
Parenthesis to care, and sorrow, and pain, but there is no sleeping there; the
God that executes wrath, and they on whom wrath is executed, neither slumber
nor sleep: here they have some intermissions, and lucid intervals in their
madness, but there they will be even mad continually for vexation of heart.

Methinks I cannot go on till I have a little expostulated with thee, who ever
thou be that read; needs there any more to fright thee from sinning, which
is the way to damnation, then the thoughts of damnation (such a damnation!)
which is at the end of the way of sin? for thy Souls-sake hear and fear, and do
no more wickedly: What! will thou be damned? can with patience think of going
to hell? have thou no pity on thy precious Soul? Oh if thou should go from
reading of hell into hell, thou would surely say, there was a Prophet, I
would not believe it, but now I feel it: Think of it, and

3 The duration
Think of what is now to be added concerning the duration of these torments,
they will be for ever; though they were great, universal, and without
intermission for a time, yet if they were to have an end, 'twere some comfort:
but here lies the misery, they will be to day as yesterday, and for ever; as in
the beginning, so all along, and for ever, always the same, if not increasing:
This is the woe of woe, the hell of hell, that it is woe and hell for ever.
After sinners have been in hell, millions of millions of years, hell will be as
much hell as at first; the fire that burns will never go out: the worm that
gnaws will never die, which is three times repeated by our Lord and Savior in
one Chapter, Mark 9.44.46.48. 'twill be a lasting, yea an everlasting misery;
it is everlasting punishment, and everlasting fire, Mat. 25.41.46.

4 There Is yet to be considered the Tormentors, The tormentors.
or inflicters of these torments: The Devil, Conscience, and God himself will
torment the damned.

1 The Devil, The devil.
the Tempter will be the Tormentor; they will be tormented not only with, but
by Devils: They will be delivered to the Goalers, the Tormentors, as it is Mat.
18.34, 35. So likewise shall my heavenly Father do to you, viz. deliver you to
the Tormentors: When the Church Excommunicates, (which is an Emblem of this)
it does deliver to Satan; and when God Excommunicates, he gives up to the
Devil, take him Jailer, torment him Tormentor. The Apostle thought it a great
misery to fall into the hands of unreasonable men, and therefore prays and begs
prayers against it: But if the tender mercies of wicked men are cruelties, what
are the cruelties of the Devil and his Angels? especially when God delivers men
up into their hands; Oh what a misery is it to fall into the Devils clutches,
to be tormented by the Devil. If he do so much now by permission, what will he
then do by Commission, when he shall be under no restraint? We may guess by
what he does do now, what he is like to do, and will do then.

We have many instances of his malice, rage and power, take one and another: In
Mark 9.17. -- 22. there was one possessed of a dumb spirit; and wheresoever
this spirit takes him, he teareth him, that he foameth, gnasheth with the
teeth, and pineth away: and v. 20. when he came into the presence of Christ
Jesus, he care him, that he fell on the ground, and wallowed foaming;
oftentimes it has cast him into the fire, and the water, to destroy him. You
know also how the Devil dealt with Job, and went to the utmost extent of his
Commission, and tantum non almost prevailed, for he brought him to curse the
day of his birth, though he did not curse God: If the Devil do so much now to
the tormenting of any, when he is in Chains, and under restraint, Ah how sad is
it like to be with men when the Devil shall have them in his hands by
Commission from God! When God shall say, take him Devil, take him Jailer, into
the fire with him, do thy worst with him: Oh who can stand before the Devils
rage, and envy thus whetted by Commission! Oh sinful sin, that thus gives up to
the Devil!

2 Conscience.
The second Tormentor is Conscience; a reflecting, an accusing, an upbraiding
Conscience; which I may say is in some sort a greater torment then any the
devil can inflict, because Conscience is within us, but the devil is without
us: That which is within has the greatest influence on us, whither for
comfort, as 1 John 4.4. or for torment, Mark 9.44. The worm that never dies,
which is within a man: 'twere a dreadful thing to be eaten up of worms, to be
continually fretted and vexed with the gnawing of worms; but this worm gnaws
the spirit, which is more tender then the apple of ones eye: a wounded spirit
who can bear? Judas sunk under the weight and burden of it, and so have many
more: but if it be so terrible when awakened here, what will it be, when a man
shall be fully convinced, and have all his sins set in order before his face,
Psa. 50.21. How will Conscience lash men then? As Schoolmasters reckon up their
Boys crimes, imprimis for this, and then a lash, item for this, and then
another lash, etc. So says Conscience, Salvation was held forth, Grace was
offered, and then lasheth for neglecting so great Salvation, and turning Grace
into wantonness: Item, says Conscience, you knew that the wages of sin was
death, and the judgment of God is just, and yet you would do such things; and
then Conscience pricks and torments, whips and lasheth them: Item, after thou
had vomited up thy pollution, and were washed from thy filthiness, thou
did return like the dog to thy vomit, and like the Sow to wallowing in the
mi^e, and then lasheth him: If a man were falsely imprisoned, 'twould be a
mitigation, and some relief; but when a man is (...) self-condemned, and finds
that his perdition is of himself, that his own wickedness does correct him,
this will be the sting of death and damnation.

3 God also
Not only the Devil and Conscience, but God also will torment them; for though
God in this life suffer himself to be pressed with their sins, as a Cart is
pressed with sheaves, yet at last he will show his power in revenging himself on
wicked men: though now he seem to have leaden feet, and be slow to wrath, yet
then he will be found to have iron hands: Here God is patient, and if he judge,
yet in the midst of judgment he does remember mercy, and does not deal with men
as their wickedness deserves; but then he will be extreme in punishing; the
Lord himself will rain upon the wicked snares, fire and brimstone, and an
horrible tempest, Psalm. 11.5, 6. This shall be the portion of their Cup from
the Lord; they shall drink of the wine of the wrath of God. which is powered out
without mixture in the Cup of his Indignation, and they shall be tormented with
fire and brimstone, in the presence of the holy Angels, and of the Lamb, Rev.
14.10, 11. As many times, when Judges suspect their Officers, that they will
not do it home enough, they will have it done in their presence, the whole
Court and company looking on: So shall it be, and the smoke of their torment
ascends up for ever and ever, and they have no rest day nor night. Yet further

5 The aggravations.
Let us consider the aggravations of these torments: As sin has been
aggravated, so will the torments be; there will be degrees of torment, 'twill
be, though intolerable for all, yet more tolerable for some then others, Mat.
11.21. -- 24. their torments will be aggravated.

1 Who have lived long in sin: The longer men have lived in sin on earth, the
greater will their torments be in hell, Isai. 65.20. The sinner being an
hundred years old shall be accursed, with a witness; for he has been long
treasuring up wrath (much wrath) against the day of wrath: he has a great
account to make for all the patience and forbearance of God: Some men grow rich
by having other men's goods in their hands, not called in: when men forbear
their money, and leave it in their hands, they grow rich by it; so do wicked
men grow rich in wrath by abusing the goodness and patience of God, because God
forbears them, and does not take out executions against them, and enter into
judgment, they grow rich, but alas! it is in wrath. See Rev. 21.22.

2 The more means men have had, the more cost and charges God has been at, the
more pains God has taken with men, and yet they continue impenitent, the more
severe will his judgment be upon them: If Christ had not come, they had had no
such sin; this is the condemnation, that light is come into the world, and men
love darkness. Capernaum that was exalted to heaven, by means, will be thrown
to hell in the end, Mat. 11.23. To sall from earth to hell will be a great
fall, but to fall from heaven to hell will be a greater: To go from Turkey to
hell will be sad, but to go from England to hell, and from London to hell, ah
how rufully sad!

3 The more knowledge men attain to, the more convictions men have had; without
practice and improvement, the greater will their condemnation be, Luke 12.47.
That servant which knew his Lords will, and did not according to his will,
shall be beaten with many stripes: And 2 Pet. 2.21. it were better they had
never known the way of righteousness, then (to know it, and not walk in it, or)
having walked in it, to depart from it: to him that knows to do good, and does
it not, to him it is sin, great sin, sin with a witness, and condemnation with
a vengeance. How can they escape the great condemnation, that neglect the great
salvation; these become inexcusable under the judgment of God, Romans 1.32. with
Romans 2.1; 2, 3.

4 The further men have gone in a profession of Religion, without the power of
godliness, the greater will their condemnation be! Formalists and hypocrites
will-know the worst of hell, how can ye escape, not only hell, but the
damnation of hell, the hell of hell? Mat. 23.33. The form of godliness, and the
power of ungodliness, will fare alike, as Mat. 24.51. with Luke 12.46.

5 Apostates will meet with aggravated torments in hell: the backslider will be
filled with his own ways; his latter end will be worse then his beginning, 2
Pet. 2.20. better for them they had died in their sins at first, then to be as
now twice dead, Jude 12. If we sin wilfully after the knowledge of the truth,
(if we do nuncium metere pietati, turn our backs on Christianity and godliness)
there remains no more sacrifice for sin, but a certain fearful expectation, or
looking for of judgment and fiery indignation, which shall devour (them that
by Apostasy become) adversaries: He that despised Moses Law died without
mercy, and yet of how much sorer punishment shall he be thought worthy, who
treads under foot the Son of God, and counts the Blood of the Covenant,
wherewith it was sanctified, an unholy thing, etc. Oh what fearful vengeance
will such meet with! See Hebr. 10.26.-32. and this little shall suffice to have
spoken to the aggravations.

6 And lastly, The effects of hell torments.
let us take a view of the effects of these torments.

1 There will be inexpressible sorrow, sighing and groaning that cannot be
uttered; weeping, and wailing, and gnashing of teeth, Mat. 8.12. anger,
indignation, vexation, even to madness and rage, will be the effects of them.

2 There will be intolerable horror and pain: if thunder, lightning, and
earthquakes make men afraid, and shrink together, what will hell do! If the
throbing Toothache, the gnawing Gout, etc. put men to such exquisite pains,
what will hell do! If sickness make us fear death, and the fear of death be so
dreadful, what will hell be! If you Felix-like tremble to hear of this judgment
to come, what would you do, if you were to undergo it! If seeing ugly and
devilish shapes affright us, what will it do to be with the devil and his
Angels!

3 This will be the sad effect of these torments, sinal and eternal
impenitency, and desp^ir, even to cursing and blaspheming: he that dies
impenitent, continue; so for ever, and impenitency is attended with blasphemy,
Is. 8.21, 22. They shall pass through it hardly bestead and hungry, and it
shall come to pass, that when they shall be hungry, they shall fret themselves,
and curse their King, and their God; which I quote to show the nature of a
fretting and vexing heart under torments, a thing very common with despairing
(and thereby made desperate) persons, Revel. 16.9, 10. When they were scorcht
with great heat, they blasphemed the name of God, and repented not to give him
glory: and v. 10, 11. they gnawed their tongues for pain, and blasphemed the
God of heaven, because of their pains, and their sores. We see that when the
plagues of God are on impenitent sinners, they are cursing, and though they may
repent; i.e. be sorry for the plagues, yet not for the cause of them: And hence
many do infer this, that if these plagues (which are far inferior to them in
hell) do provoke men thus, that they will do it much more: Woe and alas! what a
dismal, doleful condition it is to be damned! and then what! Oh what a sinful
thing is sin that brings this damnation!

I have now dispatched the second thing, viz. the contrariety of sin to the
good of man, and that not only in this life, but in that to come: Before I
bring in the W^tnesses to prove this Charge against Sin to be true, as I have
said in this Indictment, let me a little bespeak thee, good Reader, to consider
of what has been said, and that thou would be more afraid of sin then of
hell, which had not been but for sin, and where thou shall never be, if thou
repent and believe the Gospel, for righteousness is not by repentance, but by
faith: Believe they, and love Faith as thou love thy Soul, and Heaven; hate
sin, and avoid it, as thou would hell and damnation; sin no more, least a
worse thing come unto thee, least the Rod be turned into a Scorpion, least the
next loss be the loss of heaven, least the next sickness be unto death, and
death to damnation; for if thou die in sin, thou art damned irrecoverably:
'twere sad to die in an Hospital, in a Prison, in a ditch; but as it is worst
living to live in sin, so worst dying to die in sin; if thou go on, these
Sermons will witness against thee, as much as if not more then if one had risen
from the dead; if two or three devils or damned wretches should come from hell,
and cry fire, fire, it might startle thee, but if thou believe not Moses and
the Prophets, yea Christ and his Apostles, 'twill work no good upon thee: Oh
mind the good of thy soul, and do not bring on thy self this great, universal,
intolerable and eternal damnation: Take heed least, Prove. 5.11, 12, 13. when
thy flesh and thy body are consumed, I, and thy soul damned, thou say too late,
how have I hated instruction, and my heart despised reproof, and have not
obeyed the voice of my teachers, nor inclined mine ear to them that instructed
me! Oh! oh! How have I rewarded evil to mine own soul by doing evil against
God! I made a pish at these things, and mocked at sin; now I would hear, now I
would return, but hope is perished! Such will be the direful outcries of
sinners one day; take heed therefore, for if thou have not on the wedding
garment, thou will be cast out, Mat. 22.11. and if thou be found a worker of
iniquity, thou must depart accursed. But not to prevent the application, which
I reserve to its proper place; I now proceed to the third thing propounded.

3. The witnesses against sin.
The Witnesses, and their Evidence against Sin, as being exceeding sinful.
That sin is so exceeding sinful, extremely and notorious guilty of contrariety
to God, and the good of man, I have a cloud of witnesses to produce; God
himself, Angels and men, both good and bad, the Law and Gospel, the whole
Creation, sins names, and sins actions, even sins own confession, do all bear
witness to this Charge, that it is true, viz. that sin is an exceeding sinful
thing; from heaven, from earth, from hell will we bring witnesses against sin.

1 God in 7 particulars
God himself bears witness against sin: As he leaves us not without witness
of his being good, so he has not left us without witness of sins being sinful,
against him, and against the good of man.

1 Forbidding it.
By this, that God has forbidden is, and made a Law against it; all the Laws,
and every command of God, are his witnesses against sin; and as he that
believes not the testimony God bears of his Son, so he that believes not Gods
testimony against sin, makes God a liar, who is true and cannot lie: The Law
written in man's own heart, the Law written in Tables of stone, the Gospel also
(which is the Law of Faith) is written as a witness against sin, 1 John 2.1.
Now surely God would not have prohibited sin, had it not been an abominable
thing, abominated by him, and to be abominated by us. God has given man room
and scope enough, a very large allowance; of all the Trees of the Garden man
might eat, only one excepted. So Phil. 4.8. whatsoever things are true, honest,
just, pure, lovely; whatsoever is of good report, if there be any virtue, any
praise, these things think on and do: Now sin comes under none of these names,
but is contrary to them all, and therefore forbidden: God has not forbidden
man honors, riches, nor any pleasures, but them of sin: Surely then, seeing
God delights not to grieve the children of men, but rejoices over them to do
them good with all his heart, and all his soul, as he is pleased to express it,
Jer. 32.41. he would never have forbidden any thing to man, but what was
prejudicial to him, as well as displeasing to himself: But I shall speak more
of this, when I show how the Law of God witnesses against sin.

2 God witnesses against sin by this, Will not allow us to do evil, that good
may come of it.
that he will not allow us to do evil, that good may come of it: As pleasing a
thing as good is to God, yet he will not allow us to do the least evil for the
greatest good. See how angrily, and with what indignation the Apostle speaks
against them that said the contrary, Romans 3.8. It Is a damnable Doctrine to
teach, that we may do evil for a good end, or that good may come of it. This
Doctrine was first broacht by the Devil, and ushered in the first sin, Genesis
3.1.-6. But

1 We may not do evil; that good may came is our selves: God allows man to love
himself, and has made self-love the rule and measure of our love to others;
thou shall love thy Neighbor as thy self: God is not against man's being rich,
only God will not that men grow rich by sin, as Jer. 17.11. God is not against
man's pleasure, if it be not by displeasing him, nor against his honor, if it be
not by dishonoring him: God well knows that good gotten by evil, will do man no
good but hurt: To gain the world, and lose a man's soul, has more of loss then
gain; and there is not any one sin but wrongs and hazards the loss of a man's
soul. God would not allow Adam and Eve to eat of the forbidden Tree, though
'twere good for food, pleasant to the eye, and to be desired to make one wise,
Genes. 3.

2 We may not do evil that good may come to others: God has indeed commanded
us to do good to all, but has forbidden us to do evil, that we may do good to
any, or to all: He that provides not for his family, is worse then an Infidel;
and so is he that provides for it by a sinful way of covetousness, lying,
cheating, oppressing, etc. See Habak. 2.9.-12. Paul (as Moses before him) could
wish himself dead and anathematized, to save the Jews, but durst not sin for
their sakes. When one sent to S. Austin to know if he might not tell a lie for
his Neighbors good; Oh no, says the Father, thou must not tell a lie to save
the world: There Is such a malignity in sin, its so contrary to God, that it
must not be done for no good: It Is our duty to honor Father and Mother, but
still in the Lord; it may be a duty to disobey, yea to hate father and mother
rather then obey them, viz. when to obey them will be disobedience to God:
whither it be better to obey God or man, judge you: So that God will not allow
us to sin to gratify the greatest persons, the nearest and dearest relations.

3 God will not allow us to sin, though we should professedly do it for his
glory. Sin can never directly glorify God, and though he know how to bring
good out of evil, yet he will not that we should sin for him, who needs not us,
much less our sin: God will take, and is righteous in taking vengeance, though
our unrighteousness commend and set off the righteousness of God, Romans 3.5.
Though the truth of God have more abounded through thy lie, yet thou will be
found a sinner, Romans 3.7. so that for this good, evil must not be done, v. 8.
they that cast out their Brethren, saying, let God be glorified, yet God will
put them to shame, Is. 66.5. And though they thought in putting them to death,
they should do God good service, yet God reckons it as their serving the devil,
John 16.2. with Rev. 2.10. When Saul excused his sin under the pretense of
Sacrifice, it was yet called Rebellion, and reputed as witchcraft, a most
abominable thing, 1 Samuel 15. Job upbraids his friends with this irreligious
piety; says he, Job 13.7. Will ye speak wickedly for God, and talk deceitfully
for him? Surely; v. 10. he will reprove you for it: Sin is so much the worse
for being committed in the name of the Lord; men thereby do (as it were) make
God to serve the devils designs: Nay (...) will be no excuse that men (like
(...), Jud^^, etc.) sulfill the con^^el and (...) will ( i.e. determination of
God, as to what eventually shall be) if they sin against his revealed will,
which is the rule by which men are to walk, and to which they ought to be
obedient: ^o that by all this it plainly appears, how that God witnesses
against sin, that we may not sin for the good of any, nor for any good, no not
for God.

4 Threatening.
God witnesses against sin by threatening men; in case they sin, he makes penal
Statutes against (...), in the day thou eatest the forbidden (...) thou shall
surely die: If sin were not an ^^onourable thing; surely God would not have
(...) it on such peril, on pain of death, of (...) will be said under the
execution of (...), and ^he just judgment of God (...).

^ (...)
God is (...) with the wicked, and that wit(...) angry with (...)) argues and
(...) by them for he (...) (...) displease him: (...) is nor that evil (...)
God to (...) sometime to (...) judgment (...) ^^gry were (...) God would not
^ebuke (...) who knows the pow(...) his ^nger and (...) ^appy they that (...)
do nor withdraw his anger, the proud helpers do stoop under him, Job 9.13. the
helpers of pride, so it is; man is apt to be very proud, and has helpers of
pride; and it is observeable, that the word we read, pride, signifies strength
also, to denote that man is very apt to be proud of his strength; but all the
strong helpers of pride must stoop, if he withdraw not his anger: The strength
of riches, Prove. 10.15. the strength of friends and families, Psa. 49.7.
strength and stoutness of spirit must all stoop, if his anger break forth, if
he take but one of his arrows and discharge it against a sinner; if he strike
him but with one blow of his sword, as the phrases are, Psa. 7.11.-14. Kiss the
Son least he be angry, and ye perish; perishing is at the heels of his anger,
Psa. 2.12. The fear or terror of a King is like the roaring of a Lion, whosoever
provokes him to anger, sins against his own soul, Prove. 20.2. Oh what dread
is there then from the anger of the King of Kings, when God sets our iniquities
before him, we are consumed by his anger, and troubled by his wrath, Psa. 90.7.
Now we infer, that if Gods anger be so terrible, and it is sin that makes God
angry, that certainly sin is extremely sinful, contrary to God; or else the God
of all grace, the God of patience, whose name is Love, would never be so angry
at it, and for it.

5 God witnesses against sin by this, that it, Repent^^^.
and it only put him upon repenting, that he had made man, Genesis 6.5, 6. God saw
that the wickedness of man was great on the earth, and that every imagination
of the thoughts of his heart was only evil continually, and it repented the
Lord that he had made man on the earth, and it grieved him at his heart; and v.
7. God says, It repents me that I have made them: The repentance of God
argues a very great dislike of, and displeasure against the wickedness of man.
Time was, (though 'twere but for a little while) that there was no sin, and
then when God looked on what he had made, he was so far from repenting, that
'twas wholly hid from his eyes, and he was infinitely pleased; but when sin had
spoiled the fashion and beauty of his work, then indeed he (speaking after the
manner of men) grieves and repents: So that it is not the work of his hand, but
the work of man's heart, that put God on repenting: Is God man that he should
repent? oh what an horrible thing is that which puts the unchangeable God on
changing! for such a thing repentance is, viz. a change: It repented the Lord
that he had set up Saul to be King, 1 Samuel 15. and when men do wickedly, God
repents that he has done them good, Jer. 18.7.-10. If men do evil against God,
God repents of the good he has done men, but (such is his goodness) if men
repent of their evil, God will repent of the evil he thought to do unto them:
Now as that must be very good that puts God on repenting of the evil, so
undoubtedly that must be very evil, that puts God on repenting of the good he
has done to man.

8 God witnesses against sin by the many great and severe judgments which he
has executed upon, ^ Executing, jud^ment.
as well as threatened to sinners, and which he will in all Ages execute on
many, and to all Eternity on some sinners; for what God has done, shows what
God will do; as the Apostle infers, 2 Pet. 2.3, 4, 5, 6. Sinners do hugely
mistake God, when they say evil is good in his sight, or where is the God of
judgment, Mal. 2.17. and do no less forget themselves, and what God has done,
when they say, all things continue as they were; and therefore scoffingly say,
where is the promise of his coming, viz. to judgment, 2 Pet. 3. It Is true, if
God should judge as fast as men sin, the world would be depopulated, and at an
end quickly: But his patience now argues his judgment to come, 2 Pet. 3.9, 10.
and then when God sends men to hell, and damns them, they will know and
acknowledge what an evil thing sin was, and what bitterness it brings in the
latter end. Damnation being so dreadful a thing, as the pouring out of Gods
wrath for ever on sinners, it must needs conclude sin to be extremely
displeasing, because contrary to him: That Is no little matter for which God
brings on men such great damnation: Next judgment to this, is being let alone,
or given up to a reprobate judgment, and an hardened heart; but that being
future, and this (though present) invisible, I shall wave further speaking to
them, and show that God has visibly judged this world for sin, from Age to
Age: He is a God that judges in the earth, as he is a God that will judge the
earth: And the Lord is known (to be against sin) by the judgments which he
executes, the wicked is snared in the work of his own hands, Psa. 9.16, which
has a double note upon it, Higgaion, Selah; both which I do not remember to be
added to any other Text, so notable a Text is this.

God has testified his displeasure against sin, by (...) judgment 1 On
Sinners. 2 Saints. 3 His Son.


1 God has executed judgment on sinners; On (...).
and usually the first committer of any particular sin, has been punished with
eminent and remarkable punishment: Nor to mention Adam (who was all men i^ one,
virtually) though he underwent a punishments and a curse for his sin: but Cain
the first (...), was as 'twere hung up in (...) (...), or a terrible warning to
others. Judas (...) first Apostate, was made an example under the Law: Nadab
and Abihu, the first breakers of the Ceremonial Law, after the establishment of
Aarons Priesthood, Ananias and Saphi^a, the first that belied God in the
beginning of the Christian Church, were miraculously punished: God has made
heaps of witnesses this way: God has set up monuments for Pillats of Salt,
like ^ots Wife: The Flood that drowned the old world, the Fire that burnt up
Sodom and Gomorrah, etc. and the many things that befell Israel for an example,
were all types, as the Apostle speaks. 1 Cor. 10.11. God has punished all
sinners more or less; he spared not the (...) sinned, they were all doomed to
darkness; he consumed almost a whole world at once, having eight persons; he
has cut off Cities and Nations, not a few, beside what has ^^allen particular
persons, and therefore men cannot say, that all things continue as they were,
and that God is not a God of judgment, or consequently an allower of the evil
of sin.

There is no Age wherein God does not really and actually judge sinners; though
perhaps this may not be so clear to a prejudiced and partial observer, that
will think nothing a punishment, but what is miraculous, or extraordinary, as if
the earth must always swallow men up, or God strike men down with thunderbolts
continually, and nothing less must be called a punishment: Oh how often is Gods
hand lifted up, but men will not see, yea felt, yet not acknowledged: God has
his Deputy in men's bosoms, their own Consciences, which does often accuse and
condemn them, that they cannot stand before its judgment; when their hearts
smite them, they sink, and their countenance and courage falls, as that of
Cain, and Judas, and Spira did; If men were but ingenuous, and would but
declare what stingings of Conscience they feel, there would be witness enough,
how God lasheth men within, and executes judgment upon their spirits; but
sisibly, and in the eyes of others, God does often inflict corporal
punishments, either immediately, as was most usual before the Flood; or
mediately, and that sometimes by Angels, and sometimes by Men-Magistrates,
humane and mortal Gods, Deputies to the God above; and by these God (as I may
say) rides Circuit, and keeps Assizes very frequently: Though judgment be now
his strange work in comparison, (and seems not so proper to this day of
patience, as to that of a rath which is to come) yet God does often make
examples; and though he make not (as yet) a full end of all Nations, he leaves
none altogether unpunished.

2 On his own people.
God has executed judgment on his own people when they have sinned, to show
how hateful sin is, though it be in them he so dearly loves: One would think,
that if God would spare any, he would spare his own; and indeed he does pity
them, and spare them, as a Father pitieth and spares the Son that serves him:
I, but though he forgive them, yet he takes vengeance on their iniquity, Psa.
99.8. Many a sinner God forgives (as to punishment) in this life, who will not
be forgiven in the world to come; but seeing God fully resolves to forgive his
people for ever, he will not wholly forgive them, i. e. leave them altogether
unpunished here in time: God has carried it very severely to his people when
they have sinned, it has cost them dear; King David's adultery and murder
cost him broken bones, oh heal the bones that thou have broken; as it is in that
Penitential Psalm, Psa. 51.8. When Peter had sinned, it cost him a bitter
weeping; repentance is a chargeable thing; it is disgrace, sorrow and pain to
man, though it be a grace and duty: If Gods children transgress, and play the
Trewant, they must feel the Rod, it is the Rod of the Covenant; chastenings and
corrections of wantonness are in the Covenant, as well as supplies of wants;
threatenings of judgment, as well as promises of mercy; and sometimes sin brings
such sorrow on the very members of the Church, that they are in danger of being
swallowed up of overmuch sorrow, even to despair of giving over to hope for
mercy, 2 Cor. (...) Though God be a God gracious and merciful, yet he is a God
visiting iniquity, and will sometimes punish them whom he has known and loved,
above all the people of the earth: and though he take not his loving kindness
from them, yet he will visit their transgression with the Rod, and their
iniquity with stripes, Psa. 89.30.3^. Yet further.

3 God sp^red not his Son when he came in the likeness of sinful flesh, and was
no sinner, On his Son.
but by imputation, and representation: God was ever well pleased with his Son,
yet when he stood in the behalf and stead of sinners, it pleased the Lord to
bruise him; as if none else could strike a stroke hard enough; and though he
cried with strong cries, yet his father would not take the Cup out of his hand:
he suffered not for sinning himself, (for though he were tempted to sin, yet he
was without sin) but he suffered for the sin of others; and in the glass of his
suffering we ^^y clearly see the sinfulness of sin: And this leads me to the
last and great testimony of God against sin. Viz.

7 Gods not sparing his Son, Not sparing Christ Jesus,
but delivering him up for us all; Gods sending his Son into the world to
condemn sin, Romans 8.3. and to destroy it, 1 John 3.8. does clearly witness for
God, how odious sin is to him, and ought to be to man, for whom Christ suffered
and died, that sin might die, and man might live; yea, live to him who died for
us, for to no less does his love constrain us, 2 Cor. 5.14, 15.

To clear and evince this the more plainly and fully I shall show these three
things.

1 That Christ's sufferings were for sinners. 2 That Christ's sufferings were
exceeding great. 3 That the greatness of his suffering are full witness on Gods
part of Sins sinfulness against God and Man.
1 He suffered for sinners.
That Christ his sufferings were for sinners: Jesus Christ himself suffered,
but he did not suffer for himself; for he was without sin, Hebr. 4.15. and
7.26. neither was guile found in his mouth, nor any misbecoming word, when he
suffered, though 'twere a provoking time, 1 Pet. 2.22, 23. It Is a faithful
saying, that Christ came into the world to save sinners, 1 Timothy 1.15: This was
the design, errand and business about which he came; he had his name Jesus,
because he was to save his people from their sins, Mat. 1.21. And he himself
professes, that he came to seek and to save that which was lost, Luke 19.20.
Now dead and lost is the sinners Motto, Luke 15.32. accordingly when he was in
the world, he suffered and died, that he might save sinners; he died for our
sakes, and so loved his Church, that he gave himself for it, Ephesians. 5.25. Yea,
it is not only said often, that he died for us, Romans 5.8. and 8.32. but that he
died for our sins; not only for our good, as the final cause, but for our sins,
as the procuring cause of his death, Romans 4.25. He was delivered for our
offenses, 1 Cor. 15.3. Christ died for our sins, according to the Scripture,
according to what was typified, prophesied and promised in the Scripture. One
eminent place instend of many others is in Is. 53.5. He was wounded for ou^
transgression, he was bruised for our iniquities, the chastisement of our peace
was upon him, and by his stripes we are healed. To this the Apostles bear
witness in the New Testament, Gal. 1.4. he gave himself for our sins; and 1
Pet. 2.24. who his own self bare our sins. Now this dying for us, and our sins,
notes:

1 That he died, and gave himself as a ransom for us, Mat. 20.28. As a ransom.
I came to give my life a ransom for many, said our sweet and blessed Savior,
1 Timothy 2.6. He gave himself a ransom for all: Christ's dying was the paying of
a price, a ransom price; and hence we are said to be bought, redeemed, and
purchased, 1 Cor. 6.20. Ye are not your own, ye are bought with a price, viz.
that of his blood; as it is in 1 Pet. 1.18, 19. Ye were redeemed with the
precious blood of Christ: and the Church is purchased with his own blood, Acts
20.28. He gave himself as a Redemption price, and we are a purchased people, 1
Pet. 2.9.

2 He died for us, as a Sacrifice for our sins; A Sacrifice.
he became sin for us. 2 Cor 5.21. In the Old Testament the Sin-offering is
called sin; so here Christ Jesus an Offering for sin, is said to be made sin
for us. It Is said in the holy Scripture, that Christ offered his Body, his
Soul, himself, Hebr. 10.10. There Is the offering of his Body. Is. 53.10. He
made his Soul an offering for sin: And Ephesians. 5.2. He has given himself for us
an offering, and a Sacrifice to God, Hebr. 9.14. He did offer himself without
spot to God: and v. 26. He put away sin by the Sacrifice of himself. Now as we
were redeemed by the price, so we are reconciled by the Sacrifice of his death:
For Romans 5.9, 10. We are reconciled by the death of his Son.

3 3 A curse.
Christ laid down his life for us, as bearing the curse and punishment due to
our sins; and therefore it is said, he was made a curse for us, which was the
punishment of our sin, Gal. 3.13. He bare our sins, i. e. the curse due to our
sins: The punishment of sin, is called sin often in Scripture, and to bear
iniquity, is to be punished; and as Redemption came by the price, and
Reconciliation by the Sacrifice, so Justification, by his bearing the curse and
punishment, Is. 53.11, 12. He shall justify many, for he shall bear their
sins: He became a curse for us, that the blessing of Abraham might come upon
us, and that is Justification by Faith; as you may see, Gal. 3.13, 14. with v.
8, 9. This shall suffice as to the first thing, viz. that Christ's sufferings
were for sinners.

2 His sufferings were great.
The sufferings of Jesus Christ were exceeding great. I shall omit what may be
gathered from the types under the Law, and what is expressed by the Prophets
concerning the suffering of Christ, though many things might be collected
thence, but they being all fulfilled in him, I shall confine my self especially
to the relation made thereof in the N. Testament: He was a man of sorrows, as
if he were a man made up of sorrows (as the Man of Sin is, as if he were made
up of sin) as if he were nothing else: He knew more sorrow then any man, yea,
then all men ever did: For the iniquity (and consequently the sorrows) of all
men met in him, as if he had been their Center; and he was acquainted with
griefs, he had little acquaintance else, grief was his familiar acquaintance;
he had no acquaintance with laughter; we read not, that he laughed at all when
he was in the world; his other acquaintance stood afar off, but grief followed
him to his Cross; from his birth to his death, from his Cradle to the Cross,
from the Womb to the Tomb, he was a man of sorrows, and never were sorrows like
his, he might say, never grief or sorrow like to mine: it is indeed impossible
to express the sufferings and sorrows of Christ; and the Greek Christians used
to beg of God, (...), that for the unknown sufferings of Christ he would have
mercy on them: Though Christ's sufferings are abundantly made known, yet they
are but little known; eye has not seen, nor ear heard, nor has it, or can it
enter into the heart of man to conceive what Christ suffered; who has known
the power of Gods wrath? Christ Jesus knew it, for he underwent it: but though
it be impossible to declare all, yet it is useful to take a view of what we can;
I shall therefore draw a Scheme of Christ's sufferings under three Heads.

1 Jesus Christ underwent all manner of sufferings. 2 Jesus Christ suffered by
all manner of persons. 3 All manner of aggravating circumstances did meet in
his sufferings.
1 All manner of sufferings.
Jesus Christ suffered all manner of sufferings; it is said, Hebr. 4.15. that he
was tempted in all things like unto us, and among other things meant by
temptations, suffering are not the least, he suffered being tempted, he
suffered while he lived, but especially a little before, and when he died; all
his life was a suffering (not to mention his self-denials, which were
voluntary) he was no sooner born, but suffering came upon him; he was born in
an Inn, yea in a Stable, he had but a Manger for his Cradle; as soon as his
birth was noised abroad, Herod sought his life; so that his supposed Father (or
Father-in-law, as I may call him) was fain to fly into Egypt; he was
persecuted before he could (after the manner of men) be sensible, and have
understanding of his sufferings: and when he returned, his sufferings grew up
with him; hunger and thirst, travel and weariness, scorns and reproaches, false
accusations and contradictions waited on him, and he had not where to lay his
head: But his special sufferings were a little before, and at his death; and
here you find him suffering in 1 His body. 2 His soul.


1 In his body.
In his body, that was wounded and crucified; he suffered in bearing his Cross
(as Isaac his Type did) and he suffered in his body on the Cross, 1 Pet. 2.24.
and he did not only suffer unto death, but in the manner of his dying; 'twas a
shameful, a painful, an accursed death; yea, he bled to death: Christ Jesus
lost blood several times; at his Circumcision, in his Agony, when he sweat
drops and clods of blood, when he was whipped and scourged, when he was nailed to
the Cross, and probably when they platted a Crown of Thorns (the earths curse)
on his head: And lastly, when they thrust the spear into his side, with which
he bleeds out his life, and gave up the Ghost.

He suffered in all parts and members of his body, from head to foot: His Head
(which deserved a hetter Crown then the best in the world) was crowned with
thorns, and they smote him on the head: His Face suffered, being spat upon; His
Back, 'twas turned to the smiters, 'twas stripped and whipped, yea they even plowed
upon his back, and made deep and long surrows; his hands and feet were pierced
and nailed to the Cross, yea, says he by the Prophet, all my bones are out of
joint (as if he had been on the Rack) Psa. 22.14. He suffered also in his
senses, his feeling; Could he be smitten wounded, nailed and pierced, without
feeling? His taste suffered, for they gave him (instead of strong drink and wine
of consolation, which was usual to them ready to die Prove. 31.6.) instead of
this they gave him vinegar and gall to drink: His sight suffered, and among
other things, the sight of his Mother, and other grieving friends, could not
but affect his heart, Luke 23.27. 'Twas a grief to him to see them grieve for
him: Did it not afflict him to see his Enemies wag their heads? His hearing
suffered many a scoff and jeer, many an ill word and blasphemy: His smell could
not but suffer when he came to Golgotha, the place of skulls, where filthiness
and putrefaction lodged, the very stinking sink of the City: But more yet:

2 In his soul.
Christ Jesus suffered in his soul: We read of his sighing and groaning, but
let us consider him especially in his Agony, and upon the Cross: In his Agony,
Mat. 26.37, 38. He began to be sorrowful, and very heavy; (these were but the
beginnings of sorrow) he began, etc. sorrow is a thing that drinks up our
spirits; and he was heavy, as feeling an heavy load upon him: And v. 38. he was
exceeding sorrowful unto death; sorrowful! exceeding sorrowful! and unto death!
It was in such extremity, that it made him cry out, Father, if it be possible,
let this Cup pass; and this was with strong cryings and tears, Heb. 5.7. When
he was upon the Cross he was under a desertion, which made him cry again, My
God, my God, why, or how have thou forsaken me? Now to cry, and to cry with a
loud voice, argues some extremity of suffering; and after this he gave up the
Ghost, he poured out his soul an offering for sin: And yet further, as he
suffered all manner of sufferings, both in soul and body; so to proceed,

2 He suffered from all manner of persons,
He suffered from all manner of persons; Christ Jesus suffered from the Devil;
for though Christ bruised his head, yet he bruised Christ his heel: No sooner
had Christ the testimony from heaven, that he was the Son of God, but he was
immediately carried into the Wilderness to be tempted of the Devil; and this
was the thing questioned and disputed whither he were the Son of God or not:
and though Christ worsted him, and beat him out of the field, yet he departed
but for a season; for when Christ was about to suffer, the Prince of this world
mustered up all his forces again, and came upon him with much violence, and
made men of all qualities his Agents, to add to the sufferings of Christ: And
indeed, he suffered not only from bad men, as you have it, Acts 4.26, 27. which
fulfilled that in Psa. 2. beg. He was tempted by the Pharisees often, and he
endured the contradiction of sinners; yet this was not all, but he suffered
from his own disciples, and nearest relations. Peter was a Satan to him once,
and denied him thrice; the rest grieved him with their slowness and littleness
of faith: Judas betrayed him, his Brethren believed not on him; and which was
heavest of all the rest, he suffered from his Father, he put the Cup into his
hands, and took pleasure to bruise him, and he laid upon him the iniquities of
us all, yea, God did not spare him, nor abate him any thing, but hid his face
from him, as if he had been angry with his only and most beloved Son.

3 His sufferings aggravated by circumstances.
Jesus Christ had all manner of aggravating circumstances met together in his
sufferings. He was made of a woman; now that he who made the woman should be
made of a woman, and become and be made a Son to the work of his own hands, was
a degree of suffering: he that made the Law, was made under the Law, Gal 4.4.
He that was Lord of all, was made in the form of a servant, and though equal to
God, yet came in sinful flesh, and so obeyed as a servant, of which these
sayings speak (as Dr. Jackson observes) I ^ame not to do mine own will, but the
will of him that sent me, etc. and suffered as a sinner, for so he was judged,
and as such put to death, though his Judge confessed he found no fault in him;
yea, more then this, he became a curse, Gal. 3.13. yea, which is the worst of
words, he became sin for us, 1 Cor. 5.21.

There are yet other circumstances, which added to his sorrow and suffering,
such as these, he came to his own, and they received him not, he had least
honor among his own in his own Country; yea, he was wounded in the house of his
friends, and one of his own betrayed him, devil that he was, Joh. 6.70. He did
good to many, but had little thanks from any; of ten Lepers cleansed, but one
returned to give him thanks; oh disingenuity and ingratitude! but oh the
aggravating circumstances at the latter end! He was taken and apprehended as a
sinner, they came against him, as to take a Thief, with swords and staves; they
charged him with blasphemy for speaking the truth; they preferred Barabbas (the
Son of their Father the Devil) before him; his Disciples left him, his Father
forsook him, as was hinted before: Alas! who can reckon up the aggravating
circumstances of his sufferings? he was crucified between two thieves, and
upbraided by one of them; his death was painful, shameful, etc. as before. But
I pass from hence to the

Third thing, His suffering witnesses the sinfulness of sin.
to show that the greatest sufferings that Christ underwent, are a full witness
against the sinfulness of sin: Oh what an odious thing is sin to God, that he
will pardon none without blood, Hebr. 9.22. that God would accept no blood, but
the blood of his Son! not that of Bulls and Goats, Hebr. 9.22. but that of his
Son, 1 Pet. 1.18, 19. that God would not abate one drop, one dram of this
blood, but he must power out his life! the very heart-blood must be spilt and
spent for sinners! and which is the wonder of wonders, all this was a pleasure
to God, for it pleased the Lord to bruise him: That it should please the Lord
to bruise the Son in whom he was well-pleased, is to us men an inconceiveable
mystery! Well then upon the whole, this is a great witness that God has born
against sin, that he would send his Son to die for sinners: oh what an hell of
wickedness is that, which none but God can expiate and purge, and that God does
not do it, without taking humane nature, and that God-man could not do it,
without suffering, and no suffering serve but death, no death but an accursed
one: oh what an evil odious evil is sin, that must have blood, the blood of God
to take it away! This shall suffice for the first thing, viz. the witness of
God against sin as exceeding sinful.

2 Angels bear witness against sin; Angels witness against sin. 1 The good.
both good Angels, and bad Angels.

1 Good Angels; the Angels of God and heaven, as they are often called, do bear
witness against sin, as an exceeding sinful thing. 1 Their very title (which
contains their nature and employment too) being holy Angels, shows, that they
have an antipathy against, and are at enmity with sin; that which is meat and
drink to wicked men, to do the will of the devil, it is poison to holy angels,
whose meat and drink it is to do the will of God; they are all holiness to the
Lord, and cannot endure iniquity; they often contend and fight with evil
Angels, and so witness against sin, Jude 9. Their being holy, loving holiness
and contention against the Devil, are their witnessings.

2 Holy Angels witness against sin, in being Gods Heralds, to proclaim the Law
which is against sin: it is the aggravation of the sin of the Jews, that they
kept not the Law which they received by the disposition of Angels, Act. 7.53.
The Law which was added because of transgressions, was ordained by Angels, Gal.
3.19. Every transgression of this Law received a just recompense of reward; for
the word spoken by Angels was steadfast, Heb. 2.2. So that Angels in proclaiming
the Law, have openly declared against sin, as exceeding sinful.

3 They witness against sin, in that they will not sin (though provoked to it)
to be revenged on the Devil himself: They will not rail at a Devil, because
railing is a sin; nay, it is said of Michael, that he durst not bring a railing
accusation, Jude 9. One would have thought he would have told the Devil his
own, and have put it home upon him; that is true, but he durst not bring a
railing accusation, nor give the Devil ill language. We (hot-spurs and hot
spirited that we are) are apt to render evil for evil, and railing for railing,
to pay men their own in coin; but Angels dare not to do so, for it is a sin;
railing is language that holy Angels cannot speak.

4 They witness against sin by this, that they will not suffer men to sin, that
would do it to honor them. When John fell at one of their feet to worship him,
says the Angel, See thou do it not, Rev. 19.10. do not that to me, which is to
be done to God alone: And again, Chapter 22.8, 9. I fell down (says S. John) to
worship before the feet of the Angel, which showed me these things, but he said
unto me, see thou do it not, but worship God. The Angels are so holy, that they
cannot endure the least reflection should be cast on God, or least duty
neglected toward God, though they might be worshipped.

5 Their testimony against sin appears thus, that where they find it, though in
Gods own people, they rebuke it, and that sharply and severely: Though Hagars
hard usage made her run away, yet says the Angel to her, return to thy
Mistress, and submit thy self to her, Genesis 16.8, 9. As if he had said, Hagar,
Hagar, it is better to suffer then to sin: When Sarah laughed at the tyding of a
Son, and after denied it, being afraid: Nay, says the Angel, but thou did
laugh; he told her her own roundly, Genesis 18.12.-15. When Zachary believed not
the Angel, he was made dumb, Luke 1.13.-20. Thus they rebuke for sin.

6 Angels witness against sin, by rejoicing at the conversion of sinners: It Is
the recovery of a soul from a dead and lost condition, to be converted; and
then do Angels rejoice, Luke 15, 7.-10. As there is a kind of joy in hell among
the Devils when one sins that is converted, and when sinners are not converted;
so there is joy in heaven at the conversion of a sinner: The Rabbis speak, as
if while sinners are rejoicing in their sins, the Angels were grieving for
them: when and while men live in sin, they dishonor their and the Angels God;
but when converted, they give glory to God, which is the Angels work and joy;
it is their Song, glory to God on high, and when men bear a part with them in
this Song, it is their joy.

7 Angels witness against sin by the constant opposition they make against
wicked Angels, and wicked men: Who would abuse their charge, that is good and
holy men: good men are committed to the charge of good Angels; He gives his
Angels charge to keep them in all their ways, Psa. 91.11. and the Angels are
ministering spirits for the good of them that shall be heirs of salvation, Hebr.
1.14. They incamp round about them that fear the Lord, Psa. 34.7. And when
wicked men or devils would hurt this their charge, they rise up in their might,
Dan. 10.20. Gabriel and Michael join against the Prince of Persia, Rev. 12.7.
Michael and his Angels fought against the Dragon, and his Angels, and overcame.
When Balaam hanker'd after the wages of unrighteousness, to curse Israel, the
Angel of the Lord withstood him, Numb. 22.32. Thus by their protection of the
good, they show their detestation of sin in them that would touch Gods
Anointed, or do his Prophets harm.

8 Angels discover themselves to be haters of sin, as a most abominable thing,
by their readiness to execute Gods judgment and vengeance on sinners. The Angel
that was merciful to Balaams Ass, was ready to slay Balaam, but that he was
reserved to fall by other hands. When Herod was so wicked as to assume glory to
himself, which of right is Gods, the Angel of the Lord smote him, because he
gave not glory to God, Acts 12.23. When God will judge, the Angels will execute
the judgment written: The Angels executed destruction from the Lord against
Sodom and Gomorrah, Genesis 19.13. because their sin was great: When Israel
sinned, God sent destroying Angels among them; great havocks have they made
among the Armies of the Aliens: They power out the Vials of Gods wrath on the
earth, Rev. 16.1. and praised God as they went about their work, because God is
just in judging ungodly men. At the end of the world, the Angels will be the
reapers, and will gather out all that does offend, Mat. 13.39.-41. The Lord
will come with his holy and mighty Angels to take vengeance on them that know
not God, and that obey not the Gospel of our Lord Jesus Christ, 2 These. 1.7, 8.

I might instance in other things also, by which the Angels bear testimony
against sin; they are present at our worship, and observe us, which is a great
obligation to reverence, and a witness against immodesty, 1 Cor. 11.10. They
take account of our vows, Eccl. 5.5, 6. better it is thou should not vow,
then vow and not pay, because it is before the Angel. The Apostle charge
Timothy, not only before God, but before the Elect Angels, to be strictly
conscientious, 1 Timothy 5.21. They are witnesses of what we do, and shall be
witnesses of what God will do; for he that confesses Christ, shall be owned by
him, and he that denies Christ, shall be denied by him, and that before the
Angels, Luke 12.8, 9. 'twill be one part of hereafter glory, to be like Angels;
let us be like them here, in witnessing against sin, and doing the will of God
on earth, as they do it in heaven. But I proceed to evince that

2 Evil Angels, The evil Angels.
the devil and his Angels witness sin to be sinful, not only in their being
devils by it, and suffering for it, but many other ways, as I shall evince: We
use to say, that virtues confessed by foes, and vices confessed by friends, are
true: Surely then by the Devil we shall find that vice and sin is, as we have
declared it to be; and if such a friend of sin as the devil is, will confess it
to be sinful, we may believe him; for though he be the Father of Lies, yet in
this he speaks truth, a clear and great truth.

1 Then the devil witnesses against sin by his trembling; the devil trembles
at this, that there is a God, James 2.19. Now God was never terrible to the
Angels till they sinned, then they saw and trembled at the terror of God: Sin
brought judgment on the devils, 2 Pet. 2.4 at this they tremble; so that sin is
the first cause of devils trembling: That then which makes devils tremble at
the belief of a God, (who will be a God of judgment) is exceeding sinful.

2 As great as their judgment is (and greater though it be like to be) yet they
acknowledge it just, and so by consequence sin to be unjust and sinful: The
justness of judgment confessed, is a confession of the vileness of the sin which
brings the judgment. Say the devils, Mat. 8.29 Art thou come to torment us
before the time? they confess that the Son of God was to judge them to torment;
that they had no exception to make against being tormented, but only as to the
time; they are reserved in chains to judgment, 2 Pet. 2.4. Jude 6. and say
they, art thou come to torment us before the time? before the judgment of the
great day, to which we are reserved? they deny not their being worthy of this
death, or that their damnation is just, and therefore do confess the ugliness
and filthiness of sin.

3 They witness sin to be sinful, in tempting men to sin: They used to say,
that surely they must be good men whom Nero hated and persecuted; so may we
say, that must needs be evil, which the evil one tempts men to, as that is good
which he hates and persecutes; he is the evil one, and the Tempter, Can that be
good that the evil one tempts us to? Can any good come out of this Nazareth?
Can any good come from hell? It Is enough to evince sin to be sinful, that it is
of the devil, it is a clear proof of the evil of sin, that the devil tempts to
it.

4 The devil tells us that sin is an ugly thing by this, that he turns himself
into an Angel of Light, that he the more effectually lead us into darkness. If
he should come like a devil, like an enemy, all would be shy of him; but he
comes disguized, and puts on the face of a friend, and so puts tricks on us,
and cheats us; and indeed does prevail more by his wily subtilties, then by his
power: If the devil had come to Eve and bespake her thus, I was once a glorious
Angel, and lived above in the Court of Heaven, but I have sinned, and am cast
down to hell, do thou also eat the forbidden fruit, and thou shall be like me;
would this have taken? Surely no: So if he did come and tempt men to sin, and
tell them it is the ready way to hell, would this prevail with them, to swear
and whore, etc. No, no, the devil is subtle (an old Serpent) he colors and
paints sin, covers his hook with a bait, etc. and draws men in ere they are
aware: He is a deceiver, but least he should be known, he puts on a good garb,
and clothes himself with false light, 2 Cor. 11.13, 14. And indeed as this is
the danger, (least as the Serpent beguiled Eve through his subtilty, so our
minds should be corrupted the same way, 2 Cor. 11.3.) so this disguize and
subtle transformation, proves sin to be a monstrous ugly thing; why else does
the devil paint it? why does he pretend good, when he intends evil? this proves
the sinfulness of sin, that the devil tempts not in his own name or shape, he
dares not say, I am the devil, I am a deceiver, I will lead thee to hell, for
that would spoil his project.

5 The devil grants sin to be the worst of evils by this, that all the
affliction and misery which he brings upon men, is to make them sin more; so
that in the devils account, sin is worse then suffering: as it proves the
goodness of God, that he brings evil on us, to do and make us good, to cure us
of the evil of sin by the evil of suffering; so it argues the sinfulness of the
devil, and sin too, that he brings evil on us to make us worse; he does not
care to afflict us so much because we have sinned, as that we may sin no more.
The end of the devil in persecuting Job, was not only to make him smart, but to
make him sin, that he might curse God; it is something beyond suffering, which
is worse then suffering, that the devil aims at in bringing suffering, and that
is sin.

6 The devil bears witness that sin is sinful by this, that when any are
awakened to see their own vileness, he endeavors all he can to drive them to
despair; as he would at first they should presume to sin, so after that they
should not hope for, but despair of pardon: he littles it (or nothings it)
before commission, and greatens it after; when sin revived, the Apostle died,
Romans 7.9 It wrought in him apprehensions of death and hell, due to that state
wherein he then was: when Christ Jesus convinced him of his sin of persecution,
it made him tremble, and struck him almost dead, Acts 9. Conviction of sin
pricks men to the heart, and makes them cry out like undone men, what shall we
do! what will become of us! is there any pardon? is there any hope? Now the
devil strikes in, and tells them, that their sin is greater then can be
forgiven. When the poor Penitent was sorrowful, the devil made use of his
devices that he might be swallowed up, and drowned in sorrow, 2 Cor. 2.7. with
11. as if he would have told him, if these forgive thee not, much less will
God, the Church has cast thee off, and so will God: His great design is (then)
to persuade men, that the Mercy of God, and Merit of Christ, is not enough to
save them. Thus the devil speaks out fully, that sin is exceeding sinful.

7 And lastly, the devil declares sin to be sinful, in being the accuser of the
Brethren, Rev. 12.10. Oh what stories does he tell of God, of the Brethren, how
sinful they are! and thereby confesses to God himself the ugliness of sin; for
from thence only does he take the rise, and frame the arguments of his
accusation: as Christ ever lives to make intercession for us, so the devil
lives to make accusations against us, day and night: when God asked the devil if
he had considered his servant Job, Yes, says he, I have, and accuse him for an
hired servant, one that serves thee merely for wages, and would, if but touched
by thee, curse thee to thy face. When Satan accused Joshua, Zech. 3.1, 2. 'twas
for his filthy garments, his iniquity; as v. 3, 4. He is ever telling tales
(and sometimes true stories) of the miscarriages of Professors; he Registers
their pride and wantonness, their vanity and folly, all their unworthy
walkings, and accuses them to God for these things, and even tempts God, Job
2.3. to destroy them for their sinfulness, and sometimes, (as in Jobs case)
without a cause: whatever he say to us, to be sure he says to God, that sin is
an exceeding, and out of measure, sinful thing, when he accuses the Brethren.
Thus of the devils witness. I proceed to bring in

3 The witness of men Good and Bad against sin. Men witness against sin.


1 Good men bear witness against sin, Good men.
jointly and severally, to which of the Saints shall we turn? (as was said in
another case) they all with one consent, as one man, with one voice, and one
mouth, cry out against sin as a sinful thing: one says, yea all say, 'twere
damnation to be a sinner, if there were no other hell: another says, 'twere
better to be in hell with Christ, then in heaven with sin: another says, it is
more ugly then the devil: they all subscribe to this, that sin is the most
odious of all evils, hell it self not more, for it had not been, had not sin
made it: Good men bear witness against other men's sins, and against their own
also.

1 Against other men's sins, Against other men's sins.
if possible to prevent, if not to convince: For

1 They do give advise and counsel to men against sin, that they may not sin,
which proves that sin is an abominable thing in their esteem: The sum of what
is spoken, by way of commend, as to Abraham, Genesis 18.19. amounts to this, that
he would advise and charge his Posterity not to sin: So that of Samuel to
Israel, 1 Samuel 12.24, 25. and that of David to Solomon, 1 King. 2.1, 2, 3. etc.
yea to all his children; Come, says he, I will teach you the fear of the Lord,
Psalm. 34.11. and it is by the fear of the Lord, that men depart from evil: So in
the N.T. 1 These. 2.11, 12. 1 Pet. 2.11. 1 John 2.1. it is the advise-general
that good men give to every one, do not sin.

2 If they find that their counsel has not taken place, but men have sinned,
then they bear witness against sin, by reproving it: Reproofs are arguments of
sinfulness, for men do not reprove any for what is good; reproof argues
preceding guilt: were it not that sin is odious to them, good men would not be
at the cost and charges, nor run the hazard of reproving others for it;
reproving others is a thankless office, and unacceptable employment, for the
most part: men take reproofs for reproach^^ yet God having laid it on good men
as their they to rebuke, and not suffer sin to lie upon their Brother, they
dare not omit it, Levis. 19.17. Though Eli reproved his sons for their sins,
yet he is sharply reproved for not reproving them more sharply, 1 Samuel 2. We
find Samuel reproving King Saul; Is it meet to be said to a King, thou art
wicked? Yet 1 Samuel 13.13. says the Prophet to the King, thou have done
foolishly, thou have done wickedly: and Chapter 15.22, 23. he calls his sin
rebellion and stubbornness; thus cuttingly did he reprove King Saul. S. John
was not afraid to tell Herod of his wickedness, and to his face too, Luke 3.19.
S. Paul would not s^are S. Peter, when he sound him tripping and dissembling,
Gal. 2.11. but withstood him to the face: what does this speak, but that sin is
an odious thing to good men, and they judge it extremely sinful against God and
man. Further.

3 Good men witness against sin, by withdrawing from sinners, and their
society; to have no more to do with them then needs must: this separation from
their persons is only because of their sins; if good men be constrained to
converse with them, yet they cry out, as Psa. 120.5, 6. Woe is me, that I dwell
in Meshek, and the Tents of Kedar: The society of the wicked is very
burdensome to the godly; Lot was in a kind of hell, when he was in Sodom,
their wickedness was continually vexing his soul, 2 Pet. 2.7, 8. This
withdrawing from, or groaning under the society of the wicked, testifies
against sin, and is in obedience to the Command of God, 2 Cor. 6.14. etc.

4 Their mourning over other men's sins, shows, that in their eyes sin is an
abominable thing, though but the sin of others, Psalm. 119.136. Mine eyes run
down with rivers of tears; why? because men keep not thy Laws: Oh how dear is
the Law of God, and how vile the sin of men to holy David! so the Prophet
Jeremiah, Chapter 13.15.-17. expresses the like zeal for God: Hear ye, and give
ear, be not proud, give glory to the Lord, etc. But if you will not hear, my
soul shall weep in secret for your pride, mine eyes shall weep sore, and run
down with tears. The Apostle Paul, when he speaks of the sins of men, he does
it weeping, Phil. 3.19. Other men's sins cost good men many a weeping eye, and
aching heart, because sin is so contrary to God, and the good of men.

5 And lastly (to name no more) they testify how sinful a thing sin is, by
their prayers and endeavors to get pardon for their sins, who, it may be,
scarce seek it for themselves. Sinners little think how much they are beholding
to good men, who pray for their salvation, even then when the wicked seek their
destruction: Said St. Stephen, Father, lay not this sin to their charge, oh
forgive them: How earnestly did Abraham pray for mercy in behalf of Sodom, that
if possible it might not be destroyed: When Israel had sinned a great sin, and
provokt the Lord, Moses mediates and intercedes for them, and offers to die
that they may live, Exodus 32. Now if they did not know that sin were a sinful
thing, offensive to God, and destructive to man, would they interpose at such a
rate? no, they would not. But by all this it appears, that good men witness
against sin as the worst of evils, yea, and wicked men bears witness against
sin; no man has a good word for sin: There is no man can plead sins cause, or
be its Advocate; but before I produce their testimony, I am to show,

2 That good men witness against their own sin, Against their own sin.
as well as against other men's sins: they do not only wish others reformation,
but do endeavor their own; and would, if possible, be so innocent, as not to
sin at all; it is their ambition and prayer, that their thoughts, words and
deeds, may be all acceptable to God, Psa. 19 14. they would not dream
extravagantly, if they could avoid it, nor that a vain thought should lodge
within them: it is possible indeed, that some men may declaim bitterly against
other men's sins, and yet indulge their own; as if they had rather see other men
reformed then themselves, and virtue were a more pleasant Theme to talk of,
then a thing to be possessed; but godly men dare not do so, but are against sin
in others, and against sinning themselves. As appears

1 By this, that they will not, dare not sin, though they have opportunity, and
may do it with pleasure, honor and profit, as the world rates these things:
Some men that do not sin for want of opportunity, would sin if they had it,
they want not heart, but occasion, not inclination, but opportunity, they would
sin, if tempted to sin: Others avoid sins that would bring disgrace, etc. but
for pleasant, fashionable, and profitable sins, they can easily embrace such;
but godly men dare not sin, though all these concur; take an instance in
Joseph, who when he was courted into pleasure, etc. yet even then, says he,
how, oh how, (can I find it in my heart?) can I do? how shall I do this
wickededness, and sin against God! Genesis 39.7.-9. it is, says he, sin against my
Master, sin against thee, sin against mine own soul, but the worst is, it is
against God; how shall I do this wickedness, and sin against God! Another
instance of him there is in relation to his brethren; how ill they had deserved
at his hands, what opportunity he had to be revenged, is well known yet he
generously forgave them, and provided for them; and this was the reason, I,
says he, fear God, Genesis 42.18. Job also in his Apology, Chapter 31. etc. gives a
full account, how odious a thing sin of all sorts was unto him, even in his
prosperity, when he might (according to the course of this world) have done
whatever seemed good in his own eyes, and none have said to him, what do
thou? or why do thou thus? You shall find Balaam (after the guize and mode of
hypocrites) talking and pretending like an Angel, but acting and intending like
a devil; 'twas a kind of trouble to him, that he could not sin, Numb. 22.18. I
cannot go beyond the word of the Lord, but it seems he would if he could;
whereas a Saint would say, I neither can nor will go against, or beyond or
short of the word of the Lord, if I can help it.

2 Good and godly men discover that sin is odious to them by this, that they
will rather suffer then sin: Many men make an ill choice, such an one as Elihu
charged on Job, Chapter 36.21. This ( viz. sin) have thou chosen rather then
affliction; but godly men make Moses his choice, who chose affliction rather
then the pleasures of sin, Hebr. 11. As precious a thing as life is, a godly
man would not willingly sin to save his life: Though the mouth of a Fiery
Furnace (heated sevenfold) were open to devour the three children (as we use
to call them) yet they would not sin, Dan. 3.18, and Daniel would rather
adventure on the Lions, then neglect a duty to his God, Dan. 6.10. Though bonds
waited on S. Paul every where, yet he could not be withheld by fear of them
from preaching the faith of Jesus, Acts 20.23, 24. with 21.11. -- 15. you have
a long Catalogue, a little Book of Martyrs, Hebr. 11. who chose all manner of
deaths before any kind or manner of sin, and would not accept deliverance on
ignoble terms, but had rather die holily, then live sinfully. They all declare,
that it is better to suffer to avoid sinning, then sin to avoid suffering.

3 They witness against sin by this, that they will not sin though grace
abound, or that grace may abound, Romans 6.1, 2 no, God forbid! Though they have
an Advocate with the Father, Jesus Christ the righteous, who is the
Propitiation for their sin, 1 John 2.1, 2. the very Doctrine of Grace and
interest in the death of Christ, is the great obligation upon them not to sin:
Read (...). 6.2 Cor. 5.15. Titus 2.11, 12. the assurance of glory is an
engagement to mortification, Col. 3 4, 5. when Christ who is our life shall
appear, then shall we appear with him in glory; what then? May we therefore
gratify corruption, and live as we list? Oh no, but mortify therefore, etc.
though there be promises of forgiveness to him that confesses his sin, yet a
godly man dare not sin, and buy repentance at so dear a rate: When S. John had
said, that if we confess our sin God is faithful, and (not only merciful, but)
just to forgive us our sin, and the blood of Jesus Christ shall cleanse us from
all; yet he adds these things, I write that you sin not, 1 John 1.9. with 1 John 2.1. nay, they dare not sin that good may come of it, nor tell a lie,
though the truth of God may thereby abound unto God his glory, Romans 3.7, 8.

4 They witness that sin is an abominable thing by this, the care they take,
and the means they use to prevent sin, that they may not sin.

1 They maintain a continual war against the devil, world and flesh, because
they would not sin; as much as they (good souls) love peace, yet they live in
war; I, and live in war to preserve their peace, on which sin would make a
breach: Godly men would not hate the devil, but that he is a sinner, and tempts
them to sin: they would not hate their own flesh, or Father and Mother, but to
prevent sinning: Of this war you may read Romans 7. and Gal. 5.17. They are fain
to fight their way to heaven from day to day, and duty to duty, and are at
great cost and charges, pains and watchings, to keep this war on foot, and all
that they may not sin.

2 They are praying always that they may not sin; Oh our Father, lead us not
into (...) on, but deliver us from evil: though temptations be no sins, yet
they are the way to sins, and therefore they pray that (if possible) they might
not be tempted, Psa. 119.113. Let not any iniquity have dominion over me, says
good King David keep me from presumption, that I may be upright, etc. Psa. 19.
yea it is their joint supplication, thy will be done on earth, as it is in heaven.

3 They hide the word of God in their heart (as an antidote) that they may not
sin, Psalm. 119.11. and when Princes persecuted this holy man without a cause,
yet he durst not meditate revenge, but his heart stood in awe of the word,
which he had hid there, Psa. 119 161.

4 That they may not sin, they abstain from appearances and occasions of evil:
Job made a covenant with his eyes, Job 31.1. King David said he would take heed
to his ways, that he might not sin with his tongue, Psa. 39.1. that is, that he
might be perfectly holy in the sense of Saint James's phrase, Chapter 3.2. If any
man offend not in word, the same is a perfect man, a great Commander of
himself, and able to bridle the whole body, which is the expression used in the
forequoted Psalm: when chaste Joseph met with a tempting Mistress, it is said of
him, he hearkened not unto her, not only not to lie with her, but not to be with
her, Genesis 39.10. but fled, as from a plague, or devil, v 12.

By all these things (to name no more) it clearly appears, that in the esteem
of good men, sin is an ex^eeding impious and pernicious thing: But I am
sensible there will be two exceptions made against this witness of these men.

1 A posse, from what may be; it may be sin and sinners will say, it is true,
these men did reprove sin, and condemn it in others, and endeavored to prevent
their own; but was it for the ugliness of sin, or some inconveniences that
might else befall them? was it because sin was sinful, or for some other
reasons?

2 Ab esse, from what is; though you would make us believe that godly men are
such Ermins, such nice and tender things, as if they could not endure any
uncleanness; though you make them so shy and strict, as if they would not come
near a sin, yet it is apparent they have sinned; yea, the very men whose
instances you please your self in, and make them patterns to, and Patrons of
all the rest.

Before we can proceed, these Amasaes must be removed out of the way; and
therefore for the removal of the first, I answer; That though good men (as
Joseph did) make use of all manner of arguments to keep themselve and others
from sin, yet it is sin, as sin, that they abhor, as ugly and abominable;
though there were no affliction, no hell, no wrath, yet would regenerate and
newborn men declaim against, and hate sin. As appears

1 By this, that the main thing which keeps them from committing it, or which
they repent for having committed it, is, that it is against God: when Joseph
had mustered up many arguments, this was the prevailing one with him, how shall
I do this wickedness, and sin against God, Genesis 39.9. against the will and
glory of God. Job tells us he durst not sin; why not? why? because 'twas
against God, as well as against himself, Job 31.1.-4. and in their repentance
after a sin, this goes most to their heart, that they have sinned against God,
Psa. 51.4. Against thee, thee only have I sinned; how so? Surely David had
sinned against Vriah, and against Bathsheba, and against himself (his bones as
well as conscience felt it.) Oh but this goes most to the heart, that 'twas
against God; it grieves him more that God was displeased by him, then that God
was displeased with him; he puts in twice as much of that consideration, as of
any other ingredient; and as to others, his tears run down like rivers, not so
much because men kept not his, as because they kept not Gods Laws.

2 By this, because they abhor all sin, all kinds, and all degrees of sin:
Surely we may conclude, that they who hate all sin, hate sin as sin; this godly
men do, and only godly men do, and godly men always do it, so far as godliness
acts in power in them: it is the prayer in Psalm. 119.133. order my steps (all
and every of my steps) in thy word, and let not any (not any, i.e. none)
iniquity have dominion over me; from the highest to the lowest, from the
greatest to the least, let not any one iniquity have dominion over me. Some
other men abhor some sins, as Atheism, blasphemy, idolatry, murder, etc. but
pride and wantonness, etc. are pleasant to them as meat and drink. Now this is
no argument that they hate sin as sin; he that hates sin as sin, hates all sin;
and I think it may be inverted truly, he that hates all sin, hates sin as sin.

3 They evidence their hatred of sin as sin, and not for by-respects, thus,
that they abhor all their secret sins, which none knows but themselves, yea
such as they know not by themselves, but only God knows them: they hate that
which none can accuse them for, or lay to their charge as guilty of, Psa.
19.12. Lord, who knows the error of his way? and as S. Paul, though I know
nothing by my self, yet, etc. 1 Cor. 4.4. the heart of man is such a maze, as
man himself cannot find out all the windings of it; such a deep, as man himself
cannot fathom it; so deceitful, that man himself does not know it, only God
searches it: Well, this being so, Lord cleanse me from my secret errors,
undiscerned and unknown, yea, by me unknowable errors and extravagancies: it is
meet to be said to God, as Job 34.32. that which I know not (viz. wherein I
have done amiss) that show thou me: A man does many things amiss, which escape
his own observation, as much as that of others, and of these would a good man
be cleans'd: these create no trouble to his conscience, but only they are
against God, though unknown to him, and therefore would berid of them, that
they might not lodge in his heart, though as strangers and unknown. Yea

4 They are against all inclinations to sin, against the very conception of
sin, they do all they can, not only that sin may not bring forth, or breed, but
that it might not conceive, that I may refer to James 1.14, 15. Oh the burden
of the body of death, and Law of the members; that though S. Paul can say, it is
not he that sins, but sin that dwells in him; yet he would berid of this in
being of sin, that it might not so much as incline him to evil. Yet once more.

5. And lastly, they are carried out against sin as sin, as appears by this,
that they cannot content themselves not to do evil, unless also they do good;
they think it not enough that they do not displease God, unless they please
God; to be negatively, unless they be positively good; they would not only not
commit evil, but they would not omit good; many men as they will do no hurt, so
no good: the charge against them, Mat. 25. is, not that they did defraud, or
oppress, or were cruel to the members of Christ, but they did not actually do
them good; not cloth, not feed, not visit, etc. but good men are for being,
and for doing good, not only cleanse me from secret sins, or only keep me from
presumption, but oh that the thought of my heart, the words of my mouth, and
consequently the works of my life may be acceptable to thee O Lord, Psa. 19.
The Apostle in the name of all the household of faith, speaks thus, 2 Cor. 5.9.
wherefore we labor (the word is, we are ambitious, or (like heavenly
Courtiers) we affect this honor) that whither present or absent, that is
(living or dying) we may be accepted of him; or (as the Greek will bear it
well, to be actively read) that we may be acceptable to him, even to all well
pleasing. This to the first Objection.

The second Ob. is to this purpose, We see that godly men have sinned, it is
matter of fact: Now if sin were so odious to them (as you say) would they sin?
Before I give answer to this Objection, let me premise,

1 By way of concession and confession, that they do sin; yea, who is he that
lives and sins not? If any man say he has not sinned, he makes God a liar
(who has concluded all men under sin) and if we say we have no sin, we both
deceive, and yet confute our selves, for we sin in saying so, 1 John 8.10.

Yet 2. There is this to be said, that the sins of good men are more usually
sins of captivity, then sins of activity, as the Apostle speaks, Romans 7. they
are rather led into sin by temptation, then go into sin by choice and
inclination; it is against the Law of their mind: It Is indeed possible that a
good man may plot and contrive a sin, as David did the death of Uriah; and this
is the only thing wherein God himself says that David sinned, 1 Kings 15.5.
God covers all his other sins, as being rather overtaken by temptation, then
acted by design in the rest: So that for the most part, good men are captivated
rather then active as to sin: And David himself could say, that he had not
wickedly ( after the manner of the wicked, Jude 15.) departed from God, Psa.
18.21.

3 God may sometime have a good man to this saddest of trials, to know all that
is in his heart, as he left the good King Hezekiah, 2 Chronicles. 32.31. we are not
over-forward or willing to believe our selves, so bad as we are in our hearts,
as to the seeds of evil sown there: Is thy servant a dog, said Hazael, when his
sin was foretold? and S. Peter himself could not believe it possible, that he
should deny Christ his Master; yet, when left to himself, he did it; but then
notwithstanding this, there is enough to be said in the behalf of godly men's
hatred of sin; yea indeed they hate it the more for having sinned. I answer
then, that the godly man's witness against sin is still true, good and firm; for

1 As he abhors to commit sin, so he abhors sin committed, and himself for
committing it, Job 40.4. and 40.6. Sin is the burden of every good man's soul:
when the Author of Psa. 73. had sinned, he was so angry with himself, that he
could not (do that which God did for him, viz.) forgive and pardon himself, but
calls himself fool and beast: good men condemn not only their sin, but
themselves, and sin in the more hateful to them, for having been done by them.

2 They are restless till sin be purged, as well as pardoned: King David could
not content himself to have sin blotted out by a pardon, unless 'twere washed
and cleans'd away, Psa. 51.1, 2. and the mending of his beart, without new
making it by Creation, would not content him, v. 10.

Yea 3. If God chastise and afflict them for having sinned, yet they justify
God; and whoever justifies a punishing God, condemns sin; if the sentence be
just, the sin is unjust. Thus they do continually, Micah 7.9. I will bear the
indignation of the Lord, because I have sinned against him: So Psa. 51.3, 4.
This confession I make, and this prayer I make, that thou (O Lord) may be
justified when thou judge. This also speaks against sin.

Yea 4. They take an holy revenge on themselves, and become the more zealous
for God; as S Peter, who did not only weep bitterly, but was made willing to
feed sheep and Lambs, to do any and every service for Christ: And Psa. 51.12,
13. restore to me (says he) the joy of thy salvation, and I will teach the
transgressors thy ways: So 2 Cor. 7. when the Apostle had made them sorry with
a sharp Epistle, he does not repent of it, because it wrought such sorrow in
them, as wrought repentance to salvation, not to be repented of, as appeared in
their indignation against, revenge upon themselves, and zeal for God; as he
there speaks in their behalf.

Lastly, It fully appears that godly men abhor sin by this, that they desire to
die upon no account more then this, to berid of sin, that they may sin no more,
but be holy, as he which has called them is holy; they groan for a change upon
this account, 2 Cor. 5.4. mortality and corruption are conjoined, 1 Cor. 15.
and this is not laid aside till that be; and therefore they desire not only to
be in Christ, where there is no condemnation, Romans 8.1. but to be with Christ,
Phil. 1.23. which is best of all; for there is no sin, no, nor temptation to
it: There was never a temptation to sin in heaven, since the devil was cast
out, nor will never be, for the devil shall never be there, nor corruption
neither, for that cease, when mortality is swallowed up of life: So that upon
the whole, the witness of godily men is unexceptionable, notwithstanding their
having sinned. I now proceed to show,

2 That wicked men themselves are witnesses of, Wicked men.
and against the sinfulness of sin, that it is an ugly, shameful, and an
abominable thing, that which they are ashamed to own. Let us hear some of the
Heathens speak their sense of it; Cicero tells us, he thought not that man
worthy the name of a man, that spent one day in the pleasures of the flesh;
yea, he faith further, that after death, he thinks there is no greater torments
then sin: and another speaks after this manner, that he thought it one of the
greatest torments that men should have in another life, to be bound to the sins
they most delighted in in this life: Socrates would die rather then consent to
a sin of injustice; and one of them says, Socrates was not unhappy in being
put to death, but they unhappy that put him to death; he suffered, but they
sinned: another has a saying of men's living in pleasure, (much like that of S.
Paul concerning the wanton widow, 1 Timothy 5.6. she that lives in pleasure is
dead while she lives) (...) their reason of these things said by them
concerning sin, was, because sin degraded man, and was a degeneration, that
such live the life of a beast, and not of a man, which is a life of reason and
virtue: whence Plotinus says, the pleasures of the body do so interrupt the
happiness of the soul, that it is the souls happiness to despise the bodies
pleasures: Sin (say the Stoics) is the worst kind of suffering, and he is the
only miserable man that is wicked; the greatest punishment of sinners is sin.
Seneca. I could produce many more to this purpose, but I shall not take in the
witness only of these, or such other brave, magnanimous, and well-bred
Heathens, but the very Herd of wicked men, the very dregs of them shall give in
testimony (will they, nill they) by their thoughts, words or works, and sad
experiences, that sin is an ugly, because finful thing.

Sinners are ashamed of sin: 1 When before they commit it. 2 After they have
committed it.


1 Sinners are ashamed of sin before, and think it an ugly thing when they
commit it: For 1. though they are so daring and impudent as to sin, yet they
have not the courage to consider what it is they are going about, or at least to
speak one what they think concerning sin; they know that when they sin their
conscience will accuse them, and they shall find regrets which they are loath
to feel, much more to utter and declare; therefore they dare not ask themselves
what it is they are about to do, or are a doing, to catechize themselves, and
say, is there not a lie in (or at) my right hand? Is. 44. It argues that men
are afraid they shall find what they have no mind to meet with, when they are
loath to entertain themselves with a few forethoughts concerning it, but rush
like horses into the battle: The Scripture speaks, as if 'twere impossible for
men to be so wicked, if they were but considerative, without which they act not
like men: if they think of it, and yet sin, they care not, dare not speak out
their thoughts, but had rather conceal their shame and pain, as well as they
can, then tell any body what fools they have been, and how foolishly they have
done: If sin had any thing of Noble or Honorable in it, why do they not
proclaim its virtues, and thereby their own in loving it? If they think it
good, why do they call it by its name? if they think it evil, why do they but
think it so? it is only because they are ashamed on it, that any body should know
what they think, as Psa. 14.1. the fool has said in his heart, there is no
God: It seems he had not the hardiness nor heart to say it with his mouth; he
whispered, and muttered, or wished, but was loath to be heard: their speaking
thus within speaks out this, that they are ashamed of what they think, and dare
not utter it.

2 Sinners dare not commit sin, till they have given it a new name; they sin
not under the name and notion of sin, no, woe unto them; they call, as good
evil, so evil good, Is 5. Revenge they will not own, but a vindication of their
Honor, a doing right to their reputation; Covetousness is a fordid thing, they
say, theirs is but frugality, and good husbandry; Drunkenness is unmanly
(because unmanning) it is beastial, they confess, but theirs is only good
fellowship in the liberal use of the creature; Pride must be called decency,
and being in the fashion; Fornication but a trick of Youth, or gratifying
nature. Thus do men disguize sin, for surely did they call it by its own name,
and but look it in the face, they know they shall find it such an ugly Hag, as
were not fit for the embraces of men, no nor of devils. This their new-naming
it condemns it.

3 This argues their being ashamed on it, that they do what they do, as much as
they can, in the dark; yea (as they foolishly think) in the dark, from Gods
sight also, and do thereby implicitly confess, that if men or God saw them,
they should be ashamed of what they do: time was, when they that were drunk
were drunk in the night, it being a business of shame: And Ephesians 5.11, 12. the
Apostle tells us, that it is a shame to speak of what is done by some in secret;
and therefore, it seems, they themselves do it secretly, because they are
ashamed it should be known and talked of: And indeed it is a general rule given
by Christ himself, that he who does evil hates the light, because his deeds
are evil, and he cannot endure that they should be manifested, for then they
would be reproved by the light, Joh. 3.19, 20. The abominations of the Ancients
of Israel were so abominable, that they did them in the dark, and thought them
hid from God himself, Ezekiel. 8.5.-12.

4 That sinners find sin a painful thing, and are ashamed on it, is clear by
this, that they are tormented while taking their pleasure, and are stung with
eating the honey; their conscience accuses them when it takes them in the very
act, Romans 2.15. Even in laughter the heart is sad, it is not only at the end of
laughter, but in it, while at it, Prove. 14.13. while men are taking the
pleasures of sin, they hear a But remember thou must die, and go to judgment,
which chills and cools their heat, Eccl. 11.9. We little think what secret
sighs and groans are within, when wicked men are merry, or seem at least to be
so from the teeth outward.

In 2 Samuel 13. you will find no meaner person then a Kings Son vexed and
tormented with his own passion, 2 Samuel 13. he was in a Burning Fever with
lust, it made him sick and lean, even to being consumptive; but it may be said,
this was because he had not his will, was he so when he had? Yes, and worse too
by his own confession, for the hatred wherewith he hated her, was nor^ then the
love wherewith he loved her; as much as to say, he was more tormented now then
before: Sin disappoints men, they have false joys, but true miseries, and
suffer rather then enjoy any pleasure from sin; they are vexed to see how they
are cheated: This Amnon was now in an hot, presently in a cold fit, and tossed
as from a Fever to an Ague, cast into the fire, and into the water, contrary
torments, sick of love, and sick of loathing, sick for want of her company, and
sick of having it, discontented at not, and at having his will; sin pleases
not men either full or fasting: Oh how are they tormented, whose desires are
great, and enjoyments little, yea contradictions to what they thought of? they
expected pleasure, and find pain, sought joy, and met with grief! Hence sinners
are so weary of time, and not only of business, but recreations; their changing
so often, argues they have no satisfaction: Hence the Pythagoreans place the
wicked on a rolling pin, as having no quiet or peace, but are like the raging
Sea, as the Prophet speaks, Is. 48.22. and 57.21. The soul, says Tacitus, is
lasht with guilt, as the body is with stripes; and Tiberius as impudent as he
was, could not protect himself from those inward scourges, which are such
horrid and hideous furies and torments, as hell has not worse.

5 Sinners are so ashamed of sin, that they mask it under a form of godliness;
they paint it, and think to make it look well, though it be so much the more
ugly for being colored and complexion'd with a form of godliness; the thing it
self, and they that do it, being witnesses: Though sinners are like devils, yet
they would be thought Saints: Saul's sin must needs be for a sacrifice, and so
God must patron the sin that was committed against himself, 1 Samuel 15. Absalom
covers his Rebellion and Treason with the devotion of a vow, 2 Samuel 6.6. Herod
smooths over his murtherous intentions with the pretense of worship, and will
murder S. John least he should be perjured, as if forsooth he durst not sin,
unless he did it conscientiously (ne sit sceleratus secit scelus) This shall
suffice to show, that wicked men are ashamed of sin, and to own it as such,
they are ashamed of it before, and when they do commit it.

2 Yet further, Sinners are ashamed of sin after they have committed it: good
men are ashamed of what does but look like a sin, and of what may be
interpreted to be meant for a sin, though 'twere not so; as David for cutting
off the lap of Saul's garment; which argues their loathness to, and aversness
from sin: and we shall find that wicked men also, when they have done evil, are
ashamed that they have done it, which is a witness what an ugly (because
sinful) thing sin is. As

1 Sinners dare not own their sin, to avow it, and stand to it, to justify
their wickedness, (though they may excuse it, as I shall show presently) which
clearly shows they are ashamed of it, and are not satisfied with what they have
done. The Thief (as bold and sturdy a sinner as he is) when he is taken is
ashamed; so is the house of Israel ashamed, Jer. 2.26. they cannot plead sins
cause to justification. Particularly.

1 They cannot endure to be called by the name of the sin which they have
committed, and live in the practice of: No Drunkard cares to be called so, but
takes it for a disgrace; no Liar will receive the lie given him, but as an
affront; no Adulterer will own that name: Now, whoever follows a lawful honest
Trade or Calling, is not ashamed of its name, though never so mean; as Shoe
maker, etc. but sin is such an ugly base employment, that they who commit sin,
will not endure to be called Sin-makers, though it be their trade: Sinners
charge God with slandering of them, when he complains of their sin, Mal. 1.6.
and 2.17. and 3.8.13. When God accuses them, they put God on the proof, and
say, wherein? so impatient are sinners to be called sinners.

2 They are ashamed of their sin, and dare not own it, as appears by their
palliations, excuses, and put offs: when sin was but young, yet Adam and Eve
were ashamed of their First born (as lewd women are ashamed of their base born
children) they cloaked, and hid their sin, Job 31.33. If they do well, what
need excuses? if ill, excuses plead against it, and are accusations of its
illness: They who were invited to the wedding made excuses, which were indeed
proofs of their denials, and that they would not come, Mat. 22.^. their seeming
civilities and apologies were arguments of their being criminal; all our
figleaf aprons and coverings are proofs that we are atham'd of what we have
done; yea, many times it is laid at the wrong door; Nature is blamed, as if the
fault were in their constitution; the De^^^ is blamed, because he tempted and
beguiled; yea God himself is blamed for permission, or it may be for more; the
woman thou gave me, etc. Genesis 3. what does all this prove, but that in the
eyes of sinners sin is a very ugly and abominable thing. Yet again.

3 That sinners dare not own what they have done, but are ashamed of it, is
evident by this, they deny that they have sinned, and commit a sin to cover
sin; it is an hard and difficult thing to bring sinners to confession, sin is
such a shameful thing: It Is said of the adulterous woman, Prove. 30.20 she
eats (viz. her stolen bread in secret, Ch 9.17.) and wipeth her mouth (which
argues 'twas foul and filthy) and says, I have done no wickedness, she will sin
to avoid the scandal of her sin. When Gehazi had taken a reward (by lying in
his Masters name) of Naaman the Syrian, and was returned, his Master asked him
where he had been; says he, thy servant has been no where, 2 Kings 5.15, 16.
He was so ashamed of what he had done, he durst not own it: and this is a clear
discovery, that sin is an ugly thing, that sinners will not, dare not stand to
avow and justify it. But

2 It further appears that sin is an unpleasing thing, and that which sinners
are ashamed of, that they dare not look into their actions, nor call themselves
to an account: It Is as troublesome a thing to sinners to look into themselves,
and to examine their lives, as it is for men that go backward in their estates,
to look into their books; and cast up their accounts, Jer. 8.5.6. Why is this
people backsl^dden with a perpetual backsl^ding, (and never look behind them,
nor within them) no man said (so much, or little as) what have I done? They
care not to be alone, least the thoughts of their sins should stare them in the
face; they study divisions and pastimes, and run into company, least their sins
(like Ghosts and Devils) should haunt and lay hold of them; and when these are
over, they sleep away the rest of their time, they cannot endure to be at home,
least (a worse thing then a scolding woman) an upbraiding Conscience should
fall upon them, they can afford no leisure to think how they have idled and
sinned away, and thereby worse then lost so much of their time, Amos 6.3.-6. we
read of persons on whose hands time lay heavy, and as a burden, and therefore
studied Arts and Methods of laying it aside, that they may put the thoughts of
the evil day far from them, sometimes by lying on their beds, and being weary
of that, they stretch themselves upon their Couches, and then they fall to
eating and drinking, and so rise up to play and dance, etc. what does all this
speak, but an unwillingness to have any sense of sin, or but to look on its
picture, it is so hellish a thing.

3 It appears yet further by this, that they will decry and punish that sin in
others, which themselves are guilty of, the better to conceal their own, or to
compensate for it, by being severe to others: when a Thief has stolen and
robbed, he is the first that makes Hue and Cry, they are loath to be found the
sinners themselves. We read that though Judah was guilty of Incest himself, yet
how forward he was to punish fornication in Jamar his Daughter-in-law, Genes.
38. When our Savior put the case to the Pharisees, what the Lord of the
Vineyard would do with the Husbandmen that had abused and beaten his servants,
and (which was worse) slain his son; they could readily answer, (...) he will
miserably (Gr. wickedly, i.e. with a punishment great as their sin, will be)
destroy these wicked men, Mat. 21.41. Thus when they knew not whom they
condemned, they condemned themselves, and their own sin, ex ore tuo, out of
thine own mouth art thou condemned, O sinner! It Is true, the case was altered,
when he said that they were the men; but by this we see, that when men are not
concerned, or seem not to be so, how severe they are against sin, yea, when
they do it to hide their own wickedness, as John 8.7, 8, 9.

4 Its yet more apparent by this, that they usually fly to the horns of the
Altar, to some fits of devotion and forms of godliness, as if they would
compound with God to save them: What meant all the purifications, sacrifices
and attonements which the Heathens used, but that a sense of guilt was too
heavy to be born? and what more common among men of better profession, then to
say (just as soon as they have sinned) Lord have mercy upon me, God forgive me?
they kiss their Crucifix, tell over their Beads, and go to confession, and what
does all this conclude? but that they have (even themselves being witnesses and
judges) they have been injurious to God and their own souls, and that without
reconciliation and pardon (or one fancied at least) they cannot be quiet.

5. And lastly, they fully declare against sin as sinful, in that they desire
to die the death of the righteous. Balaam, and others, that lived not the life
of the righteous, but accounted their life madness, yet reckon their end happy,
and therefore would that their own might be as theirs: By this we see, that no
wicked man cares for sins wages: and surely that work cannot be good, whose
wages is so bad, that no man cares to receive it; but oh that their after state
may be with the righteous, Numb. 23.10. The wages of sin is death, and the end
of sin is death; oh no such death, no such wages, says Balaam; though they go
hell-ward while they live, yet they would fain go, to heaven when they die; and
what is deduceable from hence more then this, that sin is a damnable thing? and
though sinners seek their happiness in their misery, yet it is happiness they
seek, and when ever they find their disappointment, they grow angry with
themselves, with sin, the devil and all.

There is one exception that may be made against this witness; true, there are
some pitiful sneaking sinners, cowardly and timorous ones, that are daunted
at, and ashamed of sin; but there are others past shame, fear and sense,
roaring Boys, ranting and rampant sinners, Rodomontado Blades, that boast of
their sin, and glory in being wicked, that take pleasure in things worthy of
damnation, and yet scorn to be frighted with terrible Preachers, but will sin
in the face of the Sun without a blush; we will hear what these say, and be
judged by these brave Sparks and bold Fellows. Be it so.

1 With sorrow, for them that have none for themselves, it is to be confessed,
that there are some hardened sinners, sunk into the image, practice, and it may
be condemnation (as well as snare) of the devil himself; yea they seem to outgo
the devils, for they believe and tremble, which is more then some sinners do:
Godly men rejoice with trembling, but some ungodly men sin without trembling,
and rejoice at it too. But

2 This is a sad and dreadful judgment upon them, worse then any affliction
that could befall them; of all judgments this the most terrible, as being the
Suburbs of hell it self; to be punished for sin by sin, is the worst of
punishments: when God says of a person or people, he will let them go, they
shall take their course, and not be punished, ( viz. by bodily and sensible
plagues) he punishes them most and worst of all: To denote the greatness of
it, it is three times said in Scripture, Romans 1. that God gave them up, and gave
them over; v. 24.26.28. It Is no wonder men act the devils part, when they are
under the devils doom.

3 This therefore speaks no more in commendation of sin, then a Bedlams going
naked and enduring (without feeling) the pricks of pins in his flesh, commends
his condition: Is it any part of handsommess to have a whores sorehead? Shall
we make blind men judges of colors, or dead men of the affairs of the living,
and their concerns? Who would take the judgment of them that are void of
judgment, and given up to a reprebate mind? If men have lost their senses, and
will say Snow is black, Honey is bitter, etc. shall we believe them? But yet
there is none of these but will at one time or another bear witness against sin,
and blush at their own impudence: Have you not heard Pharaoh saying, who is the
Lord? and yet (hardened as he was) the same Pharaoh saying, I have sinned
against the Lord: God has ways enough to bring them to confession; they who
were once so wild, as to call the Saints lives madness, were at last tame
enough to call themselves fools for it; we fools counted their lives madness:
There is a time coming when all these daring and impudent sinners will sneak
and be ashamed; either the grace or the judgment of God will awaken them out of
their dead sleep, and then though they dreamt of a feast, they will be hungry,
then the mouth will confess, the eyes weep, the cheeks blush, the hands smite
on the thigh, the heart bleed and break. Cain feels little till he hear God
calling from heaven, and tell him he was accursed, then sin became heavy in its
punishment, yea intolerable, Genesis 4.9.-13. Judas makes merry a while, and
chinks his 30 Pieces, but anon cannot endure the money nor himself, but went to
his own place. The Prodigal gallants it long, but yet at last cries peccavi. I
find

3 Times when (...) sinners have confessed their sin.

1 In a day of affliction, when the plagues of God have taken hold of them, and
the judgments of God have been heavy upon them: The story of Pharaoh is too
long to rehearse, and that of Nebuchadnezzar, Dan. 4 Oh how did God stoop their
stout hearts and bring them on their knees! Sinners that are shameless, and
seem to dare heaven, and challenge God himself, and scoff at his threatenings,
will then be made to change their note, and to weep instead of singing another,
or the second part to the same tune. Joseph's Brethren that were shameless in
Canaan, were ashamed in Egypt, and cried out, Verily we are guilty concerning
our Brother: The cruel Adonibezek would acknowledge the Justice of Gods
retaliation: Oh tell me what your Desperadoes will say in distress, and on a
Death bed; if they do not then awake and repent, yet

2 In the day of judgment, (the great and terrible day of the Lord) they will
be ashamed: they that run now to all ex^^^se of riot, will not be able to stand
then: the wicked shall not stand in judgment; they will then quake and tremble,
horror will take hold of, and arrest them; they will not stand to justify
themselves, nor to be justified by any other; they will be found specchless,
(without a word to say for themselves, or their sins) as he that came to the
wedding feast without a wedding garment; if the righteous be scarcely saved, or
with difficulty, where shall the sinners and ungodly appear? 1 Pet. 4.18. See
how they run away, and would fain hide themselves, Revel. 6.15. etc.

5 In the day of Eternity, (that long, everlasting day) then when they are in
hell, they will will confess the sinfulne^s of sin; the place of torment will
extort the consession of sin, as it d^d from Dives, Luke 16. Where Is the
rus^ling of Silk and Satin now? where are the dainty bit^, the generous wines,
and all the deceitful pleasures of sin now? Alas! though they have no pity
shown them, they will pity others, and wish that none might come into that
place of torment; then they will cry out, oh sinful sin, oh devilish and
hellish sin!

So much shall suffice to have spoken of this, and thereby to have evinced the
sinfulness of sin, from the confession of wicked men. I now proceed to call in
other witnesses.

4 The whole Creation witnesses against sin.
As God, Angels and men have witnessed against sin, so the whole Creation does
witness against sin; not one creature between, or in heaven and earth, or under
the earth, whither animate or inanimate, but proclaim the sinfulness of sin;
not only the sensible, but insensible creatures can find a tongue and language
to speak against sin: And that 1 With respect to themselves. 2 With respect to
God and man.


1 The whole Creation witnesses against sin, as having done them a great deal
of wrong and injury: that sin has deprived them of their privilege, that they
are not now as when they came out of Gods hand, and were made by him. When God
looked on all that he had made, behold it was very good, Genesis 1.31. But ah, how
are things altered since sin came into the world! The Angels he has charged
with folly, Job. 4.18. The Heavens are not clean in his sight, Job 15.15. Man
in his best (now) estate is altogether vanity, Psa. 39.5. The Earth is under a
curse, Genesis 3.17, 18. Yea, the whole Creation groans, Romans 8.21, 22. The whole
Universe, as the Learned Grotius clearly observes and notes, beside many others
as well as he. The Apostle had three times said the Creature, v. 19, 20, 21.
and yet more fully, v. 22. The whole Creation (or every creature) is subject to
vanity, and under the bondage of corruption, which makes it groan, and puts it
to pain, as a woman in travel; as if it cried out, Oh sinful sin! I was free
born, and though under dominion, yet not under bondage; I did once serve man
freely, but now from fear, Genesis 9.2. I did nothing of my self, may every
creature (that is under his power) say to man, to make me liable to bondage,
but being thy goods and chattels, I suffer a part of the penalty of thy
Treason; if thou had not sinned. I had not suffered; but now I groan and wait
to be delivered from the bondage of thy corruption, Oh sinful sin!

2 The Creation witnesses against sin, with respect to God and man: For, 1 It
teaches man many duties. 2 It convinces man of many a sin.


1 The Creatures teach man his duty in general, and many special ones: In
general, they do all in their courses and places praise God, and fulfill his
word; as you may read at large, Psa. 14.8. Rev. 5.13. Never did any creature,
but the fallen Angels and man, transgress the Law, or disobey the word of their
Creator; they are such good servants, that when God bids them them go, they go;
come, and they come; do this, and they do it; and by this they teach man to do
what God bids him, and what a sinful thing it is to break his Law, and to
disobey his word: The creatures cry shame on us when we sin: But specially

1 The creatures do teach man dependence upon God; they depend on God, and
teach man to do so too, as our Savior speaks, Mat. 6.25.-34. take no anxious
(and soul-disturbing) thoughts for your livelihood, etc. learn of the Fowls of
the Air, and Lillies of the field, to trust God, etc.

2 They teach man to pray, or call upon man to call upon God; for they cry to
God, they observe their morning prayer before they break their fast (as I may
speak) the Ravens forget it not, Psa. 147.9. He gives to the Beast his food,
and to the young Ravens which cry; this cry is made to God, for Joh 38.41. who
provideth for the Ravens his food, when his young ones cry unto God; they are
no sooner hatched, but they cry unto God: (Oh man then remember thy Creator in
the days of thy youth.) All the creatures do the like, Psa. 104.27, 28. they
all wait upon thee, that thou may give them their meat in due season; yea,
beside their waiting, they petition too, Psa. 145.15, 16. Thou satisfiest the
desire of every living thing: Now if thou be a prayerless, or (as before) a
distrustful person, these creatures witness against thy sin, for they teach
thee to pray and trust.

3 They teach us to be weary of the bondage of corruption; they are a weary
on it, they groan under it, and wilt not thou cry out, Oh wretch that I am, who
shall deliver me from this bondage of corruption, and this body of death! if
not the creature witness against thee, and withal teach thee to wait, and long
for a better state, and to long for the glorious liberty of the Sons of God.
Again

4 The creatures teach us to be fruitful under means, to answer the cost and
charges that God bestows on us: The earth, which drinks in the rain which
comes often upon it, brings forth herbs meet for them by whom it is dressed,
Hebr. 6.7. with Is. 53.10. The Ox knows his owner, and the Ass his Masters
crib, Is. 1. The Flock feeds the shepherd, etc. 1 Cor. 9.7. If thou be barren
and unfruitful, thy gardens and thy fields; if thou be disobedient, thine Ox
and thine Ass will upbraid thee, and God himself appeals to heaven and earth
against thee, Deuteronomy. 32.1. Is. 1.2.

2 The creatures, as they teach many duties, so they convince of many sins;
they are in both respects Schoolmasters to man: The use we have of the creature
now bears witness against sin; our eating flesh does, there was no such grant
in the first blessing, since sin our appetites more canine; our clothes witness
against sin, and (in the Hebrew) the same word signifies treachery or
prevarication, and a garment; the clothes that cover our nakedness tell us,
that sin dispoiled us of better robes, viz. our Innocence, the dust tells us we
must to dust, having sinned; as the use, so the vanity and disappointments, and
thence vexations we meet with, in and from the creatures, do all witness
against sin. Particularly,

1 The Creation witnesses against Atheism, Romans 1.20. He that has said in
his heart there is no God, is called fool by every creature; quaelibet herba
Deum. The very notion of a creature supposes a God, and we may more reasonably
conclude, that there is nothing then that there is no God; their being made,
argues a first cause, and who is that but God? It Is so clear, says the
Apostle, from the Creation, viz. the Eternal Godhead, that they are left
without excuse, Romans 2.20. Rain from heaven, etc. is Gods witness of his being,
and being good, as the Apostle infallibly concludes, Acts 14.15.-18. Creation
and Providence (which is Creation upheld and continued) are witnesses for God!
so that I may say with Job, Chapter 12.7, 8, 9 Ask now the beasts, and they shall
teach thee, and the Fowls of the air, and they shall tell thee; or speak to the
earth, and it shall teach thee, and the Fishes of the Sea shall declare unto
thee, what? that the hand of the Lord has wrought all these; if there be any
being, there is a God, says the Creation.

2 The creatures witness against disingenuity and ingratitude, against
non-acknowledgments of beholdingness to God; yea the dullest among the
creatures witness against this, Is. 1.3. God upbraids the ingratitude and
rebellion of Israel, with the gratitudes and services that the Ox and the Ass
pay their owners: The rivers of waters return continually to pay their
acknowledgments to the Fountain-general, the Sea, Eccl. 1.7. These waters
upbraid them that make none but ill returns to God, and say in effect, what
Moses did in words, O foolish people and unwise, do ye thus requite the Lord,
evil for good!

3 The creatures bear witness against the idleness of man, and the sinfulness
thereof: Man was not to be idle in Paradise, every man should have a calling to
follow, and should follow his calling; and he (says the Apostle) that will not
labor, must not eat; of idleness comes no good; yet alas how many busybodies
are there, that do nothing but idle away their days? to these the creature
speaks by his industry, and Solomon turns the Sluggard to the Ant to learn,
Prove. 6.6.-11. It Is not only go to the Infidel, for he that provides not for
his family is worse then an Infidel; but it is, go to the Ant: It may be thou
have a wife and children that want conveniences, yea necessaries, whilst thou
art ^dle; go to the Ant thou Sluggard.

4 Against ignorance, and its sinfulness, against man's non-observance of times
and ^easons, and the judgments of God, Jer. 8.^, 9. The Stork in the heaven
knows her ^ppointed time; the Turtle, the Crane, and be Swallow, observe the
time of their coming, but my people (wise though they thingk hemselves to be)
do not know the judgment ^f the Lord; though they pretend skill in the ^^ce of
the Skies, yet discern not the signs of ^^e times, they scarce know what time
of ^^y it is, nor that it is the day of their visitat.-^^, as it is in Luke 12.56.
and 19.42.

5 They witness against oppression and covetousness, as exceeding sinful; the
stone shall cry out of the wall, and beam out of the timber shall answer it,
Hab. 2.11, 12. But what do these strange kind of speakers and witnesses say?
this, woe to him, and woe to him, etc. Some men's Lands, and the furrows of
their fields cry against them, as Job 31.38. possibly the poor laboring man
that plowed and reapt has not yet his wages, as James 5.4. the gold and the
silver also, yea the canker and rust thereof; the moth-eaten garments also are
witness against these sins, James 5 1, 2. The Ass rebuked the madness of the
Prophet, when he was hastening after an evil covetousness, 2 Pet. 2.15, 16.

6 They will and do witness against the sinfulness of resusing the tenders of
the Gospel, and the offers of grace; quis nisi mentis inops, etc. 'tad wont to
be said, who but fool^ refuse gold when it is offered them? But ala^ there are
such fools as refuse Christ, and heaven, and happiness offered them, and will
no be entreated to be reconciled, that they man be saved, but are set against
the glory (...) God, and their own salvation; now against these do the stones
of the street, and the d^^ of the Apostles feet bear witness, Luke 1^ 40. Luke
9.5. and 10.10, 11. Indeed the^ is not a sin but the Creation in whole, and
(...) the several parts does bear witness against the very dullest and
worst-natured creatu^ have exceeded man, the Ox and Ass; a^ Dives his dogs had
more humanity then Dives himself, and were witnesses against his cruelty. In
short, whatever duties they teach, by that they convince of, and bear witness
against the sins which are contrary to them duties, and whatever sins they
convince of, they teach the duties contrary to them sins.

There remains yet another thing to prove the sinfulness of sin by the
creatures (which I shall but touch) and that is, as they are instruments in the
hands of God to punish sinners, which they do with much readiness, as if they
were revenging themselves as well as vindicating God, witness the plagues of
Egypt. The four Elements have born their testimony often; Fire burnt Sodom,
Water drowned the old World, the Earth swallowed up Corah, etc. the Air has
conveyed infection in times of plague; the Sun, Moon and Stays have been
warriors, and fought in their courses against sin; the beasts of the field and
sowls of the air have done the like; but I only hint these things: Two ways
they show their displeasure (and his, whose creatures they are) against sin, in
punishing sinners.

1 By withdrawing their influences, Deuteronomy 28.23. the heaven shall be brass, and
the earth iron, that shall not rain nor drop dew, this shall not bring forth
fruit. See Hos. 2.18.22.

2 By acting contrary to their ordinary course and nature; for waters to stand
on an heap, Exodus 15.8. fire not to burn, Dan. 3. are unwonted and
contranatural things, and they do this to witness against the contranaturalness
of sin, and both these were witnesses against the sin of persecuting Gods
Israel: This do the creatures continue to do upon occasions to this day, they
are always bearing witness, though men observe it not, which also infers their
further sinfulness; and this shall suffice as to the witness of the whole
Creation. Next.

If any should say, notwithstanding all these witnesses, we cannot put sin to
death without a Law; if there be no Law to condemn sin, we cannot condemn it: I
shall therefore proceed to show, that there is a Law against sin, which
condemns sin, as worthy of death, for being guilty of the death of many, and
attempting the death of all; so that we may legally, and ought by Law to
condemn and put sin to death: For,

5 The Law witnesses against, and condemns Sin.
The Law of God is without sin in it self, The Law does witness against sin.
and it is against sin in others: The Law being holy, just and good, that which
breaks the Law must be unholy, unjust and evil: The Law discovers the
authority, wisdom, will and goodness of God (in its primary intention and
promulgation, for 'twas to life) sin must therefore be exceeding sinful, it
being against all this: The Law discovered man's d^ty and man's happiness ('it was
the whole of man, in both these senses) how evil is sin then that is a
contradiction of, and contrariety to both the duty and happiness of man; so
that sin being a transgression of Gods good Law, the sinfulness of sin appears
by the Commandment. More particularly.

1 The Law is against sin before it is committed.

2 After it is committed.

1 The Law is against sin before it is committed, it is against its being to be
committed, its holy, and wholly against sin, for it forbids sin, all sin,
whither of Omission or Commission, whither in thought, word or deed, whither
against God, or against man, the voice and cry of the Law is, thou shall not
sin; so that (in this sense) by the Law is the knowledge of sin, viz. what is
sin, as well as what sin is, Romans 7.7. Is the Law sin, God forbid! nay, I had
not known sin but by the Law, for I had not known lust or concupiscence (to be
a sin) except, or unless the Law had said, thou shall not covet, thou shall not
lust: The Law shows that lust is sin by forbidding it; yea, the Law does not
only forbid sin, but forbids it upon great and severe penalty, upon no less
then pain of death, on the peril of a curse, for this it says, cursed be every
one that does not, and continues not to do all things which are written in the
Law, Gal. 3.11. So that the Law is utterly against the commission of sin.

2 The Law is against sin after it is committed; and here, even by the
commandment, sin appears to be exceeding sinful after commission. For

1 The Law discovers (as before what is sin, so now) what sin is, how
displeasing to God, how destructive to man, and that as it is a transgression of
the Law of God made for the good of man, no sooner is sin committed, but the
Law is so far from indulging or justifying it, or the sinner, or from
concealing it, that it discovers it, and the displeasure of God against it,
Romans 3.20. yea, not only discovers sin, but

2 It condemns the sinner; the Law is not against the righteous, against such
there is no Law, nor condemnation; but this Law, which (like a good Magistrate)
is an encouragement to them that do well, is a terror to evil doers, says the
Apostle, Romans 7.9. when the commandment came (and showed me sin as in a
Perspective-glass) sin revived, it got the victory over me, was too strong for
me (for the Law strengthened it against me, 1 Cor. 15.56.) and I died; I was
dead in Law, I had sentence of death within me, as he speaks in another case:
The transgressed Law works wrath, Romans 4.15. it sends abroad terrors,
thundrings and flashes of wrath; it discovers wrath to them, that by sin have
made work for wrath. Thus the Law is against sin, before and after the
commission of it.

Yet further, to show how the sinfulness, the malignity of sin appears by the
Commandment; as
1 Thus, That it takes occasion from its being prohibited, and forbidden by the
Law, to sin against, and transgress it the more: It has such a malignity, such
an enmity in it, that it will not be subject to the Law of God, Romans 8.7. it
strives to break this bond in sunder, and to cast this cord far from it; the
Law stands in its way, and therefore it rusheth upon the breaking of it with
the more violence; sin grows angry, and swells like a river pent up, and stopped
in its course. Thus the Apostle speaks of it, Romans 7.8. Sin taking occasion by
the Commandment, wrought in me all manner of concupiscence: The Law said, thou
shall not lust; at this Lust grows mad, and provokes to sin the more: nitimur
in vetitum; gens humana ruit per vetitum nefas. Sin is proud and impetuous, it
scorns to be checked, or have any chains put upon it: Poor we (such is the
sinfulness of sin!) are apt to be the more proud, the more covetous, the more
wanton, etc. because it is forbidden us.

2 The sinfulness of sin appears by the Commandment thus, that it takes
occasion by the Commandment to deceive us, as the Apostle says it did him,
Romans 7.11. just as the devil took occasion from the Commandment to deceive our
first parents; as if God were envious to us, or at least we mistake his
meaning, etc. Thus did the devil, and thus does sin take occasion from the
Commandment to deceive us, to corrupt our understanding first, and by that our
affection, and by that our conversation: The devil and sin put their
interpretations on Gods Text, they gloss and comment upon it, and put Queries,
has God said? Genesis 3. and 2 Cor. 11.3. You need not fear, there is no such
danger, there is another meaning in this command, etc. such are the sly and
cunning tricks that Satan and sin put on us, to harden us by deceit, Hebr. 3.13.

3 Sin appears exceeding sinful by the Commandment, in that it makes use of it
to slay and kill us; it works our death and ruin by it; as Romans 7.11.-13. Sin
at first makes us believe (as the Serpent did Eve) that we shall not die, but
live better, and be like Gods: But James 1.14, 15. being tempted, enticed and
drawn away of our own lust, then when lust has conceived, it brings forth
sin; and sin when it is finished, brings forth death, yea all sorts of
deaths, natural, spiritual and eternal; this is the wages and end of sin, Romans
6.21.23. Man no sooner sinned, but he became mortal, dead in Law; and by living
in sin, men become spiritually dead in sin, Ephesians. 2.1, 2. and (if grace prevent
not) will die in sin, and be damned for sin, which is eternal death: Thus says
the Apostle, while sin flattered and deceived me, (as if I should go
unpunished) it brought me under condemnation and death; and though God do let
sentence of death pass upon some men, that he may raise them from the dead, yet
these persons find themselves dead first (before they pass from death to life)
as was the Apostles case in this place; Conversion is a Resurrection from the
dead: Sin kills men, grace revives men; so (like the Prodigal) they that were
dead, are alive: But by this we see the sinfulness of sin, that it makes use of
the Law, which was ordained to life, to condemn and pass sentence of death upon
sinful men; that which was made to be our strength against sin, is become the
strength of sin, 1 Cor. 15.56. Death were weak without its sting, which is sin,
and sin were weak without its strength, which is the Law: Oh sinful sin,
exceeding, out of measure sinful, that works death by that which is good, and
was ordained to life!

Hereupon follow several things which proclaim the sinfulness of sin from the
mouth of the Law: Do we not hear the Law? Gal. 4.21. what dreadful things it
speaks against the transgressors of it.

As 1. This, The Law allows us no favor, if we break it in any one thing,
though we observe it in many things, if we keep not all, it is as if we kept it
not at all; the Law will not pardon the least sin; there is no compounding with
the Law, nor compensating a sin by doing a duty, Romans 2 25. What profits
Circumcision? it profits if thou keep the Law, but if thou break the Law,
Circumcision is as uncircumcision, it profits not at all: as one sinner
destroys much good, so does one sin; it is like a dead fly in a box of
ointment, James 2.10. whosoever shall keep the whole, and yet offend in but one
point, he is guilty of all (for the nature of all sin is in any and every one
sin) if a man sin once, though but once, the Law casts him; for the Law is but
the one will of God in diverse particulars, either of which transgressed is
against the will of God, which runs through all (as a silken string through a
great many pearls, which if it be cut or broken but in one place, the whole is
broken) and where ever there is but one transgression, the Law pronounces the
curse, Gal. 3.10. Had not God provided a City of refuge, a new and living way,
we had never found any favor from, or by the Law, Romans 8.2, 3. Hence

2 The Law (since sin entered) cannot justify any man, it has lost its power,
and grown weak; as Romans 8.23. If it were pitiful, compassionate and friendly,
yet it wants power to justify us; the Law cannot give life (though 'twere made
to that end) Gal. 3.21, 22. If there had been a law given, which could have
given life, righteousness had been by the law; but the Scripture has concluded
all under sin, that the promise (viz. of life) might be given to them that
believe: If the law could, implying that it was not in the laws power, but why
not? it could at first; true, but it is weak through the flesh, all are
concluded under sin, the law is transgrest, and therefore cannot give life:
Sinful sin has weakened the law, as to the justification, but it has
strengthened it, as to the condemnation of sinners.

3 The law makes sin abound, and aggravates it exceedingly, Gal. 3.19.
Wherefore serves the law? of what use is the law? It was added because of
transgression, to make sin appear in its own colors: the law written in man's
heart was so obliterated, that men could not discern sin by it, as they had
wont: for, says the Apostle, I had not known sin but by the law, viz. new
promulged and written, I did not know it by the law in my heart, for that let
me alone; so that the law was added to revive the sight and sense of sin, that
men might see what an ugly thing sin is, infinitely worse then men are
generally aware of, till the commandment come. The law entered that sin might
abound, Romans 5.20. not that men might sin more, but see their sin more, that
men might take a full measure of sin in all the dimensions of it, in its
height, depth, breadth and length; the holiness, goodness, justice, the
severity. etc. of the law, do all set out sin in its ugly shape and color.

4 The law witnesses against sin as exceeding sinful in its being become as a
Schoolmaster to us, Gal. 3.24. We should scarce ever have looked to Christ, had
not the law whipped and lasht us, like a severe Schoolmaster, for this (not to
exclude others) is, as I conceive, much the meaning of this Text, viz. that the
law kept us in awe and bondage, by its severity, until Christ came: Compare
this Text with Chapter 4:1, 2, 3. The heir, as he is a Child or Babe, differs
nothing from a servant, but is under Tutors and Governors; so we (says the
Apostle) were in bondage, etc. To be under Tutors, is all one as to be under a
Schoolmaster, and that is to be in a condition of bondage: Many go to School
with an ill will, for they go to the Ferula, to the Rod, to the Whip, to
bondage, to fear and torment; the law does nothing but frown on us, puts us
hard tasks, and lasheth us for nonperformance, till Christ come, and till we
come to Christ, as the Egyptians did the Israelites, Exodus 5.14. The law is
the state of bondage and fear; the very children are all subject to bondage
through fear of death, Hebr. 2.14, 15. This also argues the sinfulness of sin,
that it made the law such a dread and terror to us (as it is to all) till
Christ come, who is the end of the law for righteousness, Romans 10.4. and so
takes off the Schoolmasters terribleness, by taking us into the university of
an higher and better state, viz. that of believing in him for righteousness, by
which we come to have a spirit not of fear, but of power, of love, and of a
sound mind, as S. Paul speaks, 2 Timothy 1.7.

5 The law silenceth man from making any complaint, how great soever the
judgment of God be upon him: Mark what, to whom, and to what end and purpose
the law speaks, Romans 3.19. that every mouth be stopped: All the world must be
silent when God speaks judgment, for all are guilty: If living man complain, he
has this answer presently, and in short, it is for his sin, Lam. 3.39. There Is
no room for one that has finned to complain when he is judged: a sinner, and
yet complain? Oh I, I am punished, it is for sin; now this stops his mouth: Man
has no reason to enter into judgment with God, when God enters into judgment
with man: O what a wicked thing is sin, that has brought man into such a
condition, that he cannot speak one word for himself; if he should open his
mouth, the law would stop it, by saying but this, thou have sinned: The Law
tells man that he is without excuse, and therefore it is in vain to plead; all
on this side hell is mercy (for it is the Lords mercy we are not consumed) and
hell it self is just judgment, under this, or that, any, or all judgment, man
under the law (the sentence and condemnation of the law) has no cause to
complain, he must be silent for and because he has sinned.

6 And lastly, The law leaves a man without hope; when it has once past
sentence on man, there is no reversing it by the law: Hope is one of the last
succors, and when this fails, the heart breaks, and sinners (as they are
without hope, so they) are brokenhearted; Christ came to save sinners, and to
heal the brokenhearted, men without hope, Is. 61.1. men that were in a
desperate and despairing state: The law condemns without mercy, Hebr. 10.28. it
leaves no place for hope from it, if you present it with Petitions never so
many, and seek a pardon with tears, the law is inexorable, he is cursed, and
shall be cursed, says the law. Now if there be any reprieve, or hope of
pardon, that is from the grace of heavens Prerogative, which is above the Law,
and can revoke and disannul its sentence, yea bestow a blessing, where the law
denounced a curse; but the law it self admits of no altering, it is like that of
the Medes and Persians, peremptory, and unalterable: quod scripsi, scripsi,
what I have written, I have written, says the Law. In all these respects, sin
by the Commandment, and the law, does become and appear to be exceeding sinful.
But

If it should be said by any, that though the law be severe to sinners, yet the
Gospel is propitious and merciful to them; and therefore sin seems not (now at
least) to be so vile a thing as heretofore: To this I shall answer, and make it
evident;

6 That the Gospel also bears witness, yea, The Gospel witnesses against sin.
and is the greatest and clearest testimony that is born against sin: Though
sinners find favor from the Gospel, yet sin finds none: The Gospel is not, in
the least, indulgent to the least sin: The whole voice of the Gospel is, these
things are written, that ye sin not: The Gospel is the Declaration of the life
and death, the design and doctrine of our Lord Jesus Christ, which was and is
all against sin: The design of Christ was indeed to save sinners, 1 Timothy 1.15.
but to destroy sin, Romans 8.3. 1 John 3.5. with 8. he came to save his people
from their sins; he came not to save from the petty and contemptible evils of
reproaches and afflictions, etc. but from the great and formidable evil of sin;
from the guilt for time past, and the power for time to come; he came to redeem
us from all iniquity, Tit. 2.14. And this is the blessing with which he
blesses us, to turn us every one away from every one of our iniquities, Acts
3.26. so that whoever names and calls upon the Name of the Lord (i.e. makes
profession of being a Christian) is thereby obliged to depart from iniquity, 2 Timothy 2.19. How ^he life and death of our holy and blessed Savior did witness
against sin, I declared before: I shall now treat of the doctrine of ^he
Gospel, which does so fully comport with, and is adequately fitted to his aim
and design, viz. the taking away of sin.

The sum of Gospel Doctrine (preached by Christ himself, and confirmed to us by
them that heard him) was and is, repentance and faith, Mark 1.15. and under
these the Apostle compriseth the whole counsel of God, Acts 20.21. with 27.
both these doctrines speak aloud against sin, as exceeding sinful: Repent,
says the Apostle, for the remission of sins; what an evil is that which man
must repent of! and none but the God of all grace, rich in mercy, can remit and
forgive? And which forgiveness argues him to be a God of great love, rich in
mercy, etc. or else sin could not be forgiven, it being easier to heal
diseases, etc. then to forgive sins, as our Savior tells us, Mat, 9.5, 6. It Is
the manifestation of his power; according to what Moses said in prayer, let the
power of my Lord be great to pardon, etc. Numb. 14.17.-20. Repentance takes in
many things, its made up of sorrow and shame, confession and reformation, all
and every of which speak sins sinfulness: Repent, that your sins may be blotted
out, Acts 3.19. If sin be not blotted out, man is undone, his name will be
blotted out of the Book of Life: as Repentance, so Faith speaks against sin:
Faith speaks men to be void of righteousness and life, for they both are by
faith; and, as if men repent not, they will not be forgiven, so, if they
believe not, they will be damned; for not only they that know not God, but they
that obey not the Gospel of our Lord Jesus Christ, will have vengeance taken on
them, and be punished with everlasting destruction from the presence of the
Lord, 2 These. 1.8, 9. And how can they escape ( i. e. there is no possibility of
escaping) this great damnation, that neglect the great salvation, Hebr. 2.3.

Let us take the Doctrine of the Gospel apart, and it is (as in the whole, so in
every part of it) against sin; not one Gospel doctrine, but the application of
it is (and is to be made) against sin, Tit. 2.11. The grace of God bringing
salvation (or the saving grace of God) has appeared to all men (and so is
against the sin of all men, and against all sin) teaching us to deny
ungodliness, and worldly lusts (not one excepted) and to live soberly (as to
our selves) righteously (as to others) and godlily (to God) in this present
world, i e. all the days of our life; as it is Luke 1.74, 75. The Gospel is a
witness against the old man, with all his corrupt affections, passions, lusts
and deeds, and is all for new light and knowledge, new love and affection, new
life and conversation; and its design is, that man be no longer an old, but a
new creature, Ephesians. 4.17.-25. 2 Cor. 5.17. It Is against all sin, and for all
righteousness and holiness; it is against hypocrisy, and for truth; against
formality, and for spirit and power.

More particularly 1 The Doctrinal part Of the Gospel is against sin. 2 The
Mandatory part Of the Gospel is against sin. 3 The Promising part Of the Gospel
is against sin. 4 The Menacing part Of the Gospel is against sin. 5 The
Exemplary part Of the Gospel is against sin. 6 The ^^^rimental part Of the
Gospel is against sin.


1 The Doctrinal part; yea that which flesh and blood is apt to interpret as an
encouragement to sin, and takes occasion from it to abuse it: As

1 The Doctrine of Gods free and abounding grace, Romans 5.20, 21. S. Paul had
taught, that where sin abounded, grace did much more abound, and grace did
reign to eternal life: Hereupon, Chapter 6.1. some were apt to take occasion to
sin, as if they were encouraged by grace: but oh with what detestation and
abhorrency does the Apostle speak against it; Shall we sin, either because
grace does, or that grace may abound, God forbid! and when men would do evil
that good might come of it, he speaks like a Son of Thunder, and tells them,
their damnation is just, Romans 3.8. and S. Jude writes an Epistle purposely
against them, that turn the grace of God into wanconness, (perverting the end
of grace) calling them ungodly men, and men ordained to this condemnation, Jude
4.

2 The Doctrime of Redemption by the blood and death of Jesus Christ: Christ
Jesus died for our sins, and some wicked wretches are apt to conclude, that
they may live in sin, because Christ has died for sin; but he died for sin,
that we might die to sin, Romans 6. and gave himself for us, to redeem us from
all iniquity, and to purify us to himself. Ti^ 2.14. the death of Christ calls
for dying to sin, and living to him that died for us, 2 Cor. 5.

3 The doctrine of privileges is against sin: God has dignified his people,
and given them titles of honor (such a^ (...) when them of Caesar's and
Emperors are but (...)) behold it (as a matter of wonder) (...) of love the
Father has (...), that we should be called (...) God! 1 John 3.1. And you,
says S. Peter of believers, 1 Pet. 2 9. are a chosen generation, a Royal
Priesthood, and (which is more glorious) an holy Nation: Oh therefore abstain
from fleshly lusts, therefore show forth the virtues (and by them the praises)
of him who has called you out of your mavelous darkness, into his mavelous
light.

4 The Doctrine of judgment to come is against sin; wicked men scoff at this, 2
Pet. 3. and think if they may be let alone till tha^ day, they shall do well
enough; but remember, for all things thou must come to judgment, and therefore
learn to fear God, and keep his Commandments, as the wi^e man teaches, Eccl.
12.13, 14. and the Apostle speaking of the day of judgment, says, knowin^ the
terror of the Lord we persuade men, 2 Cor. 5.11. viz. not to sin, but to live
in righteousness and holiness. Seeing this must be, what, oh what manner of
persons should we be in all holy conversations, and godlinesses! (for the Greek
is plural) yea, and to take heed not to fall into the errors of the wicked, but
to grow in grace, as S. Peter concludes, 2 Pet. 3.1^.17.18. all the Doctrine of
the Bible, from the beginning of Genesis to the end of the Revelations, is a
continual preaching and witnessing against sin.

2 The Mandatory, the commanding and exhorting part of the Gospel witnesses
against sin: What are men commanded and exhorted to, but to serve God in
righteousness, and true holiness, all the days of their life? to depart from
iniquity, as from the way to hell, and walk holily in Christ Jesus as the way
of heaven: Yea, God condescends so far, as to entreat men to be reconciled,
that they may be happy, 2 Cor 5.20. and what does this speak, but that sin is
both displeasing to God, and destructive to man, that it is sinful sin.

3 The promising part and promises of the Gospel are all against sin: God has
given to us exceeding great (Gr. the greatest) and precious promises, that by
these we might escape the pollutions of the world through lust, and be made
partakers of a Divine Nature, 2 Pet. 1.4. and that having these promises, we
should cleanse our selves from all filthiness of flesh and spirit, to perfect
holiness in the fear of God, 2 Cor. 7.1. Promises of good are against the evil
of sin.

4 The Menacing and threatening part of the Gospel is against sin; God threatens
before men sin, that they may not sin, to prevent sin; and he threatens after
men have sinned, that they may repent of sin: it is not only the Law, but the
Gospel also that threatens sinners, and with no less then damnation, Mark
16.16. and when any have sinned, God threatens the execution of threatenings if
they do not repent, as Rev. 2.5.16.22. Chapter 3.3.19. This also witnesses against
sin.

5 The Exemplary part does (the examples recorded in the Gospel do) witness
against sin, as the examples of the Old Testament, so them of the New are
registered as witnesses against sin: The examples of good men and good things
are set up as way marks to show us what to do; the examples of the wicked as
Sea-marks to show us what to avoid; the good examples are, that we may not sin
by omission of good, Heb. 12.1. the bad, that we may not sin by commission of
evil, 1 Cor. 10.6.-11. Abraham's faith, Moses's meekness, Jobs patience, etc.
they are examples for us to follow, that we should tread in their steps.
Ananias and Saphira's lying, Judas his covetousness and Apostasy, etc. are
written for our example, that we might hear and fear, and not do so wickedly.

6 The Experiences that any have had of Gods goodness, and their own deceitful
and evil hearts, and what they have suffered by sin, do all bear witness
against sin: Has God been so and so good, and are ye so foolish to requite the
Lord evil for his goodness, which should have lead unto repentance? Deuteronomy. 32.6.
God was angry with Solomon because he departed from the Lord God of Israel, who
had appeared to him twice, 1 Kings 11.9. we should draw inferences as Ezra did,
Chapter 9.13, 14. After all that is come upon us for our evil deeds, seeing thou
have punished us less then our iniquity deserves, and have given us such a
deliverance as this; what then? what ^^e is there to be made of it? shall we
again break thy Commandments? Oh no! would thou not be angry with us, till
thou had consumed us? Oh yes! we could expect no other: Have thou had so many
experiences of a deceitful heart? what? and yet so foolish as to trust it,
Prove. 28.26. It Is sad and dangerous sinning after experiences, Heb. 6.4, 5, 6.
Its impossible (very difficult, at least morally impossible) for those that
have been enlightened, and have tasted of the heavenly gift, etc. to renew them
again to repentance, if they fall away: thou have had many an aching heart for
sinning already, oh sin no more, least a worse thing come unto thee. Having
such a Cloud of experimental witnesses, let us lay aside the sin that so easily
besets us: If you ^in against these witnesses, these witnesses will witness
against you, and aggravate your condemnation. Let us therefore say to our sins,
(as Ephraim to his Idols) with a great indignation, get ye hence, what have we
any more to do with you!

That I may draw to a conclusion:

7 There is but one witness more, Sin it self confesses its sinfulness.
that I shall produce against sin, and that is sin it self; I shall evince that
sin proclaims its own sinfulness.

1 By its names, which it cannot disown. 2 By the Arts, which it owneth and
uses to disguize it self.
1 I shall consider sins names, which sin cannot deny, but confess to be its
proper names; of which I shall instance but two. 1 It Is (as it is called) the
work of the devil. 2 It Is defiling, polluting, and pestilential filthiness,
worse then any Plague-fore.

1 Sin is the work of the devil, 1 John 3.8. with 5. not that man's sin is not
of himself, or only of the devil, but that sin is that which the devil does,
and tempts others to do; so that to sin is to act and work like the devil; he
that sins is of the devil: Man indeed is of God; but the sinner is, or
sinful man is of the devil: The devil was the first sinner, and he that sins
is of him, as his child, Joh. 8.44. He that does the devils work is of the
devil, sinning is the devils trade, and he that follows this trade is of the
devil; he lives a devilish, a devils life: The devil does nothing but sin,
it is his business, and they that tread in his steps are of him, and like him,
they are devils incarnate.

Particularly 1. To sin, and live in sin, is to do as the devil does, to be
like him, and conformable to him: Sin is his work, he is so evil and wicked,
that he is called (emphatically, and by way of eminence) the (...), the evil,
and the wicked one, 1 John 2.13. Chapter 3.12. as if there were none evil, or at
least so evil as he: yea, the devils are not only wicked, but called
wickednesses in the abstract, Ephesians. 6.12. and abstracts note Essences: He sinned
from the beginning, and continneth sinning to this day; and they that do
imitate him in his work, are his children as much as if they were begotten of
him, Joh. 8.44. ye are of your father the devil, and (his works his lusts ye
will do; he was and is a marderer, he attempted it upon God, but effected it on
himself and man; he is the Abaddon and Apollyon, the murderer to this day, Rev.
9.11. he is ('it is true) a liar, deceiver, a tempter, but he does all these as
subserving his name as a King (for so he is called, Rev. 9.11.) his reigning
sin, which is a destroyer or murderer, 1 Pet. 5.8. Now just thus it is said of
them that sin, Prove. 8.36. they destroy their own souls, they are selones
de^se, self-murderers. Sin is devils work.

2 He that sins does not only do as the devil does, such work as he, but he
does work for the devil, he is servant and slave to the devil; he works in
the children of disobedience, and they work for him; he is their Prince, and
their God, whose servants they are, and whose work they do; his servants ye are
whom ye obey, says the Apostle, Romans 6.16. So then, they that serve and obey
the devil are his servants: Sin is the service of the devil, the work that
sinners do for the devil: Oh what wages are they like to have, who serve such a
Master! though sinners defy the devil in words, yet they deifie him in works,
and at last he will devillize them, and bring them into like nature and misery
with himself: Sinners are led by him at his will, like his dogs in a string:
when men are converted, they are delivered from his power, Acts 26.18. and they
that apostatize or are excommunicated, are delivered again to Satan; so that in
whatever state a sinner be a sinner, whither Infidel, Formalist, or Apostate,
he is under the power of the devil, doing his work, and making work for his
wages.

3 He that sins, as he is of the devil, and does the devils work, so (yet
further) he is a devil, is so of the devil, and so does the devils work, as to
have the name of, and to be called devil; he is as the devil to God, as a devil
to himself, as a devil to others. S. Peter for one sin had the name of Satan,
Mat. 16.23. but wicked men are called devils; Judas was a devil, Joh 6.70. Sin
made Angels devils, and it makes men devils, Traitors (as Judas was) to their
Lord and Master, Rev. 2.10. it is said, the devil shall cast some of you into
prison; surely the devil did not appear in person to do it, but by his
instruments, and agents, devils incarnate: Oh sinful sin, the work of the devil!

Let me here take occasion to offer to your view some sins, which are
especially said to be the devils sin, and they that do them are of, work for,
and are like to, and called devils.

1 Murder, especially soul-murther, of which Antichrist the devils Son is
hugely guilty, in making merchandise of souls, Rev. 18.13. and lying Prophets
that hunt souls, Ezekiel. 13.18, 19, 20. that devour and destroy souls, Ezekiel.
22.25.27. The devil was a murderer from the beginning, Joh. 8.44. and they
that murder are (as Cain was) of the devil, 1 John 3.12. the rise of murder
is from anger and hatred, who so hates his brother is a murderer, 1 John
3.15. therefore, says the Apostle: be not angry, so as to sin; let not the Sun
go down on your wrath, for that is to give place to the devil, Ephesians. 4.26, 27.
Pride is for contention, and that is for murder: Pride produces discontent,
discontent produces envy, and envy, hatred and malice, and hence comes
murder: If ye have bitter envying and strife in your hearts, this is not only
earthly and sensual, but devilish, James 3.14, 15. So that originally the
devils sin, and his condemnation, was from pride, 1 Timothy 3.6. Pride made him
discontented, envious, angry, and a murderer; and so it did Cain his eldest
Son, as a murderer: The proud spirit lusts to envy, James 4.5.-7. and when
S. Peter teaches us how to resist the devil, he tells us, it must be by
submission and humility, 1 Pet. 5.5.-8.

2 The second sin that calls the devil father (and denominates them that do it
to be his children) is lying, Joh. 8.44. the devil is a liar, and the Father of
lies. When Ananias told a lie, says the Apostle, Satan filled his heart, Acts
5.3. and they that do lie, are of the Synagogue of Satan, members and Sons of
the Synagogue of Satan, Rev. 2.9. with 3.9. and God says of his children, that
they will not lie, Is. 63.8. They that love and make lies, are without among
dogs and devils, Rev. 22.15. they are without the gates of the City of God; and
Rev. 21.8. they have their portion with the devil in the Lake of Fire.

3 Deceivers and seducers are of the devil, who is the deceiver, Rev. 12.9. and
20.12. the old Serpent that deceived Eve, and deceives the whole world: They
that deceive the souls of men, are like the devil, whither it be done by
calling the truth into question, as the devil did at first, and against which
the Apostle speaks, 2 Cor. 11.2, ^or whither by abusing and wresting, or false
quoting of Scripture, 2 Pet. 3.16. as the devil did, Mat. 4.6. or by
transforming themselves into Angels of light (as the devil does 2 Cor. 11.14.
they that sin in the name of the Lord, and attribute that to the spirit, which
is but their fancy, if not a falsehood; or whither it be done by false and
pretended miracles, after the manner of Satan, 2 These. 2.9, 10.

4 They that tempt men to sin come under the devils denomination, and do his
work, who is the tempter, Ma. 4.1 and 1 These. 3.15. he tempts all men to one or
other sin; the devil had a hand in Cains murdering his brother, 1 John 3.12.
in Judas's treason, Lu. 22.2. in Ananias's lie, Act. 5.3. in David's numbering
the people, 1 Chro. 21.1. in Peter's denying his Master, Luke 22.31, 32. he
tempted to the first sin, and has tempted all men to sin (and to all sin) ever
since: it is the devils work, and sin, to tempt others to sin, and they that do
so, do the devils work.

5 False accusing, slandering, evil speaking, and backbiting of others, is of,
and like the devil, Rev. 10.12. he is the accuser of the Brethren; as he did
Job and Joshuah, so he does others very often without cause: they that do so,
their tongues are set on fire of hell, Jam. 3.6. make-bates, slanderers,
calumniators are called by the devils name, Diaboli, of which we read in three
places of S. Paul's Epistles, 1 Timothy 3.11. 2 Timothy 3.3. Tit. 2.3. to carry
slanders is the work of the devil.

6 Another sin, which is the work of the devil, and which makes them that do it
like the devil, is bindring persons from believing and closing with the truth
of the Gospel, which may be done several ways: As,

1 By keeping them in ignorance, and blinding of them, 2 Cor. 4.4. either by
stealing and taking away the word, Mat. 13.4. with 19. or by hindering and
keeping off means from them, 1 These. 2.18.

2 By sowing tares among the wheat, Mat, 13.27, 28. with 38, 39.

3 By perverting the ways of the Lord, Acts 13.10. representing them as
tedious, dangerous, etc. who ever keep means from men, or men from means, or
make false representations of the ways of God, are of the devil.

7. Apostasy is a Devil-like sin, John 8.44. The Devil abode not in the truth,
but left his first love, life, and estate, 2 Pet. 2.4. with Jude 6. Hence Judas
is called Devil, Joh. 6.70. and Apostates are said to turn aside after Satan, 1 Timothy 5.15. as Converts are turned from Satan to God; so Apostates return from
God to Satan: He that abides not in the truth, is like unto the Devil.

8. To name no more but this, Persecuting the righteous for righteousness sake
is the Devils work, 1 John 3.12. Math. 23.15. and they that do it, are of and
called Devils. Some he oppresses, some he possesses; and where he is
dispossessed, he there turns Persecutor, Rev. 2.10. The Devil shall cast some of
you into prison; this was a persecuting Devil incarnate. Thus in the general
and particular I have cleared this, That sin is the work of the Devil, it is
sins name, and is a great witness against it.

I may here add, that in some sense sin in men (or in some respects the sin of
men) is more horrible and heinous then that of Devils; I speak not of the first
sins of either, but of their sins from the time that God discovered his
pleasure concerning the disposal of Devils and Men. (1) The Devil has some
kind of gratification in tempting men ('it is a kind of victory being a revenge)
but men do wrong and torment themselves. (2) The Devils are past hope, and
grown desperate, being rejected of God, 2 Pet. 2.4. for Christ Jesus took not
them on him, Heb. 2.16. they are hardened against God as punishing them; and are
grown so envious, that they will be revenged on man, seeing they cannot on God:
if they had but a door of hope opened, it is probable they would not be so
wicked as they are. When there is no hope, persons are more resolute, Jer.
2.25. But now for men to sin, whom God has spared, for whom he spared not to
give his own Son; men, whom God calls and woes, and even begs them to be
reconciled, and be happy, for these men to sin, Oh what an horrible ingratitude
is this! Oh what aggravating and inexcusable sin is this; it is worse then the
devils sin! they sin not against second mercy and offers of grace as men do!
But I hasten to sins second name, filthiness of flesh and spirit, 2 Cor. 7.1.

2. Sin is all filthiness, which denotes, 1. The Loathsomness of Sin. 2. The
Infectiousness of Sin.


1. That Sin is a filthy, i. e. a loathsome thing, will be clear, if we do
consider a little that to which sin is resembled and likened, as to the most
offensive and loathsome diseases; it is likened to a Canker or Gangrene, 2 Timothy
2.17. Now with such persons as are under these diseases, others are loath to eat
or drink: it is likened to the rot, to the filth and corruption of the foulest
disease, which is so foul and rotten, as (according to the Proverb) one would
not touch it with a pair of Tongs. The Apostle tells us of some who (like
Jannes and Jambres) resist the truth, and calls them men of corrupt (or rotten)
minds: And Solomon gives us to know, that as a sound heart is the life of the
flesh, so Envy (any thing opposed to the sound heart) is rottenness to the
bones; yea, sin is likened to the Plague, which every one flies from; it is so
noisome and loathsome, that it separates the nearest relations: now sin is called
the Plague of the heart, 1 Kings 8.38.39. which is much worse then any
plague sore of the body; and this is not all, but as sin is likened to the most
loathsome diseases, so to other the most loathsome things that are; it is likened
to the blood wherein infants are born, which is loathsome, as Ezekiel. 16.5, 6. Its
likened to Mire and Dung, to the very excrements that lie in Ditches and Common
shores, wherein Sows and Swine do wallow, as it is expressed, 2 Pet. 2.22. yea, to
the Vomit of dogs, in the same place; to the Putrefaction of graves and
sepulchers, Math. 23.27, 28. which is stinking, as Martha said of Lazarus, when
he had been some days dead, Joh. 11.39: it is likened to Poison, Romans 3.13. All
these things and others which I shall not name, are loathsome things, at which
men stop their noses, and from which they hide their eyes; yet sin is more
loathsome then they all, if we consider, that nothing but the fountain opened
for Judah and Jerusalem to wash in, nothing but the blood of Jesus can cleanse
from this filthiness: all the Nitre and Soap in the world cannot get it out:
beside, it is not only filthy, but filthiness; not only corrupt, but corruption,
in the very abstract, and all the things to which sin is resembled are far
short of sin, they are but shadows, which are very imperfect representations of
things: all the former Instances (or others of like name and nature) reach but
to the body, and do not defile the man; but sin reaches and seizes on soul
and spirit, and defiles the man, Math. 15.19, 20. This is the Canker, the
Rottenness, the Plague, the Poison of the Soul; and sin is not only worse then
any, but then all of these: yea, further, if our righteousness be but as a
menstruous rag, Isa. 64.6. how filthy must our sin be? The Apostle St. Paul
counted his righteousness which was of the Law to be but dung, Phil. 3. what
did he reckon his injuriousness, persecution, and blasphemy then? surely as bad
as death and hell; if not only our righteousness, but our righteousnesses, yea,
all our righteousnesses be as filthy rags, as it is in that fore quoted place,
Isa. 64.6. what is our sin, our sins, and all our sins? Ah how filthy beyond
expression or imagination! yet again, sin is not only filthy, i. e. loathsome,
but it is,

2. A polluting and infectious thing: it is of a pestilential and poisonous
nature, and therefore called not only corruption, but pollution and defilement,
2 Pet. 2.20. There are many things that may make a man foul and loathsome, as
Leprosy and ulcerous tumors, etc. and yet the soul of a man may be pure and
fair, as Jobs was when his body was all over of a scab or sore, and he state on
the dunghill; but sin (as was hinted before) defiles the man, and soaks into his
very spirit, and infects that. But that we may take the clearer and fuller
prospect of sins pestilent and infectious nature and operation, let us behold
it,

1. In its Universality, how it has extended and spread it self over all the
world; there is no Land or Nation, Tribe, Language, Kindred, or People, where
it has not been known, from the rising of the Sun to the going down thereof,
all Climats, hot and cold, all Quarters of the world, Americans, Africans,
Asians, and Europeans have all been infected; not only Sodom or Samaria, but
Jerusalem and Sion were infected and ruined by it: it is here, and there, and
every where, but in Heaven. Beside this, it has infected all Ages, it is almost
as old as the world; it has run in a blood from Adam to Moses, and so on to
this day, it is a plague that has lasted almost 6000 years; yea, which is more,
not one man has escaped it; all kind of men, of all ranks and qualities, high
and low, rich and poor, Kings and Beggars have been infected by it; the wise,
the learned, as well as foolish and illiterate, Romans 3.9, 10. who is there that
has lived and sinned not, our Savior excepted? and if any man say he has not
sinned, he sins in saying so. By one man sin came into the world, but since,
not one man but every man has sinned, all have sinned, and come short of the
glory of God, Romans 3.23. and death came upon all, in as much as all had sinned,
Romans 5.12. If all men are mortal, then all are sinners, for death came in by
sin; where there is no sin, there is no death, as in Heaven. Rev. 21.4. All men
have died of this plague, yea, our Lord and Savior had not died, if he had not
been made sin for us. Moreover this Leprosy has spread it self not only on
whole mankind, but on the whole of man; every whit of every man is infected, it
has made flesh and spirit filthy, 2 Cor. 7.1. from the crown of ^he head to
the sole of the foot, there is no sound part in him all (as I instanced above)
all his members are servants to sin; and it is no better within, Genesis 6.5. his
heart is evil, the thoughts of his heart are evil, the imaginations of the
thoughts of his heart are evil, the very thoughts of his thoughts are evil,
every creature of the heart is evil. How the Understanding is darkened and
depraved, I showed above; that the Heart is desperately wicked and deceitful
beyond any knowledge but Gods, the Prophet assures us from God himself, Jer.
17.9. the mind and Conscience is defiled, Tit. 1.15, 16. The Will is become
perverse and stubborn, worse then so, it is wilful and mad, set upon sin and
hell, Eccle. 8.11. The Affections (concupiscible) are inordinate, the Passions
(irascible) are unruly, that man's more headstrong then the horse that rusheth
into the battle: It has made some men so restless, that they cannot sleep,
unless (or until) they have done mischief, Prove. 4.16.

To go on yet further, Sin spreads its infections to the defiling of man's
duties and holy things; it defiles his natural and civil actions, the plowing
of the wicked is sin, Prove. 21.4. Man should d^ all (from the highest to the
lowest duty) to the glory of God; but, Alas, what does man do that is not ill
done, and to the dishonor of God Sin infects men's prayers, the prayers of the
wicked are an abomination to the Lord, Prove. 28.9. yea, though offered up with
incense to persume them, Isa. 1.13. Under the Law Aaron was to bear the
iniquity of the holy things, Exodus 28.38. Israel brought God many a present,
but sin (like a dead fly in a box of ointment) spoiled all, Isa. 1.11.16. Yet
again,

Sin infects all that belongs to man: when man was created, God furnished his
house for him, gave him the world and fullness thereof, and it was good; but,
Alas, how is it changed! (as I spoke before) for sin has made all that belongs
to man very vanity, i. e. empty and unprofitable, Eccl. 1. The fullness of the
creature cannot fill a man, the eye is not satisfied with seeing, nor ear with
hearing, for all is vanity; the gloss and beauty, the pleasure and profit of
creature-enjoyments are become vanity; yea, and more, sin has made it vexation
too, sin has embittered man's enjoyments; man lives among his comforts but a
vexatious life; as in the fullness of his sufficiency he is in straits, so in
the fullness of his comforts he is in sorrow, in the midst (the very heart) of
laughter, his heart is sad: Man's enjoyments are disappointments, they fail his
expectations, and so add not to his content, but vexation; neither the length
nor the comfort of his life is in the abundance of these things, Luke 12.15.
and which is yet worse, sin has not only made things vain and vexatious, but a
snare and temptation to man; they are sins baits, by which it catches men;
what are honors, pleasures, and riches, but snares to the children of men?
Prove. 30.8, 9.

This we have said in brief as to the universality of sins infection, how it
has spread it self all over. 2. Let us consider how suddenly it infects, and
withal does increase and multiply: Sin is not barren, but, Alas, too fruitful
to beget and bring forth more: it is not lazy, but gets ground continually: how
great a fire has a spark kindled? Adams ^^^^erity have not been so numerous as
his sins: A little Cloud (as it seems at first) no bigger then ones hand, grows
and spreads to cover the whole Hemisphere. The water that at first seemed
little and shallow, swelled more and more, from the ankles to the knees, from
the knees to the loins, thence to the head, till it grows to so great a River,
as cannot be passed over; and so does sin, a very monster for its growth.
Particularly let us observe how it increases in our selves, and then how in
others.

1. How it increases in our selves. Sometimes the same sin increases from
little to great, it grows from an inf^nt to a man: it is as a snowball, that
(like same crescit eundo) grows bigger by rolling it in the snow: the little
grain of mustard grows to a great tree; a little seed of sin becomes a great
tree: Adams sin was but one, but 'twas a breeding and big-bellied sin, the
mother of all abominations. One sin transgresses the whole Law, James 2.10.
when lust has conceived, it hastens to bring forth, and when it has brought
forth, it brings it up till it come to its full stature, James 1.14, 15. it is
at first but a Lust, an appetite, inclination, or motion, thence it proceeds to
Inticement, by that to draw us aside, and then to tempt and impregnate us, by
this temptation it conceives, and there is an Embryo; this grows in the womb,
and when it is brought forth, it is a sin; and this being finished or perfected,
it proves deadly. So James 3.5, 6. the tongue is a little member, but as a
little spark of fire, but it being kindled (becomes a world of iniquity, and)
defiles the whole body, and sets on fire the whole course of Nature; a little
Leaven leaveneth the whole lump, and sometimes one sin begets many more sins,
not only of the same kind, but others also. Josh. 7.11. God had forbidden them
to take the accursed thing; but when they had taken, they dissembled also, and
put it among their own stuff; and when Achan confesses his sin, you may see
how one drew on another, verse. 19.20, 21. says he, when I saw, I coverted, and
when I coveted, I took, and when I had taken, I hid them; thus one begat
another. Sin degrees it self into a greatness, and multiplies into a number: If
we abhor not the garment, we may be (as it) spotted with the flesh: if we
withdraw not from occasions of evil, we may by the occasions be drawn to evil;
and in not abstaining from appearances of evil, be brought to apparent evil.
There is one Chapter that gives us two sad Instances of this thing, Genesis 34.
Dinah, out of curiosity, will needs make a visit to the Daughters of the Land;
while she goes to see the daughters, the son saw her, (visamque cupit) having
seen her, he took her, having taken her, he lay with her, and by lying with
her, defiled her. The report whereof coming to Jacobs sons, they were grieved,
being grieved, they were wroth, being wroth, they meditate revenge, meditating
revenge, they spoke deceitfully, having deceived, they slew, and having slain,
they fall upon the spoil: How hard it is to sin once and but once! sin grows
upon us Let us see,

2. How sin increases in others, and infects others; it went from one man to
every man: how soon had the world got the name of ungodly world, or world of
ungodly? 2 Pet. 2.5. and after the flood, how soon was the world overspread
with sin from seven or eight persons? one root of bitterness defiles many, Heb.
12.15. Men's ill examples are very pestilential and pernicious, a little Leaven
leaveneth the whole lump, as our Country Proverb has it, one scabbed sheep
infects a whole flock. The world grows worse and worse, the latter days most
peril us because most sinful; and as if there had not been sin enough, some
set up projects and trades of new sins, being inventors of evil things, Romans
1.30. Oh how diffusive and catching is this infection, for others will quickly
be in these new-invented fashions of sin and sinning! Yet again,

3. The infection of sin is (tantum non) almost incurable ('it is to us
impossible, and only possible with God, and that at a costly rate, by the blood
of Christ, to cure this plague, and cleanse us of it) it is very hard to be
cured, because it is within us, and dwells in us, Romans 7.17.20. an ulcer in
the flesh is more easily cured then one in the lungs; a disease that is inward
cannot be so well reached; yea, it is not only in us, but it is rivetted in us,
it is gotten into the flesh and spirit, as if it were one with us, as the
Leopards spots and the Aethiopians blackness. There was a leprosy so
inveterate, that though they scrapt the house round about and within, and threw
out the dust, though they took other stones and mortar, yet it returned again,
Levit. 14. When distempers become as it were natural, and are in the
constitution, they are hard to be cured; it is not easy obliterating that which
is written with a pen of Iron, and the point of a Diamond; it is difficult to
soften an heart of stone. Beside, this filthiness has had long possession,
even time out of mind: it pleads prescription, so long a Custom is become a
Law, and as another Nature, Jer. 13.23. yea, to show how hard it is to be cured
and rooted out, we may observe, that very forceable means have bin used for the
cleansing of it, yet it has not been done: God poured out a whole flood of
water, which washed away most sinners; yet sin (as I may say) kept above water,
and was found alive and strong after the flood. When God sent fire and
brimstone ( Hell, as an Ancient calls it) from Heaven on that Center of sin,
Sodom, etc. yet sin got out with Lot and his daughters. Fire and water are very
cleansing and purifying things; yet these you see have not done it. When others
sinned, the Earth swallowed them up, yet sin remained, it did not dye; the same
sins are still in the world after all these judgments. Even in the Saints
themselves, with all the forces that Faith can make, it is very hardly kept
under, but the flesh will be lusting against the spirit, and when their
affections do not cleave to sin; yet sin will cleave to their affection, and it
makes them cry out as burdened with St. Paul, Wretch that I am, who shall
deliver me from this body of death! the victory is by Christ Jesus; it is death
kills sin. And yet,

4. It lives in its effects when we are dead and gone; for it follows us to our
grave, and there it rots our bodies; when it can no longer reach our souls to
make them vile, it yet forbears not to make our bodies putrid and vile. He that
sinned not saw no corruption, but we that sinned do, and stink within a few
days, as Lazarus did. Oh sinful and infectious sin!

Thus far of the names of sin, and how they witness against sin; there remains
only one thing more to witness against it, and that is the second thing I
mentioned as to sin witnessing against it self. Viz.

2. The Arts or Artifices that sin uses to disguise it self: if sin were not
an ugly thing, would it wear a vizard? or if it had not evil designs, would it
walk disguised and change its name? truth is not ashamed of its name or
nakedness, it can walk openly and boldly; but sin is a cheat, a lie, and
therefore lurks privily, and puts on false names and colors; for if it should
appear like it self (as it sooner or later will to all, for conversion or
confusion) it would fright men into dying fits, as it did the Apostle, and when
they come to themselves, engage men to abhor and hate it, as he and the
Prodigal did. Men would never be so hardy as they are to sin, but that sin
hardens them, and hardens them by deceiving them, as the Apostle speaks, Heb.
3.13. take heed lest any be hardened through the deceitfulness of sin: Sin uses
all manner of Arts, Methods, and Devices (as Satan does) to draw us in, to
inveigle us; it puts many tricks upon us, and has all the faculties and knacks
of deceiving and cheating us. I may truly say, that sin has not learnt, but
taught all the deceits, the dissimulations, flatteries, and false policies that
are found in Courts; the Stratagems of War, the Sophisms and fallacies of the
Schools, the Frauds of Tradesmen, whether in City or Country, the Tricks of
Cheaters and Juglers, the Ambuscadoes of Thieves, the Pretensions of false
Friends, the several Methods of false Teachers, and whatever else there is of
Consenage in the World, and practices them all upon us to make us sin.

And though it be impossible to reckon up all the particular ways whereby the
deceitful hearts and sins of men abuse them; yet I will instance in a few, that
it may be for a warning to sinners, and a witness against sin; and then
conclude this part of our Discourse.

1. Sometimes sin persuades us that such or such a thing is no sin, though it
look like a sin, as the Devil dealt by Eve at first, and so deceived her: she
was a little jealous and shy, that what the Serpent put her upon was evil, but
he cunningly insinuates, that however it seemed to her, yet that it was not so:
This way is the pride and wantonness of persons upheld, that though these
things are appearances of evil, yet they are not evil: but, alas, it is next to
being a sinner to look like a sinner; appearance in good is too little, in evil
it is too much: it is a very hard thing to look like a sinner, to talk and garb
it like a sinner, and not to be one; and which is the worst on it, it is more
then likely, that what the Devil grants to be like a sin is a sin; and they
that are persuaded otherwise, are deceived by him, as Eve was: it is great odds,
but if we do like the picture, we shall like the thing: though an Idol be no
God, nor like him; yet God has utterly forbidden graven images, for they are
of the Devils carving.

If this prevails not, then (2) It would persuade, that though it may be a sin
in another; yet (rebus sic stantibus) all things considered, it can be none in
thee, because thou art necessitated, as for a poor man to steal; but no man is
necessitated to sin, though under necessity, sin is sin in any, in all: for
though temptations may mitigare and e^cuse a tanto, yet they do not excuse a
toto, from its being a sin, or make it no sin.

3 It Is but one, and but this once. If sin be good, why but once? if evil, why
once? one sin though but once, is one and once too much: Beside, when the
Serpents head is in, it is hard keeping out the whole body; one makes way for
another, it is almost impossible to sin once and but once. Yet then fourthly,
says sin, it is but a little one; that cannot be a little sin which is against
a great God, and deserves so great a punishment as death, for the wages of sin
(of every single sin) is death, Romans 6.23. I but says sin, (5) it is in secret,
none will see it; but this is a cheat, for it is impossble to sin so secretly
but there will be two Witnesses, God and Conscience know all the sins that men
commit. I but, says sin, (6) thou will hate it and dread it ever after; as
some go to Mass that they may distasie it, and to Plays to see the folly of
them: but who would be a burnt child to dread the fir^^ it is bad making such
costly experiments as may cost us the loss of our souls, it is dangerous meddling
with that which is an appearance, and may be an occasion of evil, much more to
parley and tamper with sin it self. But then (7) says sin, I promise thee thou
shall get by it; so much profit, so much pleasure, so much honor shall thou
have by it; but sins gain is loss, he that gets the world by a sin, pays too
dear for it, for it is the loss, at least the hazard of his soul; the pleasures
of sin are grievous; its honors, disgraces and shame. Did not our first
Parents sind it so, and do not we? the Apostle appeals, Romans 6.21. the precious
substance promised, ends in a pernicious shadow, and the spoils we get by sin
do but spoil us. Sin promises like a God, but pays like a Devil; sin tells us
we shall not dye, but live like Gods, but we find nothing but death and such a
life as they have in Hell. Sins performances are contrary to its promises: it
promises gold, and (...) dross: If any man have a mind to true mise^^es, let
him take sins fall promiset. Well but then, (8) says sin, others do it, and
why may not thou? It Is not what others do, but what they ought to do that we
are to follow; we must not follow any man, nor a multitude of men to do evil:
if others will venture their damnation, what is that to us? 'twill be no
(solamen miseris socios habuisse) no comfort to have had companions in sin, and
to meet them again in Hell. I but, says sin (9) it is but repent, and God will
forgive thee: to this we have to say, that he who promised forgiveness to them
that repent, has not promised repentance to them that sin; beside, if sin were
to cost no more but repentance, one in his wits would be loath to buy repentance
at so dear a rate; Repentance (though it may free from greater, yet it) puts
men to more grief and pain, then ever sin could afford them pleasure. I but,
says sin (10) thou have escaped well enough hitherto, no evil has yet befallen
thee: to this say, it may be it is so much the worse, and not to be punished may
be the worst punishment, Isa. 1.5. Hos. 4.14 17. but what will it cost if God
do awaken me? if not that, what will it cost when God shall damn me? But then
says sin (11) it is but thine infirmity, thou can not help it: this is a
thing (tell sin) that none but fools and children can pretend to; beside, to
plead for infirmities, is more then an infirmity, and that which is but an
infirmity to day, may become a disease to morrow, if not prevented; when once
the will is engaged, it is past an infirmity, and is become a sin. If these (or
other like) do not prevail, then it speaks more openly; Sin, (says Sin) either
there is no such thing, there is no difference between good and evil; as all
things come alike to all, so all things are alike; or says Sin, evil is good
in Gods sight, else he would judge it, Mal. 2.17. his silence bids thee think
that he is such an one as thy self, Psalm. 50. but here tell sin, that this
defeats and confutes it self, and proves nothing more clear then that sin is
exceeding sinful: if there be no sin, or no difference between good and evil,
to what purpose are these different words used by sin to prove that there is no
difference? to say it is only in imagination and not real, is to deny that there
is any such thing as sense and conscience, which every man ownes, and cannot
deny without denying himself and God to be. Between good and evil, there is
more difference then between light and darkness, life and death, ease and pain,
food and poison; and yet these are real, and not the differences of our fancy
only. That all things come alike to all, is not always true, there are contrary
Instances; and to say, That all things are alike, is never true, but is a
manifest contradiction. To say that evil is good in Gods sight, and that he is
such an one as a sinner, is to deny God to be; for if he be not good and just,
he is not God: but this speaks men wilfully ignorant; for the flood that
drowned the old World, and the fire that fell from Heaven on Sodom; the
Judgments which God executes in the Earth continually (of which before) do all
witness that God is displeased with, and the avenger of sin: as his giving us
rain from Heaven, and fruitful seasons, are witnesses that he is good and does
good; and that his Sun shines and his rain falls on the unjust as well as just,
is a greater argument of his goodness, which calls for repentance, and that
also does witness that sin is evil. And indeed over and above,

If sin were not exceeding sinful, what need it use all these tricks and
subterfuges? if it were not, and its deeds were not evil, why does it avoid the
light? Why (like a false Coyner) does it put the King of Heavens stamp on its
base metal? Why does Jacob call himself Esau, and counterfeit his Brother, if
sin were not abominable? Why do the Gibeonites pretend to come from far, if
they had not a mind to be unknown? if it were not false and a Robber, why does
it creep in privily, climb up another way, and avoid the door? Why does it
flatter and deceive? Why does it never keep promise, but breaks all that it
ever made? it is because it is sinful sin.

Having shown what sin is, wherein its sinfulness consuts, and proved it by
many witnesses (even it self being one) before I come to the fourth thing, viz.
the application and improvement of this Doctrine; I shall in brief sum up the
charge against sin. That which sin is accuse^d for, and proved to be guilty of,
is High treason against God, and that it attempts no less then the dethroning
and ungoding of God himself; that it has unmanned man, made him a fool, a
beast, a Devil, and subjected him to the wrath of God, and made him liable to
eternal damnation. It has made men deny God to be, or affirm him to be like
themselves. It has put the Lord of Life to death, and shamefully crucified the
Lord of G^ory: It is always resisting the Holy Ghost: it is continually
practicing the defilement, the dishonor, the deceiving, and the destruction of
all men. Ob what a prodigious, monstrous, devill^sh thing is sin! it is
impossible to speak worse of it then, or so bad of it as it is, for it is
hyberbolically sinful! there is want in the words that are, and need of more and
worse words then there are any to speak its vileness! to say it is worse then
death and devil, the very Hell of Hell, is not to rail at it, but to tell it
its own; for it is the Quinitessence of evil, which has made all the evils that
are, and is worse then all the evils it has made; it is so evil, that it is
impossible to make it good, or lovely by all the Arts that can be used; poison
may be corrected and made medicinal, if not nutritive; but sin is sin, and can
be no other, its nature cannot be changed, no not by a pardon. To speak as the
thing is, it is not only ugly, but ugliness, not only filthy, but filthiness,
not only abominable but abomination: there is not a worse thing in Hell it
self, it has not its fellow there. All this and much more may be said of and
against sin; and having laid this groundwork, I shall now build upon it the
fourth thing, viz. The Application.


The Application and Improvement of the Doctrine of Sins sinfulness.
1. Then Sin is the worst of Evils.
By way of Inference for our Information in several things; as first in
general, That Sin is the worst of Evils, the evil of evils, and indeed the only
evil; nothing is so evil as, nay, nothing is evil (properly) but sin, nor in
comparison of it. As the sufferings of this present time (of our life which are
upon us) are not worthy to be compared with the glory that shall be revealed in
us; so neither the sufferings of this life or that to come, are worthy to be
compared (for evil) with the evil of sin: No evil is displeasing to God or
destructi^e to man, but the evil of sin. It Is worse then affliction, then
death, then Devil, then Hell; affliction is not so afflictive, death is not so
deadly, the Devil not so devilish, Hell not so hellish as sin is; and this will
help to fill up the charge against its sinfulness, especially as it is contrary
to and against the good of man.

These four Evils that I have named are terrible indeed, and from all which
every one is ready to say, Good Lord deliver us; yet none of these are, all of
these are not so bad as sin, and therefore our prayers should be more to be
delivered from sin; and if God hear no prayer else, yet as to this we should
say, We beseech thee to hear us, good Lord!

1. Worse then affliction and suffering.
It Is worse then any evil of affliction; there are afflictions of several
sorts, and they are all called Evils: is there any evil (of what sort, or kind,
or quality soever) in the City, and I have not done it? Amos 3.6. (God, you
see, will own himself the Author of it, but not of sin, that is a bastard of
someothers be getting and breeding, the evil of plagues and afflictions are of
Gods bringing, though of sins deserving) now indeed no affliction seems to be
(or is) joyour for the present, Heb. 12 11. but though they are not to be
desired, yet they may be endured but sin is neither to be desired nor endured:
any sin is worse then any suffering, one sin then (...) suffering, the least
sin then the greatest suffering What (you will say) is it worse then to be
whipped, to be burnt, to be sawn asunder, etc yes, by a great deal, as appears by
what our Savior says, Mat. 10.28. fear not them that can kill, but fear him
that can damn, q. d. it is better to be killed then to be damned, We man more
easily suffer from men, then sin against God. One may suffer and not sin, but
it is impossible to sin and not suffer. They that avoid suffering by sinning,
sin themselves into worse suffering. Th^^ seems to be clear enough; yet because
truth are seldom well improved till they be believed and are seldom believed
till they are well proved, I shall therefore make this out more fully, That sin
is worse then suffering, first by this Argument in general: because Sin is all
evil, only evil, and always evil, which no affliction is nor can be; in my
flesh, says the Apostle, there dwells no good, no not the least, and this is
ever present with me; this cannot be said of afflictions, that there is no good
in them, that they dwell in and are always present with us: there are some
lucida intervalla, Sun-shines in Winter. One may say, 'twas good that I was
afflicted, Psalm. 119.71. it is good to bear the yoke in ones youth, Lam. 3.23.
but one can never say, 'twas good that I sinned, no, though 'twere but in my
youth, Eccl. 11.9. and 12.1. All things may be corrected and made to work for
our good, and we can say, not only God that afflicted me was good, but the
affliction wrought for good, 2 Cor. 4.17. but we can never justly say, that sin
did us good. Many can say (periissem nisi periissem) I had been undone had I
not suffered; but none can say (periissem nisi peccassem) I had perished if I
had not sinned; no, no, it is by sin we perish and are undone: many have thankt
God for affliction, but never any for sin. Some indeed mistake that place, Romans
6.17. as if the Apostle thanked God that they were sinners, no by no means; but
he thanks God that they who once were sinners, were become obedient to the
Gospel: and the proper sense and reading is, Thanks be to God, though ye were
the servants of sin (in time past) yet (now) ye have obeyed the form of
Doctrine which was delivered to you, or (as the Margin and Greek) whereunto ye
were delivered. Sin of it self is neither good before nor after its commission,
it is not good to be committed, nor good after it is committed, nor does it do us
any good, but hurt all our days; but other evils, though we cannot call them
good before, and so desire them; yet we can call them good after, and so thank
God for them.

More particularly. 1. Suffering may be the object of our choice, which sin
cannot be; for that which is evil, and can be no other (and so is sin) cannot
be the object of our volition and choice, it is contra-natural. If men did not
call evil good, and good evil, they could never love the evil, nor hate the
good: nor can fin be chosen as a means to a good; for as it is evil and nothing
else, so it does evil and nothing else. But now affliction, though not chosen
for it self, yet for an end (a good end and effect of it) may be chosen, yea,
and rather then sin; it may be chosen, though no other good thing should follow
then this, that one did no evil. Instances we have of this, as the three young
Worthies, Dan. 3.17. whose gallantry of spirit was such, that though they
should not be delivered by their God, yet they would not (they were holily
wilful) they would not sin against their God, nor so much as demur, deliberate,
or take time to consider, whether they should suffer or sin, it was past dispute
with them, brave and noble Souls that they were. The like we have of Daniel
himself, Chap. 6. and of St. Paul in Chap. 20, 21. of the Acts, of which I
spoke before; I shall therefore only add this to it, which is observable, That
when he speaks of his afflictions, he calls them light, 2 Cor. 4.17. but when
of sin, he speaks of it as a burden that pressed him down, and made him cry out,
Wretch that I am! and again, we groan being burdened, 2 Cor. 5. Moses his
choice is famous and celebrated all the world over; for 'twas not made when he
was a Child, but when he came to (forty) years of age: and he preser'd
suffering, not only before sinning, but before honors, riches, and pleasures,
accounting the worst of Christ (Reproaches) better then the best of the world.
There is one Instance more which is more then all the rest, and that is of our
blessed Savior, who had the greatest offer made him that ever was made, and
though tempted, and suffered by being tempted; yet he scorned and abhorred to
sin, Math 4. yea, he endured the Cross, and despised the shame, Heb. 12.1. --
4. he met the Cross, shame, and pain, and as an addition, the contradiction of
sinners; yet all this he endured, rather then he would sin, for verse. 4. 'twas
striving against sin: And when St. Peter would have him decline suffering, he
calls him Satan, and said as to him, Get behind me, Satan: reaching us this,
That it is better to suffer then to sin.

2. We may and ought to (not only choose suffering, and not sin, but) rejoice in
suffering, and that with all j^y, and (in the highest degree) glory in
tribulation; but sin is matter of shame and grief, not of joy. James 1 2.
account it all joy, not simply joy, or a little joy, but all joy, matter, of
glory, when you fa^l into diverse temptations, that is, tribulations, as Saint
Paul speaks Romans 5.3. they were temptations for trial of faith, and the trial
thereof is the furnace of affliction, Isa. 48.10. with 1 Pet. 1.6.7. Now if any
glory in their sin, and pride themselves in that as a glory, they glory in
their shame, Phil. 3.19. yea, if we do but fall into sin, it is matter of grief
and shame: so that suffering is as far to be preferred before sin, as joy is
before grief, and glory is beyond shame; to which this also may be added, That
God himself takes pleasure, joy and delight in the trials of good men; for
though he delight not to grieve the children of men, yet, Job 9.23. he laughs
at the trial of the innocent; and in this sense many understand that Text. God
laughs not at them as at the wicked, by way of derision and scorn, but by way
of pleasure: just as a Commander in War rejoices when he puts a Party, of
whose valor and skill he is confident, upon some dangerous service: though he
knows that some of them must bleed, and perhaps dye for it, yet it pleases him
to see such engaged in it. Thus God laughs at the trial of the innocent, for he
sees they are men that will bide a trial; as the excellent Expositor on the
Book of Job expresses it, with much more to this effect. God took pleasure in
the sufferings of Christ (as Christ himself also did) and so he does in the
sufferings of his people, as he did in Jobs, of whom God makes his boast to the
Devils face, that he still held fast his integrity, though he were afflicted by
the Devil, who moved God against him to destroy him without a cause, Job 2 3.
upon which an ingenious and eloquent person speaks thus: Surely one may call
him more then happy Job, since if, as David tells us, the man is happy, whose
sins God is pleased to cover; what may that man be accounted, whose graces he
vouchsafes to proclaim? God then (we see) takes pleasure in and laughs at the
trial of such his Champions and Heroes: The H^athen Moralist (Seneca) ventured
to say, That if there were any spectacle here below noble enough, and worthy to
entertain the eyes of God, it was that of a good man generously contending with
ill fortune (as they used to phrase) afflictions and sufferings. But now, when
men sin, he laughs them to scorn, if his sons and daughters sin, it provokes
him to grieve and be angry; but the sins of others provoke him to laugh at and
to hate them, Psalm. 2.4, 5 Psalm. 37.13. and which is better to suffer and
please, or to sin and grieve God? to undergo that which by patient suffering of
it, will rejoice and glorify God, and give him occasion to magnify us too? or
to do that which will provoke him to be angry with us till we be consumed, and
then laugh at our calamity? Prove. 1.26, 27.

3. There are many blessed encouragements given us to suffering, none to sin,
but all manner of discouragements against sinning: all encouragement and no
discouragement to suffering; all discouragement and no encouragement to sin.
As, when we suffer for God, God suffers with us; but when we sin, God suffers
by us: In all their (his peoples) afflictions he was afflicted, he sympathized
with them, Isa. 63.9. Heb. 4.15. but when he speaks of sin, it is Saul, Saul,
why persecutest thou me? Saul's sin persecuted Christ Jesus, Acts 9.4. God
complains of their iniquity, as a burden, as if they made a Cart of God, and
loaded him with sins as with sheaves, Amos 2.13.

Again, when we suffer for God, he has promised to help and assist us with
counsel and comfort, with succor and support; but when we sin, God leaves us
and withdraws his presence and consolations; if Jacob be in the fire or water,
God will be with him, Isa. 43.1, 2 but, says God, if you forsake me, I will
forsake you. 1 Chro. 18 9. and 2.15.2. Sin is a forsaking o^ God, and sin makes
God forsake us: now which is better, to have God with and for, or against us?
if God be for us, it matters not who be against us, Romans 8.31. but if God be
against us, and depart from us, all is Ichabad, 1 Samuel 4.21, 22. Job 34.29.

Yet once more, sufferings for God are evidences and tokens of his love, and
that we are his children and darlings, Heb. 12.6-8. but sin i^ a proof that we
are not born of God, 1 John 5.18, 19. but are children of wrath, and heirs o^
the Devil and Hell. Thus the encouragement to suffering, and discouragements to
sinning speak sin the worst evil.

4 Suffering, though for sin, is designed to cure us, and kill sin; surely the
remedy is better then the disease; but sin kills us, and does strengthen sin:
they that add sin to sin, feed it, give it nourishment, and new life, and
strength, its adding fuel to the fire, which sufferings are to quench and put
out.

Psalm. 119.71. 'Twas good for ^e that I was afflicted, why? because before I
was afflicted I went astray; affliction is better then going astray: the fruit
is the taking away of sin, Isa. 27.9. yea, to make us partakers of his
Holiness, Heb. 12.10. which is the end of the greatest promises, 2 Pet 1.4. 2
Cor. 7.1. So that God aims at the same thing in bringing threatened evils on us,
as in making good promises, and making them good to us: Is not this better then
sin, did that ever do such kindnesses for us? A as, its mercies are cruclties,
its courtesies are injuries, its kindnesses are killing ((...), Sic notus
Ulysses?) it never did (nor meant) us any good, unless men be so mad to think,
that it is good to be defiled, dishonored, and damned!

5. Sufferings tend to make us perfect, but sin makes us more and more
imperfect. The second Adam was perfected by suffering, Heb. 2.10. ^u the first
Adam was made imperfect by sinning; and thus it fares with both their seeds and
children as it did with them, a sinner and without strength, Romans 5.6. a sinner
and without God, without Christ, without hope, etc Ephesians. 2.12. But a sufferer
after a while (...) be perfected by the same God of all grace, who has called
him into eternal glory by Christ Jesus (and after his example) 1 Pet. 5.10. but
the more a sinner, the more imperfect, and fitter for Hell.

6. Suffering for God glorifies God, 1 Pet 4.14. and calls on us to thank and
glorify God for it, verse. 16. but sin dishonours God: by suffering the Saints
are happy, verse. 14. being Gods Martyrs; but by sinning sinners are miserable,
as the Devils Martyrs, verse. 15. and which (I pray you) is better, to suffer
for God, or for the Devil? to be suffering Saints, or Sinners?

7. Sufferings for God, Christ, and Righteousness, add to our glory (as well
as they glorify God) but sinning adds to our torment: That suffering adds to
our glory, see Mat. 5.10, 11, 12. 2 Cor. 4.17. Light afflictions work an
exceeding weight of glory; but sin (which is exceeding sinful) works an
exceeding weight of wrath and torment, Romans 2.5. It heaps heap upon heap, load
upon load, to make up a treasury of wrath: which then is the greatest evil (I
speak to wise men, judge ye what I say) light affliction, or heavy sin? which
is better, treasures of glory or treasures of wrath? or which is all one, to
suffer, or to sin?

Thus far I have evinced, that sin is worse then affliction: I, but it may be
said, if we suffer not unto death, it is no great suffering, skin for skin and
all a man has will he give for his life, but to dye is dreadful; it is worse to
sin: I shall therefore prove,

2. Sin is worse then death.
That sin is worse then death: we use to say, of two evils choose the least, now
to dye is more cheap and easy then to sin: as Gods lovingkindness is better
then life, we had better part with this then that; so sin is worse then death,
we had better undergo this, then do that, better submit to death, then commit
sin, as I hinted before from Mat. 10.28. But let us compare them.

Sin is more deadly then death, viz. the separation of soul and body, the
dissolution of Natures frame and the union thereof: this (which we call Death)
is apprehended as a great evil, as appears by man's unwillingness to dye; men
will live in sickness and pain, they will be in deaths often rather then dye
once: and it is not only an evil in apprehension, but it is really so to humane
Nature, for it is called an enemy, 1 Cor. 15.26. It Is true, death is a friend to
grace; but it is as true that death is an enemy to nature; and there are four
things in which death is evil, and an enemy to man, and in all these respects,
sin is more an enemy to man then death.

1. Death is separating; it separates the nearest and dearest relations, yea,
that which God has joined together, man and wife, soul and body: it separates
from Estates, Ordinances, etc. as I showed before; thus death is a great evil
and enemy; true, but sin is worse, for it brought death, and all the evils that
come by death, and separates man (while alive) from God, who is the light and
life of our lives. Death separates not from the love of God, that sin does,
Romans 8.38, 39. Isa. 59.2.

2. Death is terrifying, it is ((...)) the King of Terrors, Job 18.14. it is a
grim Sir, a very sour and tetrical thing: it is ghastly and frightful, for men
are not only unwilling but afraid to dye; but all the terror that is in death,
sin puts there, it is the sting of death, 1 Cor. 13.56. without which, though it
kill, it cannot curse, nor hurt any man: so that sin is more terrible then
death, for without sin either there had been no death, or (to be sure) no
terror in death; when the sting is taken away by the death of Christ, there is
no danger nor cause of fear, Heb 2.14, 15. and the Apostle looking on the
Prince of Peace, was not afraid of the King of Terrors, but could challenge and
upbraid it, 1 Cor. 15 55

3. Death is killing, but sin much more; death deprives of natural and
temporal, but sin deprives of spiritual and eternal life; death kills but the
body, sin kills the soul, and brings it under a worse death then the first,
viz. the second: Men may kill us, but only God can destroy us, i. e. damn us,
and that he never does but for sin; so that sin is more ^i^ling then death is.

4. Death is corrupting, it brings the body to corruption, and makes it so
loathsome, that we say of our dearest relations (as Abraham of Sarah when she
was dead) bury her out of my sight; death makes every man say to the worm, thou
art my mother, and to corruption and putrefaction, thou art my sister, Job
17.14 But sin corrupts us more then death (for he that dyed without sin, saw no
corruption) it defiles us, and makes us a stink in the nostrils of God and men,
Genesis 34.30. the old man and its lusts are corrupt and do corrupt us, Ephesians. 4.22.
They corrupt our souls, and that which corrupts souls (the principal man of the
man) is much worse then that which corrupts the body only; but sin corrupts the
body too while alive, intemperance, uncleanness corrupts soul and body; so that
sin is even in this worse then death. Our Savior tells the Jews, that their
great misery was not that they should dye, but that they should dye in their
sins, Job. 8 21. intimating that sin was worse then death, and that which made
death a misery; better dye in an Hospital or a Ditch then in sin; it is better
to dye any how, then sin, and dye in sin, and therefore the Father told Eudoxia
the Empress, when she threatened him, Nil nisi peccatum timeo, I fear nothing
but to sin. And 'ewas a Princely Speech of a Queen, who said, She had rather
hear of her childrens death, then that they had sinned. And they of whom the
world was not worthy, being too good to live long, chose rather to dye then
sin, Heb. 11. and many a good man (like S. Paul) desires to dye, because this
dying will prove the death of sin. Sin is worse then death, yea, and,

3. Sin is worse then the Devil: Sin is worse then the Devil.
the Devil is inde^d a terrible Enemy, the evil and envious one, the hater of
mankind, but he knows he can nor damn nor hurt men without sin: Sin can do that
without the Devil, which the Devil cannot do without sin, and that is, undo
men. God and the Devil are not so contrary as God and Sin; for the Devil has
something ^eft (viz.) a Being which was of God: but sin never was nor can be of
God, he is neither Author of, nor Tempter to it, James 1.13. Sin made the Devil
what he is (as a Devil) the Devil was not made so of God: as to man, the Devil
('it is true) does now seek to devour him, but he cannot do it without sin, nor
can he compel any man to sin. But,

1. Though the Devil tempt, it is man that sins. Temptations from Satan to si^,
are not sins nor the way to Hell; but the very temptations of sin are sins, the
way to more sins, and so to Hell. A man's own lusts are more and worse tempters
then the Devil, and the Scripture speaks as if a man were not tempted (nor
indeed is effectually) till his lust do it, James 1.14. If a man were tempted
by the Devil forty days, and yet without sin as Christ was; yea, tempted all
his days, yet if a man yield not, but the grace of God be sufficient for him,
he may as St. Paul, glory in his infirmities, and triumph over the messenger of
Satan, 2 Cor 12. The Devil gives over for a season, which sinful lusts scarce
ever do; they haunt men more then the Devil does, There is a scum of filthiness
beiling or ^ubling up, when the Devil does not meddle with us. Libera me a male
homine meipso, was St Austins Prayer, and should be ours; for indeed, no man
nor Devil is so bad to us, as evil-self is to us. The Serpent beguiled me, and
I did eat, was no excuse; the Devil owed me a spite, and paid it, will not
apologize; it is man that sins, and sin that damns, either of which the Devil
cannot force upon man.

2. As sin is worse then the Devil as a Tempter, and a worse Tempter; so sin is
worse then the Devil as a Tormentor, and a worse Tormentor. The Devil is cruel
enough, a roaring Lion, and many times takes possession of men, and handles
them most unmercifully, and will much more torment men in Hell (as I have shown
above) but all this while the Devil is without the spirit of a man; but sin is
there, takes possession of, and torments that ^is a grief to be tempted to sin,
but it is a torment to be a sinner; and God does more form when he pardons us,
and more to our ease and refreshment, then if he did cast as many Devils out of
us, as he did out of Mary Ma^^^^lene, or a^ whole Legion, as he did, Mark 5.9.
Yea, in Hell, the gnawing worm of a guilty and upbraiding conscience does more
torment men then Devils do: 'Twould be a relief to a man in Hell, if he could
but have peace in his conscience; or if he could say, that he were there
without his demerit, and that his perdition were not of himself. But to eeke
out this a little further, I say:

4. That Sin is worse then Hell; Sin is worse then Hell.
Hell is but a punishment, Sin is a crime, which has more evil then the
punishment, and is that which made Hell the punishment thereof; yea, the
greatness of this punishment argues the greatness of the crime, and the
sinfulness of sin; Gods being glorified upon men in such a way, is a clear and
full proof what an evil thing it is to sin against and dishonor a God, and
consequently that Hell it self does not so much hurt (no not to man) as sin
does. Hell indeed is a disinal place of horror and torment, the extremity of
suffering, but never had an existence till sin had; nor never could admit of
such names as it does, and such torments, if sin were not there. It Is storied
as a Saying of Anselmes, that if Sin and Hell were set before him, and he must
go through one of them, he would rather choose to go through Hell then Sin: it is
sin, it is sin, that is the worst of Hell, and worse then Hell: it is that which
makes sinners cry out of the unhabitableness of devouring sire, and everlasting
burnings, which are no terror to righteous and upright souls, as it is, Isa.
33.14.15. It Is sin that makes Hell to be Hell; God was never angry, till sin
made him so, his wrath was never kindled but by sin; now as sin made Hell, so
the more sin, the more Hell, as Tire and Sidon feel beyond Sodom and Gomorrah.
If there were no Hell but such as Cain and Judas felt within them, 'twere yet a
great one; and they would tell you 'twere damnation enough to be a sinner, and
to feel the horrors of a guilty and accusing conscience.

Yet a little more to show, that Sin is the worst of Evils.

1. Other proofs (...) sin is the worst (...).
There is more evil in it, then good in all the Creation, that is, it does us
more hurt then all the Creation can do us good; when we are sick or wounded,
there are many medicinal Creatures that can help to recover and cure us; but of
this evil of sin there is no cure by any or all the Creatures: 'twas too hard
for that good wherein we were created, and all created good ever since has not
been able to recover us from it: no, it is not but by God that we can be either
pardoned or purged of it; all the Angels in Heaven could neither pay our debt
for us, nor cleanse our hearts for us; and God himself does new-make us, for
mending would not serve our turn, and therefore man's recovery is called a new
Creation, and the man, a new Man, created, etc. Ephesians. 4. and 'twas David's
prayer, create in^^^e a clean heart, Psalm. 51. Sin is an evil past the skill
and power of all the Creation to cure and cleanse.

2. There Is no evil but this to be repented of: God allows us to sigh and
groan, to mourn and lament at other evils; but for this he calls for and
requires repentance, which is a severe thing, full of rebuke and disgrace to
man, though it be a grace. How great is that evil for which a man must cry
Peccavi, and to bring him to the confession whereof, and repentance for and
from it, other evils are inflicted!

3. They are the greatest punishments, which are made up of sins: It Is worse to
be let alone and given up, then if men were sent quick to Hell; for they live
but as reserved to fill up their measure brimful, and to undergo the more of
Hell, to grow rich in wrath, having treasured it up against that day. As it is
the best of comforts to have assurance of the love of God, and to be sealed to
the day of Redemption; so it is the saddest of judgments to be given up (as it is
three times in one place, Romans 1.) to their lusts, to an hardened heart, a
seared conscience, a reprobate mind; when God shall say, let him that is filthy
be filthy still, Rev. 22.11. and they shall not see nor understand, lest they
should be converted, Isa. 6.9, 10. a dreadful place, which is six times quoted
in the New Testament, as you may see in the Margin.

4. Sin is the worst of Evils, as appears by this, that God hates men for it;
it is not only sin, Prove. 6.16.19. but sinners that God hates, and that for sin:
Psalm. 5.5. it is said of God, that be hates the workers of iniquity, not only
the works of iniquity, but the workers of it: hatred is not known by judgments,
the evil of suffering, but it is known by the evil of sin which is before us,
Eccl. 9 1, 2. it is for this that the merciful God says, he that made them will
not have mercy on them, nor show them any favor, Isa. 27 11. and as a Learned
person expresses it, This is the highest that can be spoken of the venom of
sin, that in a sort, and to speak after the manner of men, it has put hatred
into God himself, it made the Lord hate and destroy his own workmanship. God is
Love, and Judgment his strange work; yet sin makes him out of love with men,
and in love with their destruction at last; so though he delight not in the
death of a repenting, yet he does in the death of an impenitent sinner.

5. It proves Sin the worst and greatest of Evils, that Christ is the best and
greatest of Saviors, and his Salvation the best and greatest Salvation: he
came to save sinners, and to save them, not from the petty evils of sickness,
affliction, and perfection, but from sin, the greatest of all evils. Math.
1.21. 1 Timothy 1.15. To be saved from Egypt was of old reckoned great; but being
delivered out of the North, was a greater Salvation, Jer. 23.8. but Salvation
from Sin is the greatest Salvation, and therefore Sin the worst and greatest of
Evils.

Having thus evinced Sin to be the worst of Evils, ^n being against God, infers:
the Evil of Evils, none to be compared to it for evil; I shall now apply it
more distinctly, and show what we are to inter From the sinfulness of Sin, His
patience to be wonderful.
as it is 1. Against God. 2. Against Man.


As sin is considered against God, I infer:

1. That the patience of God with, His patience to be wonderful.
and the long-suffering of God toward sinners, is wonderful; if sin be so
exceeding sinful, i. e. contrary to and displeasing to God, then surely his
patience is exceeding great, his goodness exceeding rich, his long-suffering
exceeding parvellous, even to wonder! That God should entreat Sinners his
enemies to be reconciled, 2 Cor. 5.20. that God should stand at a Sinners door
and knock, Rev. 3 20. that God should wait on Sinners to be gracious to them,
Isa. 30.18. is not after the manner of men, but of God; yea, the God of grace
and patience and to be admired for ever! That at first God should think
thoughts of good, and not of evil, of peace, and not of wrath, but visit us in
the cool of the day, was a wonder; but that after he had imparted and commended
his heart-love to us in and by his Son, Romans 5.8. and both were rejected, that
he should yet continue to offer, and call, and wait, it is a miracle of
miracles. What shall we say? it is God, who is (as his Name is, Exodus 34.6.
Numb. 10.18. Psalm. 86.15. and as he was yesterday, he is to day) the God of
grace and patience, Romans 15.5 and rich in it, Romans 2.4. with 2 Pet. 3.9. 1 Timothy
1.13. -- 16. yea, we are all living monuments and instances of his goodness and
patience: it is of the Lords mercies that we all are not altogether and utterly
consumed, yea, and that in Hell, Lam. 3.22

Sin is so sinful, so contrary, and displeasing to God, and has made man so
much Gods enemy, that it is a miracle he should find his enemies (any of them)
and let them go well away: That God who is of purer eyes then to behold
iniquity, should look on the sins of men, that his eye should so affect his
heart, as to grieve him, yea, that it tempts and provokes him to anger, wrath,
and hatred, and that God should keep in anger (which is like burning coals in
our bosom) and not let out all his wrath, and ease himself of his burden by
avenging himself of his adversaries, but woo and wait on sinners, Oh the power
of his patience! Oh the infiniteness of his mercy and compassions! Oh the
riches of unsearchable grace! God sees it, is not ignorant, God is sensible of
it, and concerned; for it grieves and vexes him: God is able to right himself
when he pleases, and yet forbears, and is patient, Oh wonder!

Consider yet again:

1. The multitude of sinners that are in the world, if 'twere but one or two,
they might be winkt at, and past by; but when all the world lies in wickedness,
as it does, 1 John 5.19. when there is none righteous, no not one (if there had
been but ten, God would have spared Sodom, etc. though ten thousand sinners
might be there) but when there is not a man to be found that sins not, but
all ahve sinned, Jew and Gentile, high and low, etc. Oh what grace, what
patience is this!

2. Consider the multitude of sins, and the multitude of sins in and by every
sinner; the sins are more numerous then sinners: if all men had finned, and but
once, it would have mitigated the matter; but sin has grown up with men, that
were not only conceived and born in sin, but went astray before they could go,
even from the womb; not a good thought to be found in their heart, Genesis 6.5 it
grows up faster then men do, they are old in sin, when young in years, they are
adding iniquity to iniquity, and drawing it on with cords and ropes, committing
it with both hands greedily, as if they could not sin enough; they dare God
himself to judge them; they drink down iniquity like water, as if 'twere their
element, and nourishment, and pleasure also: yea, and among the rest his sons
and daughters provoke him with their sins, which go very near his heart, Deuteronomy.
32.19. and yet, behold, how miraculously patient and long-suffering God is!

3. Consider the length of time in which these multitude of sinners have
committed these multitudes of sins; from the beginning even till now,
generation after generation: if all the world had sinned and committed all
manner of sins, if it had been but for an hour or a day, it had not been so
provoking: but as length of time aggravates misery, so it does sin: God reckons
up 120 years patience (after many before that) as to the old World, Genesis 6 3
and to Israel, forty years, Heb. 3.17. He came to the Figtree of the Jewish
Nation, three years in person, seeking fruit before he cut it down, or so much
as gave order for it, Luke 13.6, 7. He had waited longer on all these, but
these were over time (such as Landlords allow their Tenants after Quarter-day)
space given before Distraint or Ejectment. We were old enough to be damned when
we were young; but God has given us an overplus of time, space for
repentance, and has not yet cut us down as Cumber-grounds: Oh patience!

4 Consider that sins cry to God against us; and the Devil to be sure is a
constant Solicitor against us. The cry of Cains sin went up, Genesis 4.10. the
cry of Sodoms sin was great, Genesis 18.20, 21. and 19.13. the detaining of
laborers wages cries, James 5.4. and indeed all oppression cries, Hah. 2.8. --
12. and yet God (as if he were loath to judge us, or take up reports against us)
comes down to see if these things be so, and does as 'twere put Abraham and his
friends upon interceding, by telling them what he is about to do, Amos 3.7. Oh
the goodness of God!

5. There are many aggravating circumstances attending the sins of men (beside
the greatness of its own nature) which do exceedingly provoke God: men's sins
are not only many and great, but are both multiplied and magnified, they are
greatned by many circumstances: men increase and heighten their sin by not
repenting of it, and greaten their impenitence by despising the goodness of God
which should lead them to repentance, Romans 2. which makes them inexcusable, and
incapable to escape the judgment of God. Men sin against deliverances, as if
they were delivered to do all manner of abominations, and to sin more then
before, Jer. 7.8.9, 10. Men sin against their purposes and promises, vows, and
protestations made at Sea or Land, on sick-beds, or any times of danger, and
return like the dog to the vomit: They compound with God in time of fear and
danger, but put him off with nothing, when the danger is (the more, yet as they
think) over. M^n sin against means and means of grace, they have precept on
precept, line on line, yet sin still and more: whatever way God takes with
them, yet nothing takes with them, as Amos 4 6 -- 11. this and this have I
done, yet and yet ye have not returned; mourn or pipe to them, it is all alike,
they will not hearken; nay, alas, Men sin against knowledge and conscience;
though they know God, they glorify him not as God; they know their Masters
will, but do it not, Romans 1.21. Luke 12.47. James 4.17 'twere in vain to
attempt it, because impossible to attain it, viz. to reckon up all the
aggravating circumstances of men's sins, which make them more sins, for degree,
multitude, and magnitude; and yet God waits to be gracious with a
notwithstanding! Oh grace, grace unto it! is it not a wonder that men are
spared, especially considering what quick dispatch God made with Angels that
sinned! Wonder of Grace!

But though God be so patient beyond what we could ask or think, yet he does
sometimes, and will for ever punish sinners that repent not.

2. Therefore I infer, The judgment of God on sinners is just.
that sin being so contrary to God, and against his will and glory, the
judgments of God (great, though they be) on sinners (whether here or hereafter)
are just: God often punishes less, never more then iniquity deserves; the
greatest sufferings are no more nor less then sin deserves, the worst on this
side Hell is mercy, the worst of and in Hell is but justice. For,

1. If we consider the Nature of God that judges, he is and cannot but be
just, shall not the God and Judge of all the Earth do right? Can he do, or will
he do wrong? Oh no; he lays on man no more then is meet, that man might not
enter into judgment with God, Job 34.23. Cain could say, his punishment was
intolerable, but could not say, it was unjust; though greater then he could
bear, yet not greater then he did deserve. God will not argue the case with men
merely as a Sovereign, but as a Judge, who proceeds not by Will only, but by
Rule: many times over when the judgments of God are spoken of in the
Revelations, as Chap. 15.3. and 16.7. it is still just, and true, and righteous,
though his ways unsearchable, yet true, and just, and righteous; he makes war
in righteousness. Death is but sins due wages, Romans 6.27. therefore it is said,
their damnation is just, Romans 3.8. and every sin has a just recompense of
reward, Heb. 2.2. guilt stops men's mouths under their suffering the judgment of
God, Lam. 3.39. Romans 3.19. Psalm. 51.4. with Romans 3.4. If God judge man, God is
found true; but if man judge God, man is found a liar.

Would man complain of the Devil? (as Eve did) it is true, he is to blame, but
is not so much the cause of man's sin, as man himself is; the Devil might tempt
indeed, but could not compel; so that it is man that sins, though tempted to
sin, and though man could not prevent being tempted, yet he might have forborne
to have sinned. Would man complain of God? what Action would he enter, what
would he lay to his charge? did not God make him in the best of Creature-state?
did not God tell him what was evil, and the danger of sinning? what (may God
say as of Israel) what could I have done more that I have not done? so that man
must say, that he has rewarded evil to himself by doing evil, and that his
perdition is of himself, Hos. 13.9. Sinners have their option and choice, why
then do they complain?

2. The severest Judgment of God on sinners is just, if we consider the nature
of sin; it is Deicidium God-murther, and it is just with God to do by sinners
what they would have unjustly done by him, viz. take away from them all good
and glory, displease and destroy them, because they would him: if we consider
the person sinned against, and the aim of sin to ungod God, what punishment can
be thought bad enough? The Schools tell us, and truly that objectively sin is
infinite; Oh what punishment can be too great for so great an evil! if its deed
could have answered its intention and will, God had been no more, Oh what an
horrid thing is this! As none but infinite power can pardon it, so none but
infinite power can punish it sufficiently: As its aim is infinite, so is its
desert, and therefore though its punishment be so, it is but just. Seeing sin
contains all evil, it is not strange that its punishment should be answerable
and proportionate: That all sin should undergo all misery, is not unjust; God
renders sufferings to man but according to his doings, Jer. 17.10.

3. The judgment of God is just, if we consider the state of sinners wherein
they dye, which is a state of impenitency, and they have thereby treasured up
this wrath against the day of wrath, and revelation of the righteous judgment
of God, Romans 2.5 They that dye impenitent, continue as they dye, and so
consequently do sin, and are impenitent for ever, and is it (or shall it seem)
unreasonable that everlasting sinning should be everlastingly punished? It Is no
severity in God to damn such men for ever; let man repair the injury he has
done, and pay the debt he owes God to the utmost farthing, and he shall go
free: if he say he cannot, that is his crime as well as misery, for he might
have chosen whether he would have done the injury, and run into this debt.
Beside, he cannot plead satisfaction made by Christ, for he made none for final
unbelief and impenitency, and this man never accepting Christ on Gospel-terms,
cannot plead his Name or Righteousness to God, and there is not Salvation in
any other; so that upon all accounts sins sinfulness clears the Justice and
Judgments of God.

But though Gods Judgment be just, how great soever on sinners; yet he is
pleased to pardon and forgive some sinners, and therefore I shall thirdly show
how precious a mercy forgiveness of sin is, Forgiveness of sin a wonder of
mercy.
and that it is a wonder that any is pardoned, The preciousness of this mercy,
viz. forgiveness of sins appears in this;

That it is (1) New Covenant-mercy, the new Covenant is called a better
Covenant, and its Promises, better Promises, Heb. 8.6. the old Covenant, that
of works, vouchsafed no pardon; but this is the mercy of the new Covenant, viz.
that of grace, Heb. 8 12.

Forgiveness of sins is, (2) The fruit of the precious blood of Christ, which
was shed to this end: that must needs be precious that cost so great a price; 1
Pet. 1 18. we were redeemed with no less then blood, and no worse blood then
that of the Lamb and Son of God, which Redemption is called Forgiveness of
sins, Ephesians. 1.7. Col. 1.14

Yea, (3) By forgiveness of sins we have the knowledge of Salvation (pardoned
and saved) Luke 1.77 they that have their sins remitted are blessed, and shall be
blessed, Romans 4.8.

And then, (4) By this mercy of sins forgiveness, we have ease and rest for our
souls, and cause to be of good theer; the sense of pardon will take away the
sense of pain. Isa. 33 24. what, sick when pardoned? no, I am no more sick;
when sin is taken away, the abiding of sickness is as nothing: The sense of sin
makes us sick, but the sense of pardon makes us well; that we can say, as Psalm.
116.7. return, my soul, unto thy rest, for the Lord has dealt bountifully with
thee: a man sensible of sin, and not of pardon, can hardly sleep or take any
rest; but when the joyful sound of a pardon is proclaimed and received, the
soul justified by faith, has peace with God and within himself, and is at
rest. Though the sick of the palsy was not cured, yet he had cause to be of
good cheer, because his sins were forgiven him, Mat. 9.2. This is called
speaking comfortably (or to the heart) Isa. 40.1, 2. comfort ye, comfort ye, my
people, speak comfortably to Jerusalem, tell her that her warfare is
accomplished, is that all? no, but which i^ more, tell her that her iniquity is
pardoned. It Is a greater comfort to hear that our sins are pardoned, th^n that
our afflictions are at an end: it makes us able as well as willing to undergo
affliction, sufferings, and persecutions.

Now if we consider what a sinful thing sin is against God, how displeasing to
him, it is a wonderful thing that God should pardon any man^ sin! God does more
then man can do for himself, or expect that God should do for him; yea, it
costs God more (witness the blood of Christ) and requires more of his power,
then to heal all our diseases, and bestow all the good of this world upon us.
Our Savior tells us, it is easier to say to an impotent man, Arise, take up thy
bed and walk, then to say, Thy sins are forgiven thee: and it is a declaration
of his power, Mat. 9.5. and when Moses prays for pardon of Isreal's sin, says
he, let the power of the Lord be great. Numb. 14.17. -- 19. it is called Riches
of mercy, Ephesians. 2.4. and great love, and such power as by which Christ was, and
we are raised from the dead, Col. 2.13. and Ephesians. 1.7. Oh who is a God lik^ unto
thee that pardonest iniquity! Micah. 7.18. This is the Mystery that Angels pry
into and admire, 1 Pet. 1.12. God does as 'twere act against his own word, Genesis
2.17. he revokes his threatening: it is more then we could ask or think, it is
beyond our reach, as it is expressed, I^^. 55.7, 8, 9. Men (when sensible of sin)
can hardly belleve that God will or can do it, but are apt to say (as Cain) our
iniquity is greater then can be forgiven. Man's mercy is large when it reaches
to seven times, what is God, then that reaches to more then seventy times
seven in a day! Mat. 18.21. When good men have prayed, Lord, forgive them not,
Isa. 2.9. Jer. 18.23. yet God has pardoned: and when himself was so put to it,
as to say, How shall I pardon thee for this? Jer. 5 3. yet God offers it, and
teaches men what to say to him in such cases, Hos. 14.1. -- 4. that it may be
done.

4. I infer from hence, Sin not to be committed o^ any terms whatsoever.
that no sin is to be committed on any terms, or on any account or reason
whatsoever, because it is contrary to God, against his will and glory; this
reason over-ballanceth and out-weighs any reason that can be given for sinning;
let sin and sinners plead never so plausibly, how gainful or pleasureful sin
is, yet (as 'twas said of a Roman Ambassador, Romanus tamen) it is a sin, i. e.
it is against God, which is a greater reason why it should not, then any can be
alleged, why it should be committed, or so much as debated, whether it should
or not: for no reason can equal this, that it is against God. It Is a common
saying by which persons excuse their own and other men's sins, that they are no
man's foes but their own, they wrong none but themselves; if that were as true
as it is false, yet therefore sin should not be committed; but sinners are Gods
foes, they are injurious to God, which is more then being so to any other or
themselves: as we should do good, not only because it is good for us, but
because 'twill glorify God, which is an higher end (and so much higher as God
is above us) so we should forbear to do evil, not only because it is against us,
but because it is against God, who is more to be beloved by us then our selves.
To sin against God admits of many aggravations, for it is against God that made
us, yea, fighting against God that made us; we are all the offspring of God,
the children of God by the first nature, though children of wrath by corrupt
nature: it is observable how the Genealogy runs, Luke 3.39. which was the son of
Adam, which was the Son of God. Adam was, and so were we the children of God by
creation, God was our Father, who made us, and woe to him that striveth with
(and fights against) his Maker, Isa. 43.9. it is woeful sinning against God as a
Maker; Oh how unnatural is it to sin against our Parents! so heinous was it,
that Exodus 21.15. he that smites father or mother shall dye. Oh what is it
then to smite the Father of our Spirits, the Father of our father and mother!
if the Ravens of the Valley shall pick out the eyes of them that curse father
and mother, Prove. 30.17. what is like to come on them that make nothing of
cursing God himself!

It Is against God in whose hand our breath is, and whose are all our ways, on
which account we should glorify him, Dan. 5.23. he has our being and
well-being at his dispose, he can crush us as the moth, and turn us not only to
the dust, but to the hell of death: what he does for us, and what he can do
against us, do hugely and strongly oblige us not to sin against him: We are
beholden to him for all the good we have: that nakedness which had once a
Reverence, paid it from the creatures, would now be a scorn to them, if God did
not cloth it: the creatures would not serve us, nor be serviceable to us, if
God did not command and bless them; for bread we should have none, or no good
by it, if he did not provide and bless it: what could weak things do to
strengthen? or dead things do to keep us alive, did not his Word do more then
they? we live not by bread, but by his Word. If God should deny us bread by
day, or sleep by night, what would become of us? Oh how can we find it in our
heart to sin against God! There are two great wonders; the one, that God should
be so good to man, who is, and does evil against him: the other, that man
should do evil against so good a God! O foolish people, and unwise, thus to
requite the Lord!

It Is God that preserves our going out and coming in; and keeps us from
infinite, invisible, as well as many visible dangers abroad and at home: if we
did but know our dangers, we thould go in fear of our lives every moment; the
Earth would swallow us up, the fire would burn us, the water would drown us, if
God were not with us to preserve us; he could have sent us down to Hell long
ago, and yet gives space for repentance, and waits to be gracious: It Is true,
he will at last judge us, and what shall we do? how shall we stand, if found
sinners when he rises up to judge terribly the Earth? what Sanctuary or City
of refuge shall we fly to, that we may be secure? Alas! there will be no
^scaping, his vengeance in that day will overtake and ruin us. Think of this,
and think whether thou can find it in thy heart to sin, or to think it a
little or light thing to sin against God, such a God, whatever may be pretended
for it; yet let me say this further, that if God had not laid so many
obligations on us, yet were we bound not to sin against his Sovereignty, and
the Authority he has over us; but when he humbles himself, and vouchsafes so
many kindnesses to us, 'twere a monstrous ingratitude and rebellion to sin
against him, whatever profit or pleasure might come to us thereby, or whatever
reason may be alleged or pretended for our so doing.

5. I might hence infer the beauty, the transcendent and incomparable beauty of
Holiness, how lovely a thing it is in the eyes of God, and ought to be in the
eyes of men: this is the thing that is so agreeable and pleasing to God, so
adorning and beneficial to man. The black spot of sin sets off the beauty of
Holiness (contraria juxta se posita magis elucescunt.) But having in a
Discourse by it self (and which I have published in Print) I say, having
already spoken thereunto, I refer you to that Sermon, and shall add no more to
this Head here.

Secondly, Sins being against man's good, infers.
I shall draw some Inferences from the Consideration of Sin, as it is contrary
to the good of Man.

1. That they are mistaken who seek for any good in or from sin.
Then I infer, that they are miserably mistaken that seek for any good in Sin;
as sin is, so its effects are, all evil to man: there are (woe unto them) that
call evil good, or as it is in the Margin, Isa. 5.20. that say concerning evil,
it i^ good; they think (and stick not to say as they think) that evil is good,
and place their chief happiness in the chiefest evil, i. e. in sin, and (as
it is said of Doeg, and such as he, Psalm. 52.3.) they love evil more then good.
Alas, how many do not only undo themselves, but take pains and pleasure to do
and in doing of it; yea, that think it strange, that others are not so mad as
they, and run not with them to the same excess of riot, 1 Pet 4.4. all which
proceeds from this mistake, that evil is good, viz. to them, as bringing
profit, honor, or pleasure to them, which is called the Lust of the Eye,
flesh, and pride of life, 1 John 2 16. from whence came the first sin, Gen 3.6.
but, alas, (as the event proved then, 'twill always) they gather no grapes from
thorns, nor figs from thistles, they seek the living among the dead, and may as
well find case in and from Hell, as good in or from sin: the morsels of sin are
deceitful, though called Dainties; sin is a mere cheat, with (not so much fair
as) false shows it deceives the heart of the simple: the stolen waters of sin
(how sweet soever they seem to be in the mouth and to the taste) will be gall
and wormwood in the belly; bitterness in the latter end. All the corruption
that is in the world, came in by lust, 2 Pet. 1 4 and all lust is deceitful,
Ephesians. 4.22. and thus the woman was first deceived, and by her the man, 1 Timothy 2
14 and instead of being as God, which they thought was promised, they became as
the Devil, which was the thing intended and designed by him; and sin first
deceived, and then slew St. Paul, as he speaks, Romans 7.11. It pretends as Jael
did to Sisera, to bring milk and butter in a Lordly dish, but the hammer and
nail is in its heart and hand: They that serve diverse lusts are deceived, as
the Apostle speaks, Titus 3.3. All the servants of sin are deceived, not of
sins wages, but of sins promises; and though they sport themselves (while they
play and nibble at the bait, like silly fishes) it is but in their own
deceiving, for an evil heart has deceived them, 2 Pet. 2.13. and therefore the
Apostle exhorts to take heed lest we be hardened through the deceitfulness of
sin, Heb 3.13. Sins first work is to deceive us, and when it has thereby drawn
us in, then it hardens, and so destroys us. But more particularly,

1. Whether 1. Of Profit.
I shall evince that there is not, nor can be any profit to man by sin: can
that be profitable that wrongs his soul? Alas, what does it profit a man to
gain the world and lose his soul? Sin costs dear, but profits nothing; they
make an ill purchase that buy their damnation: What got Cain by killing Christ
in his type Abel, or Judas by selling his person? surely he bought damnation
dear, though he sold his Savior cheap: Take your money, says he, I have
sinned; that I have sinned, made him weary of his gain and life; he got Hell,
or (as the saying is) Devil and all. What profit have any by that whereof they
are ashamed, Romans 6.21. All the works of darkness are unsruitful (as to any
good) Ephesians. 5.11. but good works are profitable, Titus 3.8. Sin is a very
chargeable thing, it cannot be maintained without great cost. Men might build
Hospitals at cheaper rates, then they can maintain their lusts: some men's sins
cost them more in a day, then their families do in a week, perhaps in a year.
Some starve their families to feed their lusts, which have turned many an house
out of door, and brought great Estates to a morsel of bread, beside what comes
hereafter. Lusts consume health and wealth, Prove. 5. Gluttony, Drunkenness,
Uncleanness are costly and chargeable sins.

Object. But it may be said, true, these are (as you say) costly sins indeed;
but what say you to Covetousness, that frugal and thrifty, that saving and
getting sin? I answer,

That Covetousness and all its gets or saves is unprofitable: For I pray
consider.

1. All is not gain that is gotten; I will tell you what a wise man saw and
said, Eccl. 5.13. There is a fore evil under the Sun, namely, riches kept by
the owners thereof to their hurt; here are riches and riches kept, but, alas,
it is for the owners hurt and detriment; better he had not had them, or had not
kept them: did these profit him? yes, if hurt be profit, not else: Where is the
profit? he can show you his hurt, but not his profit. They perish by evil
travel, and he begets a son, but can leave him nothing, for it is not in his
hand, verse. 14. while he had them, he could not sleep for them, verse. 12. and
his abundance made him poor; perhaps 'twas his crime that he was rich, and some
Vespasian or other mightier then he, finding this sponge swelled and full,
would needs squeeze him, and leave him hollow and empty. Stories tell us of
times, when Estates have been the greatest crimes persons have been guilty of,
though charged with malignancy or treason. Or,

2. Consider, Covetousness it self may be a thief, and rob men of the use and
comfort of their own possessions: the covetous man does always need, and is
indeed the poorest man in the world, Eccl. 4.8. There is one alone, there is
not a second (he is a single man unmarried, without a second-self) yet there is
no end of his labor, yet, says he not, for whom do I bereave my self of good;
observe it, while he gets goods, he bereaves himself of good, yea of the good
of his goods. Is this profitable? no, it is a sore travel^ for he has not power
to eat thereof, Eccl. 6.2. To fill his purse he starves his belly, and grudgeth
himself victuals.

3. Consider, that though you have much, and use it much, yet it will never
satisfy, and therefore must needs vex: no satisfaction, no prefit. A man's aim
is satisfaction, Luke 12.1^. but the eye is not satisfied with seeing, nor the
car with hearing, Eccl. 1.8. Now if they cannot satisfy the senses, much less
the souls of m^n, Eccl. 6.7. and which adds to the vexation, the love of
money increases faster then the money; so that, Eccl. 5.10, 11. he that loves
silver, shall not be satisfied with silver, nor he that loves ^^^ndance with
increase. Well, it may be thou (...) say, none of these are my cases; if not,
(...).

4. Consider that which must be thy case, thou (...) not carry away one penny
of thy estate with thee; and where is the profit then? what thou leavest behind
thee, is none of thine, but thou dyest the poorer for leaving thy riches behind
thee, and having not laid up thy treasures in Heaven, 1 Timothy 6. The rich man
said to his soul, thou have goods; but thou Fool, says our Savior, thou must
die to night, and whose shall they be? not thine. What do thou get by all thy
gettings, to leave them all behind thee? and it may be to them whom of all men
thou were most unwilling should enjoy them, Psalm. 39.6. Eccl. 2.18 21. To go
naked out of the world, is a sore evil, and no profit, Eccl. 5 15, 16. If thou
enjoy all to thy dying day, yet then thou losest all, and it may be do not
only lose it, but lose by it; riches profit not in the day of wrath, and surely
that cannot be worth much while we live, that will be worth nothing when we
dye. Beside, there is no man in more danger to lose by getting then the
covetous man, who is in the ready way to lose his soul; for the love of money
is the root of all evil, which while some have coveted after, they have gotten
nothing by it but the loss of their souls, being drowned in perdition, 1 Timothy 6
9, 10. And truly, take it here for the present, while ^is in its best; the
pains of getting, the cares of keeping, and fear of losing, eat out the comfort
of having; so that all must subscribe to what our Savior said, Luke 12.15. a
man's life (neither the length, health, or comfort, much less the happiness of a
man's life) consists in the things he enjoys in this world; life needs more
and better things. Oh what sil^y foolish things are sinners! to place the good
of profit, in that which is not only unprofitable, but chargeable, to pay so
dear a price for so vile a commodity, to pay after the rate of Heaven, and be
put off with Hell! We laugh at the simplicity and childishness of little ones
that will part with gold for a toy, for a new-nothing: but how ridiculous are
they, and worse then childish, that venture precious souls for that which does
not profit! as God upbraids Israel of old, that they changed their glory for
that which did not profit, and (worse then that great King who sold his Kingdom
for a draught of water) they leave and part with a fountain of living waters,
for a cistern, an empty cistern that has none, yea, for a broken cistern that
can hold no water, no not a drop, Jer. 2.21. Sinners are often asking this
question, What Profit is there if we serve God? Job 21.15. Oh, godliness is
profitable for all times, for here and hereafter, it has the promise of both
lives, this and that to come, 1 Timothy 4.8. But let me ask them (and I wish they
would often ask themselves) What profit is there if we sin? as Judah asked his
brethren, What profit is there if we slay our brother, Genesis 37.26. surely none
but shame and sorrow, you may put your gains in your eyes, and weep it out; if
not, a greater loss will come unto you. Thus then we have seen that no good of
profit comes by sin, no not by that which is called the most prositable sin,
Covetousness; so that our inference holds good, they are mistaken that seek
good in evil.

2 Of Honor or Credit.
As there is no good called Profit, so none of that called Honor to be had by
sin, it is not a creditable thing: there are that glory in, and make boast of
their sin, but they glory in their shame, Phil. 3.19. and surely sooner or
later, they will be ashamed of their glory. Sin is not a thing of good report,
it does (male audire) hear ill, and has an ill name all the world over. Can
that be honorable which is unreasonable? can that be an honor to man which
debaseth and degrades him? the unreasonableness of sin appears by the
reasonableness of the Law, sin has no reason for it; for the Law (which has
all reason in it) is against it: that sin degrades men, I showed above. Take
the sine and brave things of this world, wherein men pride themselves, and
these cannot cover the nakedness of sinners, much less be an ornament or honor
to them, for that can never be an honor or grace to the body, which is a
disgrace to the soul. That cannot be an honor to men, which they are generally
ashamed to own, at least under its own name. But though all the world should
admire and celebrate the grandeur of sinners, yet God accounts them vile,
though they sit at the upper end of the world, and God is, doubtless, the best
Judge of Honor; that cannot be honorable to man, that is abominable to God:
Luke 16.15. even appearing righteousness, which is highly esteemed among men,
is an abomination in the sight of God, much more then is sin it self. Again,

3. Of Pleasure.
There is none of the good called Pleasure to be had from or by sin: it is true
indeed, the pleasures of sin are much talked of, and we read of some that take
pleasure in unrighteousness, 2 These. 2.12. and of some (impudent and
brazen-faced that they were) who though they knew the Judgment of God, yet took
pleasure to do, and in them that did, such things as were worthy of death, Romans
1.32. and there were that lived in pleasure on the earth (and seemed to grow
fat by it) nourishing themselves, but 'twas for the day of slaughter, James
5.5. Notwithstanding all this, we doubt not to make it evident, that there is
no such thing (as they talked of or dreamt of) pleasure in, from, or by sin.
Pleasure is the contentment and satisfaction of a man's mind in what he does or
has; but sinners have none of this from sin. For,

1. The God that searches their hearts, and knows what is there, tells us that
there is no peace to the wicked, Isa. 57.21. the Septuagi^t read it (...),
there is no joy, nor peace, nor pleasure, no serenity, nor one Halcyon-day, for
they are like the raging Sea, casting up mire and dirt, by reason of its
rolling and disquietment: Men (to our appearance) seem to laugh, and be merry,
but God sees that they have no peace within; and I had rather believe the God
of Truth then lying men, for lie they do when they say, they have peace or
pleasure in sin; Solomon said of laughter, it was mad, and of mirth, what does
it? yea more, in the midst (or heart of laughter) the heart is sad.

2. The nature of the thing, viz. sin cannot afford pleasure, it being
contra-natural to man: and therefore the Heathen Philosophers could say, that
punishment succeeds guilt at the heels; like that, Genesis 4.7. if thou do evil,
sin lies (dogging) at the door. Another says more expressly, that punishment
does not only succeed sin, but they are born together, and are Twins: For they
that deserve punishment, expect it, and who ever expects it, suffers it in a
degree; so that the sinner is his own tormenter, and sin his terment: our
knowledge of having miscarried will return and complain of the abuse, and the
impressions of the fault will bring fear, which fear has torment, if there
were no more to come; the upbraids of conscience mar the mirth, and make the
pleasure very displeasing. What pleasure can it be to feel the upbraids of
meat, though it taste pleasantly? poison it self is sweet to the taste, but not
therefore pleasant: regrets and ill-savouring belchings do not speak pleasure.
Whatever crosses and thwarteth Nature, is a punishment, not a pleasure, and so
is sin to primitive and created Nature; if custom and a seared conscience seem
to deny the sense of such regrets, yet that argues the case the worse; for what
pleasure can that be that benums a man, and makes him not only stupid, but
dead? and they that live in such pleasures, are (by the infallible truth
declared to be) dead while they live, 1 Timothy 5.6. When stupidity may pass for
pleasure, and death for life, or dreams for enjoyments, these then may have a
large share. But,

3. There can be no satisfaction, but of necessity much vexation, because of
the boundless and infinite desire in the heart of man, which this cannot fill
up, but disappoints: Lusts are like the Ho^sleech and the Grave which have
never enough, but cry, give, give; the desire argues want, and to desire again,
argues the continuance of want; hence it is, that sinners shift so often, or (as
the Apostle speaks) serve diverse lusts; which changes and varieties clearly
evince the poverty of their entertainments, and emptiness of their pleasure.
While men seek to quench the thirst of sin by giving it salt water to drink,
they do but increase it; and indeed every man may find it much more easy,
pleasant, and satisfactory to him, to mortify then to gratify sin, to deny
then fulfill the desires of the flesh. For men to be ever contradicting and
swimming against the stream of their conscience, which tells them they ought
not to sin, and if they do, chides them for it, must needs be uneasy and
unpleasant: men's sins make them sick (as Amnons did) so far are they from being
pleasures: To desire the presence of what is absent, or the absence of what is
present, or the continuance of what cannot be kept, or the continuance and
keeping whereof would surfeit them (as the constancy of drunkenness and
intemperance does do) must unavoidably be very tedious; and such men, even in
the fullness of their sufficiency (to allude to that in Job) cannot but be in
straights: if they gratify one, they displease another of their lusts; as, if
they gratify pride and prodigality, they displease covetousness, and so are
still far from pleasure, being even distracted and slain by one or other of
their lusts all the day long; they have sightings without and within, and good
men are not more persecuted by the Devil and wicked world, then these men are
tormented by their irregular and inordinate fleshly appetites, and carnal
inclinations.

But yet for all this, men are loath to believe this, which (say they) crosses
Scripture expression and their experience: the Scripture mentions the pleasures
of sin, Heb. 11.25. and we find the pleasure on it. Thus men are apt to plead
for sin, and be its Advocate, and can hug any Scripture that does but speak of
(though it disown and disallow) any such thing as sinful pleasures: As to that
misunderstood Text, let me say this, that Moses cannot be charged with any sin
from whence he drew pleasure, and therefore by the pleasures of sin are not
meant such as slow from, but such as lead unto sin; he declined the pleasures
which would have inclined him to sin. Pleasures are allurements and baits to
draw to sin, as it was to Eve, the Tree was pleasant to the eyes, and inviting;
but the taste and digestion found no pleasure, but bitterness from the fruit:
thus Moses lived where pleasures were, and such as tended or were abused to
sin, yea, such as he could not have enjoyed without committing the great sin
(which the Egyptians did) viz. afflicting the people of God, and being cruel to
them, instead of delivering them. So that this Scripture speaks nothing in
favor of sin, or that there are any pleasures to be had by or from it.

Yet if we should take the Text as interpreted by them, all that can be said of
it, is but this, that it speaks as they think, not that there are (but there
are thought to be) pleasures of sin. It Is an ordinary thing for the Scripture
to speak of such a thing, as if it were, and to say it is, which is but
supposed to be by others. As for instance, 1 Cor. 8.4-6. there are Gods many,
and Lords many, not that really there was any such, but by others they were
reckoned such: So in this Text he speaks (after the manner of men) concerning
the pleasures of sin, as they are reputed; and this is confirmed by a passage
of the Apostle, 2 Pet. 2.13. they count it pleasure to riot in the daytime;
it is no pleasure, but they accounted it a pleasure; 'twas none, for they did
enjoy but a mock-sport or pleasure, while they sported themselves in their own
deceivings: so that in counting it pleasure to riot, they deceive themselves;
they suppose it a sport and pleasure, but it is not so. Yet again,

If there be any pleasure, it can be but to the body and sensual part of man,
which is a pleasure to the beast, not to the man: the body is but the case of
man (a mud-wall Cottage thatcht ov^^ with hair) it is the Soul that is the
excellency and glory of man, the (...) the man of the man, and whoever will
take (...) right measure of what is good or evil to man must take it especially
with respect and relation to the Soul. He much misto^k the Nature (...) his
Soul, who bid it take ease in eating and drinking; alas, the Soul cannot feed
on flesh, '^i^ a Spirit, and must have a diet peculiar and proper, i. e.
spiritual. Very usually the pleasure of the body prove the Souls pain; to eat
an^ drink is the bodies pleasure, but gluttony an^ drunkenness (which are the
sins of eating and drinking) are the Souls pain, and many time the bodies too:
To take rest when weary, is the bodies pleasure, but to be idle (which is the
si^ of rest and ease) is an affliction and trouble to the Soul.

Yet further, That which men call the Pleasure of sin, is both their dy^^ and
punishment: many laugh, and are merry from the sickliness and distemper they
are under, as they say of them that are bitten by the Tarantula, they laugh
themselves to death: Some are such ticklish things, that they will laugh at the
wagging of a feather; but this is an Argument of their weakness and folly, two
ill diseases. Many persons take pleasure in eating lime, mortar, coals, and
such like trash, but it is from a disease which vitiates and corrupts their
palate, else they would not feed on ashes, had they not the Greensickness
disease: so whoever pretends to find pleasure in sin, proves himself
distempered and diseased, and under the old radicated disease of being in sins,
yea, dead in them.

It Is as a disease, so a punishment, because it is false pleasure, and what
truer misery then false joy? it is like his pleasure who receives much money,
but it is all false coin; or his who dreams of a feast, and awakes so bungry and
vexed, that he could eat his dream; and on this account sin should be doubly
bated, because ^ugly, and because false, because it defiles, and because it
mocks us. But,

Yet again, If there be any pleasure, it is but for a season, a very little
while, it is soon over and gone, like the crackling of thorns under a pot; the
triumphing of the wicked is short, and the joy of the Hypocrite is but for a
moment, Job 20.5. but the miseries of sin may be, yea, (without repentance)
will be Eternal: so that as the sufferings of this present life (to the godly)
are not worthy to be compared with the future glory; so the pleasures of the
wicked are as nothing (take the best of them) not to be compared with the
future miscry: certainly they are woeful and ruful pleasures that men must
repent of, or be damned for to all Eternity.

Upon the whole then, the inference is undeniable, that there is no good (of
profit, honor, or pleasure) to be had by sin, and that they who seek for all
or any of them there, do as they that would seek case in Hell, the very place
and Element of torment. If good be not good, when better is expected, how
miserably vexatious must the disappointment be? when men look for good and
peace, but behold evil and trouble (yea, and nothing else) comes upon them:
when they bless themselves, and say (as, Deuteronomy. 29.19.) we shall have peace,
though we walk in the imaginations of our heart, to add drunkenness to thirst,
the Lord will not spare them, but then the anger of the Lord and his jealousy
shall smoke against them; and when they shall say, peace and safety, then
sudden destruction will come upon them (as travel upon a woman with child) and
there will be no escaping, 1 These. 5.3.

There are some other inferences yet to be spoken to, and of them I shall say
but a few things in brief. Time spent in sin is worse then lost.
Sin being so sinful,

2. I infer, that time spent in sin is worse then lost. Most of the pastime in
the world is lost time, but sinning time or time spent in sin, is worse then
lost: it must be accounted for, and who can give a good account of evil doing?
while men live in sin, they do nothing but undo themselves. Man was not sent
into this world only to eat, drink, sleep, and play (much less to sin, yea,
that he might not sin) but as into a great Workhouse, to work for the glory of
God, Joh. 17.4. and so to work out his own Salvation, and that with fear and
trembling, Phil. 2.12. but they that live in sin, work out their damnation, and
many times without fear or trembling; of which they will have great store when
they come to receive their just doom and damnation. Time is a most precious
Commodity, for on this moment depends Eternity, and as men sow in this
seed-time, they will reap in that harvest: Time is a Prophet for Eternity, as
men live here, they are like to live for ever: they that sow sin, must reap
death, Galat. 6.8. Time is to be redeemed, Ephesians. 5.16. and every day to be
numbered, greatly valued and improved, that we may apply our hearts to wisdom,
Psalm. 90.12. and this is wisdom, the fear of the Lord, and this understanding,
to depart from evil, Job 28.28. This is wisdom, to know and do what is the
acceptable will of God, Mat. 7.24. Ephesians. 5.15-17. We may be said to be, but not
to live, if we live not to God, and all time that is not so spent, is but
misspent, and worse then lost: poor distracted persons that have lost their
understanding, They that mock at sin are worse then fools.
wear out their days to less loss and disadvantage then sinners do.

3. Then they that make a mock at sin, are worse then fools and madmen: fools
make a mock at sin, Prove. 14.9. tell them (as Lot did his sons in Law) the
danger they are in, the judgments that hang over their head, and our is to them
(as Lot was to them) as one that mocketh, Genesis 19.14. they laugh at it, as if
God were not in earnest when he threatens sinners, and as if they that preach
against sin, were but ridiculous persons. Its a sport to fools to do mischief,
Prove. 10.23. and there are that sport themselves in their way to Hell, as if
'twere but a recreation! Oh what fools are they that laugh at their own folly
and destruction too! It Is a devilish nature in us to mock at the calamity of
others, but to laugh at our own, seems to be worse then devilish! There are
many, too many, that mourn under affliction, yet laugh over their sins; that
sigh and weep when they feel any burden on their bodies, but make merry at that
which destroys their soul! Can any thing be more mad then these, that laugh,
mock, and make sport at that which is a burden and weariness to God, Isa. 1.14.
Amos 2.13. which is the wounding, piercing, and crucifying of Christ Jesus,
Zach. 12.10. Heb. 6.6. which is a grief to the Spirit of Consolation, Ephesians.
4.30. which is a trouble to holy Angels, Luke 15. which is a wrong to, and the
undoing of their own souls, Prove. 8.36? and such is sin.

4. It cannot be well with men in their sin.
Sin being so sinful, infectious, and pernicious, it can never be well with a
man (how well soever he be) while he is in his sins. Was it well with Dives,
though he fared deliciously every day? no, it was better with Lazarus that lay
at his gate full of sores; for that is wel^ that ends well, which it never does
with sinners: if judgment be not executed speedily, 'twill surely, for they are
condemned already, being sons of death and perdition. No man has cause to envy
the prosperity of sinners, it is not good enough to be envied; but it is bad
enough to be pitied; they are but fatted, and thereby fitted to destruction,
Prove. 1.32. the prosperity of fools shall destroy them; their folly alone does
it, but their prosperity does double it, and do it with a vengeance; the
prosperous sinner is in the worst case of all sinners, they are set in slippery
places, and shall be cast down from their height, to the depth of destruction,
Psalm. 73.18.

5. Sin being so sinful, It concerns us to be religious betimes
it greatly concerns persons, and hugely obliges them to be religious
betimes, that they may prevent a great deal of sin, which without being early
religious (and strictly so) they cannot possibly do: how precious and dear
should that be to us, which prevents the being of what is so pernicious and
destructive? how industriously careful should we be to keep our selves from
that, which will keep us from happiness? and how ambitious to enjoy that, which
capacitates us for the enjoying of God for ever, and gives us the first fruits
of it here? We cannot be too soon nor too much religious, but the sooner (and
more) the better. If ever you mean to be religious, there is no time more
proper then now, the present now, no day to to day: Eccl. 12.1. remember now
thy Creators (as the word is, viz. God in Christ, for he ^reated all things by
Christ Jesus, Ephesians. 3.9. Col. 1.16.) Remember now, in the days of thy youth,
before the evil days come, when thou shall say, I have no pleasure in them: not
only no pleasure in the evil days (of sickness, death, and judgment, that evil
day, which I put far from me) but I have none in the remembrance of my youthful
days. Youth is the most proper season of all our days, and now is the most
proper season of all our youth to remember God in. If you say, we will do that
when we are old, it is now springtime with us (and no month to May) we will
think of Religion in a Winters night: Oh do not boast of to morrow, as young as
thou art, thou art old enough to dye, this night thy soul may be taken from
thee, and be in Hell to morrow!

Take the Wise-mans counsel, Eccl. 11.9. Rejoice, O young man, in thy youth,
and let thy heart cheer thee in the days of thy youth, and walk in the ways of
thine heart, and in the sight of thine eyes: yes, Sir, with all our heart, we
will take this counsel, we like it well, this is pleasing Doctrine; we had
rather mind this, then to be holy, we will be dehonaire and jovial, we care not
for severe Preachers of strictness and devotion, we will laugh and sing, drink
and dance away our time, while we have it, etc. But mistake not, Solomon speaks
Ironically, and has something else to say, take all, and then if thou rejoice,
'twill be with trembling; rejoice but; let thy heart cheer thee, but; walk in
the ways of thine heart and eyes, but; but what Know thou, that for all these
things thou mus^ come to judgment: and how will thou answer for thy vanities
and follies, thy pride and wantonness, thy drunkenness and debauchery then? Oh,
remember thy Creator, before that evil day come, and prevent a life of sin,
which is the miserablest life in the world! and God has promised, that if thou
seek him early, thou shall find him, and in finding him, thou find all,
Prove. 8.17-21.

Remember him in thy youth, for memory is then in its prime and most
flourishing; shall he that gave thee thy being and memory be forgotten by thee?
If God should not remember thee, what would become of thee? and see what is like
to become of thee, if thou forget God, Psalm. 50.22. How good, how excellent
soever thy memory be, I am sure thou have a very bad one, if thou forget and do
not remember thy Creator in the days of thy youth. The young man's glory is his
strength (whether of memory, etc.) and will thou give thy strength to sin,
which is due to God? Mark 12.30. Gods Sacrifices were to be young, the first
ripe fruits, and the firstborn (which is the strength, Genesis 49.3.) were to be
dedicated to God, and he will not be put off with less now. Gods chiefest
Worthies have been and are his young men, 1 John 2.13, 14. Gods men of valor
are young men: the Princes of this World (like the Romans of old) make up
their. Armies of young men, the flower of their Army is (Romana juventus) of
young and strong men; and shall the King of Kings be put off with what is
decrepit and worn out? no, he will not, Mal. 1.8.13.14. go offer it to thy
Governor, will he be pleased with, or accept such persons? no; nor will God,
who is a great King, the Lord of Hosts, whose Name is dreadful.

They that have been religious betimes, are greatly famed and honored in and
by the Scripture-Records: God is taken with, and remembers the kindness of
their youth, Jer. 2.2. Abel, though dead, is yet spoken of with an honorable
testimony, even that of God himself, for serving God so young and so well, Heb.
11.4. Joseph was very early religious; so was Samuel: Jeroboams little Son is
not to be forgotten, for God has honored him. King Josiah, Daniel, and the
three Children (or young men of Israel) are all enrolled in the Court of Honor
and Heaven: And in the New Testament St. John is called the Disciple whom Jesus
loved, his Bosom-favourite and Darling, and the reason usually given is,
because he came to Christ, and became his Disciple, while yet very young: it is
the command of Timothy, that he knew the Scriptures from a Child, 2 Timothy 3.15.
Many Parents are afraid to have serious and divine things taught their
children, lest it make them melancholy and dispirit them; but, is there any
thing better to fit them for service to God o^ man, then Religion? or any
spirit comparable to that true greatness and gallantry of spirit which is in
being afraid to sin? We should teach children moral and religious courage and
bravery, which is more in fearing to sin then t^ dye; and to make Moses his
choice, to prefer the reproaches of Christ before the treasures an^ pleasures
of this world: and this way are the^ like to attain better names and greater
estates, to enjoy more pleasure and preferment, then any this world can confer
upon them. They are best bred, who are taught to love and serve God best; and
they attain most honor, who honor God, for them will God himself honor. I
speak not in derogation of any thing that is civil, handsome, and gentile, but
would press to more, to what is commendable to God, and in his sight of great
price, to remember him in the days of youth. For evil days are a coming,
sickness, old age, death is approaching, the Judge is at the door; and
certainly that is best while we are young, that will be best when we are old and
dye; and that can be worth very little at the beginning, which will be worth
nothing at the end of our days: The sins of youth will lie heavy upon an old
age; yea, if God give repentance to thee when thou art old, 'twill cost thee
the dearer, that thou did repent no sooner; and thou will regret it, that
thou have been so long in sin, and art now to live but a little while to
testify thy conversion. 'Twas sad with Job to possess the sins of his youth,
Job 13.23, 24. Youthful sweets do often prove old ages bitterness; and the
pleasures while young, cost pains when old: which made King David pray to God,
that he would not remember against him the sins of his youth, Psalm. 25.7. I
suppose, this may suffice (though much more might be added) to show how much
persons are concerned to be religious betimes, seeing sin is a thing so
dangerous and destructive. To welcome the the Gospel.


6. Sin being so pernicious, how welcome should the Gospel be, which brings the
good and happifying news of a Savior, and how to be saved from sin the cause of
wrath, and wrath the effect of sin? how beautiful should their feet be that
bring this blessed Receipt to us? Romans 10.15. had we the gout or stone, what
would we not give for a Recipe, an infallible medicine to cure us? We use to
welcome Chirurgions, though they put us to pain, and Apothecaries, though they
bring us loathsome drugs; yea, so dear is health, that we not only thank, but
reward them too: Oh, what a welcome then should Christ and his Gospel have, who
come with saving health, to cure us of the worst of diseases and plagues, viz.
that of sin? methinks we should press with violence, and be so violent, as to
besiege Heaven, and take it by force; and we should no less hasten to receive
the Gospel, and take into us the wine and milk thereof, and the waters of life,
seeing we may have them so freely for coming for: indeed our Salvation cost
Christ Jesus dear, but he offers it us at a cheap rate, and methinks we should
not let Heaven be so thinly, and Hell so populously inhabited, when Salvation
may be had at an easier rate, then going beyond Sea for it, Romans 10.6-10. with
Deuteronomy. 30.12-14. Oh, seeing it is so faithful a saying, and worthy to b^
received, be not so unworthy as to refuse it, and with that to refuse thy own
Salvation. But,

I shall take an occasion from hence to pass to Exhortation and Counsel:
Exhortation.
for it may be some poor Soul or other may be pricked at heart, an^ cry out, as
they, Acts 2.37. What shall we do (...) or as the Jailer in Acts 17.30. Sirs,
what mu^^ I do to be saved? Is there any hope for poo^ sinners? is there any
balm in Gilead, or Physician there? Jer. 8 22. yes, surely there is: God would
never (as a Learned person expresses it) have suffered so potent and malicious
an enemy to have set foot in his Dominions, but that he knew how to conquer it,
and that not only by punishing it in Hell, but by destroying it. He will not
only pardon, but subdue thy sin. If thou will hear him, hear then, that thy
soul may live, hear the Call of Christ Jesus, behold, he calls thee, come to
me, ye that are weary and heavy laden, and I will give you rest, Mat. 11. All
that were in debt and distress came to David; thou art such an one, come to
this David (for so Christ is called) take his counsel, and thou shall do well,
thou shall live, and sin shall dye. What Is that counsel?

Repent, and believe the Gospel, Mark 1.13.
1. Repent, To repent
Jesus Christ came to call sinners to repentance, Mat: 9.12, 13. 'twas one of
the errands he came into the world about; repent then not only for, but from
dead works, Heb. 6 1. abhor both thy sin and thy self, repenting as in dust and
ashes, Joh 42.6. be full of indignation against, and take a full revenge upon
thy sin and self, as true repentance uses to do, 2 Cor. 7.11. to be merciful
to sin, is to be cruel to thy soul, to save that alive, is to put this to
death; therefore spare it not, but repent unfeignedly from the very bottom of
thy heart. Let it grieve thee that God is displeased with thee for thy sin, but
much more that he has been displeased by thee, and by thy sin: bring forth
fruit worthy of repentance, amendment of life; that thy repentance may appear
to be a change of heart and life, of thy mind and manners, yea, not only a
reformation, but a renovation, and that thou art a new man.

The goodness of God leads thee to repentance, he might have driven thee into
it by terrors, but he gently leads thee; it is indeed his goodness that he will
admit us to repent, but that he will call and lead to repentance, is goodness
much more: and, Oh, what goodness is it, that he puts us to no greater penance
then repentance! Jer. 3.13. God might have said, thou shall lie in Hell so many
thousand years to feel the smart of thy sin, and if he had bid thee do some
great thing, would thou not have done it? how much more when he says, wash
and be clean (that I may allude to that of Naamans servant unto him) 2 Kings
5.13. yea, which is yet more, God waits to be gracious, and is patient even to
long-suffering: he might have called and knocked at thy door once and no more,
but he has stood, and knocked, and begged, given thee space and means, Rev.
2.21. Luke 16.31. and why all this? but that thou might come to repentance,
2 Pet. 3.9. which if thou do not, it is a greater affront to God then thy former
sin was; Humanum est errare, it is humane frailty to sin, but to continue in it
without repentance is Devilish; it is to despise his goodness, Romans 2.4. it is to
justify thy sin, and to upbraid God with a scoff, as they did, 2 Pet. 3. where
is the promise of his coming? But that his goodness may yet prevail, I entreat
thee to consider this much more.

1. If thou repent, thou shall be forgiven, Acts 3.19. repent, and be
converted, that your sins may be blotted out: they shall be as if they had not
been: where God gives repentance for, he also gives remission of sin, Acts
5.31. He that hardneth his heart in impenitency shall not prosper; but he that
confesses and forsakes, shall find mercy, Prove. 28.13, 14. For God looks
upon men, and if any say, I have sinned and perverted that which was right (i.
e. if any do repent) he will deliver his soul from going into the pit, and his
life shall see the light, Job 33.27, 28. yea, he is not only merciful, but if
we confess our sins, he is faithful and just to forgive us our sins, and to
cleanse us from all unrighteousness, 1 John 1.9. Oh, how does this oblige us to
repent!

2. Repentance is (by Gods interpretation) the undoing of all the evil thou
have committed, and the doing the good thou have omitted; indeed he that
repents of his sin, tells all the world, that if 'twere to do again, he would
not do it; and he that repents for not having done the will of God, does do it
in repenting, Mat. 21.30. Oh, what goodness is this to put such a construction
on repentance, and shall we not repent!

3. Thou will, by repenting, rejoice all whom thou have grieved by sin; thou
have grieved thine own soul, repentance will cheer it; for though it spring
from sorrow, it ends in joy, and will never be repented of, 2 Cor. 7.10. thou will rejoice the generation of the righteous; yea, there will be joy in Heaven;
God and Angels will be glad, and rejoice at thy return, Luke 15. It Is their
sin, and greatly aggravated, Rev. 16.9. that they repented not to give him
glory; sin dishonours, but repentance gives glory to God; and therefore Josuah
said to Achan, Jos. 7.19. confess thy sin, and give glory to God: Oh, may we
rejoice the heart, and glorify the Name of God both at once by repentance, and
shall we not repent? Oh, repent, repent; if not, know,

4. That God has appointed a day in which he will judge thee, and that calls
on thee (at thy peril) to repent, Acts 17.30, 31. which if thou do not do, thou
do but enrich thy self for Hell, and by thy hardness and impenitent heart,
do treasure up wrath against the day of wrath, and the revelation of the
righteous judgment of God. The God that is long-suffering will not be
all-suffering, he that is a God of patience now, will (if that be abused) be a
God of vengeance hereafter to the abusers of his patience. Gods Patience will
be at end one day, he will wait on thee no more, no longer: he waited forty
years, but then swore in his wrath, Heb. 3.11. he waited three years on the
Jewish Fig Tree, but at last cut it down. God has set thee a day, and that is
this day, to day while it is called to day hear his voice, and harden not your
hearts. When this day of patience is over, if thou be found unprovided then, woe
unto thee, thou art undone for ever. I pray thee, think of it, have not grieved
God enough yet? nor wronged thy soul enough yet? art afraid of being happy too
soon? or of going to Hell too easily and cheaply? that thou will not repent, or
delayest it; Oh, if in this thy day thou consider not the things of thy peace,
thou may have them hid from thine eyes, and go blindfold to Hell, and be
damned for ever; and then God will require payment (even use upon use) to the
utmost farthing, Mat. 18.23-34. he will be paid all that is due; for time, for
talents, for means, for mercies, for patience, and for bearance, he will be
paid for all: If he be not glorified by thee now, he will be glorified upon
thee then. But, I hope, you are sensible, and I shall not need to urge or press
this any further, and therefore I pass to the

Second Counsel, believe the Gospel; To believe the Gospel.
it is not only repentance toward God, but faith in our Lord Jesus Christ,
that is required for the pardoning and purging of sin, for destroying sin, and
saving thee. Repentance is not enough, for righteousness is not by repentance,
but by faith; Phil. 3.9. Prayers and tears, sighs and sorrows are not our
Savior; it is Jesus only that saves from sin, Mat. 1.21. None can put our sint
to death, but be that dyed for our sins. Do not think to compound with God; if
all the riches of the world were thine to give, and thou would give them all,
it must cost more then so to have thy soul justified and saved, Psalm. 49.9. If
all the men of the world would lend thee their blood, and thou should offer
it up, and with that thine own, and that of thy firstborn too, 'twere all too
little, Micah. 6 7. bring all thy repentance and righteousness, and it cannot
compensate or make amends for one sin; if all the Angels in Heaven should lend
thee their whole stock (and it is a great one) yet 'twould not do; there is no
satisfaction could be made, nor any thing merited for thee, but by the Son of
God; he, and he only is the Savior from sin, nor is there any Name given under
Heaven but his, whereby we must be saved, nor is there salvation in any other,
Acts 4.12. Oh then look to him, and be saved, for be thy sins what they will,
he can save to the very utmost all that come to God by him, for he ever lives
to make intercession for them, Heb. 7.25. But if thou believe not in Christ
Jesus, though thou repent of sin, and live as touching the Law blaineless (as
Saul did, Phil. 3) though thou be celebrated for a Saint, and may seem too
good to go to Hell, yet without Christ and faith in him, thou will not be good
enough to go to Heaven. Though there be a Christ to be believed in, who has
dyed for sinners; yet if thou believe not in him, thou may dye and be damned
notwithstanding that. Come then, come to, and close with Christ, not with an
idle or dead, but with an effectual and lively faith; receive whole Christ, not
only Jesus but Lord, not only Savior but Prince, Col. 2.6. be as willing to
dye to sin, as he was to dye for sin, and to live to him, as he was to dye for
thee; be as willing to be his to serve him, as that he should be thine to save
thee. Take him on his own terms, give up thy self wholly to him; forget thy
fathers house, depart from all iniquity, and become wholly and entirely his:
let thy works declare and justify thy faith, by purifying thy heart, Acts
15.9. by sanctifying thee, Acts 26.18. by overcoming the world, both the good
and evil, the best and worst, the frowns and flatteries thereof, 1 John 5.4, 5.
as Moses and the rest did by faith, Heb. 11. Thus come, and thus make good thy
coming to, and believing in Christ.

And then thou shall be saved, as the Apostle told the Jailer, Acts 16.30, 31.
believe in the Lord Jesus Christ, and thou shall be saved. Sin, this
destructive thing Sin, shall not destroy them; sin, this damning thing sin,
shall not damn them that do unfeignedly, and with their heart believe in Jesus:
as there was need of a Jesus Christ, and as there inrequired faith in Jesus
Christ, so Salvation i^ ascertained and ensured to them that believe in Jesus
Christ; He that perseveres to the end, shall find the end of his faith, the
saving of his soul. Oh then hasten to take hold on him, close with him, and
cleave to him, as ever you would be saved from your sin and Gods wrath. Do you
like the end, and not the way? is Salvation desirable, and is not faith?
without which it is impossible to please God here, or to be saved hereafter.
Have ye not souls as well as bodies? would ye not be saved from sin as well as
from sickness? hasten to Christ Jesus then, the Physician, the Savior of
Sours; is there any other Christ? is there Salvation in any other? has God any
more Sons to send? is there any other way to Heaven? have we not been in hazard
long enough? Oh, now, come now to Christ, if ever there will be reason for it,
there is now: will thou need him? thou do now: will he be lovely hereafter?
he is now. Oh, methinks these things being so, we should fly like Doves to the
windows, and not stand off a moment longer, lest we dye, and dye in our sins,
and then adieu to happiness and hope for ever. But I trust this is not in vain,
I am willing to hope, I have not preached from, nor prayed to God in vain,
expostulated with, and begged of you in vain, but that you will yet repent and
believe the Gospel.

There is yet another thing I have to exhort to on this occasion, and that is,

3. Not to sin again by returning to folly.
That you would sin no more, nor return again to folly; hear and fear, and do
no more wickedly: it is sad to lick up vomits, and after being washed, to wallow
in the mire, the latter end of such is worse then their beginning, 2 Pet. 2.
and better it had been for them they had not known the way of righteousness,
then after they have known it, to apostatize and depart from the holy
Commandment: 'twill be difficult (next to impossible) to renew such again unto
repentance, Heb. 6.6. and what can they expect but judgment, fiery indignation,
and vengeance, Heb. 10.26-30. Oh, how is, and will the sin and condemnation of
Apostates be aggravated! what, after all his kindness, will thou kick with the
heel against him! after sin has cost thee so many sighs and tears, and aching
hearts, will thou make work for more! thou will have thy belly-full, for the
back-slider in heart shall be filled with his own ways, he will have enough of
it one day, Prove. 14.14. and then cry out, Oh, what an evil and a bitter thing
is Apostasy! Oh, this evil heart of unbelief that made me (again) depart from
(after my returning to serve) the living God!

The fourth and last thing I have to say is, Not to live in any known sin
by way of Caution, Take heed of living in any one (especially any known) sin.
Let us lay aside all the remains of naughtiness, and the sin that does most
easily beset us, let us not have any favorite-sin, but out with right eyes, and
off with right hands, rather then offend; yea, let us cleanse our selves from
all filthiness of flesh and spirit (without and within) that we may perfect
Holiness, and grow up to a perfect man, the measure of the stature of Christ
Jesus. Shall we continue in sin? Oh no, not in one, God forbid; he speaks as if
it were not only inconsistent, but impossible for them so to do, that have seen
and tasted that the Lord is gracious: for now they see the sinfulness of sin
more then they did before, as that which went about to murder God, and did
indeed put the Son of God to death, and shall (say they) shall we crucify him
again? King David would not drink the water that hazarded man's blood; how then,
how can we do any wickedness, and sin against the blood of God, which was shed
to cleanse us from our sin? Shall we take pleasure in that which put Christ to
pain, and live in that which put Christ to death? Oh no, by no means: shall his
love and power have no better influences and effects then? have we put off the
old man, and shall we put it on again? are we dead, and shall we not cease from
sin? can we say we believe in him, and not obey him? no, no, get ye hence, all
ye Idols. Thus will gracious persons and new creatures both reason and resolve
the case. I caution and beseech you then to take heed of living in any sin,
whether in Thought, Word, or Deed.

Caution against 1. Thought-sins. 2. Word-sins. 3. Deed-sins.


1. Not in Thought-sins.
Take heed of sinning in Thought, or of Thought-sins: Seeing sin is so sinful,
it is evil to be (though but) a thinking sinner, or a sinner, though but in
thought. It Is too commonly said, That thoughts are free; they are indeed free
in respect of men, they cannot judge us for them, but God can and will. Many
persons that seem to be modest and sparing as to evil words and deeds, will yet
make bold with thoughts, and (as the saying is) Pay it with thinking; such as
are speculative, contemplative sinners: There are some who are so wise, as not
to say with their tongues, yet such fools as to say in their heart, there is no
God, Psalm. 14.1. There are some that do not actually murder, yet (by anger and
envy) are murderers in heart or thought, as Joseph accuses his Brethren,
saying, you thought evil against me, Genesis 50.20. There are Thought-adulterers,
who it may be never were, nor durst to be, adulterers as to fact, Mat. 5.28.
There are Blasphemers in heart, who speak it not with their mouths, as they who
when they heard Christ forgiving sins, they thought in their heart, that he
blasphemed, and thereby blasphemed him, Mat. 9.3, 4, 5. Some talk of the world,
and declaim against it as a vanity, who think vainly in their heart, that their
houses shall endure for ever, Psalm. 49.11. So the rich man said within himself,
thou have good laid up for many years (as if he thought these things his
happiness) but it is said of the former, this their way is their folly, Psalm.
49.12. and of the latter, thou fool, Luke 12 20 for the thought of foolishness
(or a foolish thought) is sin, Prove. 24.9. and therefore it is said in Deuteronomy.
5.9. Take heed that there be not a thought in thy wicked heart, i. e. that
there be not a wicked thought in thy heart.

It Is true, all thoughts of evil are not evil thoughts, as all thoughts of good
are not good thoughts: a man may think of evil, and yet his thoughts may be
good; and a man may think of good, and yet his thoughts be evil. One then
thinks of evil, yet with good thoughts, when he thinks of evil, to grieve and
repent for it, to abhor and forsake it: and one thinks of good with evil
thoughts, when he thinks of good to neglect and scorn it, to call it evil, and
so to persecute it. But thoughts of sin may be sinful thoughts, with respect to
sin past, or sin to come; with respect to sin past, when men please themselves
in the thoughts of their past sins, when they chew the cud, and lick their lips
after it, or as it is said in Job 20.12, 13. they hide (and roll) it (as if
'twere a Sugar-plum) under their tongue; they do it over and over again by
thinking of it, when they do not act it: so some understand that, in Ezekiel.
23.19. She multiplied her whoredoms in calling to remembrance the sins of her
youth; she acted it over again in her memory, in new speculations of her old
sins: and on the other hand others (and it may be the same persons) think
sinfully of the sins they have not done, grieving at, and regretting it, that
they had not taken such and such occasions, and embraced such and such
temptations as they had to sin. So with respect to sins to come, men think
sinfully in plotting, contriving, and fore-thinking what sins they will do,
though they do them not. Against this we are charged, Romans 13.14. make no
provision for the flesh (the word is) do not project and cater for the flesh;
lay not in fuel for such fire, do not lie abed and forecast to fulfill the
lusts hereafter, which thou can not act at present.

That you may see the sinfulness of evil Thoughts, consider,

1. That sinful Thoughts do defile a man, though they never come to words or
deeds, be never uttered, never practiced: Mat. 15.19, 20. Out of the heart
proceed evil thoughts, murders, adulteries, etc. and these defile the man; not
only murder and adultery, but the thoughts of murdering and committing
adultery defile the man, as the Text speaks, and our Savior again in another
Text says as much, Mat. 5.22. and 28. as Job made a Covenant with his eyes,
that he might not think (lust fully) of a Maid, Job 31.1. So should we take
heed to our ways, that we may not offend, not only not with our tongues, but in
our thoughts; for they are the words of our heart, and the deeds thereof, and
all the words of our mouth, and the acts of our lives come from thence: and
therefore above all keepings, keep thine heart, Prove. 4.23.

2. Sinful thoughts are an abomination in the sight of God: God has a special
eye to the thoughts of men's hearts, to them of good men, Mal. 3.16. and to them
of bad men, Genesis 6.5. In good men God accepts (very often) the will for the
deed, if to will be present with them, though to do they have not power; if
they be as willing to do as to will the deed, God accepts the will for the
deed, though they cannot do it, 2 Cor. 8.12. Math. 26.41. So when men will and
think wickedly, God takes their will for the deed; as he takes the good man's
will for the deed with acceptance, so he takes the wicked man's will for the
deed with abomination: for Prove. 15.26. the thoughts of the wicked are an
abomination to the Lord, i. e. their wicked thoughts are filthy steams and
stinks in the nostrils of God. Sin is a filthiness, and sinful thoughts have
their filthiness as well as sinful actions, and it is therefore said, Jer. 4.14.
Oh, Jerusalem, wash thine heart from wickedness, that thou may be saved, how
long shall vain thoughts lodge within thee? the very remedy speaks out the
disease; if they must be washed, they were filthy sure; for sweeping will not
serve the turn: and what was the wickedness of their heart? it follows in the
Text, the vain thoughts that were there, and these must be washed, or they could
not be saved, so abominable in the sight of God is the villainy and vanity of
thoughts.

3. Thought-sins are root-sins, and the roots of all other sins; they are the
mother-sins, actions are their issue, Prove. 4.23. evil deeds are the offspring
and children of evil thoughts, the branches and fruit that grow out of this
root. Thoughts are the firstborn of the soul, words and actions are but
younger brothers: They are the oil that feeds and maintains the wick, which
would else go out; life-sins receive their juice and nourishment from
thought-sins. St. James speaks as if our thoughts were the belly and womb where
sin is conceived, James 1.15. Now when men would (as Job did) curse grievously,
they curse the day and place of their birth, the womb that bare them; so do you
curse sin even in the very womb that bare it, lay the ax to the root of this
tree. The wickedness of men's lives is charged upon their thoughts, as having
its root and rise there, Genesis 6.5. Mat. 12.35. and 15.19. murders, adulteries,
etc. they all come out of the heart, as out of the belly of a Trojan-horse: one
would wonder (as we do at some birds, where they lodge all winter) to see so
many flocks and herds of wickedness, one would wonder whence, from what corner
of the world they come; why, they all come out of the heart, the rendez-vous of
wickedness, the common Inn that lodges all the thieves and traveling lusts
that are in, and do so much mischief in this world; all the unclean streams
flow from this unclean Fountain, this Ocean, and Sea of Sin. Says holy David,
Psalm. 119.113. I hate (vain) thoughts, any thoughts that are against thy Law,
which I love; we all hate that which is against what we love: but why does he
hate thoughts of sin? because evil thoughts beget evil words, and evil words
corrupt good, and beget ill manners; vain imaginations beget vain
conversations: it is hard for them that think well to do ill, and more hard for
them that think ill to do well, for as the root is, so is the fruit, and by
that the tree is known, Mat. 7.17.

4. If we had no other sins to be pardoned, yet we were to beg pardon for
sinful thoughts: a may think himself to Hell, if the sinfulness of his thoughts
be not forgiven him: Acts 8.20. says St. Peter to Simon Magus, repent of thy
thought-wickedness, and pray, if perhaps the thoughts of thine heart may be
forgiven thee: if God should pardon all our word-sins and evil deeds, and leave
but our thought-sins unpardoned, we were undone for ever; yea, blessed David
was so afraid of sin, that he begs God to cleanse him from his secret sins,
which lay lurking in his heart, and were undiscernable there, Psalm. 19. if they
should not increase to more ungodliness (which they will attempt, and too
easily effect) yet there is impiety and ungodliness enough in them to ruin us
everlastingly: Oh, that they would think of it, that make nothing of vain
thoughts, no not of evil thoughts, as if they had no evil in them!

5. It Is the great design (and indeed argues the great power) of the Gospel, to
bring thoughts to the obedience of Christ Jesus: It Is far more casie to reform
men's manners, then to renew men's minds, the Laws of men may do that, but it is
the Law of God does this. Many men could live alone with their heart and
thought-sins, though they had no other company, pleasing themselves, and
blessing themselves too in their own vain imaginations, and acting sins in
their fancy: they will more casily surrender their tongue and hand, then their
heart-sins: Now the Gospel comes to throw down these strong Towers, to cast
down imaginations, to conquer whole Armies of thoughts, to reduce these
straggling and thievish highway men into good order and obedience. This is the
glory of the Gospel (beyond all the Philosophy in the world) that it has so
great influence on the hearts and thoughts of men, 2 Cor. 10.4, 5.

6. Conversion begins, is carried on, and is completed in the heart and
thoughts of men. It begins there, while men are in (and dead in sins) they are
inconsiderate, and regard not what is in their heart and thoughts; but when the
grace of God comes in power, and they receive it in truth, they bethink
themselves and consider, what shall we do to be saved? men are in a great
quandary in their thoughts, they begin to wamble, and their bowels are turned
within them: and therefore regoneration is called the Renewing of the mind, and
Repentance is a change of mind, and the heart becomes a new heart, and when the
heart is gained, all the rest follows. If the wicked forsake his thoughts, he
will quickly forsake his ways, Isa. 55.7. The first turn is in the thoughts,
Psalm. 119.59. I thought on my ways, and turned my feet unto thy testimonies;
the thoughts go before, and the feet follow after: and the first motions of the
Prodigal were in his thoughts, when he came to himself, he said within himself,
I will arise and go to my father, and while he was thus thinking (which is
said, while he was afar off, but taking the first step) his father saw him, and
had compassion on him, etc.

As Conversion begins, so its carried on in the heart and thoughts especially,
though not only; when others study (like the Pharisees) only to make the
outside look fair and beautiful, the godly man is employed about his inside, to
keep his heart clean; the prayers of godly men are chiefly taken up about their
heart, Psalm. 51.10. create in me a clean heart, and renew a right spirit within
me. And (as an excellent person words it) wherein lies the difference between
sincere-hearted Christians and others? but in the keeping of thoughts, without
which all Religion is but bodily exercise: Papists may mumble over their
prayers, Hypocrites talk, but this is Godliness.

As it begins, and is carried on, so Conversion is completed, finished, and
perfected in thoughts, it ends there; for when a godly man comes to dye, his
chief and last employment is about his thoughts; he has done with works, he
has made his Will, and concluded all without him, and his speech (it may be)
fails him, and then his main work and the conclusion, the shutting up of the
whole matter is in his thoughts; so that when he comes into the new world, and
continues here, and when he is going into the world to come, his main
employment is about and in his thoughts: there he began, and here he ends.

7. God keeps an account of, and will call us to account for thoughts, as well
as for words and actions: he has a book of remembrance written for them that
think on his Name, I, and for them that think on their sins too, with sinful
thoughts. There is no thought hid from him, all things are naked and open
before him with whom we have to do, Heb. 4.13. or as the words may be read,
before him, to whom we are to give an account. God knows our thoughts afar off,
Psalm. 139.2. long before they came out into words or actions, Deuteronomy. 31.21. So
the father saw the Prodigal, while yet afar off, while but thinking to return:
yea, he does search and try the heart to this very end, that he may give to
every man according to his way, Jer. 17.9, 10. God will judge righteous
judgment (not according to appearance, as men do) as the man thinks, so is
he, and so shall he be judged: man judges our inside by our outside, our heart
by our works; but God judges our outside by our inside, our works by our
hearts: and it is therefore we should fear God, and keep his Commandments,
because God will bring, as every work, so, every secret thing, to judgment,
whether good or evil, Eccl. 12.13, 14. When the Lord comes, he will bring to
light the hidden things of darkness, and make manifest the counsels of the
heart, all the secret designs and projects of it, 1 Cor. 4.5. and will judge
the secrets of men by Jesus Christ, as our Gospel teaches, Romans 2.16. Oh think
then that for thoughts thou must be judged, and therefore make conscience of
them, for not only scientia divina, Gods science or knowledge, but conscientia
humana, man's conscience will be (one of the books opened, and) a witness in
that day, according to which men shall be judged.

Well then, what say thou, or what shall I say to thee? have thou thought
evil? lay thine hand upon thy mouth, Prove. 30.32. not only if thou have done
foolishly, but if thou have but thought evil, lay thine hand on thy mouth, i.
e. be humbled and abased: The vanity and vileness, the folly and the filthiness
of our thoughts should make us ashamed. And lay thy hand on thy mouth for
prevention also, as persons when they cough lay their hand on their mouth, lest
any unsavory or unseemly thing should come from them, so do thou; for that
which we say in our hearts, we shall soon say with our lips, if we lay not our
hands on our mouth, to stop the issue of vain thoughts from flowing out into,
and infecting our lips and lives, our words and actions. This Hive of Drones
will swarm, if thou lay not thy hand on the mouth: This Cage of unclean birds
will be open, and they will take their flight: thy thoughts will run wast at
least like water beside the Mill, if thou keep not a strong hand over them; Oh,
keep thine heart with thine hand, with mighty power, and suppress sinful
thoughts as well as keep them from expressing themselves. In relation hereunto,
take these directions for thine help and assistance; for know this, that of thy
self thou art not sufficient to think one good thought, nor to subdue one evil
thought.

1. Humbly make thine address and supplication to God, in whose hand thy heart
is, and to whom alone heart-work does belong: he only can search it, cleanse
it, new-make, and keep it. Pray to God, not only that past ones may be
forgiven, but that thy future ones may not need forgiveness, beg him to
new-make thine heart, and to create a clean one in thee. Would thou be rid of
sinful thoughts, pray against them, lift up a prayer, and cry out as St. Paul
did against the Messenger of Satan, and pray without fainting, that if they be
not removed, yet his grace may be sufficient for thee. Cry out as a Virgin
would do in case of a Rape, and God will hear the cry of the oppressed, and
them that groan. Be often in spiritual ejaculations, which will be as so many
deadly darts to wound and kill sinful thoughts: call in God to thy relief, tell
him, thou can not stand before these Troops and Armies that defy Israel and
Isreal's God, and beg him to vindicate his own Name by his own Power, as he can
easily do; for not only the heart of Kings is in his hand, but he is the King
and Ruler of all hearts, and can by his Word command them into, and keep them
in order and obedience. Then,

2. Do as holy David did, that he might be more holy, hide the Word of God in
thine heart, that thou may not sin against him, Psalm. 119.11. apply the
plaster to the sore place, the heart is the seat and center of sin, apply the
Word there, lay it up, and 'twill rout and root out these Canaanites and
Daughters of the Land that are a grief of heart unto thee. Sin is in the heart,
hide the Word there (as in ambush) to cut it off upon the first appearance of
it: The Word of God is the sword of the Spirit, and there is none like it to
wound and kill sin withal: it is one of the weapons of our warfare, which is
mighty through God to cast down, and cast out wicked imaginations, 2 Cor. 10.4,
5. put on therefore this and the whole armor of God, that thou may be strong
in the Lord, and in the power of his might, Ephesians. 6. He is a God that works
wonders (even in this matter and of this kind) by his Word and Spirit; hide
this Word then, which is the sword of the Spirit, and by which he atchieves
such glorious conquests over hearts and thoughts.

3. Begin the day with thoughts of God and good things; let not fancies and
vain imaginations get the start of thee in the morning: fancy and we were
Play-fellows many a year, before we knew what reason and understanding was, our
childhood and youth was vanity; and you know that many times there is such an
intimate acquaintance and familiarity gotten by School and Play-fellows, that
its hard to break it off; but fancy and imagination (these childish things
which yet have strong bold of, and strong holds in us) must be cast off, before
our thoughts will become obedient to Christ, as the Apostle tells us, 2 Cor.
10.5. and therefore (mount up with the Lark) begin with God, think much and
often that he sees and observes thee (Cave tibi, spectat Cato) this will awe
thee, as it did them, Psalm. 44.20, 21. and so it did David, Psalm. 139.17, 18.
If vanity get possession in the morning, 'twill strive to keep it all the day
(Quo semel est imbuta recent servabit odorem testa diu) what the vessel is
first seasoned with, it reserves a tang of it long after. Take a good
mornings-draught to prevent the windy vapors of vain thoughts; as soon as thou
wakest, there are many Fiddlers at thy Chamber door to sing thee wanton Songs,
but listen not to them, tell them, and all the Suitors and Clients that
solicit thee, that thou art otherwise engaged, and have business of
consequence to mind; listen not to any Sirens, stop thine ear against all such
Charmers, though they chant and charm never so pleasingly, for it can never be
wisely nor to advantage. Thus, if when thou awakest, thou art with God in
meditation, thou art like (when thou risest) to walk with God in thy whole
conversation, and to be in the fear of the Lord all the day long.

4. If this do not do, but they haunt thee still (and like flies that are
beaten off, yet they return again) then chide and check them, use severity and
sharpness: we are (alas, that we are!) but too indulgent, courteous, and gentle
to these bold intruding Travelers, for so they are called, 2 Samuel 12.4. There
came a Traveller to the rich man (a lust to David in the case of Bathsheba, for
to that it refers) and he killed another Lamb for this Traveller, this lust;
if he had but examined it, he would have found it a Spy or a Vagabond, which
should not have been feasted, but sent to the Whipping-post. The reason we have
so many Pedlars come to our doors, is because we use to buy and take their
trifles, and the reason so many of these wandering Beggars and Gypsies knock at
our door, is because we give them alms and lodging: if we did but frown on
them, and execute the Law upon them, we should probably have none, or less of
their company.

5. Turn away thine eyes from beholding vanity, avoid occasions and appearances
of evil; for the world is cheated by appearances and shows, and men become
thieves (occasio facit furem) when occasion is offered them, who without it,
would not perhaps have thought of being so: As the heart inflames the eye, so
the eye affects and inflames the heart. Curiosity to see and hear lascivious
pictures and wanton songs has often induced persons to think such thoughts,
and to do such things, as else they would scarce have dreamt of; vain objects
and vain discourses engender vain fancies and imaginations, and so proceed and
increase to more ungodliness, 2 Timothy 2.16. Therefore the Apostle would not that
Christians should tell stories of fornication, uncleanness, or covetousness,
they should not be so much as named or mentioned, Ephesians. 5.3. such stories,
(though but Romantic) yet leave ill impressions on the sancies of men. There
needs to be a strict watch over eyes and ears, as ever we would preserve our
hearts and thoughts to be pure and chaste, lest we tempt the Tempter to tempt
us, and make our hearts worse by occasion and custom, then they are by nature:
which made King David beg of God to turn away his eyes from beholding vanity,
Psalm. 119.37. and good Job was so much afraid of himself, that he made a
Covenant with his eyes, lest he should think (unbecomingly) of a maid: Looking
produces lusting, as lusting puts on looking, Mat. 5.28.

6. Take heed of Idleness: every man should have a Calling to follow, and
follow his Calling, which is an excellent preservative from evil thoughts: Idle
persons have no business but to sin, and they that follow their Callings have
no leisure to sin; their thoughts are too intent to be diverted. Time lies
heavy on some men's hands for want of employment, and therefore they become
busybodies, gadding and wandering about, as their Fancy or the Devil (like a
wind) does drive them, or like a Decoy does draw and allure them, 1 Timothy
5.13-15. yea, these idlers or busybodies are joined with evil doers, thieves,
and murderers, 1 Pet. 4.15. they know that their time does, and will pass
away, but they know not how to pass it away (...) so that come what temptation
will come, they seem to be ready; the wink of an eye, the holding up of a
finger prevails with them; they follow the Devils whistle, and dance after his
Pipe: they spend their days like Vagrants, and their life is a mere diversion
from that which is the business of it: they cannot endure to be with
themselves, and therefore visit away (most impertinently) their precious time,
and adventure the loss of their precious souls, by becoming sinners for
company. Our thoughts are so active and restless, that something or other they
will be doing, and like unruly soldiers, if others employ them not well, they
will employ themselves ill: God has therefore in mercy appointed us Callings
to take up our thoughts, that they may be not only innocent, but profitable to
our selves and others. Paradise had, and Heaven also will not be, without,
employment. Idleness is an hour of temptation; and we can have no excuse to
stand idle in the marketplace, when God himself offers to employ us. The best
way to rid our ground of weeds, is to till it, and the best way to free our
hearts from evil thoughts, is good employment; only remember, that thy
particular Calling must not justle out, nor entrench upon thy general, nor thy
being a Tradesman make thee forget that thy conversation ((...)) thy Trading
must be for Heaven: 'I would be ill with thee to mind what is convenient, and
forget what is necessary. Let Mary's one thing be preferred before Martha's many.

7. Love God and his Law much, and thy thoughts will be much upon him and it;
the love of God will fi^d thy heart work enough to do: he that delights in God
and his Law, will find occasion enough to meditate therein, and pleasure enough
in meditating thereof day and night, Psalm. 1.2. Psalm. 119.97. your soul will be
where it loves, and where your treasure is, there your heart and thoughts will
be, Mat. 6.21. set your affections on things above, and when once your love is
settled, your thoughts will center and dwell there: Love will make you watchful
and fearful, lest you should offend the Beloved of your Soul; 'twill make you
angry with, and cause you to hate all the sinful thoughts that would attempt to
withdraw you, or to divert you; and 'twill make you like a tree planted by the
rivers side, exceeding and beautifully fruitful, for you will be so in season;
and it is meditation that is there likened to the watering of the river, and that
meditation flows from delight, and that from love, as you may see, Psalm. 1.2,
3. Thus will thou grow up and prosper, and so much, that thy leaf shall not
fade or wither, verse. 3. Thus I have endeavored to discover the sinfulness,
and endeavored the prevention of sinful thoughts: I now proceed to Caution.

2. Not in Wordsins.
Against sinful Words.
As I have endeavored before to clear the Heart, so now to clear and cleanse
the Mouth, that as there might not be an evil thought in that, so not an evil
word in this: persons too many are apt to think that words are but wind, things
that they shall not account for, and therefore are so bold and daring as to
say, as Psalm. 12.4. with our tongue will we prevail, our lips are our own, who
is Lord over us? we may speak what we will, and we will speak what we may: Oh,
what an unruly tongue has that man, who can say his tongue is his own! Patient
Job in a fit of passion did say, let me alone that I may speak, and come of me
what will, Job 13.13. Alas, is it not thus with many, when we tell them of the
sinfulness of sin and of tongue-sins, they fly in our faces, and say, hold
your peace, we will speak, let there come on us what will. Ob desperate!

But if you will be a little serious, I would ask you (when cool and calm) this
question, Would you not live and see good days? yes, we would, who is there
that does not desire life, and to see good days while he lives? many say, who
will show us any good? and every one says, life, life, skin for skin, and all
for life. Co^^ then, come ye children, hearken unto me, and I will teach you
the fear of the Lord; what man is he that desires life, and loves many days
that he may see good? Keep thy tongue from evil, and thy lips from speaking
guile, Psalm. 34.11, 12, 13. Oh, that all the parents in the world would call
their children together to read them such Lectures as this: many say, come, my
children, I will teach you the way to grow rich and great, how to be sine and
in fashion, etc. but few call them and say, come, my children, I will teach you
the fear of the Lord, the best wisdom; and godliness, the best and most
enriching Trade, good for this life, and that to come. Oh that they would ask
them, would you see life? etc. yes, but how? why, if you be for life and good
days, keep your tongue from evil, etc. this is confirmed in the New Testament,
1 Pet. 3.10. The next and best way to live and live well is (as the Proverb
has it) to keep a good tongue in our heads, and have no evil words in our
mouths: for as the Wiseman assures us, Prove. 21.23. whosoever keeps his mouth and
tongue, keeps his soul from troubles: and this is not only a political, but a
divine assertion, and is true between God and man, as it is between man and man.

Holy David was so afraid of his tongue, lest he should offend with it, that he
put a bridle into his mouth, Psalm. 39.1. and surely the tongue is an unruly
thing, that it must be bridled like an Horse or an Ass; yea, it is so unruly,
that one may better rule Horses, and manage them, and more easily turn such
unwieldy things as great Ships are, then keep the tongue in order; and
therefore St. James pronounces him a perfect man, that offends not in word,
and one that is able with ease to bridle the whole body, when he has the
mastery of his tongue, James 3.2, 3, 4. Oh, it is a rare thing to use the tongue
well!

Now to help you against this evil, that you may not sin with your mouths,
tongues, or lips (which are all one in signification) let me entreat you to
consider,

1. That sinful words are wholly forbidden us, and the contrary to them are
enjoined us; God has told us what we shall not, and what we shall say, what
words we ought not, and what we ought to use. For the Negative; let no corrupt,
or filthy, and rotten, unsavory communication (no kind of it, no degree of it)
proceed out of your mouth; but (affirmatively) that which is good to the use of
edifying, that it may minister grace unto the Hearers, Ephesians. 4.29. so again,
Chap. 5.3, 4. but fornication, and all uncleanness, or covetousness,
filthiness, foolish talking, and scurrilous jesting and gibing, let it not be
named, i. e. let not these be subject and matter of your discourse and talk;
but giving of thanks, or that which is graceful and thankworthy, fit to season
and edify others by ministering grace to them, as 'twas said before: and again,
Col. 4.6. let your speech be always with grace, let it be as becomes Saints,
graceful and comely, seasoned and savory, that which may not defile any, but
edify all: Though a Christian be not always to talk of grace, yet he is always
to talk so, as to show himself a gracious person. Our very Table-talk, as well
as our meat, should be seasoned with salt, it should be with the first and
second course; for salt is the first put on, and the last taken off, that all
may be seasoned and savory, and so should all our discourse be, and not like
salt that has lost its savor, which is not good, no not for the dunghill, Luke
14.35.

2. Unless a man take heed to his words, and bridle his tongue, that man's
Religion is vain, and consequently in vain: it is unprofitable, idle, and
impertinent, James 1.26. he does but seem to be religious, and thereby both
flatters and deceives himself: it is too much to seem to be evil, and too little
but to seem to be good: appearance in evil is too much, but appearance of or in
good, is not enough. If he seem to be religious, and does not bridle his
tongue, notwithstanding his seeming to be, he is not religious: A seeming
Religion is worse then none, as vanity is less then nothing, Isa. 40.17. He
that has a form, and but a form of godliness, denying the power thereof, is
worse then he that has not so much as a form, or makes no profession of
godliness. Oh, how should this oblige us to take heed of tongue-sins!

3. Sinful words are arguments of sinful hearts; words are the image of the
mind, and the declaration of it: as a man is known by his picture, so an heart
by its words. Thou art a Galilean, thy speech bewrays or discovers thee. We
may know what Countrymen any are by their language, whether French, Dutch,
etc. whether of the heavenly or hellish World. It Is out of the abundance (the
fullness and overflowing of) the heart, that the mouth speaks, Mat. 12.34.
broach any full vessel, and what is there will come out; words are as the
broaching of the heart, and giving it vent, and then out comes that which was
within. It Is indeed both possible and common for persons to speak well, when
they mean ill, peace is in their mouth, when war is in their heart; but that
heart is hypocritical, and out of that double heart, which is full of
Hypocrisy, they speak with their tongues, as Psalm. 12.2. Jer. 42.20. so that
if wicked men speak well, yet it is still from an evil heart of Hypocrisy, and
out of that abundance of the heart the mouth speaks.

4. Evil words corrupt men and their manners: our great care should be, not to
be corrupt, and the next to that, not to corrupt others; but evil words corrupt
both: they corrupt and defile our selves, Mat. 15.17, 18. What goes into the
mouth ( viz. meat) defiles not the man, but what comes out of the mouth (
viz. evil words) proceeds from the heart, and they defile the man. The tongue
is but a little member, yet it boasts great matters, it is but as a spark of
fire, but it kindles a great deal of wood, a world of iniquity, the whole
course of nature, and defiles the whole body, James 3.5, 6. It defiles, not
only a man's own body and course, but the body and community of them with whom
we converse too, a little leaven leavens the whole lump: be not deceived, evil
communication corrupts good manners, 1 Cor. 15.33. What Is the ill language or
evil discourse the Apostle means? That which he had mentioned, verse. 32. let us
(say and do like Epicures, as they say and do) let us eat and drink, for to
morrow we shall dye. Such loose Epicurean and Atheistical discourses do debauch
men and their manners. Many an ingenuous and hopeful person has been corrupted
by such ill discourse: they have no good conversation, who use evil
communication; persons of evil words are seldom persons of good manners, or if
so for a while (for nemo repent fit pessimus) none being suddenly wicked, or
worst at first, yet they degenerate and grow immoral and ill-manner'd more and
more. Lying frequently makes men at last so unacquainted with truth, that they
scarce think any difference to be between them; and they jest so long, that
they forget to be in earnest, till awaked by the quarrels that these things
beget in and among themselves.

5. The tongue is either man's glory of shame, worth much or nothing, as it is
good or evil. God made man's tongue his glory, but sin makes it his shame. Says
holy David to his tongue, awake, my glory, Psalm. 57.8. and Psalm. 16.9. my glory
rejoices; which the Apostle (according to the Septuagint) renders, my tongue
was glad; Acts 2.26. And when is our tongue our glory, but when it speaks to
the glory of God? when its words are savory and gracious; but if our tongue be
a lying tongue, a slandring tongue, or any other way evil, it is then our shame.
Oh, the vast difference that there is between a good and a bad tongue! Prove.
10.20. The tongue of the just is as choice silver (a precious commodity) but
the heart of the wicked (and therefore his tongue) is little worth, it is but
dross; he pays too dear by a farthing, that pays but a farthing for that which
is nothing worth: and this is so little worth, that he cannot tell how little,
worth nothing, or if you will, it is worse then naught in being naught. Again,
Prove. 12.18. there is that speaks ( Daggers, as we say) like the piercing of
a Sword, dangerous and killing words, but the tongue of the wise is (not only a
medicine or wholesome, but in the abstract) health. There is as much difference
between a good and bad tongue, as between soundness and wounds, health and
sickness. Yet once more, Prove. 15.4. an wholesome tongue is a tree of life
(which is for healing) but perverseness therein is a breach in the spirit: and a
wounded spirit who can bear? or who can bear up under a broken spirit? But,

Sixthly and lastly consider this, God will judge us for and by our words, as
well as by our works and actions. There is a place may make us tremble, and
should engage us to take heed of our words, while we have a day to live, it is
in Mat. 12 36. I say unto you, that every idle word that men shall speak, they
shall give an account thereof in the day of Judgment; and verse. 37. for by thy
words thou shall be justified, and by thy words thou shall be condemned. If we
must give an account of idle, what account shall we give of filthy and
ill-working words! of words that are corrupt, and do corrupt others! Solomon
upon this account tells us, Prove. 18.21. death and life are in the power of the
tongue; a man shall be judged and sentenced according to it. There is such a
connection between heart, tongue, and deed, that he who is judged by one, is
judged by all of them, for they agree in one. It Is observable, that though all
the charge, or most of it, in Psalm. 50. is for words, the sin of the tongue. 1.
In abusing Gods good Word. 2. Using their own ill words, they gave their mouth
to evil, etc. yet that the heart was consenting, and the deed executing, there
was a concurrence and co-working of all three: after his words are spoken of,
says God, these things have thou done, and it follows, thou thoughtest, etc.
verse. 21. but I will judge thee, viz. for all this, yet especially for thy
words, according to what is said, Jude 15. Behold, the Lord comes to execute
judgment upon all, to convince all that are ungodly among them of all their
ungodly deeds, which they have ungodlily committed, and of all their (mark it)
their hard speeches which they have spoken against him: yea, against him in his
members. It Is said, verse. 16. their mouth speaks great swelling words, viz. as
Murmurers and Complainers use to do: they will jeer the people of God, and twit
them with the name of Holy and Spiritual, and utter hard speeches against them;
but when Christ comes to Judgment, he will call to account for all the hard
speeches, and all the great swelling words, which by way of complaint they have
spoken against his members; or by way of flattery and admiration (for lucres
sake) they have spoken in commendation and praise of wicked and cruel men. Oh,
take heed of tongue-sins; when Dives was in Hell, the part that (it seems) was
most tormented, was his tongue; for he begs water to cool his tongue, which
gives some occasion to think that (even in relation to Lazarus) he had sinned
much with his tongue, and used hard speeches against poor Lazarus; for 'twas by
him he would have the water brought: In quo peccamus, in hoc plectimur, as and
in what we sin, we smart and are pained and plagued, as Dives with and in his
tongue. If the tongue be set on fire of Hell while on earth, Ah, how will it be
set on fire when in Hell! The sins of the mouth cry for vengeance with an open
mouth, and make others cry for it too, Psalm. 59.11, 12, 13. the holy man (not
yet King, but Prophet) prays, scatter them, bring them down, O Lord! why,
David, why so severe, what have they done? Oh, it is for the sin of their mouth,
and the words of their lips, for their cursing and lying; and then he is at it
again, consume them, consume them in thy wrath. This is the dreadful
imprecation that the sin of their mouth occasioned this merciful and good
person to make against them, and to beg God to execute it upon them. Sad will
the account be that men will have to make for speaking, as for working of
iniquity.

On all these considerations, let me beseech you to take heed as to your words,
and, 1. let your words be few; and that not only in your commerce and
conversation with men, but in your addresses to God, Eccl. 5.2. God is in
Heaven, and thou upon Earth, therefore let thy words be few; which is much of
the meaning of our Savior in the Prayer which he taught his Disciples, as will
appear by comparing the 6, 7, 8, 9. verse. of Mat. 6. It Is a vanity that attends
men in Religion, that they think to be heard for their loud and much speaking;
silence were better then ill-speaking, yea (and many times) then much-speaking.
It Is true, there is a time to speak, as there is to be silent (and happy they
that improve it well) but yet it is seldom that a multitude of words are without
sin; and therefore he that refraineth his lips is wise, Prove. 10.19. Silence
discovers wisdom, and conceals ignorance, and it is a property so much belonging
to wise men, that the Oracle tells us, Prove. 17.28: That a fool when he holds
his peace, is accounted wise, and he that shuts his lips, is esteemed a man of
understanding: And as a very worthy and noble Person expresses it, If silence
were as much in fashion, as it is charitable to mankind to wish it, the Regions
of Hell would be far thinlier peopled, then now they are like to be. Many have
repented for using their tongues too much; it is true, a man that holds his
peace may offend with his tongue, but it is a more scarce and seldom crime, then
that of much (which is usually too much) speaking. It Is Gospel-doctrine which
teaches us to be swift to hear, and slow to speak, James 1.19. Moses's
imperfection or defect would be an excellency in some persons, to be slow of
speech; and 'twere well with some, if they had got such a cold, as would keep
them from speaking. Oh, the prittle, prattle that abounds among the busy
bodies of this world! and there are many, not only vain, but unruly talkers,
Titus 1.10. that a man had need of more patience to hear them, then to hear the
beating of an unbraced Drum: and, alas, it is not only the chat and tattle of
idle Gossips (such as, 1 Timothy 5.13.) who spoke unbecomingly, and things which
they ought not; but much of the discourse that wastes men's time (who would be
loath to drink and swear it away) consists of talk that flatters the present, or
detracts from the absent; censuring of Superiors, or despising of Inferiors!
what empty and ridiculous, if not frothy discourses (that excite to carnality)
are the common entertainments, even among them that pretend to better things!
what is such company and converse good for, but to quench zeal and fervency,
yea, the ready way to lose credit and good name; and if not innocence, yet
always time, which is too precious to be squandered away and lost, much more to
be sinned away! Shall a man of much talk be justified, Job 11.2. Oh no, much
talk is full of folly; for a dream comes through a multitude of business, and
a fools voice is known by multitude of words, Eccl. 5.3. and in the multitude
of dreams and many words, are diverse vanities; but fear thou God, verse. 7. as
if multitude of words were inconsistent with the fear of God; for to that
purpose the words sound. We cannot well speak too little, unless we speak by
command from God, and in obedience to it. Therefore,

2. If we will, or must be speaking, let us speak as we ought, let our words be
wholesome words, such as carry Physic and health in them: safe and sound speech
that may not be gainsaid nor reproved: that may do no hurt, but that may do
good. We should speak that which is good to edify men, that which is good for
our selves and others, either naturally, civilly, morally, or spiritually good,
as occasion offers and requires. I intend no particular enumeration of
Tongue-sins to be avoided, nor any distinct and particular Discourse about
speaking and ordering our Tongues; but only to hint these things in general,
leaving the particular Application and Improvement to be made by every man, as
his own case calls for; and therefore to conclude this, I shall commend but
these two things in relation hereunto.

1. Look well to your hearts, if they be not well kept, your tongues will be
ill kept; and therefore it is said, Prove. 4.23. keep thine heart with all
diligence, or (as it is in the Hebrew) above all keeping: it needs more keeping
then any thing else, for all the rest are at the hearts dispose, both faculties
and members; therefore keep a strict watch and strong guard over thine heart;
the speaking of the tongue is from the musing of the heart, which is as fire in
the bosom that cannot be hid, but will break out into a flame of words, as the
Phrases are used, Psalm. 39.3. when thou art heart-full, thy mouth will run
over, and if the fountain of thy heart be bitter, the streams of thy words
cannot be sweet. When Holy David prayed that the words of his mouth might be
acceptable, he prays for this in relation to it, Let the meditations of my
heart be acceptable, Psalm. 19.14. If the latter, viz. our meditations be not;
the former, viz our words, are not like to be acceptable. When our heart speaks
our words, our words speak our heart, and it is but one thing: and no sooner
does our heart indite a good matter, but our tongue will be as the Pen of a
ready Writer, Psalm. 45.1. The heart of the wise teaches his mouth, Prove 16.23.
the Hebrew is, makes his mouth wise: the fool speaks with an open mouth, any
thing that is uppermost; but a wise man opens his mouth and speaks, gravely,
wisely, and upon deliberation. The mouth needs going to School, and if we will
have it wise, let us get it a wise heart to be its Tutor, to teach it the art
and grace of speaking wisely and well; the heart of the wise teaches his mouth.

2. Pray to God, for prayer is the means-general for preservation and
sanctification of heart, tongue, and life: lift up thy heart and soul to him,
and pray as, Psalm. 19.14 of which I newly spoke; and say as, Psalm. 51.15. O
Lord, open thou my lips, and my mouth shall show forth thy praise; and as,
Psalm. 71.8. let my mouth be filled with thy praise, and with thine honor all
the day. And again, Psalm. 141.3, 4. set a watch, O Lord, before my mouth, and
keep the door of my lips, and incline not my heart to any evil thing. That Is
well kept that God keeps, and if he keep not the City, the watchmen watch in
vain. Commit thy self to the Keeper of Israel, and all will be well, Prove.
16.1, 2, 3.

3. Not in Deed-sins
Caution against Deed-sins.
The third thing I am to dehort from, and caution against, is living in the
practice of any sin; yet before I directly speak thereunto, I crave leave to
say some things about and against sins of omission, a thing too seldom treated
or taken notice of, though scarce any guilt more common.

I shall therefore dehort 1. From sins of Omission. 2. From sins of Commission


1. Take heed of sins of Omission; Of sins of Omission.
it is a sin to omit what good is commanded, as well (or ill) as to commit what
evil is forbidden, not to do what we ought, as to do what we ought not. We are
not only to eschew evil, but to do good also, 1 Pet. 3.11. and I the rather
insist a little hereon, because many are more apt and prone to omit Duties, to
be neglectful of doing good, then to commit (especially) gross and palpable
evils; and withal, to look upon it as a less evil, if any at all, there being
so many (though but trifling) excuses ready for it, as you may see, Luke 14.18,
19, 20. I beseech you therefore to consider these things.

1. That good, and some of the best of men have been guilty hereof, and have
suffered hereby; to instance but in two: the first is Jacob, who was exceeding
tender of telling a lie, though 'twere to get a blessing, Genesis 27.11, 12. but
this Jacob was so forgetful of, and did so long neglect and omit to pay his
vow, which he made at Bethel, that God minds him of it, Genesis 35.1. and for the
omission whereof, its suppo^ed, that the afflictions mentioned in the former
Chapter did befall him. The other Instance is Hezekiah, a good man and a good
King, who returned not to the Lord according to the benefit he had received,
nor did answer the end of it, but was guilty of not being humble or thankful
enough, though he sung a Song of Praise (and it seems, annually) unto God: and
therefore wrath was upon him, 2 Chronicles. 32 25. with Isa. 38.20. Alas, how apt
are good men to neglect Duties, and especially returning ones, even them of
praise; and for these things sake the wrath of God comes on his own Children,
as for gross sins, it comes upon the children of disobedience, Ephesians. 5.5, 6. How
dear did it cost the Spouse her not opening to her Beloved, Cant. 5.6, 7.

2. Yet generally, and for the most part, it is a great affliction to good and
godly men to be forced to omit, and to be constrained to be absent from Duties,
though the omission of them (at such a time, and in such a case) be no sin of
theirs, as in time of sickness, or in case of flight: how does David mourn
while in the wilderness (being persecuted and driven there) how does be lament
his absence from the Assemblies of them that kept Holy Day, Psalm. 42.1-4.
Though God in cases of such necessity dispense with his Sabbath, and
consequently his instituted Worship on that day; yet holy men lament this
necessity, and mourn that they are restrained from bearing a part with others,
and forced to do that which else were not lawful to do on a Sabbath Day: and
it is on this account (not to exclude others) that (as I conceive) our Savior
bid the Disciples pray, that their flight might not be on the Sabbath Day, Mat.
24.20. For the usual Ordinances of the day could not be enjoyed, nor the
ordinary Duties of the day practiced and performed. But,

3. As it should be an affliction to be in a necessity, so it is a sin to be
willing to omit a Duty. It Is an affliction not to have an head or hand, but a
sin not to have an heart for Duty. As it is a sin to will evil, so it is a sin
not to will good; but to be willing not to do good, is more a sin: too many
persons are glad of diversions (as Schoolboys are when they have no mind to
their books) any thing shall serve to put off a Duty. When the flesh was weak,
and the spirit willing, Christ himself excused them, Mat. 26.41. but if the
spirit be unwilling, it is no excuse, though the flesh be never so weak. 'Twas
some comfort to St. Paul, that though to do he had not power, yet to will was
present with him, Romans 7.18. but not to will, though we have no power, and much
more not to will when we have power, is a sin. The reason why the wicked bad
God depart from them, was, because they had no mind nor desire to be acquainted
with his ways, Job 21.14. so Romans 1.28. they did not like to retain God in
their knowledge, or to pay acknowledgments to him, they had no mind nor will,
nor list to do it; and this is sin, as well as the other sins wherewith they
are charged.

4. One omission makes way for another; he that under pretense of unfitness to
Duty puts it off, makes himself fit for nothing more then to omit again (qui
non est hodie, eras minus aptus erit) he prepares and fits himself to be unfit
for, and to omit Duty: much and too long fasting takes away and deadens our
appetite; he that omits one, is like to omit another, and so another, till he
omit all, and give up his very profession, and when that is gone, the man's
Religion dies, and he becomes twice dead. Omissions make way for commissions
(as it did in our first Parents) and 'twill be worth our while to observe a few
Texts that speak of sluggards (from whence sins of omission generally arise)
Eccl. 10.18: by much slothfulness the building decays, and through idleness of
the hands, the house drops through: it not only lies open to wind and weather,
but at last falls down, the repairs being neglected and omitted. Our bodies are
called the Temples of God, of which our souls are (as I may say) the Holy of
Holies, or as we call it, the Chancel, and it is through sloth that this
glorious Fabric decays so much, Prove. 18.9. he that is slothful in his work,
is brother to him that is a great waster, he is a man that will come to
nothing, and be worse then naught very shortly and speedily; for he is a
Prodigal, a spend-thrift, he spends more then he gets, and more then was given
him; true, and it is as true, that his brother, the slothful man, will not hold
out much longer then he: for, Prove. 20.4. the sluggard will not plow by reason
of the cold, therefore shall he beg in harvest, and have nothing. A Prodigal
comes to nothing, and so does the Sluggard. Love is a laborious thing, we read
of the labor of love, 1 These. 1.3. and love never grieves to be obedient, 1 John 5. Now idleness argues a defect and want of love; for when the Angel of
Ephesus left his first love he left also his first works, Rev. 2.4, 5. When
love grows cold, practice becomes dead. Prove. 26.13, 14, 15. the slothful man
says, there is a Lion in the way; ask him, why do not you arise and walk with
God? why do not you go forth and serve God? Oh, says he, there is a Lion in
the way, there is danger in it; when this is but his conceit, as it is verse. 16.
as the door turns upon the hinges, so does the slothful upon his bed; how is
that? why, first one way, then another, he cannot rest on his bed of idleness,
and yet is loath to rise, and therefore turns him to this and the other side: and
if after much ado, and many a yawn he get up, then he hides his hand in his
bosom ('it is cold weather) and he is grieved to bring it twice to his mouth,
though it be to feed himself: This is the guise of idle and sl^thful people,
yea, Professors; we are to do what we do with our might, and how can that be,
while our hand is in our bosom? for shame take it out, for as he that having
put his hand to the plow looks back, so he that puts not his hand to the plow,
will be found unfit for the Work and Kingdom of God, he shall beg in harvest,
but have nothing. In the great day of recompense, these slothful ones will
learn to pray and beg, saying, Lord, Lord, open to us, but they shall have
nothing, viz. of that which they beg, no door opened to let them into the House
of God, where is bread enough.

I remember I said, that sins of omission made way for sins of commission, and
it is but too true: Johs friends hearing such unsaint-like language from him as
cursing, concluded that he omitted praying; thou restrainest prayer from God,
Job 15.4. When men neglect Duty, they do usually fall into sin: to carry on
this by the story of the slothful, see Prove. 24.30. I went by the field of the
slothful; and what did he observe? Lo it was all grown over with thorns,
nettles covered the face thereof, and the stonewall was broken down; alas, Eden
becomes a wilderness, and Paradise a desert, the poor soul is under the curse,
it brings forth grieving thorns and pricking briars, and stinging nettles, and
is again nigh unto more cursing for bringing this forth, Heb. 6.8. Sin comes on
by degrees, it seems modest at first, do but omit, then it grows bold, and bids
thee commit, and so from omission to commission, till at last the man become a
man of sin, and a son of perdition, vir perditus, an hopeless, desperate, lost,
and undone man. Yet again, to show the worst of it, which follows hereupon,
such persons are frequently given up, as Romans 1.21. their first sin was not
glorisying God as God, and then not being thankful, they became vain, being
vain, they were darkened, thence they became fools, and so on to abominable
Idolatries, and at last it came to this, that God gave them up, verse. 24. Oh,
the danger of sins of omission, one makes way for another, and thence they
proceed to commission, till they be given up and cursed!

5. The more knowledge of any Duty we have, the more clear it is, and the more
we are convinced of it, the more is the omission of tha^ Duty aggravated; the
clearer the light is, the greater the sin of not receiving it, this is the
condemnation, Joh. 3.19. If Christ had not come, their sin had not been so
great; but now not to believe, is to be without excuse, Joh. 15.22. and 24. If
God had not told us what we ought to do, we might have made excuse, and said,
Had we known better, we would have done better; but God has shown thee, O man,
what is good, Micah. 6.8. and that not only by his Works, but by his Word; and
if the knowledge of him by them only aggravated their sin as it did, Romans 1.21.
how greatly will their sin be aggravated that neglect so great Salvation, which
at first was preached by the Lord Jesus Christ, and afterward confirmed by them
that heard him, God bearing them witness with signs and wonders, diverse
miracles and gifts of the holy Ghost, as it is, Heb. 2.3, 4. To him that knows
to do good, and does it not, to him it is sin, a great sin, an heinous sin, sin
with a witness. It may be sin to another that knows not to do good, but not so
great a sin as it is to him that knows; and therefore he that knew not his
masters will was beaten but with a few stripes, but he that knew it, and did it
not, was beaten with many, Luke 12.47, 48. The Jews had wont to abate one of
the forty stripes which the Law allowed, and that to St. Paul (as much as they
hated him) for of them twice he received forty stripes save one, 2 Cor. 11.24.
But he that knows his masters will, and does it not, nor prepares himse^f,
shall be beaten with many stripes, with the full number, without abatement or
mitigation, the total sum of the Law shall be inflicted on him.

6. Sins of omission (if in the view of others) are evil examples, as sins of
commission are; a man may do a great deal of hurt by not doing good: we are
commanded to let our good works shine before others, Mat. 5.16. and to be
examples of faith and charity unto others, to be presidents of good works,
Titus 3.8. for so the word signifies in that place. The world is led by the eye
as much, if not more then by the ear, and are as much prevailed with by
examples as they are by precepts; and are (on the other hand) very inclinable
to think, that they may do what others (especially their betters) do; if rich
men give but little, others (that are not so rich, and yet able to give) think
they may be excused, if they give nothing to the poor. If the parents neglect
prayer, the children scarce think it their duty to pray: As it is an excellent
thing to be an examplary Christian, it shows that Religion is practicable, and
tolls men on: it is a dull Jade that will not follow and strive to keep pace,
when another mettled horse leads the way: So it is sad to be an examplary
sinner; for such an one has more sins to answer for then his own, even them of
other men, that were committed by his example. It Is a common plea, such learned
and knowing men do so and so, and why may not I? Oh follow not a multitude (how
mighty and wise soever) to do evil; let us therefore provoke one another to
love and good works by our example; let us not only show, but lead the way.

7. Consider this, sins of omission are sins which God has severely judged men
for in this world, and for which he will judge men in the great day. It Is
observable how severe God has been to them that have omitted what he commanded
them to do, though they have pretended to do it for Gods-sake; an instance
whereof we have in Saul, 1 Samuel 15. God sent Saul to destroy Amaleck root and
branch, King and people, from head to foot, from Throne to threshold, not to
leave one person alive; man, woman, infant, and suckling, all must dye; oxen
and sheep, etc. none must escape. But Saul spared Agag, and the best of the
sheep and oxen, etc. and would not utterly destroy them; whereupon it follows,
that the Lord repented of having set up Saul to be King, verse. 11. and though
it were pretended to be done for a Sacrifice to God, verse. 15. and 22. yet it is
charged upon him as rebellion and witchcraft, verse. 23. and his not obeying the
voice of the Lord, is called a doing evil in his sight, verse 19. so that he who
omits a good, commits an evil; the omission of good is the commission of evil,
and judged accordingly. Oh, how dear did this sin of omission cost Saul;
Another instance is,

That of Eli (which is remarkable) who is charged with honoring his sons
before God, 1 Samuel 2.29. how so? Eli was a good old man, and can it be thought
that he preferred his sons before God? what should the meaning of this be? see
Chap. 3.13. and there it is cleared up; for says God, I will judge his house
for ever, for the iniquity which he knows, because his sons made themselves
vile, and he restrained them not: he did not give them so much as a sour look,
or as the Hebrew reads it, he frowned not upon them. And yet let me tell you,
Eli went so far, that had his children had any ingenuity, or any respect to the
rebukes of a Priest and Father, one would have thought he had said enough, for
Chap. 2.23. etc. the old man very gravely takes them up with this
expostulation, Why do you do such things? for I hear of your evil dealings by
all this people, nay, my sont, for it is no good report which I hear, ye make
the Lords people to transgress; if one man sin against another, the Judge shall
judge him, but if a man sins against the Lord, who shall entreat for him? thus
he lays their sin and danger before them pretty roundly, and yet, says God,
he restrained them not, there was an omission and neglect of more severe
discipline; and this omission cost him dear, as dear almost as the sins of
commission did cost his sons, which was not to be purged with Sacrifice, verse.
14.

Another instance, is that concerning the Ammonites and Moabites (who were a
bastard brood) and therefore like Bastards, they were not to enter into the
Congregation of the Lord, till the tenth generation, Deuteronomy. 23.2, 3, 4. and the
reason is taken, 1. From a sin of omission, because they met not Israel with
bread and water, when they came out of Egypt. It Is a dreadful thing to be
excommunicated from, and a dreadful thing not to be admitted into the
Congregation of the Lord; and you see that a sin of omission may keep men out
for a long time. But,

2 God will judge men for sins of omission in the great and terrible day of his
righteous Judgment: not only the wicked, but the slothful servant will be
judged, and the slothful will be judged wicked, as we have it from the mouth of
Truth it self, Mat. 25.26. thou wicked and slothful servant, wicked because
slothful; he was no waster, but brother to him (as was lately noted) because
slothful; for omitting the improvement of his talent, he was called and judged
a wicked and slothful servant, and his punishment was (beside the loss of his
talent) to be cast into utter darkness, where there is weeping and gnashing of
teeth: he had not turned the grace of God into wantonness, yet for being
unprofitable, he is sent to Hell. And again, verse. 41. he shall say to them on
his left hand, depart from me ye cursed into everlasting fire, for your sins of
omission, because when I was hungry and thirsty, ye (like the Ammonites and
Moabites newly mentioned, ye brought me no bread and water) ye gave me no meat
and drink. Some are apt to justify themselves thus, we never did any man hurt,
we have wronged and oppressed no man; I, but God will condemn them that have
not done such evils, because they have not done good: Oh, think of these
things, and beware of sins of omission. And,

2. Take heed of sins of Commission. Of sins of Commission.

As we should be careful not to omit our Duties, the things commanded, for
(beside all that has been said, I might add this, that) to omit (especially)
the weightier things of the Law (though we be observant of the lesser) is a
sign of Hypocrisy, Mat. 23.23. so we should be no less careful to keep our
selves from the evil that is forbidden, from all kinds and sorts of sins (the
enumeration of which were endless) in relation to which, let me caution you to
beware of, and watch against,

1. Such as are most peculiarly our sins.
That which may be most properly called your own sin, the sin to which you are
most inclined, and which does most easily beset and conquer you: 'Twas Holy
David's Crown of rejoicing, that he had kept himself from his iniquity, Psalm.
18.23. I was upright before him, and kept my self from mine iniquity, not only
that which was charged upon me by others to be mine iniquity in relation to
Saul, but (as most Interpreters carry it) that which was the sin of mine
inclination, as one would say, from my complexion and constitution-sin, my
natures darling-sin. Are you young? avoid the sins proper to this age, 2 Timothy
2.22. flee youthful lusts, or the lusts of youth; there are some lusts almost
peculiar to youth, as, 1. Ambition, vain Glory, Pride, 1 Pet. 5.5. which much
appears in their odd, fantastic garbes and flanting behaviors (as that Text
implies) and especially in not submitting to the elder. 2. Gratifying the
sensual appetite and carnal inclination; they are much for the lust of the eye
and of the flesh too, as well as for the pride of life; as Eccl. 11.9. and
12.1. tells us, that they are much set upon pleasure, the young man's favouritc.
The Prodigal (who was the younger brother) did this way waste his estate, his
time, and himself, he spent all on back and belly, on riotous living: 'twas a
young man that Solomon saw going the way to her house, Prove. 7.7. which way
leads to Hell. 3. Another lust of youth is self-conceitedness, too much
proneness to be wise in their own eyes. They think old men fools, but old men
know that they are fools. Their conceitedness puffs them up, and makes them
incapable of instruction, and very unteachable ( Reh^boam and his young
Counselors may save us the labor of instancing in any others, 1 Kings 12.)
and it is on this account that the Apostle would have Titus exhort young men to
be discreet or sober-minded; flee then all these and any other, youthful lusts,
make the most haste you can from them, not only creep, or go, or run, or ride,
but flee. Are you old? hear then ye old men, Joel 1.2. what shall we hear? that
in Titus 2.2. take heed of old age sins, old age lusts (concupiscentia non
senescit) when men are dying, and have one leg in the grave, when they are
about to give up the Ghost, yet (like the Thief on the Cross) they will be
sinning. Take heed of Solomon's old age sin, a kind of dotage which suffered him
to apostatize, 1 Kings 11.3. be sound in the faith, as in Titus 2.2. take heed
of the peevishness of old age, be patient (says the Text) take heed of the
covetousness of old age, be charitable, says the Text. Be fruitful in your old
age, that your latter end may be better then your beginning, and the better,
because it may be your beginning was bad: and that your last days may be your
best days, and so you may dye in a good old age, which is best so, when you dye
good in an old age, and are such as St. Paul the aged, who had finished his
course; it is a Crown and Glory to be an old good Disciple, as Mnason was, Acts
21.16.

2. Relation-sins.
Take heed of the sins which men and women are guilty of, as they are
relatives, and stand in relation to one another; art thou husband or wife? take
heed of being false to, or but faining of love: art parent or child? art master
or servant? take heed of the sins which do attend either of the relations
wherein thou stand. I had thought indeed to have particularized the sins,
but they are so commonly written of and known, that I shall forbear that, and
only hint this direction and counsel, which I have often thought may be of
great good use, viz. That every relative person, as husband, wife, etc. would
read and (if they can) write out, and pray that God would write in their hearts
the several directions, which the Scripture so frequently and abundantly gives
to all relations, and keep them before their (as holy David did the
loving kindness of God before his) eyes, that they may walk in the truth.
Relative Duties are too little minded, but if we did consider that we are that
(and usually but that) really which we are relatively, 'twould hugely oblige
and quicken us to be relatively good. It Is not like that they are good
Christians, who are bad husbands or wives, bad parents or children, bad
superiors or inferiors in their places.

3. Place-sins
Take heed of the sins of the age, country, and places where you live; there
are sins as 'twere appropriated to some ages and countries, as to them of the
latter and last days, see 1 Timothy 4.1-4. and 2 Timothy 3.1-5. When sin becomes
Epidemical, it is the less abstained from, for few (but very good persons) care
to be singular: when sins are as 'twere the custom and fashion of the country,
most will be sinners; especially if it be countenanced by the examples of great
ones. But as we should not be conformed to this world at large, so not to any
part of it. Is there any sin by which the Land is defiled (for which the Land
mourns) and is ready to spue out the Inhabitants thereof for it, Levit. 18.27,
28. take heed thou be not found guilty; but be one of the mourners, which God
will set a mark upon, Ezekiel. 9.4. When Formality, Hypocrifie, and Apostasy are
in sashion, be cautious not to sin any of these ways, no more then by swearing,
drunkenness, and uncleanness, though they be common and uncontrouled. Take heed
of minding the favor and praise of men, more then, or without the favor and
praise of God, which Hypocrites, and none but Hypocrites do, Joh, 12.42, 43.
Daniel and the three Children would not sin for fashions-sake, no though they
were commanded to sin: And the Apostles made their appeal to them that would
have had them sin, saying, Whether it be better to obey God or man, judge ye,
Acts 4.18, 19, 20. It Is God will judge us, and not men, and he only has
absolute authority over us, to command what he please, and therefore our chief
care should be to please him. We shall find that the best way to please all, or
to displease any with least danger, 'is to please him, who is all in all.
Though therefore any should think it strange, that ye run not with them to the
same excess of riot, and speak evil of you, 1 Pet. 4.4. answer them as Joseph
did his Mistress, how shall I do this wickedness and sin against God, Genesis
39.9. and tell them as the Apostle does, 1 Pet. 4.5. that thou and they must
give an account to him, who is ready to judge the quick and the dead; seeing
therefore the end of all things is at hand, let us be sober and watch unto
prayer (for so it is added in verse. 7.) as Holy David did, when they spoke evil
of him, fought against him without a cause, and for his love became his
adversaries, Psalm. 109. 2-4.

4. Callingsins.
Take heed of the sins that attend your Callings, Occupations, and Trades: and
here I premise, 1. That every man should (as was touched above) have a Calling
to follow, and follow his Calling; God has given no man a dispensation to be
idle, the rule is, 2 These 3.10. and that by command, if any will not, that can,
work, neither should he eat; and if this rule were observed, I am afraid that
more rich then poor would go with hungry stomachs and empty bellies. Of
idleness comes no good, but to be sure a great deal of evil: They that are at
work are not at leisure to sin, but they that are idle are at leisure to do
nothing but to sin. Adam in innocence (that better then golden age) had his
Calling and Employment, he was a Gardner, (...), a Cultivator of the ground, or
an Husbandman.
Genesis 2.15. The Angels of Heaven are not without their Cal^ing; when they are
abroad (here on earth) they are ministering Spirits, Heb. 1.14. and when at home
in Heaven, they rest not day or night from praising God; as one of the Greek
Fathers expresses it, (...), their service and calling is to sing Songs and
Psalms of praise. I may therefore say, Take heed of the sin of being without a
Calling, or of having no Calling, especially you that are young and strong to
labor. 2. No man's Calling necessitates him to sin; there is many a Trade, of
which I scruple not to say, it is no Calling: many make Trades for a livelibood
of that which is no Calling; Harlotry and Thieving are no Callings; for we are
called, not to uncleanness, but to holiness: and as to lawful Callings, sin is
but accidental, and springs up more from our inclination, then it is occasioned
by our Callings. Necessities are things that few men are competent Judges of;
many things are called so, which are far from being so; and nothing should be
called so, that is a sin; he that cannot follow a Calling without sinning, had
better lay aside his Trade, then live by sinning: That there is sin in
Callings, is not from our vocation, but from our corruption; it is not our
Calling, but our evil hearts that put us upon sinning. There Is no need to tell
a lie, or to steal, or cheat, there are many other better ways to live, and if
we were not distrustful of God, and indulgent to the baseness of our own
hearts, we might find them out. Yet,

3. I say this, there are snares in our Callings, the Devil lays his nets and
baits every where: he lays his snares to entangle us, not only in our general,
but particular Callings, to turn all our duties into sins. Many men do sin, and
most men are liable (being tempted) to sin in their Callings. There are many
temptations attend and wait on every Calling; and were I to speak to men of any
Calling, I would follow the example of St. John, Luke 3.10. etc. who spoke to
every one according to the sin he was guilty of, or tempted to in his place:
The Publicans were very great oppressors, and therefore he calls on them to
exact no more then their due; your stated and appointed allowance; the
soldiers were boisterous and unruly, and therefore he speaks to them to do
violence to no man, or (as in the Margin) to put no man in fear; do not trepan
men, and falsely accuse them; do not plunder and steal, but be content with
your pay. But seeing I cannot speak to every particular, I will lay before you
some things in general, which may be applied to each and every one.

1. Take heed of lying and equivocating, which is a thing grown so common in
buying and selling, that it passes but for words of course; It cost me more,
and yet sell it for less; I cannot afford it, yet take the money; I will get
nothing by you, as if men could buy and sell, and live by the loss; do you
think that men believe this, or do you your selves believe it without one or
other equivocal distinction? I will not undertake to tell you the words you
shall use, but I tell you from the Lord, that you should use but few, and speak
in truth, in a multitude of words there wants not sin; for the seller to extol
a commodity with variety of words, and tell men, it is the best in town, there
cannot better be bought for gold, etc. is many times but a Trade-complement; so
for the buyer, to say its naught, its naught, and when he is gone, to boast, is
not short of a sin, Prove. 20.14. or to say, he will give no more, though he
intend to do it. Words are precious commodities, and should not be exposed at
an adventure: What Is beyond yea and nay, and reaches to superfluity, comes of
evil, and evil comes of it, Mat. 5.37. James 5.12. and if you tell untruths and
lies, it is as bad as stealing, Levit. 19.11. ye shall not steal, nor deal
falsely, nor lie one unto another. He that lies, does constructively steal:
and the Apostle, 1 Timothy 1.10. joins liars and stealers, and perjured persons
together, and tells us, that the Law is against them all, and that they are
contrary to sound Doctrine: and if man's Law were as Gods, there would be a
recovery of restitution for what is gotten by lying, as for what is stolen,
Levit. 6.1-5. and before you can come to God with your offering, you ought to
restore that which is gotten by fraud, as well as that which is gotten by
force; yea, to lie is a thing inconsistent with being a Child of God, without
(among the dogs) are liars, and shall (if they repent not) have their part in
the lake which burns with fire and brimstone, which is the second death, Rev.
21.8. and 22.15. and the getting of treasure by a lying tongue, is a vanity
tossed to and ^^o of them that seek (this) death, Prove. 21.6. He that is not
delivered from the way of lying on earth, will never be delivered from lying in
Hell. Surely, says God of his people, they are children that will not lie,
Isa. 63.8. to be sure, they will not make a trade of it, nor live in or by
lying: and it is added, so he was their Savior, as if God would not save a
cheating Hypocrite, a lying Professor, no nor will he without repentance; for
lying lips are an abomination to the Lord, Prove. 12.22. but they that deal
truly are his delight: which had you rather be, abhorred, or delighted in by
God? think of this in your Warehouses and Shops, or when you go abroad to buy
or sell, that you may do all in truth. Methinks I hear your wives and children
begging of you, Oh, do not lie to be rich, do not venture your going to Hell to
leave me an estate! Thus do I deal plainly and truly with you, that you may do
so with all men, and I hope you will not take it ill, that I endeavor to do
you good; if you do, I say with the Apostle, forgive me this wrong.

2. Take heed of putting men off, and paying them with false and unlawful
money; as you should not buy stolen and unlawful goods, so you should not pay
unlawful money, that which you would not take, and know that others will not
receive, if it be discerned: The children of Abraham should be like him, who
when he had bought, he weighed or told out his silver, current money with the
Merchant, Genesis 23.16. And this sin is so much the worse ( viz. paying of brass
and uncurrent money) because it usually falls into the hands of the poor, who
can least discern, and suffer most by the receiving of it; do as you would be
done unto, and do not pay that which is not payment, but an abuse and wrong.

3. Use not false weights or measures, nor keep your books falsely: take heed
of writing down more then was delivered or bargained for, or writing greater
prices then were agreed upon. As to false weights and measures, they are
utterly forbidden, Levit. 19.35, 36. and Deuteronomy. 25.13-16. you are to have a
standardmeasure, and not think it enough to have one only when the Quest comes,
but all the year long, or else you (as your weights and measures) are an
abomination to the Lord, Prove. 20.10. You have a good saying (and I wish it be
made good) you shall have your weight, or measure, or tale, though you buy it
for a penny or a farthing. Says God, shall I count them pure with the wicked
balance and deceitful weights? no, no, let them never be so great Professors,
I will not count them pure, but an abomination, Micah. 6.10, 11.

4. Take heed of counterfeit and false Lights; alas, one can hardly see day by
day in many men's shops, they either shut out the light, or let it in, one
scarce sees how: men may seek for light at noonday. Men have learnt to draw up
or let down so much by the Ell or by the Yard, that people can scarce see what
they look upon with their eyes: That which seemed very fine and fair by a false
light, is found far otherwise by a true one. Now by the same reason that
weights are, lights are an abomination to the Lord, viz. because they are false
and deceitful. If you tell me, it is the custom of the City and all the world, I
ask you, whether that will answer God, and make it no sin?

5. Take heed of breaking Bargains and Covenants, when you perceive you can buy
cheaper of, or sell dearer to another: I am almost afraid that this practical
kind of Religion is with many like an old Almanac out of date, as if Religion
were confined to the first Table (some Duties to God) and the second Table
(Duties to Man) were of little concern or consequence; when as most frequently
in holy Writ the characters of godly men are drawn from their obedience to the
second Table-commands, and among the rest this that I am upon is one, Psalm.
15.4. he that swears, and changes not, though it be to his loss and
detriment: and it ought to hold good in promises as well as oaths, in
bargaining as well as swearing; for a man ought to be just, though he have not
sworn to be so, but woe to them that promise and swear too, yet are not just,
but false and perjured both.

6. Take heed of carnal and sinful compliance with your Customers and Chapmen
in their swearing, drinking to excess, etc. have no fellowship with the
unfruitful works of darkness, though you profit by them that work them, but
reprove them rather, Ephesians. 5.11. and so you shall not suffer sin upon your
brother (nor upon your selves) Levit. 19.17. otherwise it is to hate him in your
heart, which is a great sin; for he that hates his brother is a murderer, 1 John 3.15. Perhaps you will say, this is the ready way to lose our Customers,
and then we may shut up shop, and run away; if that fall out, it is better to
part with any then God, and to lose any thing rather then his favor and
loving kindness, which is better then life, and therefore much better then
livelihood (...) but it may not so fall out, it is better to tru^^ God then to
be beholding to the Devil, and sin; d^ as you ought to do, and if bad men do
not, good men may become your Customers; and when your ways please the Lord, he
can and will make your enemies to be (friends) at peace with you, Prove. 16.7.
Whatever you do, keep a good conscience toward God and men, and though the
children of this world should call you fools, yet they will call themselves
fools another day, for calling you so now: it is undoubtedly better and more
profitable to please God then men; and what will it profit thee to gain the
world, and lose thy soul? we are too prone to comply with, and to be drawn away
by them we get by, and have therefore a kindness for them; but consider what
God says, Exodus 34.12-15. Take heed lest thou make a Covenant with the
Inhabitants of the Land, lest it prove a snare to thee, that when they do
sacrifice to their Gods, and one call thee, and thou eat of their Sacrifice;
intimacy, and familiarity, and trading together, may be a snare, Genesis 34.21.
And when a good Customer calls thee, covetousness is like to make thee to do
like him; rather then men will lose their gain, they will cry up Diana, though
they cry down Godliness and God himself, Acts 19.23-28.

7. Take heed of abusing and grinding the face of the poor, Isa. 3.15. either,
1. By taking advantage of their necessity; you know they must have it, because
they need it, and their necessity is urgent, Oh, do not be cruel to them; you
know they must sell at the weeks end to buy bread, or at Quarters end to pay
Rent; Oh, do not oppress them, and add affliction to their affliction, by
making them under-sell the sweat of their brow, and labor of their hands; woe
to thee, if the spoil of the poor be in thy house, Isa 3.15. Nor do thou take
any advantage of their ignorance, to overreach and defraud them: ignorance
should be pitied, and the unskilful should be well used; it may be, he refers
himself to thee; Oh, do not put a bad for a good commodity into his hands. Or,

2. Grind them not by detaining the wages of the poor workmen; Oh, do not
think of growing rich by the poor man's money; do not put him off till to
morrow, when thou have it by thee; if thou should not doit in point of
charity, much less in a case of justice. This is a crying sin, as you may read,
James 5.4. Poor souls, they have wrought hard, and when they have done, they go
home and cry for want of money to buy bread, and truly this cry of theirs
enters into the ears of the Lord of Hosts, for so Sabbath signifies; and though
thou be too mighty for the poor, yet thou art no match for the Lord of Hosts,
who takes their part, and will not always bear with thy covetousness and
oppression. Oh, pay off the poor, as soon as they have done their work.

3. Grind them not by forcing upon them braided and trashy ware, because they
are in your debt: You complain many times that your Chapmen break, and it is to
be feared they may complain that you break them; either by forcing too much, or
very bad commodities into their hand, which they cannot vend or put off but to
their great loss. They are in your books, and for fear of your displeasure,
lest you should arrest them, they are willing to take it of you: but, Oh, for
the poors-sake, for Gods-sake, and for your own, and your famililies-sake, do
not grow rich by the poor man's poverty. If you know any more beside these (for
I have but little knowledge of your Mysteries) I entreat you to take heed of
them. If you shall say in your heart, that he is a silly fellow that cannot
distinguish away the danger and dread of all this, I list not to answer your
objections: But this I say,

That you can never evade your consciences, where this is indelibly written,
that you ought to do as you would be done by in justice, and if you would not
another should wrong you, do not you wrong them: if your conscience should be
bribed, yet God will not, and what will you do when he rises up to Judgment?
how will you answer God, to whom you must give an account? be not deceived, God
will not be mocked: it is as cheap as easy to laugh at, and put off such a poor
thing as man is; but believe it, Conscience and God will not be so put off.
Thus I have in this also endeavored to discharge my own soul, and to save
yours, as well as to be free from your blood. Oh, consider, consider! If you
are not guilty, I have not condemned you, but speak this, that you may not be
guilty; and that you may pray to God to be kept from, and praise him if you
have been kept from such crying sins. To proceed yet further.

5. Of little sins.
Take heed of such sins as the world call Peccadillos, little sins: some men
account great sins to be but little ones, and little ones to be none or very
venial: say they, what hurt is there in an innocent lie, or a pious fraud?
Alas, what a contradiction is this, can a lie be innocent, and fraud pious? Woe
be to them that call evil good, and join good and evil, as if they were one, or
agreed in one. Oh, says another, it is but a trick of youth; I, but it is such a
trick as may cost thee a going to Hell. Another deceives his neighbor, and
(laughing while he strikes) says, am not I in sport? Prove. 26.19. Ah, but he
that sins in jest, or makes a jest of sin, may be damned in earnest. Consider,

That no sin against a great God can be properly (though compared with a
greater, it may be) a little sin; but be it never so little, to account it so,
makes it greater: and the nature of the greatest sin is in the least; a spark
of fire, a drop of poison has the nature of much more, yea of all, James 2.10.
And God has severely punished them that have been looked upon as little sins,
yea some of them well-meant sins, as that of Vzza's taking hold of the Ark,
when the Cart shook, 2 Samuel 6.6, 7. When they did but look into the Ark, it
cost them dear, 1 Samuel 6.19. gathering of a few sticks on the Sabbath, was
severely punished, Numb. 15.32.-36. These seem small matters, but in sin we
must not consider so much what is, as why it is forbidden, and who forbids it.
Beside, a little sin makes way for a greater, as a little boy-thief entering an
house, makes way for a man-thief to enter; it is hard to sin once, and but once,
to commit one little sin, and but one; give the Devil and sin an inch, and they
will take an Ell; vain babbling increases to more ungodliness: a little leak in
a ship may by degrees fill it with water and sink it; the Devil does not much
care by what sins we go to Hell, whether small or great, formality or
profaneness. And to conclude, he that makes no conscience of little sins,
makes conscience of no sin; he that breaks the least of Gods Commandments, has
none or very little love for God; for herein is love, that we keep his
Commandments, and they are not grievous, no not the greatest of them, much less
the least, 1 John 5. To have respect to all the Commandments of God, is an
Argument of a sound heart, and excludes shame, as appears by comparing Psalm.
119.6. with 80. A good conscience is an universal conscience; and if a man make
no conscience of little sins, to which the temptations can be but little how
little conscience is that man like to make of great sins, to which there are
greater temptations? If Judas betray his Lord for thirty pieces, what would he
not do for more? Consider what our blessed Savior says, Luke 16.10. he that
is faithful in that which is least, is faithful also in much; and he that is
unjust in the least, is unjust also in much: beware then of little sins. And

6. Of secret sins.
Take heed of them that men call Secret Sins. There are but too many who bless
themselves in their wickedness, because (as they think) none knows how wicked
they are; they are drunkards, but it is in the night; they are unclean, but it is
in the dark; their Mystery of iniquity trades in the works of darkness and in
the dark: indeed, if men could sin, and no eye see them, they might seem to sin
securely, but this is a falsehood as well as a mistake. I have met with two
stories, which may happily serve you in some stead; the one is of a Maid that was
tempted to be unchaste and unclean; the person that solicited her, promised her
to do great matters for her, if she would yield; I will (says he) do any thing
for thee; will thou so? (said she) then burn thine hand in that fire: Oh,
that is unreasonable, answers he; but replied she, it is much more unreasonable,
that I should burn in Hell for thy sake. Oh, who would venture his soul to
torment, to gratify his own or another pleasure and lust? The other (which
comes to the case in hand) is of a Maid solicited to the same folly, who would
not give her consent, unless he would bring her to a place where no eye could
see them; whereupon he brought her to a very dark place, and prosecuted his
sollicites, saying, here no body can see us: Oh but, said she, here God sees
us. Oh that we would tell all the tempting Courtships of men and Devils, that
we can never sin, but there will be two witnesses present to observe and
register it, our own selves and God himself: we owe a great deal of reverence
to our selves, and (though none were by) we should revere our consciences and
our selves; what! shall we be witnesses against our selves, and be condemned by
our own testimony? and yet if our hearts condemn us, God (who is greater then
our hearts, and knows all things) will much more condemn us: It made St. Paul
very modest, when he knew nothing of which to condemn himself, yet that the
Lord was to judge him, 1 Cor. 3.4. we cannot escape the sight no more then the
judgment of God. He sees us, and what we do when under the fig tree, though (as
Adam and Eve did) we cover our selves with fig leaves; and he will one day call
to us (as to them) Adam, sinner where art thou? if thou go up to Heaven, he is
there, it is his Throne; if down to Hell, he is there, it is his Prison; thou
can not go from his presence: you may more easily hide from men and your
selves, then from God; and therefore that you may not be so foolish and wicked
as to sin in secret, or to think any thing or place secret from God, I entreat
you often and seriously to read the 139. Psalm. and then I hope you will say (I
am sure you will see cause to say) how shall I do this wickedness, and sin
against God!

7. Of occasions and appearances of evil.
Take heed of the occasions and very appearances of this evil, Sin: abstain not
only from apparent evils, but from the (yea from all and every the) appearances
of evil, 1 These. 5.22. do not be so irreligious as to go into temptation, when
thou have been so religious as to pray God, not to lead thee into temptation;
this is mock-prayer; keep out of harms way, Prove. 4.14, 15. enter not (put not
a foot) into the way of the wicked; if thou have been so foolishly forward, yet
go not on in the way of evil men; but avoid it, pass not by it, turn from it,
and pass away: you cannot stand at too great a distance from sin; if you will
not sit in the seat of the scornful, do not stand in the way of sinners, nor
walk in the counsel of the ungodly, Psalm. 1.1. touch not pitch, lest ye be
defiled; gaze not (like one enamored) on the wine, when it looks well, and
danceth in the glass; make a Covenant with thine eyes, lest by looking too much
on beauty, thine eyes become sore and sinful. Abhor not only the flesh or the
spot, but the very garment that is but spotted with the flesh, Jude 23. yea,
abstain from what is inexpedient (as well as from what is unlawful) for in being
inexpedient (as such, and then) it is unlawful: if it be not a sin, yet if it
(be male coloratum and) look like a sin, beware of it. It Is next to being a
sinner, to be like one; to being proud and wanton, to seem so, or look so: an
appearance of good is too little, but an appearance of evil is too much: it is
the Hypocrites sin, that he appears better then he is, and it may be a good
man's evil to appear worse then he is: a rod is for the back of fools, and
'twill be laid on a wise man's, if found in a fools coat.

Eighthly and lastly, Of being guilty of other men's sins.
Take heed of being any way, in any kind or degree, guilty of other men's sins:
Alas, have we not many (too many) sins of our own? but will we have other men's
sins to answer for? they being our-other-mens sins, as I may call them. Take
heed of being an occasion of, a partaker of, or but accessory to other men's
sins. God forbids it, that it may not be, Ephesians. 5.7-11. 1 Timothy 5.22. and sharply
reproves and punishes it, where he finds it to be, Psalm. 50.18. 2 Samuel 12 9. 1
Kings 21.19. in which two last places, King David and King Ahab are found
guilty of the murder which was acted by other hands, but (alas) by their
commission. It Is sad to sin against God our selves, but sadder to make others
sin against God too; this way the world is made worse then it would be; men are
too prone to be vile enough of themselves (were there no Devil to tempt them)
but when they have companions and brethren in iniquity, they are apt to sin
more lustily. St. Augustine confesses, that he used to boast of sins he was
not guilty of, that he might seem to be as bad as his companions, who thought
them the best that were worst. Oh, what sins (many and great) are committed in,
with, and for company, that would else happily never have been committed! there
would be no stealers, were there no receivers, and therefore the receiver is as
bad as the thief; there would be no adulteresses, were there no adulterers.
Many in Hell would probably have been less wicked then they were (and so have
had less torment then they have) had they not been furthered by others their
companions. Though all sins come from the heart (and may there be acted when
men are alone) yet as to matter of fact, some sins cannot be committed by
persons alone, but every such sin has a double sinner, if not a greater number.

Beside, this way men are confirmed and hardened in their wickedness; where all
go naked, none are ashamed; examples and company steel men in their sins, who
were Iron enough of themselves; and sometimes emboldens them who were modest
and tender before, as 1 Cor. 8.10. If any see thee, who have knowledge, sit at
meat in the Idols Temple, shall not the conscience of him that is weak be
emboldned? the Greek is, edified or built; he takes it for a good example, and
makes a kind of conscience to do so too, as if thou had instructed him to
edification, when, alas, it is edification only to the wounding and endangering
of his perishing, as it follows verse. 11.12. and ye sin against Christ Jesus,
as he also does; for thou make him to offend, verse. 13.

So that hereby we become guilty of other men's sins, and we are like sooner or
later to resent and regret this very grievously; yea (though we our selves may
be saved at last) 'twill certainly pain us to think that any went to Hell, in
whose sins we had an head or hand, and it may be an heart. Beside, it is very
usual, that we partake of their plagues, whose sins we partake of, which no
less then a voice from Heaven gives us warning, Rev. 18.4. and because for
these things sake the wrath of God comes on the children of disobedience, be
not ye therefore partakers with them, Ephesians. 5.5, 6, 7. it is sad to be found on
the Devils ground, as the Devil said, he found the woman (whom he possessed) when
at a Play. But yet more particularly, we may be guilty of other men's sin, 1. As
Occasions (if not causes) of it, before. 2. As Partakers with them, when. 3. As
Accessories, after it is committed.


1. As Occasioners before.
In being Occasioners of it before, when it may more then probably be said,
such sins had not been committed, but upon, and for such occasions given; and
that, 1. By neglecting what might and ought to be done for its prevention, Qui
non prohibet cum potest (and debet) facit scelus, He, that when he can and
ought, hinders not a sin, does contribute to its production; as when men
neglect to instruct or teach them who are under their charge, whether
Ministers, Parents, or Masters of Families, see Ezekiel. 3.17-20. 'Twas the
Apostles rejoicing, that in this case he was pure from the blood of all men,
Acts 20.26, 27. Many a child and servant that has come to prison and
execution, have made this sad complaint, my Parents, my Master never gave me
warning, never showed me the danger of sin, nor instructed me in the way of the
Lord, the way of Righteousness and Holiness! beware of this. And when sin
begins to bud and blossom, nip it by reproofs and discipline, or else you may
be charged with sin, as old Eli was, 1 Samuel 3.13. Oh, crush the Cockatrice
while in the Egg, dash the Brats against the wall, while young; if you be
silent or indulgent, children and servants take it for consent and approbation
(as they mis-interpreted Gods holding his peace, Psalm. 50.) Inclinations will
come into acts, and they into customs and habits, if not checked and
restrained. But if you thus meet with them betimes, you may prevent a great
deal of sin; it is the best proof of your love, Prove. 13.24. And it may be they
will say as David did to Abigail, 1 Samuel 25.39. blessed be the Lord God of
Israel, who sent thee this day to meet me; blessed be thy advice, and blessed
be thou, who have kept me this day from coming to shed blood, and from avenging
my self: so may one say, I had been an adulterer to day, and another, I a
drunkard to day, etc. had not thou given me counsel and correction, had not
thou given me an Item, an helping hint, I had sinned to day, Oh blessed be thou
of the Lord. Think of it, is it not better to hear of their blessing then their
cursing thee? Oh prevent sin all you can; Solon a Heathen gives a good advice,
Liberis ne arrideas, ne in posterum fleas, too many laugh at their childrens
cunning shifts, their fibbing, and lying; but this laughing may cost you
weeping, when you (and before they) are old. It was a Law among the
Lacedaemonians, Quicunque senum delinquentem puerum videns non increpat, eadem
poena cum delinquente teneatur; That if any of the Ancient saw a young one
sinning, and did not reprove him, they should undergo the same punishment with
the offender. But, 2. We may occasion other men's sins, and be guilty of their
crime, by doing something which we ought not to do, and the doing whereof does
further other men's sinning: as, 1. If Superiors, by way of command; some are so
wicked, as to command others to be wicked, and they are so wicked as to obey
their command: as Absalom commanded his servants to kill his brother Amnon, and
they obeyed, 2 Samuel 13.28. Jezebel wrote Letters in Ahabs name to the Elders to
hire sons of Belial (so false witnesses are called) that they might accuse
Naboth of blasphemy, and then stone him to death, 1 Kings 21. yea, David
himself was guilty of this great sin, and therefore it is spoken of as his only
sin, 1 Kings 15.5. Some have made Laws to command men to sin, as if they should
sin cum privilegio and with authority, as Dan. 3.10. and Chap. 6, 7, 8, 9. And
how many Masters command their servants to say, they are not at home, though
they be, and to commend their commodity for one of the best, though never so
bad, and to do that which is not lawful to do on the Sabbath Day, etc. Now poor
servants being under awe, and standing in fear, they are inclinable to obey:
Oh, take heed what you command your servants; for whatever sin they commit by
your command, will be charged on you, as on them, if not more.

2. We may be the occasion of other men's sins by counselling them to sin; they
that cannot command, may counsel, which is next to it: it is recorded three
times in one Chapter, in three successive verses, that Ahaziah walked in the
ways of Ahab, and did evil in the sight of the Lord, by the counsel of
Athaliah, and the house of Ahab, to his destruction, 2 Chronicles. 22.3, 4, 5. So
Amnon sinned according to the counsel of Jonadab, 2 Samuel 13.5.6. Jonadab is
called his friend, and friends use to take sweet counsel together; but, Oh,
what bitter counsel is wicked counsel! never counsel any to sin under the
pretense of friendship, it is killing kindness, and as Rebeccah told Jacob when
she counseled him to lie and counterfeit, that upon her should the curse be,
Genesis 27.6-13. So say I to thee, the curse will be on thee.

3. By Example; and the more eminent the example, the more taking it is: Great
men cannot sin at a little or low rate, because they are examples; the sins of
Commanders, are commanding sins; sins of Rulers, ruling sins; sins of Teachers,
teaching sins: there is a kind of sorcery and bewitchingness goes along with
such examples, Gal. 2.12, 13. When Peter and the rest of the Jews dissembled
with him, Barnabas (though a good man, and full of the Holy Ghost, Acts 11.24.
yet) he also was carried away with (by the example of, and in compliance with)
their dissimulation; so that example which I newly spoke to, is instanced in as
very catching and infectious, 1 Cor. 8.10. The world is more easily exampled
into sin then into goodness; for sin finds a party within. Abraham's Faith,
Moses Meekness, Jobs Patience, Peter's Courage are not so easily followed, as
their contraries. Give no ill Examples.

4. By Tempting (Devil-like) and provoking to sin. The Trumpeter (according to
the Apologue) though he do not fight, yet if taken, speeds as ill as the
soldiers that do, because he stirs them up: and when Ahabs wickedness is
reckoned up, it is with this remark, that his wife Jezebel incited or stirred
him up, 1 Kings 21.25. There was none like to Ahab, he had no peer, no fellow,
he was a non-such in wickedness, and this he was irritated and provokt to by
his wife. Take heed of tempting, or stirring up any to sin. Some men's
corruptions would sleep more then they do, if others did not awake and stir
them up. Some are so wicked, as not to sleep, nor let others to sleep, till
they have done mischief. Men may tempt others to sin several ways, I shall name
but some.

1. By inticement and solicitation; it is a sad employment to be sins
solicitor, yet too many such there are; Pimps, Bawds, and Panders for lust and
sin: and though the solicited person do not sin, as Joseph did not, yet the
solicitor is a sinner, as his Mistress was. There are sinners that go up and
down (like the Devil) to entice others to sin, Prove. 1.10-16. even flattery
has a force in it, and offers a kind of violence, as Prove. 7.21.

2. By Importunity; Delilah made poor Samson almost weary of his life, she
never left him till she had undone him; he stood it out a great while, but her
importunity prevailed at last, Judge. 16.16, 17. and 'twas by much fair speech,
or importunity that the Harlot prevailed with the young man, who it may be was
going about his business, and thought no hurt, till she importuned him, Prove.
7.13. with 21.

3. By lying to men in the Name of the Lord, as the old Prophet did to the
young, 1 Kings 13.18. The Name of the Lord is a great Argument, and very taking
with them that fear him, and therefore some (false Prophets) pretend it, and
turn themselves into Angels of light, though they be of the Devil, and quote
Gods authority, as he had the impudence to do (though falsely) to our Savior
himself, Mat. 4.3, 4. This is a shrewd way of temptation.

4. By giving undecent language, and offering affronts to persons. Some men
have lavish tongues, and can hardly answer without a thou lie, etc. such is
their pride and passion, that they answer rudely, and give such ill language,
as would anger a Saint, as the saying is. Persons of Quality and Honor that are
used to, and deserve Civility, will not bear such provoking words, nor take
them but on the point of their Rapier, and return it to the givers throat.
Great sins are committed from such beginnings; therefore Solomon tells us,
Prove. 15.1. that a soft answer turns away wrath, as it did Judge. 8.2, 3. but
grievous (and fierce) words stir up anger, as they did 2 Samuel 19.43. compared
with Chap: 20.1. God will not allow Parents to provoke their children to wrath,
Ephesians. 6.4. As unhandsom words, so ill and ill-becoming behaviors, abuses, and
affronts tempt men to sin; when Jacobs Sons had deceived, and by it slew the
Sichemites (as the Law did Paul, for so he speaks, Romans 7.11.) they made this
surly answer (as an excuse) to their Father, should he deal with our Sister as
with an Harlot? Genesis 34.31. as if his sin justified theirs, and they did well
to be angry; we could not put up such an abuse and dishonor. Oh, give no
provoking language, to put men upon sin.

5. By sending others to ensnare and trepan them; they that employ such decoys,
are in part guilty of their sin, and Christ Jesus called it Tempting, when such
were employed to entangle and ensnare him. The Pharisees sent the Herodians,
who should feign themselves just men, and praise him into a snare, and court
him into (crimen laesae majestatis) a crime against Caesar: They pretend a case
of conscience, but says our Savior to this sort of men (Spies and Catchpoles)
Why tempt ye me, ye Hypocrites: They that were employed sinned, and so did they
that employed them. See the story, Mat. 22. and Luke 20. I shall name no more,
though there be too many more of this nature; but add only one other thing,
whereby we may occasion other men's sins. As,

6. By declaring a thing otherwise then the truth is, by mincing and
equivocating; there are instances more then enough, wherein good men have been
guilty in this kind, which I speak, that Saints as well as sinners, may hear
and fear, and not do wickedly. Abraham prevails with Sarah to say she was his
sister, whereby Pharaoh concluded she was not his wife, and took her; but when
God plagued Phara^h for so doing, he reasons the case with Abraham. What is
this that thou have done to me? Why did thou not tell me she was thy wife? so
I might have taken her to be my wife, etc. a severe expostulation and an
upbraid, Genesis 12. and yet Chap. 20. Abraham is at it again, and meets with a
more plain and home rebuke, and is charged with no less then sin by Abimelech,
verse. 9. Thou (even thou) have brought on me and my Kingdom a great sin, thou
have done deeds unto me, that ought not to be done; he lays the sin at Abraham's
door, and Sarah also (for her suppleness) had a reproof from him, verse. 16. yet
after all this, Abraham's Son Isaac is found tandy in the same thing, and meets
with the same rebuke, and that from one who pretended not to such, or so much
Religion as Isaac did, Genesis 26. Alas, how many by taking false oaths, and
bearing false witness, give occasion to Judges to justify the wicked, and
condemn the righteous. Much more might be spoken to these things, but a word to
the wise is sufficient.

2. Of being partners in sin.
Take heed of being partners in others sins when they are committed, as
co-helpers and concauses of their production. You may partake of other men's
sins, 1. As instruments to execute others sinful designs or commands, as Doeg
was in executing the Priests, 1 Samuel 22. or as any others are, that serve the
lusts of men. All persons that are to be obeyed, (as father and mother, etc.)
they are to be obeyed in the Lord, Ephesians. 6.1. Whose ever will be left undone,
Gods will should be done, and never left undone to fulfill that of another or
our own. They that put unrighteous Decrees in execution, are under the same woe
with them who decree them; for without the execution, the Decree would do no
hurt to them against whom 'twere made, Isa. 10.1.3. They are wicked, and
partners in the wickedness of them that command wickedness, who put such wicked
commands in practice and execution. See 1 Kings 12.30. though it be light, or
fall heaviest on them that command.

2. As Confederates with others; though the sin be not committed by you that
are Confederates, yet your being such, takes part of (because with) their sin,
Psalm. 83.3-9. the Counselors and Combiners are judged equally with the
Practisers. Blessed are they that walk not in the counsel of the ungodly, Psalm.
1.1. And says the Prophet, The Lord spoke to me with a strong hand, not simply
the Word of the Lord came to me, or the Lord spoke to me, but he spoke with a
strong hand, what? why, say not a confederacy with them that say a confederacy,
Isa. 8.11, 12. The men of the League and Association speed (because they sin)
alike, Psalm. 2. with Acts 4.26-28.

3. As Consenters, giving your consent to others sin, which if you had denied,
it may be, they had not sinned, Psalm. 50.18. when thou saw a thief, thou
consentedst with him, and were partaker with the adulterer; an adulterer is a
thief (he steals waters from another cistern) and to consent with him, is to
be a partaker: therefore, Prove. 1.10. if sinners entice thee, consent not;
enter thy dissent, and let not thy soul have any thing to do with their
secrets. This consent may be, 1. By symbolizing and complying actions, as Paul
speaks in what was once his own case, Acts 22.20. he consented, and gives for
witness of it, both that he stood by, and that he kept the raiment of them that
slew St. Stephen. So many consent to the sin of others by standing Sentinel,
watching the door, they not only wink at, but encourage and embolden others to
sin this way.

2. Consent may be given by silent connivance, when any see persons about to
sin, and do not witness against it: Silence (we say) gives consent, it does so
often indeed, though not always; for the case may be such, that it were but to
throw pearl before swine, to speak to some scorners; yea, some will speak a
little gently, as if 'twere no great matter or of consequence, but will not put
forth the power they have to prevent it; Pilate seemed to witness against the
Jews, when they cried out for the crucifying of Christ Jesus, and would wash
his hands to testify his innocence, Mat. 27.24. and yet because he did not put
forth his power, he is reckoned one of the number of them that killed him, Acts
4.27.

3. Consent may be openly and notoriously given by word of mouth; as Saul
(afterward Paul) gave his voice, Acts 26.10. his vote went with the rest, and
he gave it with a voice, a loud voice. If any bring false Doctrine, and a man
bid him God-speed, this man is partaker of his evil deeds, Epist. of John 2.10,
11. When men say, as Jehosaphat did to Ahab, I am as thou art, and my people as
thy people, and we will be with thee in the war, 2 Chronicles. 18.3. When we thus
give consent, it is notorious.

3. Of being accessories after sins commission.
To draw to a close; be not accessory to other men's sins after they are
committed, which you may be guilty of many ways; I shall name but four.

1. In not grieving for other men's sins. All sin is against God, and for that
reason he that truly grieves for his own, will grieve for other men's: 'Twas the
great commend of Lot, that his righteous soul was vexed with the filthy
conversation of the Sodomites, 'twas a torment, a kind of hell to him, 2 Pet.
2.7. David could not prevent men's sinning, and therefore grieved for it, and so
much, that his eyes run down with rivers of tears, Psalm. 119.136. And this made
the Prophet Jeremiah wish his eyes fountains, that he might weep day and night.
And all these persons were remembered by the Lord in mercy, when others were
rewarded with misery. There is scarce any way like this, to be kept from
partaking in the ruin of sinners, as Ezekiel 9.4-6. God will set his mark on his
weeping and mourning people, and as for the rest, they will be found as
accessories, if not principals in wickedness, and judged accordingly. Oh, that
there were more crying persons, when there are so many crying sins! They that
grieve not and mourn not, are guilty, as the Apostle tells us, 1 Cor. 5.1, 2.
and by mourning they were cleared of this matter, 2 Cor. 7.11.

2. By concealing that which we ought to discover and make known, as may be
easily proved from Levit. 5.1. If a soul sin, and hear the voice of swearing,
and is a witness, whether he has seen or known of it, if he do not utter it,
then shall he bear his iniquity: and Prove. 29.24. whosoever is partner with a
thief, hates his own soul, he hears cursing, and bewrays it not, which he
ought to do. Yet once more, Deuteronomy. 13.6-8. if thy brother, the son of thy
mother, or thy son or thy daughter, or the wife of thy bosom, or thy friend
which is as thine own soul, entice thee secretly, saying, let us go and serve
other Gods (which thou have not known, thou nor thy fathers) thou shall not
consent unto him; is that enough? no, nor hearken to him; is that enough? no,
neither shall thine eye pity him; is that enough? no, neither shall thou spare;
is that enough? no, neither shall thou conceal him; is that enough? no, thou
shall (by discovering him to the judges) surely kill him, thine hand shall be
first upon him, etc. but you will say, is not this unnatural? what! betray a
brother, one of the same venture, the son of my mother? nay more, my own son;
nay more, my wife, and most of all, my friend; no matter, for all that thou
shall not conceal him: to conceal such a sinner, were to partake of his sin, 2 John 10.11. These Spirits, these soul-stealers must not be concealed, lest the
receiver and concealer be reckoned as bad as the thief.

3. You may be accessory to other men's sins, in not separating from them when
God calls you to it. Remember Lots wife who was loath to withdraw, and was
turned into a Pillar of Salt (as the Father said) to season us. There are
persons with whom we should not eat, 1 Cor. 5.11. To join in communion with
known sinners, is the greatest testimony you can give, either that they are
Saints, or you are sinners: you bear a false witness for them, and a true
witness against your selves. When the Apostle had reckoned up a whole troop of
sinners, of whom self-love led the Van, and a form of godliness brought up the
Rear, he adds, from such turn away, 2 Timothy 3.5. and Rev. 18.4. You may hear a
voice from Heaven, saying, come out of her, my people, that ye be not partakers
of her sins; be not therefore unequally yoked with Unbelievers, etc. 2 Cor.
6.14.

4. We may be accessory to other men's sins, if instead of reproving, we approve
of it, Ephesians. 5.11. have no fellowship with the unfruitful works of darkness, but
reprove them rather; not to reprove them, but instead thereof to have
fellowship with them, is to approve: and beside this, there are three things
which speak approbation; as,

1. When we take pleasure in the actions or the actors; Jer. 5.30, 31. the
Prophets prophecy falsely, and the Priests bear rule by their means, and my
people love to have it so, q. d. they set their seal to it, to approve and
confirm what the Prophets and Priests do: Of this import is that Romans 1.32.
Though they knew the Judgments of God, that they who did such things were
worthy of death; yet they not only did the same, but took pleasure in them that
did them. As men are said to help on the affliction of Gods people, and to
approve them by saying, Ha, Ha, so would we have it, Ezekiel. 25.3. and 26.2. To
take pleasure in such things as others do, is to be accessories, and as if they
had done them. When the Apostle Paul tells of other men's sins, he does it
weeping, Phil. 3.18. and so frees himself from any the least degree of
approbation: but when men laugh, take pleasure in, and make sport of other men's
sins, it is (by construction) an approbation of them.

2. Approbation and being accessory is concluded from hence, when men flatter
others, and speak peace to them in their evil ways: When men say peace, where
God says there is none, i. e. to the wicked. God and man will curse him that
says to the wicked, thou art righteous, Prove. 24.24. and Ezekiel. 13.10. because
they have seduced (or flattered) my people, saying, peace, and there was no
peace, and have daubed with untemper'd mortar; and verse. 18. have sowed pillows
under their elbows; therefore will I pull down the wall, and will tear your
your pillows and kerchiefs, because verse. 22. they made the hearts of the
righteous sad, and strengthened the hands of the wicked, that he should not
return from his wicked way: There is a woe against such, as verse. 18.

3. Approbation is declared by this, when any defend and excuse other men's
sins, as if they were retained (like Lawyers) and had their fee: They that
justify the wicked are equally an abomination with them that condemn the
righteous, Prove. 24.17. Some are so wicked, as to defend other men's wickedness
(not only like Lawyers, but like Soldiers) by sword and force of arms; as they
did for him, who had abused the Levites Concubine, Judges 20.14. etc. but to
plead for other men's sins, is to be as guilty as they who commit it. Many more
things might be added, but I forbear them, because I have been somewhat large
upon this subject, which I was the more willing to be, because it is a thing too
seldom treated, and too little taken notice of, and laid to heart, viz. the
share that we too often have in other men's sins.

Thus am I at last come to the Close and Conclusion of the whole matter, The
Close or Conclusion.
and I could wish with my soul, that there may never be an occasion for me, or
any other, to preach on this subject any more; shall I now entreat you to
consider of what has been said, and to bethink you what an ugly and abominable
thing sin is? The worst of Evils, worse then the worst of words can express it
to be. I have shown you how contrary it is to God and man; for proof whereof I
have brought witness from Heaven, Earth, and Hell: I have shown you how dear it
cost Christ Jesus who dyed for it, and how dear it will cost you, if you live
and dye in it. Stand in awe and sin not; lay up the Word of Gods Command,
Promise, and Threatening, that you may not sin against him: take heed of
sinning, for at once you sin against God and your own souls. I have entered your
closets and your hearts, to tell you of your secret sins; I have told you of,
and warned you against the sins of your lips, and of your life; I have told you
of your Shop and Calling-sins, that you might beware: and what shall I say or
do more for you? I have preached to you, prayed, and wept for you; I have shown
you the way of repentance, faith, and holiness; and were it to dye for you, I
hope I should not account my life dear to me, that I might save your souls by
losing it. Oh, let me again entreat, beseech, and beg you for Gods sake and
your souls sake not to sin (these things are written, that ye sin not) but as
it is, Jer. 13.15, 16, 17. Hear ye, and give ear, be not proud, for the Lord
has spoken, give glory to the Lord God, etc. But if ye will not hear, my soul
shall weep in secret places for your pride, and mine eyes shall weep sore, and
run down with tears. If you hear not, you make this sad work for me, and others
that teach you, but (alas!) much sadder for your selves; you make us weep on
earth, but you (if you repent not) will weep in Hell. I beseech you therefore,
learn what the grace (the saving grace) of God teaches you, to deny all
ungodliness and worldly lusts, to live soberly, righteously, and godlily in
this present world, Titus 2.11, 12. or as it is in Luke 1.75. to serve the Lord
in righteousness and true holiness all the days of your life; and as it is 2
Cor. 7.1. Having these promises (which according to 2 Pet 1.4. are the greatest
and precious) let us cleanse our selves from all filthiness of flesh and
spirit, perfecting holiness in the fear of God. Shall we commend holiness in
them that are dead, and not like holiness in our selves while we are alive?
Holiness is the beauty of Earth and Heaven, without which we cannot live well
on Earth, nor shall ever live in Heaven: certainly they that jeer and scoff at
holiness, and rejoice that they are none of the holy ones, they do as if they
should make Bon-fires, ring the Bells, and give thanks that they shall never be
saved; for if they be not holy, saved they cannot be: or as one words it, they
that shall be in Heaven, will be in no danger to be derided for the sake of
piety, for those that deride it, will not be admitted there. And as for the
wicked, God will turn them into Hell, and all the Nations (all them of any
Nation) that forget God, Psalm. 9.17. Poor Soul, think a little, yea, think much
of the great day of thine accounts and Gods judgment, which though thou put far
from thee, yet it will surely come; and woe unto thee, if it overtake thee
unawares, and as a thief in the night, 1 These. 5.3, 4. Seeing this may be, and
that will be, Oh, what manner of persons ought we to be in all holy
conversations and godlinesses! (as it is in the Greek) 2 Pet. 3.10, 11. What
shall I say more? I will shut up all with what was long since excellently
spoken by a great Doctor in our Israel, and which is worthy to be written in
the hearts of all men, and to be often before their eyes, and in their
thoughts: it is this,

At the last (says he) there will come a day, when all mankind shall be
summoned naked (without difference or degrees) before the same Tribunal; when
the Crowns of Kings and shackles of Prisoners; when the Robes of Princes, and
the rags of Beggars; when the Gallants Bravery, the Peasants Russet, the
Statists Policy, the Courtiers Luxury, and the Scholars Curiosity, shall be all
laid aside; when all men shall be reduced to an equal Plea, and without respect
of persons, shall be doomed according to their works. Then those Punctoes and
Formalities, Cuts and Fashions, Distances and Complements (which are now the
darling-sins of the upper end of the world) shall be proved to have been
nothing else, but well-acted vanities. Then the Pride, Luxury, Riot,
Swaggerings, interlarded and complemental Oaths, nice and quaint
Lasciviousness, new-invented Courtings, and Adorations of Beauty (the so much
studied and admired sins of the Gallantry of the world) shall be pronounced out
of the mouth of God himself, to have been nothing else but glittering
abominations. Then the adulterating of Wares, the counterfeiting of Lights, the
double Weight and false Measures, the courteous Equivocations of men greedy of
gain (which are now almost woven into the very Art of Trading) shall be
pronounced nothing else but Mysteries of iniquity and self-deceivings. Then the
curious subtleties of more choice Wits, the knotty Questions and vain strife of
words, the disputes of Reason, the variety of Reading, the very Circle of
general and Secular Learning (pursued with so much eagerness by the more
ingenious Spirits of the world) shall be all pronounced but the thin Cob-webs,
and vanishing Delicacies of a better tempered Profaneness. And lastly, Then
the poor despised Profession of the power of Godliness, a trembling at the Word
of God, a scrupulous and conscientious forbearance, not only of oaths, but of
idle words, a tenderness and aptness to bleed at the touch of any sin, a
boldness to withstand the corruptions of the times, a conscience of but the
appearances of evil, a walking bumbly and mournfully before God, an Heroical
resolution to be strict and circumspect, to walk in an exact and Geometrical
Holiness in the midst of a crooked and perverse generation (which the world
esteems and scorns as the peevishness of a few silly, unpolitick men) shall in
good earnest from the mouth of God himself, be declared to have been the true
narrow way which leads to Salvation; and the enemies thereof shall then (when
it is too late) be driven to that desperate and shameful confession: We fools
counted their life madness, and their end to have been without honor; how are
they now reckoned among the Saints? and have their portion with the Almighty!

Consider what has been said, and the Lord give thee understanding in all
things, 2 Timothy 2.7.

FINIS.

