THE HISTORY OF THE Sevarites or Sevarambi: A Nation inhabiting part of the
third CONTINENT, Commonly called, Terrae Australes Incognitae.

WITH An Account of their admirable GOVERNMENT, RELIGION, CUSTOMS, and LANGUAGE.

Written By one Captain Siden, A Worthy Person, Who, together with many others,
was cast upon those Coasts, and lived many Years in that Country.

LONDON, Printed for Henry Brom, at the Gun at the West End of St. Paul's
Churchyard. 1675

THE PUBLISHER TO THE READER.
THere are many, who having read Plato's Commonwealth, Sir Thomas More's
Vtopia, the Lord Verulam's New Atlantis, (which are but Ideas and ingenious
fancies) are apt to suspect all relatons of new discoveries to be of that kind;
and chiefly when they find in them any thing extraordinary and wonderful. But
although these persons are to be commended for being wary and cautious, yet it
is but so long as they keep within the bounds of moderation, and do not pass to
the excess of incredulity. For as some men, through a believing simplicity, are
easily imposed upon, and receive that for a truth, which in effect is not one:
So others, on the contrary, through a contrary humor, are apt to reject, as
fabulous, that which often proves to be a real truth. This clearly appears in
the case of Vergilius Bishop of Collen, who was like to have suffered a severe
punishment for affirming, that There were Antipodes; neither could any thing
save him but a public Recantation. Columbus was looked upon (here in England,
and afterward in France) as a brainsick Fellow for saying, There was Land on
the West parts of the Ocean: Yet the Voyages since made round the World have
justified Vergilius his opinion: And the discovery of America (where we have
many flourishing Plantations) has sufficiently evidenced the truth of Columbus
his Assertion. The Histories of Peru, Mexico, China, etc. were at first taken
for Romances by many, but time has showed since that they are verities not to
be doubted of.

Those remote Countries were for thousands of years unknown to the People of
Europe, and so are still many others perhaps, and at this day we know little
more of them, than what lies upon the Seacoasts. But how should we have a
perfect knowledge of remote Countries, lately discovered, since there are many
parts of Europe very little known yet, and some not at all? Nay, the British
Islands are not perfectly described: And before their last Civil Wars, the
Highlands of Scotland; many parts of Ireland, and other smaller Isles about,
were very little known to the People of England: And their Customs, Laws, and
Religion, are things we have not yet had any very good account of. Few
Travelers make it their business to write Histories, and make descriptions of
those Countries they have traveled in, for most of them being Merchants, or
Seamen, they mind little more than their Trade; and being intent upon gain and
profit, seldom busy themselves in making observations. Besides, few of them
are qualified for the writing of Books if they were never so willing; and fewer
have time and opportunity to apply themselves to that study; so it falls out,
that we have few exact relations of remote Countries, although they be often
seen, and even described in Maps. For an Instance, The Isle of Borneo lies near
Java, and in the way to China, it is one of the biggest in the world according
to Geographical Descriptions, and yet we have very little knowledge of it,
although the Dutch have very large Dominions in Java, and other Islands about
it, and sail daily by it in their way to Jappan and China. Many other places
there are which Sailers take no more notice of than as it is necessary for
their Ships to avoid them. And how can it be expected we should have any good
descriptions of them, unless some great Powers should undertake it, and send
fit persons for that purpose, with all the helps and encouragement requisite in
so useful and honorable a design? Among all remote Countries, there is none so
vast, and so little known, as the third Continent, commonly called, Terra
Australis. It is true, Geographers give some small and unperfect descriptions
of it, but it is with little knowledge and certainty; and most of their
draughts may be suspected, and looked upon, as imaginary and fictitious. Sure
it is, that there is such a Continent; many have seen it, and even landed
there, but few durst venture far in it, if any there were; and I do not think
that any body has made any true description of it, either for want of
knowledge, or other necessary means and opportunities.

This History will supply that defect, in a great measure, if it be true, as I
have reason to believe upon these grounds:

First, Upon the testimony of the Reporter, who does not only herein affirm
this History to be true, but did it also by word of mouth, a good while before,
and again near the time of his death, when he gave his Papers to the Gentleman,
who did lately put them into my hands. These two Gentlemen came to know one
another at Smirna, a little before the Dutch Fleet departed from thence, in or
about the year 1607. and being both bound for Holland; they came together in
the same Ship where by a daily converse they contracted a very strict
friendship. This Fleet being attacked in its return, there were many men killed
and wounded; and among the rest, the Author of this Relation, called Captain
Siden, was mortally wounded, and lived but little after the fight.

Upon his deathbed he made his Friend Heir of what he had in the Ship, and
spoke to him in this manner: as the Gentleman, himself, has often declared to
me.

Sir, Since it is Gods Decree that I should live no longer, I patiently submit
to his Divine Will without any murmuring. But before I die, I am willing to
dispose of a Chest I have in this Ship, where you will find some Money, and a
few Jewels, of no great value, I confess, but such as they are I give them to
you, and I am sorry they are not better worth your acceptance, I give you also
the Chest, and every thing in it; and though, it seems, the whole is worth but
little, yet you will find a great Treasure in it, and that is the History of my
Adventures in the South Continent, as you have heard me relate to you several
times. You will find it in a great disorder and confusion for the most part;
and written in several Languages, as being intended only to serve for memoires
till I could digest them into an orderly contexture. But since God will not
permit me to do it my self, I commit it to your care, knowing you are an
ingenious person, and give you full power and authority to dispose of the said
Papers as you will think most convenient; assuring you upon my death bed, as I
have done before in several discourses, that they contain nothing but truth;
which, I hope, time and further experience will bring to light. These were the
last words of the dying Gentleman, who a few hours after gave up his Soul to
God; and who, according to his Friends testimony, was a very sober, discreet,
and worthy Person.

After his Death his Heir examined the Papers, and found they were written, for
the most part, in Latin; the rest in French, Italian, and Provencal; the
diversity of which Languages put him to a great deal of trouble, for he did not
understand them all, neither was he willing to trust the Writings into
Strangers hands. These difficulties, together with the confusion of the Wars
that followed, and several troublesome Affairs, were the reason why he kept
this History concealed all this while, not knowing whom to trust it with. But
being come from Holland into England since the Peace was proclaimed betwixt the
two Nations; and having contracted some acquaintance and friendship with me, he
did me the favor a while ago to entrust me with his Papers, and desired my
assistance in putting them into an orderly method. I perused them, and found
the matter, therein contained, so extraordinary and wonderful, that I was never
at rest till I had disposed them into a good order and contexture; which I, at
last, effected, not without much labor and pains, with the Gentleman's help and
counsel.

Now we were a while uncertain in what Language we should publish this History,
he being inclined to do it in Latin, or French: But at last I prevailed with
him, and persuaded him to let me Print it in English, taking the whole task
upon my self.

But before we proceeded in that design, I was desirous to enquire after the
truth of this discovery some other way, and told him it were very material to
send into Holland, to know of the Officers of the Admiralties there, whether
any such Ship, as the Golden Dragon, herein mentioned, was at any time gone
from thence for Batavia: To which he readily answered, he had satisfied himself
therein, and found upon examination, that a Vessel of that name was gone from
the Texel, at the time herein expressed, with all the other Circumstances. But
this was not enough to satisfy me, because I had nothing but his bare
Affirmation: I therefore went to Mr. Van Dam, Advocate to the East India
Company (...)

But this could not be done, because the Dutch Gentleman was then in Flanders;
whereupon he entreated him to write to him, and desire him to give the best
account he could of it; which he readily consented to, and having sent a Letter
to his Friend concerning this matter, received the following answer, which we
have faithfully translated out of French, and inserted it here.

SIR,
ACcording to your desire, and for your Friends satisfaction, I shall tell you;
that when I was at Batavia, in the year 1659, a Dutch Seaman, named Prince,
hearing that I had been near the South-Continent, told me, that some years
before (I do not remember how many, nor at what height) he was cast away in a
new Ship, called the Green, or Golden Dragon; which carried a great deal of
Money, designed for Batavia, and about four hundred people; who for the most
part had got into the said Land, and kept there the same Discipline they had at
Sea. That having entrenched themselves, with what they had saved, and among the
rest, most of their Victuals, they made a new Pinnace out of the broken pieces
of their Ship, casting Lots for eight men (whereof this Seaman was one) to go
to Batavia, to inform the General of the Holland Company of their disaster, to
the end he might send Ships to fetch those who had been cast away. That Pinnace
being come to Batavia, with much ado; The said General dispatched presently a
Frigot, which being come to that Coast, they sent their long Boat ashore with
many men, who landed at the place and height to them described before, but
found no body there. They ranged along that Coast till they lost their Boat,
and some of their men, through the badness of the weather, which that Coast is
very subject to, and so returned to Batavia without effecting any thing. The
General sent a second Frigot, which likewise came back, with no better success
than the former. People speak differently of that Country, some saying, that in
the Inland, there are People of a great Stature; others, that they are little
and subtle, and that they carry those they can catch into the inner parts of
the Land along with them. I was like to have landed there, but, as through Gods
special favor, a sudden calm in the night saved us from being cast away; soon
after a sudden storm made us alter our minds of landing there, and we thought
our selves happy to get to Sea again.

This is all I can tell you of this business: Your Friends may hear more of
this Ship from those who belong to the East India Company. General Maetsuycker
was then, and is still, General in Batavia; but I had this account only of the
Seaman above mentioned. The Land of this Country is reddish, and barren, and
the Coasts as if they were enchanted by reason of frequent storms, which hinder
much those who will land there: And that is the reason why the aforesaid
Frigots lost their Boats and men. They could not land every where; and this
Seaman is of opinion, they could not find the right place. I remain

Bridges, Oct. 28. 1672. Your most humble Servant Th. S.


This is the true Copy of the Letter sent to this French Gentleman, who has
given me the Original and I have it still in my possession. He added, That the
Savoyard took a Copy of it, and told him, that he himself had made great
enquiry after a Gentleman of his Country, who was said to have gone in this
Ship. That the same Gentleman had been a great Traveller, and had left an
Estate near Nice de Provence, where he was born, and that his Kindred, not
having heard from him for many years, were much troubled to know what was
become of him. All these things are, in my opinion, very strong Arguments to
establish the truth of this History, since they agree so well with the History
it self in all the Circumstances of Time, Place, and Person, and are attested
by so many credible Witnesses, which are yet alive, for the most part, and who
living in several places, not knowing one another, and having no interest in
the publishing of this Story, cannot rationally be suspected, to have all
joined together to give credit to a Fictitious Narration. But I leave the
Reader to the liberty of using his own Judgment, and content my self with
showing the Reasons which have been able to convince mine. I wish that those
who shall read this most delightful and admirable Relation may reap some profit
out of it either in point of Pleasure or Utility, it being a very ingenious
Piece, and the most perfect model of Government I ever read or heard of in my
life.

D. V.

The History of the Sevarites, or Sevarambi.
MY, Natural Genius, the manner of my Education, and the Example of others,
inspired me in my young years with a restless desire of traveling the World,
that I might my self be an Eye Witness of those things I had either read or
heard of. But the Authority of my Parents, who designed me for the Gown, and my
want of sufficient means, were powerful Obstacles to my desires; and would have
confined me at home, had not fortune, mightier than all these, ordered it
contrary to their intent, and according to my wishes. For before I had attained
the fifteenth year of my age, I was sent into Italy, in a Military Employment,
which kept me there two whole years before I came home again into my own
Country; from whence, soon after my Return, I was obliged to march into
Catalonia with a better Command than that I had before. I continued there in
the Army for the space of three years, and would not have quitted the Service,
if my Fathers untimely Death had not called we home again to take possession of
a small Estate he left me, and to obey my Mothers absolute Commands, who called
me back, as the only person, after so great a loss, that was able to dry up her
tears.

These Considerations made me to return; and after that, to leave the Sword,
and to put on the Gown, and change a Soldiers life for that of a Lawyer; to
which study upon this occasion I did wholly apply my self; read the
Institutions, the Codex, and the Digests or Pandects, where having made a
pretty good progress in four or five years time I was persuaded to take my
Degrees in the University, which I did accordingly with an indifferent good
success. Then was I received into the Sovereign Court of Judicature of my
Country in the quality of an advocate, as being the first step to higher
dignities, exercised my self in Declamations upon fictitious Causes, and
pleaded real and choice ones in Apparatu, as they term it, with some applause
and credit. I was well enough pleased with these kinds of exercises, in which
young men love to show their Wit and Eloquence to the Public, and where they
get more praise than money; But when I descended to the lower practice of the
Law, I found it so crabbed, so mean and slavish, that in a short time I was
quite weary of it. I carefully examined the ways and means by which Lawyers
attain to Riches and Dignities, and found there was much of fraud and indirect
proceeding in them, and that unless I did comply with men of that Calling in
all these vices, I should never get either Wealth or Credit by my practice. Now
being naturally inclined to Ease and Pleasure, and loving frankness and
honesty, I clearly perceived I was no ways fit for that Employment. So while I
was thinking and contriving how to cast it off with some plausible reason, a
fatal accident took away my loving Mother; and although her death made me
absolute Master of my self and Estate, yet it laid so much grief and sorrow on
my heart, that all things at home became odious to me, insomuch that I made a
strong resolution to leave my Native Land, if not for ever, at least for a long
time.

Pursuant to this design, I disposed of all my Concerns, except of a small
Estate in Land, which I reserved for a place of retreat in case of necessity,
leaving it in the hands of a faithful Friend, who ever since gave me a very
good account of it so long as he could hear from me. Having in that manner
ordered my affairs and taken leave of my best friends, I traveled into the
chiefest Provinces of the Kingdom of France 'till I came to the famous City of
Paris, where I spent almost two years without going above fifty or sixty Miles
from it. But the former desire of seeing more Countries, and an opportunity
while I was there of traveling into Germany made me depart from that Populous
City to go and see the several Courts of the German Princes, those of the Kings
of Swedeland and Denmark, and at last the Low Countries, where I made an end of
my European travels, and rested my self, till the year 1655. in which I took
shipping for the East Indies.

The causes and motives which induced me to take this long Voyage were these:

First, My natural curiosity of seeing Countries, and the wonderful relations I
had heard or read of those remote parts of the world.

Secondly, The earnest solicitations of a Friend who had a concern in Batavia,
and was bound for that place.

And last of all, The great gain and profits which I was told would accrue to
me by this Voyage if it should prove successful.

These Arguments and Invitations easily prevailed with me, so that having in a
short time ordered my affairs, and prepared my self for this purpose, I went
with my friend aboard a new Ship, called the Golden Dragon, bound for Batavia.
She was a Vessel of about six hundred Tuns, and thirty two Guns, and carried
near four hundred People Seamen or Passengers, and great Sums of Money, where
my Friend, called Monsieur de Nuits, had a great concern.

In order to our Voyage we weighed Anchor from the Texel on the twelfth day of
April 1655. and with a fresh Easterly Wind sailed through the Channel betwixt
France and England with all the speed and good success we could wish, till we
came to the open Seas, and thence prosecuted our Voyage to the Canary Islands
with variety of Winds and weather, but no Storms or Tempests.

There we took in fresh Provisions, such as the Islands afford, and which we
had occasion for; and steering from thence toward the Isles of Capo verdo to
fetch a constant Trade Wind, we came in sight of them without any accident
worth my relating It is true, we saw several Sea Monsters, flying Fishes, new
Constellations, etc. But because those things are usual, that they have been
described by others, and have for many years lost the grace of Novelties, I
purposely omit them, not being willing to increase the Bulk of this Book with
unnecessary relations which would but tire the Readers patience and my own.

To proceed therefore with my intended brevity, I think it will be sufficient
to tell you that we made the Coasts of Brasil, and got there another Trade
Wind, which carried us toward the Cape of Good Hope with indifferent good
success. We doubled the Cape without any danger, and pursued our Voyage with
all cheerfulness and alacrity, till we came to 38 degrees of South Latitude, on
the Second day of August of the same year 1655.

Till this time and place Fortune had smiled upon us, but now she began to
frown, for about three or four a clock in the afternoon the Sky began to change
its former clearness and serenity into thick Clouds, Lightnings and Thunders,
which were the forerunners of the vehement Winds, Rain, Hail and Tempest, which
succeeded soon after. The very approach of this violent storm did much terrify
our Seamen, and although they had time to take down their Sails, tie fast their
Guns, and order every thing as they thought fit, yet foreseeing the terrible
Hurricane that happened immediately after, they could not choose but dread the
violence and fierceness of it.

The Sea began to foam, and turn its smooth Surface into Mountains and Vales.
The Winds ran all the points of the Compass in less than two hours time. Our
Ship was tossed to and fro, up and down again, in the horridest manner
imaginable; one Wind drove us forward, and another beat us back again; our
Masts, Yards, and Tackling were broken, and the storm was so violent that a
great part of our Seamen being sick could hardly hear and obey command.

All this while our Passengers were kept under Deck, and my Friend and I lay at
the main Mast sadly cast down, and both repenting, he for his covetous desire
of gain, and I for my foolish curiosity. We wished our selves a hundred times
in Holland, and as often despaired ever to see it again, or any other Land, for
any would have served our turn then. He was a very honest young man, but no
Soldier nor Seaman. At the beginning of the storm I was full of courage, and
well resolved to submit to the will of God without any murmuring or fear of
dying, but he did not understand that Philosophy, the dreadful image of Death
appeared to him with all his horror, and I think I might have seen it in his
face if we had not been in the dark. I have admired he did not die for the very
fear of it: At first he sighed and and groaned only, but a while after, when
the storm increased, he broke out into the saddest howling in the world.

He accused his Fathers Counsel and Command, who had sent him, but chiefly his
own folly in obeying. He called his dear Mother, Brothers, and Sisters, and bad
them an Eternal Farewell, as likewise his beloved Country, which he had no hopes
ever to see again. He lamented and deplored the cruelty of his Fate that put an
end to his life in the flower of his Age by so horrid and untimely a Death. In
fine, he made such sad complaints, and was so eloquent in his affliction, that
I was moved with Compassion more than with the fear of being drowned. Pity
first wrought upon my heart, and drove out of it all the Stoicity my reason had
laid there in store; then fear and infirmity came in, so that I began to howl
and lament with my afflicted Friend, as if I had been as weak as he, and had it
not been for some ridiculous Expressions of his, which made me sometimes laugh,
I think I had been as much dejected as he.

Man's weakness and simplicity is much to be admired in such occasions as this,
and shows that Custom, Prejudices, and Opinions, have more influence upon his
mind than true reason he so much boasts of, and which in such occurrences as
this forsakes him, and leaves the mastery of his Soul to weak and silly
Passions. Death is but one and the same thing what shape soever it assumes to
appear in, and we commonly fear the manner of Death more than Death it self.

Before this storm (wherein none of our People perished by the special Grace of
God) I had been exposed to a great deal more danger than I was now; I had been
exposed to the mouth of Canons, I had fought in Battles, and in Sieges, where
many thousands of men had lost their lives, and where we marched upon the slain
to a seeming inevitable Death: Yet the fear of it did hardly make an Impression
on my heart because it was an usual thing, and the contempt of danger as much
accounted courage and gallantry as the fear of it cowardliness and infamy, yet
death is still but one and the same thing.

While my Friend and I were thus lamenting, the Master and his Crew were not
asleep, neither did they neglect any thing that could contribute to our
preservation; They used all their art, and all their endeavors, some about the
Stern, some about the Pumps, and others about several other parts of the Ship;
and God did so bless their labor, that they kept her up while the violent
Hurrricane lasted, which at last fell into one particular Wind, that got the
mastery of the others, and drove us to the Southward with so great rapidity
that we were not able to keep out of that Course, but must yield to his
violence. After two days running that Course the Wind changed a little, and
drove us to the Southeast for the space of three days, the weather being so
foggy that we could see nothing at five or six yards distance. On the sixth day
the Wind slaked a little, but drove us still to the Southeast till toward
night, when of a sudden we felt a very great Calm, just as if our Ship had
fallen into a Pool or dead Lake, which caused no small wonder in us. Two or
three hours after we were thus becalmed the weather cleared up, and we spied a
great many Stars, but could not make any good observation by them. We judged in
general that we were not far from Batavia, and a great many Leagues from the
South Continent: But it proved afterward we were much deceived in our
Conjecture. The seventh day we continued in this great Calm, as if we had been
ordered to celebrate the Sabbath day after six days labor and toil; during
this Calm we searched and examined all the parts of our Ship, and found her
pretty tight, though she was a new Ship, and had never gone a Voyage before.
But she was so strongly built that she endured the rage of the Seas without
springing any Leak able to endamage her. The eighth day at Noon a fine breeze
began to blow, and drove us to the Eastward, much to our joy and satisfaction,
for besides that it made for our purpose, we were afraid of being becalmed; at
night the weather grew dark and misty, and the Wind stiff and violent, so that
we feared another storm The Fog continued all the day following, and the wind
blowing by fits and puffs, which did sometimes put us to great danger, at night
the Wind changed, grew boisterous and drove us again to the Southeast with
great impetuosity, the Fog growing still thicker and thicker. About the middle
of the night, the Wind being very high, and our Ship running very swiftly, she
struck of a sudden upon a Bank, much contrary to our expectation, and stuck
there so fast that she remained there without any motion as if she had been
nailed to the place. Then did we think our selves absolutely lost, and looked
every moment to see our Ship staved in pieces by the fury of the Seas and Wind,
and every body fell to his Prayers seeing neither Art nor Industry could avail.
But God, whose mercies are great, showed us salvation where we expected nothing
but destruction; for the Morning being come, and the Sun having expelled the
darkness of the Night, and dissipated the thickness of the Fog, we saw that our
Vessel stuck upon a Bank near the shore of a great Island or Continent. The
discovery of this Land turned our despair into hopes, for although it was
unknown to us, and we could not tell what good or bad fortune we should have in
it: Yet any Land was then welcome to men who had during many days been so
miserably tossed upon the water betwixt life and death, hopes and despair.

About Noon the weather grew very clear and hot, the Sun over-powring the Mist
and Fog, and the Wind abating much of his violence, so that the Sea did by
degrees lose much of his rage and agitation. In the Afternoon about three a
Clock it Ebbed from the shore, and left our Ship with less than five foot of
water upon a kind of a muddy Sand where she stuck very fast. The place where
she stuck was not above a Musket shot from a pretty high but accessible shore,
whither we resolved to remove our selves and our goods whatever should come
on it, and in order to it our Longboat was let down, and twelve of our stoutest
men were sent ashore well armed to discover the Country, and to choose a place
near the Sea where we might encamp with some safety without going far from our
Ship. As soon as they were landed they carefully viewed the Country from the
top of a rising ground not far from the shore, but saw neither Houses, nor
Inhabitants, nor any signs of either, the Country being but a Sandy barren
Land, where grew nothing but bushes and little shrubs wild and savage. They
could see neither River nor Brook in the parts they had discovered; and not
having time to make a farther search that day, nor counting it prudence to
venture any farther into so unknown a place, they came back again to the Ship
three hours after their landing. The next Morning we sent them ashore again
with provisions, and order to send the Boat back again to fetch our People by
degrees, and likewise our Provisions and Goods, which were all whole by Gods
mercy without any the least damage. All these Orders were executed with great
care and diligence, so that the day after our being cast upon the Bank we got
all ashore with a good part of our Provisions and Goods most useful and
necessary. The first who landed pitched the Camp on the side of a rising ground
near the Sea over against our Vessel, which could cover us on the Land side
from being seen by any body that should come toward the shore, and afforded us
a convenient station for a Sentinel to discover a good way round about. Thither
did we by degrees carry our goods, leaving in the Ship but ten or twelve men to
keep her till we could tow her off upon high water, if it was possible, or
dispose of her otherwise.

One of the first things we did so soon as we were landed was to call a
Council, to advise what order we should take for our mutual preservation. It
was presently resolved that we should keep for the present upon the Land the
same order and discipline we kept at Sea, till such times we should think fit
to alter it; so after this resolution it was agreed, we should humble our
selves before God Almighty, to give him most hearty thanks for preserving our
lives and goods in so special a manner, and to implore his divine assistance
for the future in a place altogether unknown to us, and where we might fall
into the hands of some barbarous people, or starve there for want of
Provisions, if he in his mercy did not provide for us as he had done heretofore.

After this Resolution and humiliation our Officers divided our People into
three equal parts, whereof two were ordered incessantly to work about the Camp
in drawing of a Trench to secure us from any sudden invasion, and the others
were employed in discovering the Country, and fetching in Wood and such kind of
supplies. Those who were left aboard the Ship had orders to see what condition
she was in, and what could be done with her. After an exact examination they
found that her Keel was broke by the violent shock she gave against the Sand,
and that she stuck so fast in it, that it was impossible to tow her off if she
were never so sound, so that they thought the best way was to take her in
pieces, and build a Pinnace or two out of her ruins to sent to Batavia with
all speed and diligence. That Counsel was approved of, and the fittest men for
that purpose were employed for the execution of it with all diligence. The
parties that were sent to discover durst not venture far in the Plain for fear
of some danger or ill accident, till such a time that the Camp was better
fortified, and the Guns carried thither from the Ship. They brought in only
Wood, and some kind of wild Berries, of which they found great quantities upon
the bushes and shrubs of the place; some spreading along the shore found a very
great plenty of Oysters, Muscles, and other Shell fish, which did not only
refresh our People, but did also much save our Provisions, which upon
examination we found could not hold out above two Months according to the
ordinary allowance: The consideration whereof made us think of some way to
husband it, which could be but by getting and saving. In the first place we
used all diligence to get our Nets and Hooks ready, for we had found that the
Sea thereabouts was very full of fish; we fed as much as we could upon the
Berries of the Plain, and upon the Shell fish of the shore; and on the other
side we shortened every ones allowance, and reduced it to eight ounces a day of
the Ships Provisions. But our greatest want was sweet water, for although we
had made a Well in the Trench that afforded as much of it as we could use, yet
it was somewhat brackish and ungrateful by reason of the nearness of the Sea.

Our adventurers made every day some new discovery, and having gone so far as
almost Ten Miles about the Camp without finding any the least sign that the
Country was inhabited grew every day bolder and bolder: They saw no living
Creature in all this sandy Plain, but some Snakes, a kind of a Rat almost as
big as a Rabbet, and some kind of Birds like wild Pigeons, but somewhat bigger,
who fed upon the Berries we have made mention of. They killed some of them with
their Guns and brought them to the Camp, where after trial they were found to
be very good meat, especially the Birds.

These new discoveries made us a little remiss in our Fortifications, and we
contented our selves by drawing a small Trench about our Camp, casting up the
Earth inwardly, and thought it was enough in a place where we found no
Inhabitants. We planted some Guns upon the most convenient places, and setting
all thoughts of fear aside, dreaded nothing so much as hunger, and the injuries
we might receive from the weather, which we were not yet acquainted with, for
it had proved very temperate since our Landing upon that Coast, where we had
been fourteen days before our Pinnace could be perfected. But about the
seventeenth day she was ready to put to Sea with Provision for Eight men for
six weeks time, which was as much as ever we could spare. Now there arose great
strife amongst the Seamen about the sending of the Pinnace to Battavia, for few
would venture on that Voyage, yet it was necessary that some should go.
Whereupon it was agreed that a number of the best Seamen should be taken out of
the whole Crew, and that they should cast Lots among themselves to determine
the difference, which was done accordingly. The Lot fell upon the Master
himself, upon a Seaman called Prince, and six more, whose names I have
forgotten. They seeing it was the will of Fortune that they should go,
submitted to it joyfully, and after having agreed upon a Signal we should give
them, to find us out if ever they should come again with relief, and taking
their leave of the Company, they went aboard the Pinnace, and with a good Land
Gale sailed to the Eastward till they were out of our sight. We made public
Prayers for their prosperity with many sighs and tears, trusting in Gods
goodness and mercy.

The same day we advised among our selves what kind of Government we should
keep as most convenient for our present Condition, for some of our Officers
being gone in the Pinnace our Sea Discipline was somewhat altered, neither did
we judge it proper for the Land, upon better consideration.

The business was debated Pro and Con, but after some contestation it was
agreed that we should live in a Military Discipline under a Captain General.
And other inferior Officers, which together should compose a Sovereign Council
of War with Authority to direct and order every thing absolutely. Now the
question was whom we should choose of all the Company. All were inclined to
defer that honor to Van de Nuits, my Friend, as being the Person of most
eminent quality among them, and who had the greatest concern in the Ship, but
he modestly excused himself, alleging that he was young and unexperienced in
Military Affairs, and therefore not fit for such Command, and that it was
necessary in such an occasion to make choice of a Person of riper years and
greater experience in that kind than himself was, who never was a Soldier.
Then, observing some trouble and irresolutions in their faces, he went on in
this manner:

Gentlemen, I give you many thanks for the esteem and good will you show
toward me, and wish heartily I were worthy of it, and capable of this Command;
But since I cannot be your General my self, give me leave to recommend one to
you who is very fit for that Employment, having been a Commander in Europe in
two several Armies and a great Traveller in most parts of the Christian World.
You know his Person, and I dare say you do all love and esteem of him as I do,
although he is not so well known to you as he is to me, who have had long
experience of his probity and good Conduct. Then (poynting to me) he said, The
Person I mean is Captain Siden, to whose Command and Authority I will readily
submit if you please to choose him for our General. This unexpected Speech, and
the looks of the Company, who all turned their eyes upon me, put me somewhat
out of Countenance, but being soon come to my self, I answered, That his
recommendation proceeded more out of affection and love than out of any
knowledge of either merit or good Conduct in me; that I was a Foreigner among
them, and born in a Country far from Holland, and that I thought there were
many in the Company far more capable of that Command than I was, and therefore
desired to be excused, choosing rather to obey my betters than to use any
Authority over them. I had no sooner ended my Speech, but one Swart (a stout
and active fellow, who never went out of my company in all the discoveries we
had made in the Country) took me up somewhat briskly, and said: Sir, All these
excuses will not serve your turn, and if Mr. Van de Nuits counsel and mine be
taken you shall be our General whether you will or no; for besides what he has
worthily spoken of you, all the Company (and I particularly) know that since we
were cast upon this Land you have showed your self most active and industrious
for the common good and preservation of all, and are therefore most fit to
command us. We are Seamen and Traders, altogether ignorant of Military
Discipline, which you alone can teach us here, since there is no body among us
that understands it, and who is so well qualified as your self, upon which
consideration I declare that you are the only sit person to command us, and
that I will submit to no man's command but yours.

This blunt Fellows Speech, which he pronounced with a strong and loud voice,
did so affect the minds of the Company, already disposed by Van de Nuits
recommendation, that all with one voice cried out, Captain Siden must be our
General.

When I saw I could not avoid the taking of this Command, I made sign for
silence, and spoke to them in this manner:

Gentlemen, Since you force me to accept of this Command, I accept it with
thanks to you all, and do heartily wish your choice may prove to your advantage
and satisfaction. But that all things may be done in good order, and carried on
vigorously I beg a few things of you, which if you please to grant me I will do
my best endeavor to preserve you from all danger, and to keep you in that
Civil Discipline and Society which may best conduce to the Public Good.

The first thing I beg, That every man here will take an Oath to obey mine and
the Councils Authority without any repugnancy, upon pain of such punishments as
we shall think fit to inflict upon them.

The second is, That I may have the privilege of choosing the Principal
Officers to be elected, and they to bear such Commands and Offices as I shall
bestow upon them for the time.

In the third place I beg, That in Council my single Vote may pass for three
Votes.

Lastly, That I or my Deputy may have a Negative Voice in all Public
deliberations.

All these Privileges and Prerogatives were presently granted me, and I was
saluted by all the Multitude in the quality of their General, and had a Tent
larger than ordinary set up in the middle of the Camp for the first Badge of my
Authority. I lay in it that night with Van de Nuits; and had his advice in
several things, which were afterward put in execution.

The next day we called all our People together, and in their presence I made
Van de Nuits Over-seer General of all the Goods and Provisions we had, or
should hereafter have. Swart Captain of the Artillery, Arms, and Ammunitions of
War. Maurice, an expert and active Seaman, Admiral of our Fleet, which was to
consist of a Longboat, a little Boat, and another Pinnace we were a making out
of the pieces of our broken Ship. Morton, an English man, who had been a
Sergeant in the Low Countries, I made Captain of the Eldest Company. De Haes, a
sober and vigilant fellow, was made second Captain, one Van Sluis, third
Captain, one de Bosch, fourth Captain, and one Brown, Major General.

I gave all these men leave to choose their inferior Officers with my
approbation, which they did accordingly.

I had two Servants with me, the one called Devese, who had been my Sergeant in
Catalonia, a stout and understanding fellow, sober, and trusty, who had served
me ever since I left the Wars, and followed my fortune every where, him I made
my Lieutenant General; and the other, named Tursi, my Secretary.

Our Officers being all chosen, we numbered our People, and found we were three
hundred and seven Men, three Boys, and seventy four Women, all in good health;
for although there were many of them sick when they first landed, they were all
well again in less than a Weeks time, which was no small argument of the
healthiness of the Country. I distributed all these into four parts, and gave
Maurice six and twenty of the best Seamen, and the three Boys, to man his Navy.
Swart had thirty for his Artillery. I disposed two hundred men into four
Companies, and Van de Nuits had all the rest to attend him, and take Orders of
him in the Camp, or out of the Camp. We had two Trumpetters, which used to say
Prayers in the Ship besides their Office of Trumpetting. I took one of them,
and gave Van de Nuits the other, and they both were confirmed in both their
employments after the Dutch fashion.

All our Affairs being so ordered and settled, in the Evening I called our
Superior Officers together, and told them, that before our Provisions were all
spent we should go about by Sea and Land to discover the Country, and endeavor
to get some fresh Provision, as likewise to discover some fitter place for a
Camp than that we were in, where in a short time all things would grow scarce,
and where we had not so much as good water. That my opinion was we should send
several Parties of men well Armed to make new discoveries, and go farther into
the Country than we had gone yet. They readily assented to my Proposals, and
told me they were ready to obey my Orders.

Whereupon I commanded Maurice to man his two Boats, and to send them all along
the Coasts, as far as they could conveniently go, the one, on the right side of
the Camp, and the other, on the left. I ordered Morton to take twenty men out
of his Company, and to go all along the shore on the left hand. De Haes was
commanded to take thirty out of his, and to go through the middle of the
Country; and I my self drew forty men out of the two other Companies, and left
my Lieutenant to command in the Camp in my absence.

We all took three days Provision, and good store of Powder and Bullets, with
Swords and half Pikes, and I commanded all my men to be ready early in the
Morning, and to wait for further Orders, which they did accordingly. The next
day, which was the twentieth since the first day of our Landing, and from which
we shall hereafter reckon as our principal Epoche, all my men were ready by
break of day, and came to receive my Commands, which were the same I had given
the night before, with this Addition only: That if they should meet with any
thing considerable they should presently send advice thereof to the Camp. I
likewise gave Orders to Morton to keep with the Boat as near as he could, and
to come every night to the shore to join with the Boats-Crew before Sun
setting, I my self intending to keep the same Method with Maurice.

As soon as these Orders were given we went our several ways all full of hopes
and alacrity. I marched my men in Rank and File, and I divided them into three
Parties, the first that had the Van was composed of six Musketteers and a
Corporal, the second of twelve and a Sergeant, I my self brought up the Rear.

We marched within Musket shot distance one from another in that manner as near
the shore as we could, that we might be within sight of our Boat. The Sea was
very calm, and the Weather very still, though something hot. At noon the Boat
came to us at a place where we stood near the shore, and there we took some
rest and refreshment for the space of two hours. All the Country we came upon
for ten or twelve Miles was much like to that about our Camp, and we did not so
much as find a Brook or a Spring in all our way, all being dry Sands, and
nothing growing upon them but Bushes and Thorns. After we had taken some rest,
we marched five Miles beyond the place where we had halted, and there the
ground began to grow more unequal, and to rise here and there into small Hills.
Two Miles farther we found a Brook of sweet water, which gave us no small
occasion of joy, chiefly when we saw that a little farther up in the Country
there was some small plots of green Trees upon the Banks of the Brook; there we
halted again, and made Signs to our Boat to come to us, which they did
immediately, coming into the Brook with the Tide; and finding it was a very
good Harbor for such a Vessel as theirs, they rowed up a Mile into the Land
till they came to a plot of green trees, where we pitched our Camp for that
night. Maurice brought us some Fish he had taken in the Sea, and some Oysters,
and other Shell fish. We struck fire, went to Supper an hour before night, and
then to sleep, keeping a good Guard about us, and hiding our fire with green
Boughs we fixed in the ground round about it lest it should be seen at a
distance. The next day early in the morning I sent three of my men back again
to the Camp to give them notice of the Brook and the Trees we had found, and to
tell them we intended to proceed farther. But before we removed from that place
I sent five men up the Brook to discover more of the Country. They came back
two hours after, and told us that the Country above was a little more Hilly
than below, but dry and barren, and like that which lay toward our Camp. Our
Boat fell down toward the Sea after these men were come with this account, and
had carried us over the Brook, which was deep and not fordable, unless we went
two or three Miles higher. When we had got over we marched on along the shore
still within sight of our Boat, and found that the Country grew more and more
unequal.

When we had gone five or six Miles further we came to a pretty high Hill,
which was barren and without Trees. We got on the top of it, and from thence
discovered a Wood of tall Trees four or five Miles beyond this Hill, which
Trees stood upon a high ground that shot a good way into the Sea.

At the sight of these green Trees we did much rejoice, and resolved to go
thither after we had taken a little refreshment. We marched on through a Sandy
Plain that lay betwixt us and the Wood, and reached the foot of the high ground
in less than two hours time, got up into the Wood, and found it did consist of
very lofty Trees, not thick, and under which there was not much under-wood, so
that it was easily pervious; there I kept my men very close to one another, and
doubled the Van, that they might be the more able to resist if they should be
set upon by any men or fierce Beast. As we went we cut down several Boughs, and
strewed them upon the ground, whereby we might know the way we came in our
return. In that manner we marched on in as direct a Line as we could till we
came to the other side of the Wood, where we spied the Sea again, and saw Trees
over the Water at six or seven Miles distance, which demonstrated to us that
this water was a great Bay between two Capes.

The place was very delightful to behold, and afforded a very fine prospect
over the Bay, which made us wish we had been cast away nearer to it than we
were. We had left our Boat on the other side of the Wood by reason of the great
way she must go about before we could meet her again. I sent down ten of my men
to the Water side, where they found a vast quantity of Oysters, and other
Shel-fish, which was no small encouragement. As soon as they were come up I
sent three men to Maurice, and bid him row as fast as he could toward the head
of the Cape, where he should meet with a Party I intended to send immediately
that way. I sent another Party toward the inner part of the Wood on the Land
side to see if they could find any sweet water. Those who went toward the head
of the Cape traveled almost two Miles before they found any, but at last they
perceived a Declivity in the ground, which led them down into a kind of a Vale,
very full of green and thick Trees, at the bottom of which they found a fine
stream of sweet water, running into the Bay. In this pleasant place they
stopped, and sent three of their Company to bring me notice of it; they had not
been come a quarter of an hour but the ten men, who were sent on the contrary
side, came back again, and told us they had gone a great way in the Wood, which
they thought grew wider and wider toward the Land; that they had found a Heard
of Deer near a little Brook, whereof they had killed two, and shot at two more.
They had cut these Deer into four pieces, and carried them upon their backs,
which was no uncomfortable sight to us. We left the place where we stood, and
marched toward the Vale above mentioned, having before dispatched five of our
men toward the Camp, to give them notice of what had happened to us, and sent
them part of our Venison for a token of the good Fortune we had met with. When
we were come to the Vale, I liked it so well, that I resolved to encamp there
that night, and to remove our old Camp thither, as soon as possibly we could.
My men made presently a fire, and fell a roasting of their Venison; and I sent
five of them to meet with the Party which were sent to Maurice; they marched
but two Miles farther before they came to the head of the Cape, where they
joined with the other Party, and there standing all together, upon the most
eminent place they could find, looked for Maurice his coming. He as soon as he
had received my Orders, Rowed to the Rendezvous with all the diligence
possible, and came to the place half an hour before Sun setting, where having
pulled the Boat upon the ground, they all came to the new Camp before it was
night.

They found us very merry, some about the fire roasting of meat, and others
lying upon Beds of dry leaves and dry Moss, which they had gathered good store
of in a little time.

We passed all the night in that place with a great deal of joy and quietness,
and the morning being come I got up betimes, and bid Maurice and his Crew to
prepare for the old Camp, whither I intended to return by Water with only two
of my men besides the Boats Crew. I left one to Command the rest, and ordered
him to keep in that place till he heard farther from me, promising to be with
him again in less than three days, and that in the mean while they might supply
their wants with Hunting, Fishing, and Shelling; so we went toward the Boat.
We soon reached the place where she lay, put her to Sea, and Rowed to the old
Camp the same day, a gentle breeze favoring our Voyage; we arrived about Sun
setting, and were received by our People with general demonstrations of joy.
They had heard of the new Camp, and all asked me if they should not remove
thither? I answered, We would do that with all speed, it being the best place
to pitch upon of all those we had seen.

Morton and De Haes were come to the Camp two or three hours before my arrival,
and came to give me an account of their Expeditions.

Morton told me, he had marched his men fifteen or sixteen Miles to the left
side of the Camp through a Sandy and barren Country, where they had not found
so much as a Spring or Brook of sweet Water; that at night they were gone to
meet the Boat on the shore, according to my Orders, and lain there till the
next morning, which being come, they departed early from that place, and
proceeded to the Westward in the same manner as the day before, through a Rocky
and Stony Country, without finding any water till Noon; at which time they came
to a pretty broad River, where they stopped till their Boat came to them. That
they had observed the Tide came into this River with great noise and
Impetuosity, and that the water was salt where they came to it at first, as
being not far from the Sea, which had obliged them to go up the River till they
should find sweet water. That going up along the Banks they had at the last
found a Stream of sweet water, which refreshed them much, and so proceeded in
their discovery; they had been set upon by two great Crocodiles, which ran out
of the River to devour them, but that they having spied them before they could
come near, had fired at them, and the report of their Guns had so frighted
those Monsters that they ran into the water with more haste than they were come
out of it. That seeing the danger there was along that River by reason of
these, or other fierce Creatures they might meet with; and having no Provision
to go on any further in a Country where they could get nothing but some
Shellfish, and those only upon the Seashore, they thought they should proceed
no farther, but come back again the same way they were gone, according to my
Command of not staying longer without some special reason.

De Haes told me he had marched twenty Miles the first day through a Sandy
Plain, directly to the Southward. That at night they were come to a little Hill
full of Heath, where they lay till next morning. That when the Sun began to
shine they saw a very great Mist five or six Miles beyond their Post, which
clearing up by degrees, as they marched toward it, they discovered a great
Pool or Lake of standing water, which could be no less than ten Miles Diameter.
That being come near this Lake they had seen abundance of Reeds and Rushes
growing about the shore, and an infinite number of Waterfowl, that flew from
place to place, and made a very great noise in their flight.

That they had gone a good way about this Lake before they could come to touch
the water by reason of the Marshy and Muddy ground about it, where they could
not march without danger of sinking, till they came to a Sandy place near a
Hill, somewhat higher than that they lay upon the night before. That having got
to the top of it, from whence they had a very large prospect round about, they
could discover nothing but a large Heath, and at great distance toward the
South, a long Row of very high Mountains, which stood like a Wall, and reached
from East to West as far as they could see. That after this discovery, they,
being afraid of wanting Victuals, were returned to the Camp on the third day
according to my Command.

I found by these relations that I had had far better luck than these two
Captains, and we were all the more encouraged to go to the new Camp on the
Eastward; that we saw it had such conveniences as we could not find any where
else, and that all our hopes lay on that side.

The next morning I called a Council, where I propounded our removal to the
green Vale. It was embraced presently, and ordered that we should transport our
People and Goods thither by degrees, beginning with those which were most
necessary and easy to carry. The New Pinnace we were making was almost
finished, and would be ready in four or five days more, and fit to transport
our Guns, Casks, and other Lumber.

In the mean while we used both our Boats to remove our Provisions, and sent
many of our People by Land, with such Axes, Nails, Spades, and other Implements
of that kind as we had there.

The Major went with the first Party, my Lieutenant with the second; and when I
saw that most of our People and Goods were removed to the new Camp, and that
the Pinnace was ready, I sent her loaded with diverse things, and traveled
thither my self by Land.

I omitted to tell you that Maurice had doubled the Cape in his second Voyage
without any danger by reason of the calmness of the Sea, and the stilness of
the weather, which was clear and serene, without any Rain or great Wind above
six weeks after our Landing, and so temperate that we felt neither heat not
cold in the first Month except about noon, at which time the Sun was something
hot; grew hotter every day as it drew nearer to us, and brought the Spring
about August: For in those Countries it begins then; contrary to our Parts,
where the Summer ends at that time. Maurice told me, that at the head of the
Cape he had found many small rocky Islands, which lay together very thick as
far as a great one that lay at the very mouth of the Bay, and defended it from
the fury of the Waves; he was of opinion that it would prove an excellent
Harbor for Ships, if the passage into it was not too difficult, or too shallow
for great Vessels by reason of the many Rocks that lay between the Cape and the
great Island which divided and sheltered the Bay from the main Ocean.

Well Maurice, said I to him, when we have removed all our Goods and People,
and they are settled in the new Camp, we shall have time enough to discover
those Islands, and I will leave the discovery of them to your care and industry.

In less than twelve days after the first discovery of the Vale we had
transported all our People and Goods from the old Camp to the new, which in my
absence Van de Nuits and other Officers named Sidenberge. That name obtained so
in two or three days time that it was impossible afterward to change it. Our
men, partly by my order, or of their own accords, made several good Huts along
the Brook side upon a piece of Ground almost a Mile long, which abutted to the
Bay on the East side of the Cape. Wood we had plenty enough upon the place, and
our Fishermen took so much Fish in the Bay that we knew not what to do with it
for want of salt to season or smoke it. But Maurice quickly supplied us with
that, for being gone upon some of those Rocks which lay at the mouth of the
Bay, he found there as much of it as would serve the whole Company twenty years
if we should be so long in that place

That Salt was naturally made by the water of the Sea, which in great storms
being slung upon those Rocks, filled some hollow places in them, where the heat
of the Sun did afterward turn it into Salt. There were every day great Parties
sent into the Woods to discover and hunt the Deer, of which many Herds were
found up and down, and many of them killed by our men. We saw every day
multitudes of Waterfowl fly over the Bay, which made us judge that they had
some particular haunt there. Maurice with his new Pinnace and his Longboat
ventured every day further and further into the Bay, and in the Islands, and
made several good discoveries. He found a place near the great Island where
grew abundance of Reeds and Rushes, and thither it was that an infinite number
of Sea-fowl of al sorts did repair. He found another place where there came
many green Turtles to lay their Eggs upon the Sand, from whence we might draw
the greatest part of our subsistence. In fine, we found so many things to shift
withal that we were certain never to want Victuals if we should live there a
thousand years. The greatest want we were sensible of was that of Powder, for
though we had saved a good quantity of it, yet that was a thing that would be
consumed every day, and that we did not know how to get again when our stock
was spent. We foresaw likewise that our Clothes, Hooks, and Vessels would in a
short time be worn out if our friends, that were gone in the Pinnace for
Batavia, should be lost, and no relief sent us. But we had already so many
experiments of Gods mercy toward us, that we hoped he would not forsake us.

The Spring came on apace, and we laid up every day new Victuals, by the means
of which we saved the Ships Provision as much as we could, and chiefly some
Casks of Pease, and other kind of Pulse we had brought from Europe. It came in
my head to sow some of these in the ground, and having told some of my Officers
of my design, they all readily agreed to it. In order to it, we felled a great
many Trees above and below the Camp, and having cleared the ground of all
bushes and underwood, which we burned upon the place, we made several furrows
in the ground, and sowed our Pease in them, covered them carefully with the
earth we had taken up, recommending our endeavors to him that gives the
increase.

Some of our Huntsmen venturing far in the Wood killed abundance of Game, and
not being able to carry it all with them, they hanged two Deer upon an old and
thick Tree with an intent to fetch them home the next day. But when seven of
them came to the place the day following, they saw upon the Tree a great Tiger
gnawing on the dead Deer before that terrible Creature perceived our men, which
I suppose was occasioned through his hunger, which made him so eager about his
meat that he minded nothing else. Our People were much surprised at the sight,
and stood still behind some Trees, and two of them, having cocked their Guns,
well charged with Bullets, they aimed, and shot a him both at one time, and
fetched him down the Tree. The Tiger made a hideous Cry when he fell, but being
shot in two places through the body he died immediately; they stripped him of
his spotted skin, and taking down the dead Deer brought them in triumph into
the Camp. I was glad of their success, but yet new fears came upon me upon that
subject; for I judged, that since they had found this mighty Creature in the
Forest, there might be a great many more in it, which at some time or other
might come to our Camp, and fall upon our People unawares.

I suggested this to the Council, and it was resolved, That without any delay
we should make a strong Pallizado about our Hutts. We fell to work the next
morning, and in less than ten days after we had empaled our Camp on all sides,
so as to be secure from any sudden invasion of Men or Beasts. Our Huntsmen also
became a little more cautious than before, and did not dare to straggle in the
Woods least they should meet any of those dreadful Creatures.

It was now seven weeks since we were cast away, and hitherto we had had no
strife nor quarrel among us so long as we lay in fear and danger: But as soon
as we thought our selves secure from men, beasts, thirst, and hunger, when we
fed plentifully upon fresh meat and Fish, and we did not labor so much as
before, then our People began to be wanton. We had a great many Women among us,
of which I hitherto forbore to speak, because I saw no great occasion for it.
But now that they began to act their part, and stir up trouble among us, I must
a little speak of them.

Some of them were poor women, who compelled by Poverty, and their hopes of
Preferment, were persuaded to go to the Indies. Some had their Husbands there,
or other Relations, but most of them were Whores taken out of Bawdy houses, or
spirited away by Fellows, who sold them to the Master for a little money,
notwithstanding the punishment ordained by the Laws against such practices.
These Whores seeing themselves at rest, and the men idle for the most part,
began to smile at them, and by amorous speeches to draw some of them to
themselves; they found many so well disposed that they needed no spur to be put
on, so they would sometimes come together in the night, and enjoy one another
in the best manner they could. But as we lay altogether in a little Camp, and
that there was a Guard kept in the night, they could not meet so secretly but
some body or other would discover them and become a sharer in the prey. These
practices did often occasion quarrels, and jealousies, which at last came to
blows, but chiefly upon this particular occasion.

Two young Fellows lay both with one woman, and did not know one of the other;
once she appointed a meeting to one of them in the night, and the other coming
to her a while after, and requesting the like favor that very night, she
denied him, and put him off upon frivolous pretenses. The Fellow being subtle,
and of a jealous disposition, suspected something of the truth, and resolved so
narrowly to watch her that he would find the true reason of her denial; he did
it accordingly, and caught the Wench with her other Gallant in the fact, the
sight whereof did so move his anger, that he drew his Sword and stuck them both
in the ground, and then slunk away without being seen.

The unfortunate Couple cried out, and were found in that posture, first, by
the next Sentinel, and then by the whole Guard, who having taken the Sword out
of their bodies, and out of the ground, into which it was run above a foot
(such was the strength and rage of this jealous Lover) carried them to the
Surgeon, who presently dressed their wounds, then came to me to give me an
account of the business.

The next day I assembled the Council to advise what should be done about this
horrid fact, but we knew not whom to accuse. We examined every body that could
be suspected; we asked the wounded man, Whether he had any enemies which he
could himself suspect? He answered, That as he had neither wronged nor
disobliged any body of the Company, so he could not fasten any suspicion upon
any man. We examined the Wench, but she would accuse no body, although she
suspected, and it may be knew the Author of the Crime; but knowing that it was
a just indignation and excess of Love that had moved her other Lover to take
that revenge, she was so generous as not to accuse or mention him in the least.

This put us into a great perplexity, and we did not know by what ways or means
we should find out the Criminal, when at last it came into our thoughts to draw
out our men into the Fields, and see which of them wanted his Sword, for no
body would own that which had been found in the unhappy Couples bodies. When
they were all drawn up, we called every one of them according to the order of
the List, and found out the Fellow by the want of his Sword. He was immediately
apprehended, and brought to his trial. We asked him, What was the reason he was
come into the field without his Sword? To which he answered boldly, He came
without because he had none. Had you never any in this Camp, said I to him? Yes
Sir, I had one Yesterday. What have you done with it? I lent it last night to
one who was to go to Sea this morning (for it was true, that a Party of Maurice
his men were gone early in the morning to some of the Islands.) Then we asked
him, What the man's name was he lent his Sword to? I do not know his name, said
he, although I lent him my Sword, and did sometimes converse with him, as I do
indifferently with any one in this Camp, where I know every one by his face,
although I am ignorant of the names of most men in the Company, and I do think
that it is the case of every man here as well as mine. Then I asked him,
Whether he was a Seaman or a Passenger he lent his Sword to? He was a Seaman,
and told me, he had lost his own Sword when he borrowed mine; and because he
would not have it known that he had lost his Weapon, he entreated me to let him
have mine upon his urgent occasian. Then did we send for the Sword with which
the fact had been committed, and asked him, Whether he knew that Sword? He
readily answered, He might very well know it, since he had wore it ever since I
trained up all the men of the Camp into a Military Discipline, whereof himself
was one. Sir, says he, This is my Sword, and the very same I lent last night
to him that borrowed it of me. How came this Sword to be found in the bodies of
the two wounded persons if your hands did not thrust it through them?

And please you General, it does not follow that I thrust it into their bodies
because it is my Sword, he that had it of me might use it to commit that
cruelty instead of using his own, thereby to shake off all suspicion from
himself, and lay the guilt on me. I confess that there are many apparent
Arguments against my Innocence, but I am sure there is no evident proof, and I
hope you will never find any. After this strict examination, finding we could
not convince this Fellow till Maurices Crew were come from Sea, we deferred his
trial until another time.

But it fell out by fortune that the men of the Boat being upon one of the
Sandy Islands where they turn Tortoises, and some of them having a mind to
swim, went into the Sea to wash and cool themselves in that Element; and as
some were more forward than others, a great Shark snapped the forwardest of the
Company, who being warned by that dreadful example, got out of the water with
all the have possible. The Story of this fatal accident, as likewise the
description of the person who had been devoured, came to the knowledge of the
Prisoner we had examined, before we could bring him to a second trial. When he
was tried again, he cunningly catching hold on the opportunity, said
confidently, That he had lent his Sword to him who was devoured, of whose Face
and Person he made a very exact description in our presence. So that we could
not do any good, nor bring any evident proof against him. We all admired his
confidence and subtilty, and hearing that the wounded persons were like to be
well again, we were contented to keep him in bonds till they were both out of
danger. The woman was soonest well, and here you may admire the humor of some
of that Sex. As soon as she was cured she came to the young man who had wounded
her, and expressed the greatest love to him that can be imagined, under
pretense that she had been the cause of all his trouble. But I think the true
reason was, that she looked upon this Fellow as a man well in his body, having
never been wounded, and who consequently was far more vigorous than her other
Gallant, who had lately received a large wound through the body.

This accident occasioned new Laws, and new Customs. We considered, that as
long as we had Women among us they would be the occasion of trouble and
mischief if we did not betimes take some good course, and allow our men the
liberty of using them sometimes in an orderly manner. But we had but seventy
four women, and above three hundred men, and therefore could not give every man
a Wife. We consulted long upon a Method, and at last pitched upon this, We
allowed the principal Officers each of them one woman wholly for himself, with
the privilege of choosing according to his rank. The rest we distributed into
several divisions, and ordered it so, that every man, who was not past fifty
years of Age, might have his woman-bedfellow every fifth night; we laid aside
the old men, and the four Wives that were going to their Husbands in Batavia,
and who professed to be very chaste and honest. These kept together, and lived
a while very reserved, but when they saw that all the other women lay freely
every night with a man without incurring any blame, and that the relief we
expected from Batavia was long a coming, they began to grow melancholy, and to
repent that they had chosen chastity for their share, by which means they were
deprived alone of those delights and pleasures which they saw all the other
women take so freely and so plentifully. They showed their discontented minds
by a hundred actions, and they nor we were never quiet till we had distributed
them among the rest, and then they were satisfied. Here we had a very great
proof that multiplicity of men to one woman is no friend to Generation, for few
of these women, who were common to five men, proved with Child; and on the
contrary, all those who lay but with one man presently got a great belly. I
think that is the natural reason why multiplicity of Husbands was never allowed
in any Nation, although Poligamy of Wives and Concubines was ever used, and is
still practiced in most Countries.

Now the time was come that we were to set up the Signal we agreed upon with
the eight men of the first Pinnace sent to Batavia. I therefore commanded our
men to choose in the Forest a tall and straight tree to set it up at the head
of the Cape with a white Sail the largest we had, which was done accordingly. I
commanded also a great fire to be made every night at the same place, that the
Ships sent to our relief might see it in the dark, and take their aim by that.
We were in good hopes that the Pinnace was got to Batavia without any great
difficulty, considering the good weather we had had, and that the General would
send us relief with all the diligence possible. But God it seems had ordered it
otherwise, for the weather, which for almost two months had been fair, began to
grow rainy, and stormy, so that we saw almost every day great tempests in the
Ocean, although our Bay was not much agitated by them by reason of the high
ground, and the many little Islands that sheltered it from the violence of the
Winds and Waves. It rained almost every day for a fortnight together, but the
Sun shined hot every day also, so that we had a mixture of Rain, Wind, and
Sunshine at the same time. It was well that we had been provident in powdring
and smoking of meat and fish, which we laid up in great store in the empty
Casks we had brought from our Ships, for if we had not done so, we might have
wanted Victuals while this bad weather lasted, which was above a fortnight. It
grew a little better after that space of time, but not so good but we had
Winds, Rains, and Storms at Sea; then sudden calms, at the least once or twice
a week, which made us despair of ever hearing from Batavia, and made us resolve
to provide for our selves there, without depending upon any relief from thence.

The weather grew very hot, and since the rain fell all things were visibly
grown in the fields, and our Pease did thrive the best that ever I saw, so we
were like to have a great Crop of them, which encouraged, us to break more
ground, and to sow a great many more. There was an infinite of Fish and Fowl in
the Bay, and upon a calm day we could take as many of them as we pleased; but
our Nets began to wear out, and we were forced to tear some of our Cables to
make new Nets of them, which we made a shift with for a great while, necessity
being the mother of Arts.

Our Huntsmen had made such a noise in the Wood near the Camp, and so chased
the Dear, that they were quite gone from that part, and none could be seen ten
miles about us. That made them resolve to take another course, and to go by
water to the other side of the Bay, or to the bottom of it, where we saw Wood
all round. Maurice was first ordered to make discoveries on the other side;
which he did, and found there were great Woods there, and a little River that
ran into the Bay. He rowed four or five miles up that River and saw nothing but
Trees, and some marshy ground along the bank of it, yet we supposed there would
be many Deer found on that side if we should put it to a trial. In order to
which, fifty of our men having taken Victuals and Ammunition for a Week, went
to the Banks of that River in the Pinnace, and the Longboat, and having Landed
there, made themselves Huts, keeping the Longboat with them to use it
according to their occasion, and sending the Pinnace back again. A while after
being gone into the Forest to seek for Deer, they found great Herds of them,
whereof they made a great slaughter; they likewise found a kind of Beast like a
Swine, but bigger, and slower in his pace, and using to go a rooting in the
Woods in great numbers; they killed first one of them, which upon examination
proved far better meat than any of our European Pork.

Maurice being desirous to discover the great Island that lay at the mouth of
the Bay, landed there with twenty men; the first part of it that lay inwardly
he found to be but Stony and Rocky places, but when they were gone a little
beyond, they found it to be a pretty big Island, consisting for the most part
of moorish ground, which being almost dreined by the heat of the Summer was
turned into very good Pasture ground; they found hundreds of Deer feeding upon
it, and abundance of Fowl of all kind, so tame that they would let a man come
within a yard or two of them, they marched to the Eastward of the place, and
found that this Land was divided from the continent by a narrow Channel only;
it was found afterward that in the Spring time the Deer swam from the Continent
to the Island, which Island was not above twelve miles Diameter. These new
discoveries being so happy filled our hearts with joy, and a certain assurance
we should not want for Victuals if we were ten times as many, and made us bold
to venture farther.

Maurice had observed that the Bay ran a great way in length toward the
Southeast, and supposed there was some great River that flowed from that side
of the Country into the Sea, which was not unlikely. He therefore, having
obtained leave to take a Weeks Provision, and a sufficient number of men,
sailed that way with a resolution to go as far as he could with his Pinnace,
and we having prayed for his good success minded our other concerns, in hopes
of his happy return.

By this time our Pease were almost ripe, and nine or ten days after we had a
most prodigious Crop of them, every Peck yielding above a hundred, which is
almost incredible; and we expected another Crop that promised no less than this
if it should come to perfection. We dried them carefully, and laid them up in
store for the Winter and so we did with every thing that would keep, using for
the present such as could not be preserved.

It was above a quarter of a year since we were settled at Sidenberg, and having
heard nothing from Batavia, we concluded our Pinnace was perished, and gave it
over for lost; but our greatest trouble was, that above ten days were past
since Maurice was gone and we heard no tidings of him: This cast a general
sorrow upon our hearts, and in that great affliction we did not know what
Counsel to take, we durst not send the Longboat in search of him for fear she
should be lost, knowing that without our Vessels we could hardly be able to
subsist.

Our Huntsmen had made a kind of a new Plantation on the other side of the Bay
for convenience of hunting, and without our Boats we could keep no commerce
with them. All these reflections, and the fear of worse accidents increased our
affliction throughout all the Camp, where we lay lamenting the loss of our
Pinnaces above a fortnight before we could hear any thing of either of them.
Maurice did not come, and we did not know what to think of him and his Vessel,
knowing there had been no great storms since she was gone, and that being in so
calm a Sea she could not have perished by Tempests. We did not think neither
that she was fallen into the hands of Enemies or Pirates, having reason to
believe from our former experience that there were no men in those parts.

Wavering so betwixt hope and fears, upon a calm day we saw Maurices Pinnace
and two Vessels more coming along with him toward us. While we were looking
upon them, wondering how he came by these two Vessels, and what they might be,
We spied ten Sails more at a good distance coming after them. This unexpected
Fleet put our Camp into a great apprehension. We ran all to our Arms, prepared
our Cannons for our defense, and sent Scouts toward the shore to observe the
motions of this Fleet. In the mean while they drew near to the shore, and at
Musket shot they all cast Anchor in good order; but Maurices Pinnace came very
near, so that we could see him and his men from the shore, and hear him plainly
speak to us. He bid us not be afraid, and desired us to send the Boat with
three men only to fetch him ashore; after some contestation we sent the Boat,
which being come aboard him he leapt into it with one of his men, and took down
with him a tall and grave Personage in a black Gown, a Hat on his head, and a
white Flag in his hand, and so came ashore to us.

I, with some of my Officers, stood at some distance, but when we saw this man
landed we went to meet him. Maurice told us in few words, That he was sent from
the Governor of a City situate about sixty miles above the Bay, where we had
received all the kindness and civility imaginable, and desired us withal to
express all manner of respect to him. Upon that advice we did bow to him in
very humble and submissive manner, which he received with a great deal of
gravity and mildness, and stretching his right hand toward Heaven, said in
very good Dutch.

The Eternal God of the World bless you, the Sun his great Minister, and our
glorious King, shine kindly upon you, and this our Land be fortunate to you.
After this, Maurice having told him that I was the General, he gave me his
hand, which I humbly kissed, and he took me about the neck and kissed me in the
middle of the forehead, and then desired to march to our Camp, where we
received him in the best manner we could. He looked upon our Huts and
Pallizadoes, and nodded his head in sign that he liked it very well; then spoke
thus to me:

Sir, I have heard the History of your disaster, and knowing of your merits and
Gallantry, I have made no difficulty of putting my Person into your hands; but
that I may not keep you any longer from the Relation your Officer Maurice will
make unto you of what has happened unto him since his departure from hence; I
desire to rest a little in your Hut while you satisfy your curiosity, and hear
those things which will be necessary for you to be acquainted with, and that I
hope will set your minds at rest. We made no answer, but making a low reverence
left him in the Hut, and went to Maurice, who expected our coming in Van de
Nuits Hut. We were no sooner with him but we began to ask him questions
concerning his journey; and he having begged our leave and favorable audience
spoke to us in this manner:

Maurices Speech.
NOble General, and worthy Officers, with your leave, and even with your
Command, I departed from this place about three Weeks ago, with a design to
make further discoveries in the Bay. The first day I sailed to the Southeast of
it above twenty miles, and saw nothing on either side but great Woods as you
see here, distant one from another five or six miles at the least. At night we
cast Anchor at a mile distance from the right side of the river, and lay there
till next morning. From thence with Wind and Tide we sailed up further to the
Southeast about five Miles more, and there we found the Banks on each side of
the River came near one to another, within two miles distance. We sailed up
still, though with a little more difficulty, till we came into abroad place,
where the water spreads it self into a great Lake, from the middle of which we
could hardly see the shore on either side; we only saw ten or twelve small
Islands dispersed up and down the Lake, and most of them shaded with tall green
trees, very delightful to the Eyes. By this time the Wind was somewhat altered,
and the Lake was so calm that we could hardly perceive any motion in it; but as
the place was wide we rid to and fro as the Wind did serve, not much caring
which side of the Lake we should go first to, yet when the Wind would serve we
endeavored as much as we could to make to the Southeast. About Evening we had
a fine breeze, which drove us to the Southeast according to our wishes, and
that night we cast Anchor betwixt two or three of those small Islands, not
above two or three miles distant one from the other, with an intent to visit
them the day following. We lay at Anchor all night, and took our rest without
any care or fear, not thinking there had been any Inhabitants in those places,
but we found we were much deceived, for as soon as it was broad light we saw
about us ten or twelve Vessels, which did so encompass us about, that we could
go no way but we must fall among them. This struck a great terror upon us, and
we thought verily we should all be killed or taken, for we had but one of
these vvays to choose, to fight, or to surrender our selves, and lie at the
mercy of unknown men, who might use any cruelty upon us. This last
consideration prevailed, and made us all resolve to fight it out to the last
man; so we all ran to our Arms, prepared our Guns, and were very well
resolved to defend our lives, for we could not run away, the vveather being
very still, and the men we savv about us having several Shallops well manned
with Rovvers, who rovved toward us with great svviftness. When they were
come within Musket shot of us they all stopped, save a small Vessel, wherein
we savv a man with a white Flag in his hand coming on to us, and making many
signs in token of Amity. We stood to our Arms, and let that Vessel come on to
us, knovving it was not strong enough alone to attempt any thing against our
Pinnace. When they were come within fifteen or twenty yards of us the man
who had the white Flag in his hand, making a low reverence, spoke to us in
Spanish, and bad us not be afraid, for no harm was intended against us. One of
my men, who could speak that Language, explained what he said, and asked him
why they came so about us? He answered, It was the custom of the place, that we
should come to no harm, and desired to know what Countrymen we were. He told
him we were Hollanders. Then he replied in Dutch, That we were welcome into the
Country, and desired to be admitted into our Pinnace himself and another man of
his Company only, proffering to remain with us as Hostages till matters were
better understood. We readily yielded unto his desire, so they came aboard us.
He was a very lusty man, with a manly look, wearing a red Gown down to the
middle of his Legs, with a Cap of the same color, and a Shash about his waste,
much after the Garb we paint Cardinals in. The other man was in the like habit,
and a lusty man too, both about forty years of Age. When he was come up to us
he asked who was the Commander of the Pinnace; and having been told I was the
Person, he came to me in a kind and civil manner embraced me, and bid us all
welcome into the Country. Then he asked how we came into those parts in so
small a Vessel. I answered, That we came in a bigger, but that she was cast
away upon the Coasts, and that out of her Ruins we had made this Pinnace. Then
he asked me if we were all that were saved? I told him it was so, and that the
rest of our Company were drowned (for I did not think it fit to speak of our
People in the Camp until we were better acquainted with these men, and saw what
usage we should have amongst them.) He altering his Countenance, as if he had
been sorry for our loss, told us he took great part in our affliction. Then did
he ask me several questions concerning our Voyage, our Shipwreck, and the
present state of Europe. To which I returned such answers as I thought
convenient. He seemed to be well pleased with my answers, and told us we were
come into a Country where we should find more kindness and civility than we
could in our own, and where we should want none of those things that are
capable to make moderate men happy. We returned him humble thanks, and desired
to know what the name of the Country was? He told us it was called in their
Language Sporumbe, the Inhabitants Sporui; that it belonged to a greater and
happier Country beyond the Hills, called Sevarambe, and the people evarambi,
who lived in a great City called Sevarinde. That we were not above fourteen
Miles from another City (but much less than the first) called Sporunde where he
intended to carry us. Then perceiving some alteration in our faces caused by
his last words, he proceeded in this manner:

Gentlemen, I told you at first you should not be afraid, for no harm will be
done you I assure you, unless you will draw it upon your selves through your
distrust and stubbornness. Your best way is to rely upon Gods Providence, and
the assurances I give you, that no wrong shall be done to the least of you
either in his person or his goods. You are but a small number of men in a
little Pinnace, in a strange Country, destitute of all things, and no way able
to defend your selves against our Vessels which are many against one, and full
of men, who no less understand how to fight than you, as you will find if you
put it to a trial. They are no Barbarians as you may imagine, but a very good
charitable and civil people. So consider what is best for you to do. As soon as
he had spoken those words, he and his Companion went to one end of the Pinnace
as it were to give us an opportunity to consult among our selves, which we did,
and presently resolved to follow his directions, and to trust to Providence.
He, perceiving we intended to go to him, came himself to us, and asked what
course we were resolved to take? We intend to obey your Commands in every
thing, Sir, and think our selves happy to be under your protection; We are poor
distressed men, fitter Objects for pity than for anger, and we hope to find
Mercy and help at your hands. You will find it in a great measure, and see in
these Countries such wonders as are not to be seen in any other part of the
World. Then he made sign to his Shallop to come near, which they did
immediately. They brought us Bread, Wine, dry Dates, Raisins, Figs, and several
sorts of Nuts, of which we made an excellent Feast, and drank merrily of the
delicate Wines that were given us. After this welcome Meal, the man told me his
name was Carshida, his Companion's Benoscar, and desired to know mine. I told
him my name was Maurice, and asked him withal how he came to speak Dutch and
Spanish in so remote a Country. I will satisfy you herein another time
Maurice, (said he) in the mean while we must give order for our going to
Sporunde, that we may be there to day before night.

Then did he speak to his men in his own Language, and they made sign to
another Vessel that stood near to come to us, they presently came, and having
tied a rope to our Pinnace, towed her up the Lake to the Southeast of it, the
other Vessel rowing after us; in that manner we left the little Island and the
Fleet (which did not stir from their Station so long as we were in sight of
them) and rowed till two in the afternoon through that great Lake of salt
water, which looks more like a Sea than like a Lake. About that time we had a
gentle breeze, which carried us in less than two hours clear out of the Lake
into a River, where we found sweet water, and saw a fine Champain Country on
each side of it. We had not sailed two miles in this River but we came to a
pretty narrow place, where the water is kept in by two great and thick Walls,
and saw all along near these Walls great Buildings of Brick and Stone mixed
together, and built after the manner of a Castle in a perfect Quadrangle. We
went two miles further up along these Walls and Buildings before we came to the
City of Sporunde, which stands in the confluence of two great Rivers, in a fine
delicate Plain, diversified with Cornfieldsd, Meadows, Orchards, Gardens, and
Groves, which make it very delightful to the eye; the small Vessel, which at
first came after us, was gone up a good while before we came to the Town, to
give them warning of our coming. We rowed up to a great and stately Key, where
stood a great multitude of People, who came out to see us Land. Carshida went
on shore first, where he was received by some grave men in black, with whom
having discoursed a while, he turned himself toward us, and made signs to
Benoscar to bring us ashore. He in a few words told us what we were to do,
and bid us to follovv him. We went up the Stairs of the Key, (which was
pretty high) and being come to the place where the grave men stood, we
inclined our selves down to the ground three several times. The men bowed a
little to us, and the chiefest of them taking me in his Arms, very kindly
embraced me, kissed me in the forehead, and bade us all welcome to Sporunde.
From that place they carried us through a stately Gate, and a noble Street as
straight as a Line, to a great square building after the manner abovesaid. We
went into it through a large gate that stood in the middle of the Building,
and found the inner part of it to be like Cloisters with large Galleries on
all sides, and a large Green in the middle. From thence we were brought into
a great Hall, where stood several Tables and Seats. There the grave men in
black stood round me, and asked me several questions, much like unto those
Carshida had asked me at the first, to which I ansvvered in the same manner. A
while after they carried us to another Hall next unto that, where we found
several Tables full of meat, much after our European fashion. Then Sermodas
(for that is the name of the grave man who is now in the Generals Hut) asked
me whether we had any stomach to our Supper. To whom I made answer, That it
was so long since we had seen such a Supper that I did not think any of us
would want a stomach to eat it. He smiled, and taking me by the hand brought
me to the chiefest Table, and made me sit next to him; then all the other grave
men sat with us, and Carshida with Benoscar took all my men to another Table.
We had a very noble Supper, after which we were carried up into a great Room,
where we saw several Beds upon Iron Bedsteads. There my men were ordered to lie
two and two, and I was carried to a Room by my self, where Sermodas and his
company wished me good night, and so went away. A while after Carshida came in
and told me, that I and my men must prepare to appear the next day before
Albicormas, Governor of Sporunde, and said he would give us directions how to
behave our selves, and so he bid me good night.

The next day about six of the clock in the morning we heard a great Bell ring,
and an hour after Carshida and Benoscar came into my Chamber, and asked me how
I had taken my rest, and if I wanted any thing? I would have risen presently,
but he told me I must not, till such time as I had new Clothes to put on, which
would be brought immediately. Upon that Benoscar went out, and came a while
after with some attendance, who brought new Clothes, both Linen and Woollen,
made after the manner of the Country. Then came in others with a Tub, which
they filled with warm water, and then Carshida told me it was to wash my body
in before I put on my new Clothes, and so went out with all the Company,
leaving only a Servant to wait upon me. According to his directions I vvashed,
and then put on a fine Cotton Shirt and Dravvers, with Stockings of the same.
I had also a new black Hat, new Shoes, a Govvn of several colors, and a
black Shash to put about my middle. As soon as I was ready, the Servant,
taking my old Clothes with him, went out, and then came in again Carshida and
his company, who told me that I and all my men were to attend Albicormas and
his Council, and gave me directions how to behave my self. We went down into
the Yard, where I found all my men in new Apparel, much like unto mine, but
not altogether so good, and vvearing Caps on their heads instead of Hats.
Benoscar was with them, and was giving them directions how to behave
themselves before the Council. We stood there a while looking one upon
another, till Sermodas and his company came in. He very kindly asked us all
how we did, and then, directing his speech to me, he asked me whether I was
ready to vvait upon the Council? I ansvvered we were all ready to obey his
Commands; which said, he took me by the hand, and made me march on his left
side into the Street. Carshida put himself at the head of my men, which were
disposed two and two, and marched in Rank and File like Soldiers, Benoscar
bringing up the Rear.

In that order we marched through some Streets till we came to a great place
in the middle of the City, and in the Center of this place stood a large and
magnificent Palace, of a square Figure, and built with white Freestone, and
black Marble, all so clean, and so well polished, that we thought it was new,
though we heard afterward it had been built a good while. In the middle stood
a great and stately Gate, adorned with several brazen Statues, and on each side
thereof two long Files of Musquetteers, all in blew Gowns. We marched through
them into the first Court, where we found another Lane of men in red Gowns,
with Halberts in their hands. As soon as we were come in, we heard a great
sound of many Trumpets, and several other Instruments of War, very sweet and
pleasant, which sounded all the time we stood in that Yard, for a quarter of an
hour. From thence we proceeded into the next Court, all built with well
polished black Marble, with Nitches round about, and delicate Statues in them.
In the middle of the Yard stood about a hundred men in black, most of them of
riper years than those we had seen in the other Courts. We stood a little in
that place, till two grave men (such as stood in the Court, with only this
difference, that they wore a piece of Gold colored Silk hanging loose upon
their left shoulder) came down and bid Sermodas bring us all up. We went up in
the same order as we came, upon a stately Staircase, gilt and painted very
richly, to a great Hall, gilt and painted in the same manner, and there we
stood a while. From that they brought us into another Hall, richer than the
first; and then into a third, far beyond either of them. At the end of this
Hall we saw a pretty high Throne, and a little lower long Seats on each side of
it. Upon the Throne sat a grave Majestic Personage, and upon the other Seats
several venerable men on his right and left. He that sat uppermost in the
midst of them wore a Purple Gown, and the others were habited like the two men
who led us into the place, who were Members of the Council. We were told that
he in the Purple Gown was Albicormas, and the others the chiefest Officers of
the City, who, together with him, govern the whole Country of Sporumbe. At our
first coming into the Hall we made an inclination of our bodies, then being
come to the middle of it we bowed a little more, but when we came to a Balister
or Rail near to the Throne, we bowed down to the very ground, according to the
directions given us before. Then stood up all the Counselors and made a small
inclination of their bodies, but Albicormas nodded only with his head. Then did
Sermodas take me by the hand, and brought me as near the Rail as we could go,
and bowing down very profoundly spoke to Albicormas, and gave him partly an
account of us in his own Language, as we imagined, and as we were told
afterward. Methoughts their Speech sounded much like the Greek or Latin, as I
have sometimes heard it spoken in Holland, and ran very smooth and Majestical.
When Sermodas had spoken a while, Carshida was sent for, who gave the Council a
full relation of our Affairs, and of the time and manner we came into the Lake,
by them called Sporascumpso; how we were seen and taken in it, which was in
this manner, as we understood afterward.

The day upon which we came into the Lake was a solemn day in those parts, so
that all the Inhabitants of the Islands were celebrating the same, and intent
upon their Exercises and Pastimes when we sailed into it, and that was the
reason why we saw no Vessels in it at first, although there are several fishing
there upon other days. But although we saw no body, yet our Pinnace was soon
spied from the Islands, so that several Vessels were sent out in the night to
catch us in the morning, and secure us from going back again without leave. It
being the custom of those People to keep a very strict guard about their
Country for fear it should come to be known to Foreigners, whose designs, and
corrupted lives might in time bring trouble to their State, and corruption to
their manners, the peace and purity of which two things they are most careful
to secure.

When Carshida had made an end of speaking. Albicormas stood up and bid us
welcome in his own Language, as Sermodas interpreted it unto us. He added, That
we should find all manner of kindness and good usage among the Sporui, and that
we should stay in Sporunde till such a time as he did receive Orders from
Sevarminas, the Suns Viceroy, who lived in the City of Sevarinde, whither he
would send a Messenger that very day to give him an account of us. That in the
mean while we should enjoy all the comfort and moderate pleasure the Country
could afford if we would be ruled by Sermodas and his Officers, to whose care
and conduct he recommended me and all my men, exhorting us to behave our selves
modestly, and so he dismissed us.

I observed, that Albicormas was very crooked, though he was otherwise a man of
good presence, and grave carriage, and so were many of his Assessors; and we
found afterward that among the People there was a great number of deformed
persons mixed with very handsome Folk of all Ages and Sexes; and I was told,
That the reason of it was, that those of Sevarinde sent all such imperfect
People as were born amongst them to this place, and would not suffer any body
who had any deformity of body to live in their Country. I was further told,
That in their Language Spora signified a defective person, and Sporunde the
City of the maimed or defective. Those that were incorrigibly vicious, or
unquiet, were disposed of another way, as in the sequel or continuation of this
History shall hereafter be made appear.

After Albicormas had dismissed us we went back to our Lodging in the same
order as we came from it, and found there a very good Dinner provided for us.
We kept at home all that Afternoon because the weather was hot, but in the
Evening Sermodas and Carshida took us out to show us the City, and led us from
Street to Street, where we found great multitudes of People, who came out to
look on us. The Town is the most regular that ever I saw, being divided into
great square Buildings, which contain every one above a thousand People, and
they are built all after the same manner. There are seventy six of them, and so
many thousands of Inhabitants in the whole City, which is above four miles
about. It stands betwixt two Rivers, as I told you before, but the industry of
that People has made it an Island of a Peninsula, by drawing a great Trench
from River to river two miles above the City. This Trench is no less than three
miles long, having a great Wall on each side and many Bridges over it, very
broad and strongly built with large Freestone, as you may see your selves when
you come to the place.

At night we had a good Supper, and two hours after we were all carried to a
great Hall, where we found fifteen young Women, who waited there for us. They
were most of them very tall and proper women, in painted Callico Gowns, wearing
their black hair in long and thick breads, hanging down upon their Breasts and
Shoulders. We were a little surprised to find so many of them in a row, and did
much admire at them, not knowing what they stood there for, when Sermodas spoke
to us in this manner:

You wonder Maurice to see here so many proper Women together, and little
understand the reason why you find them in this posture and habit, somewhat
different from other women's Dress. Know you therefore that these are our
slaves, and that they are here to wait upon you and your Comrades. You have
your several Customs in Europe, and so have other Countries their own. Some are
bad and vicious in nature, and others only seem to be good or bad according to
men's prejudices, and apprehensions. But there are some that are grounded upon
Reason, and are truly good in themselves if we rightly consider them. Ours are
for the most part, if not all of this kind, and we hardly have anyone which is
not established upon Reason. You know, I suppose, that the moderate use of
those good things Nature has appointed for all living Creatures is good, and
that there is nothing but the abuse of them, either in the excess, or in the
defect that may be termed bad, provided Faith, Justice, and Equity be exactly
observed

Among those good things, we conceive there are two of the greatest importance,
viz. The preservation and happy being of every living Creature, and the
propagation of its Species. The means to attain to the first are all those
natural Actions, without which no Creature can subsist, and such are Eating,
Drinking, Sleeping, etc. But her bountiful hands do not only give us those
things which are merely necessary to keep us alive, but also liberally bestow
upon us those delights and pleasures, the just and moderate use whereof may
make our lives sweet and comfortable; and that we may the better take pleasure
in them she has given us an Appetite, and a Palate capable to discern their
various tastes and qualities according as they are suitable to our natures. For
the preservation of every Species Nature has likewise appointed that every
Male should be united to a Female, that by their union their kind should be
preserved, which is her chiefest end. And that they may be the more inclined to
accomplish her noble design she has given them a mutual love and desire of
Conjunction, and annexed a pleasure to the actual union of the two Sexes for
the preservation of the Species, as a pleasure also in eating, and drinking to
every Animal. These are the Eternal Laws of God in Nature, and these two ends,
together with the pleasure we take in the means, through which we may attain to
them, are not only lawful and necessary, but also laudible and commanded.
Besides these two great concerns there is a third one, which has a general
regard to Humane Society, and without which no Kingdom or Commonwealth can well
subsit, and that is obedience and submission to the Government. But every
Government ought to be established as much upon Natural Reason as possibly can
be, that every Member of that Society may freely enjoy his natural liberty, and
the moderate use of all those good things which Nature has appointed for the
welfare of Mankind. For if any Government make those good things had and
unlawful, which in themselves are good and innocent, we may conclude that such
Government is unjust, and contrary to the Eternal Laws of God and Natural
Reason. By these Arguments it appears, that those who have not in these three
principal things a due regard to their own persons, their Posterity and their
Neighbors are cruel to themselves, rebellious to God, and unworthy to live in
any humane Society.

Those considerations induced our great Lawgiver Sevarias (whose glorious name
and love of his imcomparable virtues shall ever be sweet and precious to us) to
fit his Government as near as he could to the Laws of Nature established upon
Reason, carefully avoiding to forbid any thing that is naturally good in it
self, and allowing the moderate use of them to all his Subjects. Among the rest
of his Laws there is one that commands Marriage to all men and women, as soon
as they are come to an Age fit for Generation, which Law and Custom we
inviolably observe in all our Dominions. But because many among us are
sometimes obliged to travel and leave their Wives at home, we keep in all
Cities a number of women Slaves appointed for their use, so that we do not only
give every Traveller Meat, Drink, and Lodging, but also a Woman to lie with him
as openly and lawfully as if she were his Wife. According to this laudable
custom, and being willing to use you as well as any of our own Nation, we have
appointed so many women as you are men to come and lie with you every other
night so long as you remain here with us if you can find in your hearts to use
this privilege.

You may easily imagine that these reasons quickly prevailed, and that he
needed not use any further arguments to persuade us to accept of the proffer.
We gave him most humble thanks, told him his Reasons were very powerful, and
the Custom of this Country much better than that of Europe in our judgment.

Well, says he, use the privilege if you please, find out a method to agree
among your selves, and so I wish you good night.

As soon as he was gone there came in two men, who spoke to us in French, and
bid us welcome to Sporunde; one of them told us, he was a Physician, and his
Companion a Surgeon. He desired us very earnestly to be sincere with him,
and to tell him whether any of us had any venereal distemper upon him.

Gentlemen, I am appointed to examine every one of you upon that score, and if
any deny the truth it will turn to his damage and shame; but if he confess it
ingeniously he will get love, esteem, and a speedy cure.

Every one of the Company said he was free from any such thing; but
notwithstanding our saying so, the man would not be satisfied till he had seen
and carefully examined every one of us apart in a Room next to the Hall we
stood in. When he was satisfied he told us he was very glad to find us all
sound and free from so nasty distemper, very common in the other Continents,
but only known by fame in the Southern Lands. He told us likewise, he had lived
in France and Italy above six years, and seen most parts of Europe and Asta in
the space of twelve years, and that from time to time there were men sent from
Sporunde beyond the Seas upon the same account, by which means they had persons
among them who knew all those Nations, and could speak their Languages. This
Speech unriddled to me the mystery of Carshida's speaking Spanish and Dutch the
first time he came to us, and took us out of the amazement we were in, to hear
so many European Languages, and to see so many of our Fashions in so remote a
Country, where we supposed there could be none but barbarous People, if any at
all. We would have satisfied our curiosity by asking this man several questions
if the earnest desire of going to bed had not prevailed with us, we therefore
advised how to find a method to proceed in the choice of the Women. It was at
last agreed, That I, and then my two Mates should choose before any of the
others, and then the Commonalty should cast Lots among themselves, which was
done accordingly without any dispute or quarrelling, so every man chose his
bedfellow. Then was I brought to my Chamber where I lay the night before, and
my men to another long Gallery, on each side of which stood little Chambers,
divided one from another by thin partition-Walls made of white Plaster, not
unlike the Cells of Nuns and Friars. Every Couple had one of these places, and
lay there, till next day without any the least disturbance.

The next morning we heard the sound of the Bell at the usual time, and
Carshida came to me to ask me how I did, and to tell me it was time to rise. My
Bedfellow had leaped out of the Bed, and put on her Clothes as soon as she had
heard the Bell ring, and was but just gone out of my Chamber when Carshida came
into it. He told me Benoscar was gone to my men to take them out of Captivity,
(meaning out of their Bedfellows embraces, and out of their Cells) where they
had been locked all night lest they should use the opportunity of permutation,
not allowed in those parts, lest some of the women proving with Child the
Father should be uncertain. When I was dressed I went to the Hall, where my men
came in like manner, and our Guides carried us out to show us the Workhouses
in several Squares of the City, where we saw both men and women working very
orderly, some in Weaving and Sowing, others Forging, Carving, etc. But Carshida
told us, That the chiefest employment of the Nation consisted in Building and
Tilling of the ground.

We lived there in that manner till the sixth day after our first coming to
Sporunde, expecting the return of the Messenger Albicormas had sent to
Sevarinde. He came at last with Orders to send us to Sevarminas, who was very
desirous to see us. When I heard we were to march to Sevarinde I was sorry I
had concealed your being here in this Camp, chiefly after we had found so good
usage amongst those People, and did hardly know how to mend the matter; but the
reason I had at first to do so being a good and solid reason I thought it would
be received, and that Albicormas would forgive us the lie we told him, through
the care we had for your safety in a time when we much doubted of our own. I
did ingenuously confess the whole matter to Sermodas, who immediately went to
Albicormas and told him what I had confessed to him.

Thereupon we were ordered to continue in Sporunde till the return of another
Messenger, who was presently dispatched to Sevarminas to acquaint him with the
whole matter. He returned six days after his departure, and brought new Orders
from Sevarinde to Albicormas, who in obedience to them, sent us with all this
Fleet to fetch you and carry us all to the great City, where we must appear
before the Sovereign Power that resides there, and where Sermodas tells me we
shall yet be better used than we were at Sporunde.

Here Maurice made an end of his Speech, which filled us all both with joy and
admiration, and seemed not to hold any considerable time, though it had been
long, and might have proved tedious upon another subject. But the things he
related were so full of wonder and novelty that we could have given him a quiet
and patient hearing if his discourse had taken up a whole days time.

We consulted a while what we had best to do, and resolved at last to submit to
Sermodas in all things, to go whither he would carry us, and wholly to depend
upon Gods Providence and these peoples Humanity.

While Maurice was relating all these adventures to us. Some of his men, who
burned with a desire to be talking of the same to their Friends in the Camp,
got ashore, and began to discourse with our people, who gathering together in a
ring about them, were all amazed at their relations, and were acquainted with
the news almost as soon as we, so we needed not repeat any thing to them to let
them know how our Affairs stood. They were all willing to go to these fine
places the Fellows had mentioned and described to them, and wished themselves
there already. One thing only vexed us all, and this was it, We were still in
some hopes that our first Pinnace might have got to Batavia, which if it had,
we did not doubt but the General would send Ships to our relief as soon as he
should be informed with our misfortune. Now if those Ships should come and not
find us, they would conclude we were lost, and we should see our selves
deprived of all hopes of ever hearing from our Friends, and of returning to our
Native Country. But Maurice told us, That there was no reason to fear in either
of these cases, considering that we were fallen into the hands of a Civilized
Nation, who had Ships, and sent some of them from time to time beyond the Seas.
And that it was probable we might get leave to go to the Indies if we did not
like this new Country.

After we had ended these Consultations we went to my Hut, where we found
Sermodas just got up from the Quilt where he had a while taken his rest. He
smiled at us when we came in, and asked us how we liked the Description Maurice
had made us of the People and City of Sporunde? We answered, We could not but
like and admire both of them, and wish our selves there if it was his pleasure
to carry us thither. I came for that purpose, said he, and I am very glad to
find you so well disposed to go; you will find our Cities far better places to
live in than this Camp, although through your industry you have made it already
a very fine Habitation.

We had several discourses upon that and other subjects; after which we asked
him, Whether he would not be pleased to eat and drink of such Victuals as we
were able to give him? I will, says he, eat of your Victuals upon condition
you will accept of such as we have brought along with us. Then he desired
Maurice to send for some of his men, and bid them bring some of the Ships
Provision, which together with ours made up a very good Feast.

When the Dinner was ended Sermodas told us, That since we were willing to go
with him, we should use all diligence to put our selves in readiness, and order
the transportation of our Men and Goods as we should think fittest; That he
thought it convenient the chiefest of us, and all our women should go aboard
the same day, and he would leave some of his men ashore, who together with such
of ours as we should appoint should take care to ship up all our things, and
then come after us to Sporunde. Thereupon I told him we had another company on
the other side of the Bay, and if it was his pleasure we should send Maurice
with a Vessel or two to fetch them. You may do so, answered he, and I will
order one of our Ships to go along with Maurice, and carry them from their
Station directly to the City without coming back again to this Camp. Do you get
such of your Officers as you like best to keep you company, and come along with
me aboard my Ship, where you will find passing good accommodations.

I took only De Nuits and Turci my Secretary with me, and appointed Devese and
the other Captain to command in my absence, and see every thing transported
with good order and diligence.

Sermodas left Benoscar with Devese to be his Assistant and Conductor, and so
we sailed toward Sporunde, where we landed the third day after our departure
from Sidenberge. We were received in almost the same manner as Maurice had
been, with this only difference, that De Nuits and I had a great deal more
respect, and better attendance than he had had.

Albicormas was very kind to us, and particularly to me. We had several long
conversations concerning the present state of Europe, wherein I was far better
able to give him satisfaction than any one of our Company. I found he was a man
of very excellent parts, learned in all solid Sciences, and very well
acquainted with the Greek and Latin Tongues. We spoke Latin in all our
conversations; for although he understood some of our Vulgar Languages, yet he
could speak none so readily and so eloquently as Latin. He told me many things
concerning the Customs and Government of their Nation, which I will faithfully
set out when I come to describe the City, Laws, and Manners of the Sevarambi.

The day after our coming to this Town all our People and Luggage arrived
there, and nothing was left in the Camp but what they thought was not worth
taking. They were all used as Maurices men, and had new and clean Clothes given
them every man and woman.

But there arose some difficulty concerning our Women, for as you may remember
it was ordered in the Camp that one woman should serve five of our common men,
and none but our Principal Officers were allowed to have one woman wholly every
Officer to himself.

Sermodas and his Companions were much displeased with this Plurality of men to
one woman, and told us it was so beastly a thing as was not to be suffered, and
rather than to endure it they would provide more women for our men to keep them
from that filthy and worse than brutish practice. We excused our selves upon
the necessity of our condition, and told him he might order the matter as he
thought best himself. Will you, says he, heartily conform to our Laws and and
Customs? We told him, We desired to do so, and thought it our best way. Well
then, says he, number out your men and women, and give me a List of them all;
and let me know likewise, how many of your Women are with Child, and we will
take care that you shall be supplied with every thing you want in that
particular according to the manner of the Country. We gave him an exact account
of every thing according to his desire; and then he said, That if any one of us
was willing to stick to any of the Women we had, who was not with Child, he
might do it; Furthermore, we should agree of a method for every one how to
choose his Bedfellow, for there would be a number of Slaves allowed to supply
the want of our Women. We consulted among us how to proceed in that matter, and
it was agreed, That every Principal Officer, who had a woman wholly to himself,
might keep her still if he pleased, or take a Slave of the Country, choosing
according to his degree; and that the Commonalty should cast Lots as Maurice
his men had done before. Some of these Officers stuck to their old Bedfellows,
but others had rather choose a new one than to keep such as they were already
weary of; the inferior sort chose according to their Lot; and Maurices men not
being allowed to make a new choice must be content to keep those women they had
chose at the first. The women who were with child by any Officer were commanded
to stick to the Father of the Child, although he was allowed a fresh woman
besides; as for those of the Commonalty that had a great belly, they were
obliged to stick to one of the five men who lay with them, and exhorted to
choose, as near as they could, the man whom they thought to be the true Father
of the Child. And that was the Method according to which this matter was
ordered, much to most of our Women's grief and discontent.

The fifth day after we were come to Sporunde, Sermodas came to me in the
morning, and told me, That I must prepare to go to the Temple, where the
Osparenibon or Marriage Solemnities were to be celebrated. He told me farther,
That the same was kept four times a year, and that it was the greatest Festival
they had, though much inferior to that of Sevarunde, which was the most
magnificent in the world. I got up and put on the new Clothes that were brought
me, and to every one of our Principal Officers who came to my Chamber to go
with me to the Temple along with Sermodas and Carshida our perpetual Leaders.
We went together to the Palace, where Albicormas had given us Audience, and
having passed through several Courts we came at last to a large and magnificent
Temple, where we saw a great many young men and women together in new Apparel,
and wearing upon their heads, the men wreaths of green boughs; and the women
Garlands of Flowers. They altogether made the loveliest show that ever I saw,
being most of them very proper and handsome.

The farther end of the Temple was kept from our sight by a large Curtain which
divided it almost in the middle; we stood there near an hour, looking upon the
rich Ornaments, and the several Objects of the place before we heard or saw any
alteration, but at the last we heard the sound of several Trumpets drawing near
to us; we heard likewise the Harmony of many Flutes and Houboyes, which played
very sweet and airy Tunes. Then came in a great number of People with lighted
Torches in their hands, and set them up in diverse places of the Temple, where
hanged diverse Candlesticks disposed in a very good order. The Windows were
close shut up, and the Curtain drawn, which discovered the other end of the
Church, where we saw at a distance a great Altar very rich and magnificent,
adorned with Garlands and Festons of fresh flowers ingeniously done up
together. About it, and in the Wall, against which it was set up, we saw a
great Globe of Crystal, or very clear Glass, as big about as four men can
fathom, which cast such a light as enlightened all that end at a very great
distance. On the other side was a great Statue, representing a Woman with many
breasts, and suckling as many little Children, all very curiously cut. In the
middle of these two Figures we saw nothing but a large black Curtain, plain
without any Ornaments. While we were looking upon these Objects, the Music
came nearer and nearer, and at last into the Temple. Then turning our eyes that
way, we saw Albicormas; with all his Senators, coming toward the Altar in
great Pomp and State. As soon as he came in, several Priests went to meet him
with Thuribula, Censors in their hands, and singing a Canticle. They bowed to
him three times, and then turned and lead him to the Altar, where he and his
men inclined their bodies three times to the Curtain, twice to the Luminous
Globe, and once to the Statue: Then he took his Seat on the right hand of the
place against the Wall, where several high Thrones were set up to receive him
and his Company, and so many on the other side on the like manner. Sermodas
brought me to a Seat under Albicormas his feet with three more of my men, and
placed the rest over against us on the otherside.

We were no sooner set down but three of the Priests went toward the young
People, and called them to the Altar. They divided into two parts, and all the
Men came orderly on the right hand, and the Women on the left. Then did the
Principal Priest stand up on a high place in the middle of all, and made a
short speech unto them; which done, fire was brought in lighted by the
Sunbeams, as I understood afterward. This fire being brought in, Albicormas
came down to the Altar, where he lighted some Aromatical sticks that lay upon
it with that fire, and kneeling before the Luminous Globe, spoke aloud some
words, which then I could not understand. From the Globe he went to the Statue,
and bending down one of his knees only, he made there another short Speech or
Prayer, which done, the Priests sang an Anthem, which was answered by the
People. When this short Anthem was ended, several Musical Instruments began to
play very sweet and melodious Tunes. A Chorus of men and women succeeded these
Instruments, and sang so Divinely that we all thought we were in Heaven, our
Voices and Music in Europe being not comparable to these. When this Symphony
was ended, the chiefest Priest went to the young woman, who stood at the upper
end of the Row, and asked her, Whether she would be married? She, making a low
inclination, and blushing at the same time, answered, Yes. Then did he go to
all the others, asked them the same question aloud, and received the like
answer. The same was done on the other side where the young men stood, and when
all these questions were asked, and answered, the Priest went again to the
uppermost Maid, and asked her, Whether she would marry any one of the young men
who stood on the other side? Whereunto she answered, Yes. Then did the Priest
take her by the hand, and brought her to the uppermost young man of the other
row, and bid her choose her Husband. She looked upon the first young man, and
then upon the others successively, until the came to the sixth, and there she
stopped and asked him, Whether he would be her good Lord and faithful Husband?
He answered, That he would be so, if she would be his loving and loyal Wife.
Which she said, She would be till death should part them. After this solemn and
mutual promise, he took her by the hand, kissed her, and walked with her to the
lower end of the Temple. All the others did successively do the same till they
were all marched down by Couples.

But there remained eight young women who could get no Husbands: Five of them
seemed to be full of confusion, and tears trickled down their eyes in great
abundance. The three others looked not so dejected, and when the Priest came to
them they got hold of his Robes, and went along with him to Albicormas. He
spoke some words to them, and then they went to three several Senators, and
said, That since it was their ill fortune not to be able to get single men to
their Husbands, they made choice of them to take away their reproach that lay
upon their heads, after having three times been slighted publicly. Therefore
they desired them, that, according to the Laws, and their particular
privilege, they would receive them into the number of their Wives, promising
to be very loving and faithful to them. The three Senators came down
immediately, took them by the hand, and carried them to the Altar, where they
stood till all the others came up by Couples. The five afflicted Virgins were
asked by one of the Priests, Whether they had a mind to choose any of the
Officers? To which they answered, That this being the first time they had tried
their Fortune, they were willing to try twice more before they took that
course. Then pulling down their Vails they marched out of the Temple, and got
into a Chariot, ready to receive them at the Gate, and so went away much
discontented.

As soon as they were out of sight the Music began to play very merry Tunes,
and Albicormas going to the Altar spoke some words aloud, and taking the three
first Maids, and the three Senators, joined their hands together, and spoke
some words, to which they made answer, and bowed very humbly to him. He did the
like to seven or eight Couples more, and at last leaving the Office to other
Senators, he went up again to his Throne. The like Ceremony was used to all the
rest, and when it was done, two Priests took the fire from the Altar, brought
it to the middle of the Temple, and the new married Folks made a ring about it.
Every one of them had some Gums or Perfumes in their hands, and each Couple
mixing them together threw them into the fire: Then kneeling down, laid their
hands upon a yellow Book, which two Priests held in their hands, Swore
obedience to the Laws, and promised to maintain them to the utmost of their
power till the end of their lives, taking God the Sun, and their Country to
witness of their Oaths. Then did they march to the Altar again, where
Albicormas made a short Prayer, they being upon their knees, and turning
toward them gave them his blessing, which done, he marched out of the Temple,
all the Company following after, and the Music playing all in a Consort. Next,
they went into a great Hall near unto the Temple, where stood many Tables,
which were immediately covered with meat.

Albicormas took me and Van de Nuits, told us we should be his Guests that day,
and bringing us to the uppermost Table, sat down with his chiefest Officers,
and made us sit with them. Sermodas took the rest of my men to another Table,
and the Commonalty of our People, who stood in a Gallery all the time of the
Ceremony, were carried home again by Carshida and Benoscar.

We had a very noble Feast, several Instruments of Music playing all the while
we fate. After Dinner we marched out into the Amphitheater, which stood about a
Musket shot from the Temple, and all the way we went we found the Streets
strewed with herbs and flowers, and heard the acclamations of a great multitude
of People, who came out to see us pass. This Amphitheater is strongly built
with very large stone, and is no less than fifty paces Diameter, counting from
outer Wall to outer Wall. It is covered with a prodigious high and large Vault,
which shelters the place from the Sun, and from all injuries of weather. There
are Seats round about it one over the other, from top to bottom, which take up
a great deal of Room, and streighten the Pit to an indifferent bigness. The
upper Seats were full of people, and none but the Officers and the new married
Folks were admitted into the pit except some young men, who exercised
themselves a while in Wrestling, Fencing, Leaping, and in many other acts of
Agility, which was no unpleasant sight. Then fell our People to dancing, and
kept so till it was almost night, at which time the Trumpets and other
Instruments sounded out a retreat. We marched out in the same manner as we
came, and found in the Streets many fireworks, which made a second day of the
night. Albicormas and his Company went home in their Chariots, and the new
married people to the Lodgings prepared for them, where I suppose they enjoyed
one another all night to their hearts content: and Sermodas carried us home
again, where he explained to us several parts of the Ceremony. The next morning
he came to us and asked whether we would go to the Temple again to see another
Ceremony which was but a consequence of the former; to which we readily
assenting he carried us away, and made us stand a while at the Temple-gate.
Soon after we heard a sound of Music coming toward us, and saw the new
married men coming to the Temple, each of them with a long and green bough in
his hand, where were hung up the Wreath he wore the day before, and his Wives
Garland, tied together with a white Clout stained with blood, which were the
marks of his Wives Virginity. They came all into the Temple in a triumphing
manner, and being come to the Altar laid down their Garlands upon it,
consecrating them to the Deity, to the Sun, their King, and to their Country,
which is represented by the Statue I spoke of before. After this Consecration
they went out dancing at the sound of the merry Tunes, the Instruments played
till they came to their homes.

This Festival lasted three whole days with a general joy and merriment
throughout the whole Town.

Now our time was come to leave the City of Sporunde, and to march to
Sevarinde. Sermodas, gave us warning of it the day before we went, and carried
me, Van de Nuits, and Maurice to Albicormas to take our leave of him. We went
together to his house, which we found to be a noble and stately Palace, though
much inferior to the City Palace both in bigness and state. He received us
very kindly, and told us that the day following we must take our Journey to
Sevarinde to wait upon Sevarminas. Then he asked us how we liked Sporunde, and
the Ceremonies we had seen in the celebration of the Osparenibon. We answered,
We liked every thing even to admiration. You have seen nothing yet, and you are
going to a place as far above this as the Sun is above the Moon. I will not too
much prepossess your minds with the glory of it, knowing experience will teach
you more than I can tell you. Sermodas is to be your Guide, he will be very
tender of you, and I admonish you to take his Counsel in every thing, and to
carry your selves so prudently that the great Sevarminas may love and cherish
you as heartily as I have done. Then he kissed us in the forehead, and bid us
farewell.

The next morning early we were carried to the Waterside on the West part of
the City, where we found several great Barges ready to receive us. Sermodas
brought me and three or four of my men into an indifferent big one, but rarely
carved, gilt, and painted. Our other men and women were distributed into other
Vessels, and in that manner we rowed up the River, which running through a very
flat and Champain Country flowed down very slowly. We saw along the Banks of it
several great buildings like those we had seen below the City. We had many
Rowers, who relieved one another from time to time; so we went up with great
speed, and never stopped till we came to an indifferent great City, called
Sporume, about thirty miles above Sporunde. We were expected there at that day,
and so we found great numbers of people upon the Key, who came out to see us
land. A little before our Barge came to the City, a Vessel full of several
Officers, clothed like those of Sporunde, came to meet us, and some of them
leaping into our Barge expressed a great deal of respect to Sermodas, and much
civility to us. We went ashore with them, where stayed for us the Governor of
the place, called Psarkimbas. Sermodas and he embraced one another, and had
some discourse together, after which he kindly saluted us, and bid us welcome
into the Country in the Latin Tongue. Then addressing himself to me, embracing
me, and kissing me in the Forehead, he said he would be glad to have a little
private discourse with me sometime of the next day. I answered, I was at his
command, after which we followed him into the City, which we found to be built
much after the manner of Sporunde, and about half as big as it, standing in a
fine and fruitful soil, the best manured and tilled we had ever seen before. We
were received and used in this place as at Sporunde, without any great
difference, and stayed there all the day following, not observing any thing
remarkable in it but the exemplary punishment which in the afternoon was
inflicted upon fourteen Malefactors in this manner:

They were taken out of Prison fast tied together with Ropes, and divided into
three parts. In the first were six men, who as we were told had been condemned
to ten years punishment, some for Murder, and others for committing Adultery.
In the second were five young women, whereof two were condemned to suffer
punishment during seven years, to satisfy the Law, and afterward so long as
their Husbands pleased, and this was for having lain with other men. The three
others were condemned to suffer three years punishment for having been
debauched before their Osparenibon was come, or the time of their marrying,
which is at the eighteenth year of their age. In the third were the three young
men who debauched these maids, and they were to suffer the like punishment, and
at last marry them. They were carried from the Prison to the Palace Gate, where
stood a great multitude of people to see the execution.

These poor Prisoners were stripped of all their clothes from their shoulders to
the middle of their bodies, and we saw their naked skins very plainly. I
remember that one of the women, who had committed Adultery, was a very proper
and lusty woman, not above one or two and twenty years of age. She had a very
beautiful face, black eyes, brown hair, and a delicate clear skin. But her
breasts, which we saw quite naked, were the loveliest I ever beheld. This was
the first time she was brought to her punishment, so that her shame was
extraordinary. Tears trickled down her cheeks in great abundance; and these
instead of taking off from her natural beauty, did on the contrary so much add
to it that I never admired any thing like this beautiful Criminal. Admirarion
produced love, and pity joining with those two Passions did so move the hearts
of all the Spectators, that there was hardly any ingenious Person who was not
moved to an extreme compassion. But their pity was turned to a kind of generous
indignation, when they considered that within a few moments all these divine
Charms were to be soiled and profaned by the cruel stripes of a barbarous
Executioner: Yet this was an act of justice ordained by the Laws against a
Crime which among those people is looked upon as one of the greatest; so there
was no means to save this lovely Person from the rigor of the Law, and the
Officer had already lifted up his scourge, and was going to strike, when of a
sudden her Husband, running through the crowd, cried with a loud voice, Hold,
hold, hold. All the Spectators, and the Officers themselves, hearing this voice
were much surprised, and turned their eyes on the side from which they heard
the voice come, suspending the execution till they knew what this man's meaning
was. He came to them almost out of breath, as having with much ado passed
through the crowd, and, addressing his Speech to the chief Officer, said,
pointing at his Wife, Sir, I am that miserable woman's Husband, and therefore
much concerned in this Execution. Before she receive her punishment I desire to
speak something to her in your presence, after which you will know more of my
mind. Then having got leave of the Officer, he spoke to her in this manner: You
know Vlisbe with how great a passion I loved you for the space of three years
before our Marriage; You know likewise, that since we have been united my love
has rather increased than decreased and that I have given you all the
testimonies of a tender, sincere, and constant affection for these four years
that a woman could expect from her Husband. I was persuaded that you had for me
the same Sentiments, and that your flame was equal to mine; and as criminal as
you have proved, since I believe still that I have the best share of your
divided heart, knowing that you have been seduced by the wicked Claniba's
wiles, and subtle devices to commit a crime which you would not have committed
out of your natural Propensity. Within this three hours I have been informed of
his wicked practices, and know that you could not be drawn to comply with his
desires till you were persuaded I had wronged you, and done with his Wife that
which, in your ill grounded indignation and desire of revenge, you have since
done with him; If I had known so much before, you had not come to this place in
this infamous manner, and I would rather have forgiven you the wrong you have
done to our Conjugal bed, and concealed your Crime than brought you to this
severe and shameful punishment. I cannot altogether free you from it, because
you must satisfy the Law and your Country which you have grievously offended;
but if the tears I see you shed, and the sighs and sobs I hear out of your
mouth be true signs of repentance, if you have still in your breast any
remainder of that love so sincere which you once professed to me with so many
obliging demonstrations, and if you promise me that you will wholly give me
your heart again, I will save you from the cruel stripes that are ready to fall
upon you, and suffer them mine own self, rather than see them laid upon you.
Speak Vlisbe, and let not your silence be an Argument of your obdurateness, and
indifferency for me; There he stopped, and the woman, almost drowned in her
tears, was silent a while before she could utter any words, but at last she
returned him this answer, My silence, O too Generous Bramistes, is not an
Argument of my obstinacy, or indifferency, but of my shame and confusion. I
have injured you contrary to the Sacred Laws of Justice, and honor; I have
defiled our Conjugal Bed, and whether I have done it out of a just revenge, or
out of any other cause, I am guilty, and deserve to suffer a far greater
punishment than is ordained for the expiation of my Crime; Do not trouble your
self for me, I am a fit Object of your indignation, and just revenge, and not
of your undeserved pity. All that I beg of you is That you would believe that I
am truly penitent, and that I would endure with gladness the cruellest
torments, and at last lose my wretched life to satisfy you if it were
possible. Why should you receive upon your innocent body the stripes which
ought justly to fall upon mine? Ah, why should I be freed from a pain due to
me, and not to you? To make it short, there was a long Contestation betwixt the
Husband and the Wife, which made all those, who could hear them, shed tears;
and at last the business came to this, That the Man received the Blows which
were prepared for his Wife. He was tied with her, and they, with all the other,
were whipped three times round the Palace, and then sent to Prison again. It
seems that the Women in that Country have that privilege to be exempted from
such chastisement if any body will suffer it for them, whereof I was told that
there had been many examples upon several occasions. After this Execution we
went home again, where Psarkimbas and I had above an hours discourse together
about the Affairs of Europe, and such like matters as Atticormas and all the
other Officers had been inquisitive of.

The next morning we took leave of Psarkimbas, and went to the Waterside
again, where we found other Barges ready to receive us. Sermodas went into one
of them, taking me and the other person who traveled with us before, and so we
rowed up the River five or six miles above it, where we found a Town consisting
only of eight square Buildings like those of Sporume There we found other
Barges of another fashion waiting for us, so without losing any time we went
into them, and were drawn up by horses against the stream of the River, which
growing strong in this place, we could not row up any farther. The Town we left
behind was called Sporunide, and, as we were told, was governed in the same
manner as the other were. As we went up the River we drew nearer and nearer to
the great Mountains De Haes had seen at a distance when he was near the Lake in
his discovery of the Island over against the old Camp. They stretched from East
to West as far as we could see, and appeared very high and steep; we had spied
them long before we came to this place, but now we could see them very plain.

From Sporunide we were drawn up to another lesser place fourteen miles above
it, called Sporunike, where we took fresh horses, and went up eight miles
farther the same day to another little Town, called Sporaviste, where we lay
that night, and where we observed nothing remarkable.

The next day in the morning we found several Chariots and Wagons ready to
receive us; Sermodas took me, De Nuits, and Maurice only to bear him company,
and so leaving the River on the West side we went directly to the Southward,
and drew nearer and nearer to the Mountains, the ground rising by degrees as we
went toward them, although the Country be flat and plain to the very foot of
them, which is the reason of their steepness.

As we went through the Country we saw here and there many Towns and Buildings,
and came to a place called Sporagueste about eleven of the Clock; There we took
some rest and refreshment till Two in the Afternoon, and pursuing our Journey
came in the Evening to the very foot of the Mountains, where we found a pretty
big Town, called Sporagondo, where we were received with much kindness by
Astorbas the Governor of it. The Town consists of fourteen Squares, and is the
last we saw in Sporumbe. We were treated there as in other places, and rested
our selves all the day following; we saw nothing considerable in it, or about
it, but the rare Canals which are drawn up and down to water the Country, which
is full of fine Pastures, always green as we were told.

These Canals by Walls, Bridges, and Sluices convey abundance of water from the
Mountains to this Plain, and the work is so vaste and costly that the like
could not he done in Europe for fifty Millions of Livers, yet the Industry of
these People has done it without money, for they use none in any part of their
Dominions. We were told that we should rest there three days, and then we
should go through the Mountains into Sevarambe, whereof we intend to give the
Description in the Second Part of this Story, begging of the Reader that he
would allow our Pen a little rest, till we have put into a Method the Papers
out of which we are to draw the Second Part, where we shall give him an
account of the Country beyond the Hills.

FINIS.
A Catalogue of some Books, Printed for, and sold by H. Brom, since the
dreadful Fire of London, to 1675.
Divinity.
A Large Concordance, by S. N. to the Bible, Folio, price 16 s.

130 Sermons by Mr. Farindon, in three Vol. in fol. 2 l. 5 s.

51 Sermons in fol. by Dr. Franck, 15 s.

Dr. Heylin on the Creed, fol. 15 s.

A Guide to the Humble, by Thomas Elborow, B. D. in octavo 2 s.

A Guide to Eternity, by John Bona, octavo, 2 s.

A Guide to Heaven, with a Rule of Life 10 d.

A Companion to the Temple, or a help to Public Devotion, by Tho. Cumber, in
octavo 4 s.

Holy Anthems of the Church, 2 s. 6 d.

A Looking-glass for Loyalty 2 s.

Sermons.
Bishop Lanyes Sermon at Court against Comprehension 6 d

Dean W. Lloyd's Sermon before the King about Miracles. 6 d

-- his Sermon at the Funeral of John L. Bishop of Chester 6 d

-- his Sermon before the King, in Lent, 1673. 6 d

M. Naylor's Commemoration Sermon for Col. Cavendish 6 d

Mr. Sayers Sermon at the Assizes at Reading 6 d

Mr. Tho. Tanner's Sermon to the scattered Members of the Church 6 d

Mr. Stanhopp's four Sermons on several Occasions, octavo bound 1 s. 6 d

Papal Tyranny, as it was exercised over England for some Ages, with two
Sermons on the fifth of Nov. in quarto, 1 s. 6 d

-- his Sermon at the Funeral of Dr. Turner, Dean of Cant. 6 d

Histories.
The Life of the Duke Espernon, the great Favorite of France, from 1598. where
D' Avila leaves off to our times, by Charles Cotton, Esquire in fol. price 18 s

The State of the Ottoman Empire, with Cuts, by P. Ricaut, Esquire in octavo, 6 s

Bishop Cousin De Transubstantiatione, octavo, 2 s

The same in English 2 s. 6 d

The Commentaries of M. Blaiz de Montluck, the great Favorite of France, in
which is contained all the Sieges, Battles, Skirmishes, for three Kings Reigns,
by Charles Cotton Esquire in fol. 14 s

The Fair One of Tunis, a new piece of Gallantry, by C. C. Esquire in octavo 2 s. 6
d

Erasmus Coll. in English, octavo 5 s

Poems.
Elvira, a Comedy by the Earl of Bristol, 1 s

M. A. Bromes S. and Poems, oct. 3 s. 6 d

-- His, with other Gentlemen's Translation of Horace, in oct. 4 s

Virgil Travestie, by C. C. Esquire 1 s. 6 d

Lucian's Dialogues, Burlesque, 2 s. 6 d

Horace, with a Song at every Act, by Charles Cotton Esquire 1 s

Mr. Cowlys Satyr against Separatists

Physic.
Dr. Barbettes and Dr. Deckers excellent practice of Physic, and Observations.

Sir K. Digby, his excellent Receipts in Physic and Chyrurgery, and of Drinks
and Cookery.

The Anatomy of the Elder Tree.

Miscellanies.
Dr. Glisson, De vita Naturae, quarto 8 s

Lord Bacons Advancement of Learning.

The Planters Manual, very useful for such as are curious in Planting and
Grafting, by C. Cotton, Esquire

The Complete Gamester 2 s

Dr. Skinner's Lexicon, in fol. 1 l. 5 s

14 Controversial Letters, in quarto 4 s. 6 d

Essays of Love and Marriage, duod. 8 d

The Vindication of the Clergy, 1 s. 6 d

Toleration discussed, by Roger L'Estrange, Esquire 2 s. 6 d

A Treatise of Humane Reason, in twelves 8 d

School Books.
Nolens Volens, or you shall make Latin 2 s. 6 d

Centum Fabulae, in octavo 1 s

Artis Oratoriae, in duodec. 2 s

Law.
The Lord Cook's Institutes, in four Vol. fol. 2 l. 5 s

Sir James Dyer's Reports, fol. 18 s

The Clerks Guide, in four Parts, and the first part alone.

The Exact Constable.

Controversies.
The seasonable Discourse against Popery, in quarto 6 d

-- the Defense of it, quarto 6 d

-- the Difference betwixt the Church and Court of Rome, in quarto 6 d

The Papists Apology to the Parliament answered 6 d

The Papists Bait, or, The way to get Proselytes, by Chapter Gataker, B. D. 1 s

Dr. Du Moulin against the Lord Castelmain 6 d

A Journey into the Country, being a Dialogue between an English Protestant
Physician and an English Papist.

Friendly and seasonable Advice to the Roman Catholics of England, in twelves,
6 d

Essays of Love and Marriage, being Letters dissuading from Love, and answered;
with some Characters and other Passages of Wit, in twelves, 1 s. 6 d

THE HISTORY OF THE Sevarites or Sevarambi: A Nation inhabiting part of the
third CONTINENT, Commonly called Terrae Australes Incognitae.

WITH A further Account of their admirable Government, Religion, Customs, and
Language.

Written by one Captain Siden, A Worthy Person, Who, together with many
others, was cast upon those Coasts, and lived many years in that Country.

The Second Part more wonderful and delightful than the First.

LONDON, Printed by J. M. for Henry Brom, at the Gun at the West End of St.
Paul's Churchyard. 1679.

LICENSED,

Feb. 25. 1678,

Roger L'Estrange.

TO THE READER.
I Have here recommended to thy perusal the Second Part of the rare Country of
the Sevarites: a Country so curious and so pleasant, that if thou had ever
been there, thou could never have had the least inclination to dwell in any
other part of the World. I know some will be carping and quarrelling at this
Narration, like those unreasonable Animals, that are always fretting to see
things with which they are not well acquainted. But these poor Souls that have
seen nothing but the compass of their Cradle, and have confined their knowledge
within the narrow limits of their own Territory, cannot well conceive nor
imagine the glorious things, and the strange Wonders that appear to Travelers
beyond the Seas in Foreign Nations. Captain Siden was one of the most famous of
his Time, a Man well known for a worthy and approved Person. What account he
has given of these rare People is not so public, I confess, as could be
wished, because the Persons and the Nation, who have now a Correspondency in
those Parts, have discouraged all others, by declaring these things to be
fabulous, because they intend to ingross all the Trade to themselves. The
Advantages many Dutch Families have received by them already, is incredible.
The vast Treasure they have heaped up in a few years, is beyond all belief.
They have met with some new Mines of Gold in this golden Country, and raised
their Families to an extraordinary Grandeur. It is an idle humor in any of us
to despise or reject strange Discoveries. If all our wise Forefathers had been
of the same temper, the Indies had always been unknown to the European People,
and we should again burn such as dare affirm, that there is a Jamaica or an
America, a World under us. Our Nation heretofore, and the French Court, lost
the advantage which the Spaniard has well improved, through incredulity. It is
therefore good in all such cases as this, to weigh the Reasons and Arguments on
both sides, and to judge of the probabilities of this Country. If any thing is
here related of this Country or People seemingly beyond all possibility, we
must know, that as this People have the advantage of living in the earthly
Paradise, they have knowledges of Nature and natural Effects, which look like
Miracles. Captain Siden and his Dutch Camrades visited many places, and saw
some other Islands thereabouts, which are as full of Curiosities as those we
have here taken notice of. But that this Relation might not be too voluminous,
and the Account too tedious to the ingenious Reader, I thought fit to set some
of his Papers aside, and speak only of the chief Country of the Sevarites;
hoping that these lines may give some an encouragement, when they are at Cap de
bon Esperanza, to direct their Course a little out of the way, and to visit
this Country, which lies Southwest and by South from the Point. If the Charge
and Danger don't discourage them, doubtless some brave generous Soul may get to
himself an immortal Name, and Wealth enough to pay his Charges, if he returns
as safe as Captain Siden did. However I wish that this Narrative may give you
all as much satisfaction as you can desire or wish for.

THE SECOND PART OF THE HISTORY OF THE SEVARITES.
AT the foot of the great Mountains we rested three days upon the Borders of
Sevarambe, in a little Town called by the Inhabitants Cola, from the
delightsomness of the place; for it stands upon a small Rising, and is watered
by three pleasant Rivers, Banon, Caru, and Silkar, which render the ground
thereabouts extraordinary fruitful beyond all credit, to a miracle. For some
have told me, that they have usually in their fields every year four Crops of
Corn, because the ground wants neither heat nor humidity to bring forth, and is
never parched with the drought of Summer; for here as well as in all the
Kingdom of Sevarambe, they know no difference between Summer and Winter, unless
it be by the course of the Sun and Stars, which draw nearer to or farther from
the Northern and Southern Poles. Sermodas had here many old Acquaintances, and
particularly a she-friend, who caused us to stay in this place longer than we
purposed at first. For our great expectation and earnest desire was to pass
over the Mountains into Sevarambe, to enjoy the delights of that Paradise on
Earth. But whiles Sermodas was diverting himself one way, he caused some
Divertisement to be given us another way, that our abode there might not seem
too tedious. He entreated some of the chief of the place to show us their
Gardens of Pleasure, and to lead us out into the Fields to hunt the Ostrich
with Beagles, and Greyhounds, or Dogs not much unlike that sort which we have
in Europe. This Hunting was performed in Parks, where this sort of Game was
kept for Diversion. The pleasure that it afforded to us, and the extraordinary
actions which were thereby represented, caused us not to think the time long,
or our abode in that place tedious, though we were in great expectation of
enjoying sweeter Delights beyond the Mountains in a Country so far excelling
all others in the World, according to the relation which had been given to us.

It is the usual custom of all Travelers that pass often through this Town, to
have a she-Comrade, with whom they are wont to spend some days. For in the
Country of Sevarambe such kind of natural delights are not allowable by the
Laws of the Country, nor agreeable with the strict lives and sewere Customs of
the Inhabitants, nor with the nature of the Air; for at the first entertainment
of inordinate lust, such disorder happens in the blood and veins of men, that
their countenances are immediately changed, and their skins are covered with
Boils and Scabs, chiefly their Noses, which have so great a correspondency with
the noble Members. For this cause the Inhabitants of Sevarambe abominate the
least sign of all lasciviousness. I never was amongst a more temperate and
orderly Generation. All Passengers therefore use to make a due preparation
before they can or are admitted to pass over the Mountains. At this Town of
Cola therefore Travelers stop to refresh themselves with those delights which
are only allowable in Sporumbe.

After three days rest Sermodas had provided all things needful for our passing
over the Mountains, some Provisions and Carriages. We had to each man of us an
Unicorn appointed to carry us. This Creature by the skill of the Sporvi are
brought to be as tame as our Horses. They seemed to me far stronger and more
swift, and so sure footed, that though we climbed over Rocks and Mountains,
there was none of them seen so much as to stumble or fall. Instead of a Bit and
Bridle we held in our hands a silken cord tied to the horn, which was in the
front of the Beast, and at the least motion it would bend and turn, and go a
swifter or slower pace, according to our desire. I inquired several things
concerning this Animal, which I could never hear of in all Europe. Sermodas
gave me great satisfaction, and informed me of its nature, properties, and
excellent qualities, so that I had brought some over with me into my own
Country, had not this transportation been forbidden by the Law of that place.

We took our leaves of Cola about noon after a plentiful Dinner. An Unicorn of
a Chestnut color, with many black spots on the right side, and white on the
left, was prepared for me to mount upon. At the first when I saw the nimbleness
of the Beast, I was afraid to venture my self upon it, and could not be
persuaded to make any use of it, till Sermodas assured me, that it was one of
the gentlest Creatures in the World, and so extraordinary swift, that we passed
over the Mountains through uneven ways into Severambe in a day and a half,
being near threescore or fourscore miles.

These Mountains are not inhabited by any other thing but Lions, Tigers,
Panthers, and such wild and ravenous Beasts as care not much for the society of
men. We had the sight of many thousands of them in our way, and saw the Roman
Sports of their Theaters and Amphitheatres in the bottoms, when we were on the
side of the Hills; for there we met with these surious Beasts contending for
their prey. Two Bears were devouring an unhappy Deer, which by chance was by
them surprised in Thicket or Bush of Brambles. They had no sooner seized upon
it and overcome it, but in steps the Lion to share in the sport. The two Bears
would not allow him any part, therefore one steps back to encounter him, whiles
the other held the innocent Deer half dead; but the Lion being too strong for
the first Bear, the second ran in to rescue him with that fury, that made the
Lion leave his hold. The fight lasted about an hour, with such a variety of
sport, that we could not pass on in our Journey, till we had seen the end. At
last the Lion had so bitten the Master-Bear by the legs, that he was scarce
able to stand; which when the Lion perceived, he retreated from him about an
hundred paces, and then was too strong for the other Bear, which had
unadvisedly pursued him. After a short dispute the Bear ran away, and left the
Lion alone to his dinner with the lame Bear in sight, which sent to him many
snarlings and wishful looks waiting till this King of Beasts had well satisfied
his appetite. But when the Lion had well filled his paunch with the Deer flesh,
and that he endeavored to drag away the rest, the two Bears seeing his
greediness, gave the Lion another assault, and obliged him to depart with a
good piece of flesh in his mouth, leaving the remainder to the hungry Bears
that devoured all to the very Guts.

In pursuance of our Journey we were carried over a high Mountain named
Sporakas; the top reaches to the second Region of the Air, and is always
covered over with Snow and Ice in this hot Country. There is a very clear
Fountain of water which yields a plentiful stream running down the Rocks and
Mountains of various ascents, and by the fall and diversity of the noises and
rumbling of the water, gives to the Passengers a pleasant Music. When I was
within a mile of the place, I thought I had heard some Trumpets, Drums, and war
like Harmony, Flutes and Hoboys, and such other windy and watery Instruments of
Music. What! said I to Sermodas, what means this warlike Music that we hear?
Is there not an Army coming before us? This question caused Sermodas and all
the Sporvi to smile. No, said Sermodas, we have no need to fight amongst our
selves, this Country is more free from all disputes and contentions than any
other under the Sun. We are not pinched with those necessities that are apt to
make you Europeans so mad and furious one against another. There is nothing of
oppression or violence to be seen here. We are never assaulted by any Enemy:
All our Thieves, Robbers, and disorderly persons are confined to the skirts of
our Dominions where they live to plague one another, but they are not suffered
to abid in the middle and bowels of the Kingdom. Since Noah's Flood, whereof we
have more certain Memoires than you in Europe, there was never any disorder nor
War in this place, or in the Country round about, because of the excellent
Orders and useful Laws of this Country, which I shall hereafter represent to
you. At the top of the Mountain we lodged in a Tent which Nature had prepared
in a Diamant Rock, with several Apartments. The Rock stood in a plain ground,
as high as the great Steeple of Amsterdam. It occupied about an Acre of ground,
having many transparent Turrets round about at the middle of it. There was an
entrance into it so luminous and glorious, that I thought the Sun had made here
its abode, and that there was one within as well as without in the Heavens. In
the first room we rested our selves, and unloaded our Unicorns. Some of the
company gave them Provender, others kindled us a fire; but Sermodas led me and
Maurice by the hand to take a full view of this stately Palace. When we had
gone round, and seen the glory of it, and taken notice of the brightness of the
Diamant with the crystal Turrets, and steps by which men may climb up to the
top, and which are made of Ice congealed and hardened into Crystal by length of
time, we returned to our company to take a share of the fire they had kindled;
but we were no sooner sat down in the niches about the Wall, but out comes a
Leopard followed by a wild Masty from some inner rooms where they had been
sleeping all the day. Now the noise of men had awakened them, and obliged them
to seek another more quiet retreat. The entrance was stopped with our Fardels and
Goods to keep out the cold wind that blew in. When therefore we perceived them
running and walking about, we ran to our Arms to defend our selves from their
fury. But stay, said Sermodas to me, we need not stir, you shall see pleasant
sport, if you will sit quietly. He had no sooner spoken the words, but the
Leopard and the wild Masty began to salute one another with grim looks and
furious cries, which ended not without a sharp dispute for mastery. Sometimes
the one had the upper hand, anon the other would tread his Enemy under foot.
They were so furiously set one against another, that they took no notice of our
being there, nor of the fire kindled in a corner, till two of our company, by
the order of Sermodas, discharged two Guns upon them. The Bullets killed the
Leopard, but the wild Dog retreated into the inner rooms; where he remainded
till the next morning, that we fetched him out with fire, and dispatched him
also. We were mightily afraid at their first appearance; but when we perceived
how little they regarded us, and how speedily they fell foul of one another, we
were well pleased with their company, for the room was large enough for them
and us. Sermodas led us into every chamber, and corner of this Diamant Palace,
where we had the sight of all manner of Prospects and snapes of Beasts and
Birds graven there with Natures finger to delight Passengers when they pass
over these rough Mountains into Sevarambe. I shall forbear from giving any
exact Description of it, for fear this strange account, incredible of it self,
should injure the rest of this Story, and cause my Reader to suspect the truth
of all other passages of these Travels in this remote Country. The night we
spent in such pleasant dreams, as made us Europeans to laugh heartily in our
sleep. We fancied our selves in a most glorious Paradise, and were not willing
to depart the next day. Had not Sermodas promised to bring me back the same
way, I had prevailed upon him to have staid there a few nights, that we might
have again a taste of our drowsy delights, and of our imaginary happiness,
which to us was as good as any real and true.

I had almost forgot a Custom observed by all the crooked Sporvi, when they
come to this place, to prepare themselves to go down into the glorious and
fruitful Valleys of Sevarambe. They wash themselves all over their bodies in a
Mineral Fountain of a Water, which to the eye appears very yellow, which
Fountain stands at a stones cast from the Rock; and though the Air be cold,
this Fountain is hot, and of an excellent virtue: for the Water cleanses not
only the filth of the body, but it has that influence upon the humors of men,
that they are freed from all those extravagant desires of Lust and Lechery,
which agrees not with the Air and Manners of the Sevarambi. Before we went to
sleep, Sermodas led me and my Companions out to this rare Fountain: Now,
Captain, said he to me, strip your self naked, and wash your self in this
Water: with these words he showed me several corners, which seemed to be made
purposely for men to bathe themselves and wash their bodies from the irregular
inclinations of these other Regions. After we had well cleansed our selves, we
returned to our Lodging, and after supper Sermodas gave me this account of this
Custom: Captain, said he to me, we are entering into a Climate where men are
forced to be abstemious against their wills; where if they harbored those
amorous affections which other men have, they meet with so many and such
powerful temptations, that they would be far more extravagant than the rest of
men, and be more deformed than any people; for the Air and nature of this
Country is such, that it sets a mark upon all men that touch any other women
than their own. And such Virgins as forget themselves, are spotted visibly to
the eyes of all beholders, as you shall see when you come amongst them. For the
prevention therefore of this and all other inconveniences which proceed from
lustful appetites, we have a custom to wash our selves in this admirable
Fountain, whereof the water has that virtue to free us from those lecherous
inclinations as well as our bodies from filth, and to oblige us to appear
amongst the Sevarambi with a quiet and calm spirit: so that none or few dare
join with any other female but his own. I inquired whether they had not a
plurality allowed them: No, answered Sermodas, we in our Country have that
allowance, and this causes us all to be so crooked in our bodies; for this
shape proceeds from the crookedness of our reason, which carries us to act and
perform such things as agree not, I confess, with the excellency of our humane
nature, but only with those natural propensities, which we either by Art or
resolution should restrain within the compass of a moderate appetite. But you
are entering amongst the soberest people of the World, free from all those wild
passions which cause so much disturbance in other Lands. They are the
perfectest and most beautiful Ladies that ever you beheld, all their Country
and all things therein are stately, glorious, pleasant, rich and noble, and so
extraordinarily full of innocent delights, that you would be content to abide
there for ever.

This short account, with the many relations that we had already of this
Country, inflamed our desires to be Eyewitnesses of these rare things, and to
enjoy the stately advantages that this place and Country afford. Therefore the
next morning early we washed and prepared our selves for our Journey. But there
happened an accident which retarded our Journey for a while. As soon as our
Unicorns were loose and ready to be loaded, a Jaccal happened to run by in
sight of these Animals. As soon as they perceived it, they ran after it so
swiftly, that one of the foremost caught the Jaccal, and killed it: for there
is a natural Antipathy between these two creatures, as there is between a Hare
and a Greyhound. At the first sight of a Jaccal it is not possible to keep in
the Unicorn, who is naturally carried to pursue this ravenous Beast. This gave
us the trouble to run about a mile after them to the declive of the Hill, where
the Unicorns were all dividing the spoils of the dead Jaccal: one was tearing
the tail, another was busy about the Head, another was devouring the guts;
they had all shared it amongst them. When we had brought them back, we all
mounted, and went on in our Journey. About ten miles in our way, at the top of
a very high steep Hill, we saw the great City of Sevarinde, and the beautiful
Country where it is situate. Here the Sporvi are wont to perform certain
Ceremonies before they dare venture farther; for they imagine, that if they
neglected or contemned them, the Great Spirit of the Air, which governs in that
Climate, would punish them with some signal token of his displeasure, as he
does such as are given to Debauchery and Lechery. I and my Comrades were all
obliged to follow the same Customs and Manners, for fear of giving offense, and
for avoiding those deformities and marks which are said to be inflicted upon
all Contemners of the Laws of the Land.

In our Traveling we had the sight of many strange Creatures, Animals, Birds,
and Insects, whereof I knew not so much as the name. The Trees in our Road were
hung with Apes and Monkies: the Woods full of aromatic Trees and sweet
Perfumes: the Mountains and Wildernesses were enriched with Diamant Rocks and
Banks of Crystal: the Rivers and Streams of Water are full of sandy Gold and
precious Stones transparent. When I considered how rich and delightful a place
the descent of these Mountains was, I judged that the Country beyond, and the
Bottoms and Valleys must consequently exceed all that I ever beheld on Earth.
One thing I cannot omit: we saw in our traveling a Beaver pursued and hunted
by a Creature not much unlike in shape to our Rabbets, but of another nature,
more ravenous and fierce. For Eagles and Vultures of all kinds and sorts, they
were here in such numbers, that the Sky was sometimes darkened with them.

In the way Sermodas gave me and my Companions several precautions how we
should behave our selves amongst the Sevarites. First he advised us to talk but
little: For, said he, they are the wisest of all men. If therefore you will
gain any esteem, or hinder your selves from being despised, abstain from too
much discourse; for if they perceive, by a multiplicity of words, any
indiscretion in you, they will contemn you, and not think you worthy to abide
in the Land, much less to be honored by them. Again, take heed of swearing,
cursing, or damning; for such irregularities in language were never yet
admitted into that Land. They spue or banish out all disorderly persons, and
confine them to the Borders. Observe next to do as you see other men, and take
heed you be not singular in any practices: but when once you are admonished by
them, imitate them, and follow their good advices; for in so doing, you will
preserve your selves in their esteem, and show them respect. Obstinacy and
singularity are vices not known amongst them as they are amongst you Europeans.
Take heed that you drink not too much of the delicious Wines of the Country,
but use all things with abstinence and moderation. Refuse not any gifts which
they will bestow upon you; for they are all noble and generous in their
behavior and actions, and love not to see their favors slighted by Strangers.
I shall, said Sermodas, inform you what to do, and give you other directions,
as I shall see occasion, that you may pass with credit through the Country of
the Sevarambi. When he had ended his discourse, we thanked him for his
kindness, and promised him our ready obedience to all that he should require
from us. He seemed to be well satisfied with our compliance with him from the
beginning. Thus we traveled along till we came to the foot of these high
Mountains to the passage of a large River three times bigger than the Danube or
the Rhyne. It is called by the Sporvi Cocab, and by the Sevarambi Rocara. It
runs at the bottom of the Hills, and incompasseth the Kingdom of the Sevarites
almost round, till it meets with another large River, which together unite
their streams, and fall into the Pacifick Sea beyond the Streights of Magellan,
about one hundred Leagues Southwards. At Sunsetting we came to the banks of the
River, but could not get over till the next day; for there is no Bridge
suffered to be made, because the Sevarites are not willing to give such an
easy access into their Country. They are afraid of two things, of the Vices of
Strangers, and of their Diseases, which causes them to set Guards at the mouth
of their Rivers, and all the ordinary Passes, lest a sudden Invasion should
disorder their quiet and earthly tranquillity. This caused us to stop upon the
sides of the River till the morning; for the Boat which was to carry us over
and our company, was then on the other side, and after Sunset there can no man
be admitted into this happy Country: besides there are many things to be
examined of Strangers before they can be received into the Boat. We lodged
therefore all night at the foot of the Mountains in a beautiful Arbor or Bower
of Jesmine mixed with Rose-trees, which in this place flourish and bear all the
year long; for here neither Snow nor Frost is to be seen, nor such cruel winds
as hinder the Fruits of the Earth. The Bower was about an hundred paces from
side to side, so that our Unicorns and Goods lay and rested with us in the same
place all night. Whiles our Supper was providing, Sermodas took me and my
Companions to walk with him near the Rivers side, and to discourse with me
about the Wonders of Nature, the delightsomness of the Prospect, the clearness
of the River-water, the sweet harmony of the Evening-birds, the pleasant noise
of the Crystal-streams, together with the comfortable brieses of Wind, which
amongst the branches of the Chestnut, Orange, Cedar, Elm, Oak, and other Trees,
which here upon the sides of the Mountains grow naturally without planting, and
promiscuously together, made such an Angelical Music, that we imagined our
selves in Paradise, and wonderfully contributed to our satisfaction in our
Walk. Sermodas being in the middle of us, asked how we liked this abode: It is,
replied Maurice, the most glorious that I ever was in. You will see and know
something more when you get over the River, and behold the excellency of those
things which are there confined. I asked him how it came to pass, that we in
Europe were so ignorant of this Country, and why this should excel all others.
This question, replied Sermodas, requires a long discourse to give an answer to
it; but I will not leave you without some satisfaction. You must know, that
when Adam, the first man, had offended his God by disobedience, he shut him out
of the earthly Paradise, and would not suffer him nor his wicked Posterity to
enjoy the pleasures of that pleasant abode. They had liberty to inhabit round
about, but for two thousand years Paradise was guarded in such a manner, that
none could enter into it all that time. Afterward came the Flood, which turned
and altered Mountains and Valleys; therefore we have some Records that tell us,
that the earthly Paradise, which, during the old World, was in Asia, was then
transported hither, and all those rare Trees, with the Jewels and Riches, were
carried hither by Angels, and planted in this remote corner. And because there
was no man then fit to inhabit so blessed a place, of the Sons of Noah, a new
couple were formed, not out of the slimy Earth as the former, but out of a
purer and more delicate substance, out of some Metal mixed with Gold and
Silver: hence it is, that their bodies are so clean, pure, glorious, and
splendid as you shall see. This couple, named Chericus and Salmoda, are the
Parents of all the Sevarites; from their loins proceed the numbers of beautiful
men and women, which you shall see on the other side of the River. They had an
hundred Sons and as many Daughters, and lived, by our Records, two thousand
years; afterward he was buried in the City of Sevarinde, where you shall see
his Sepulcher. When men and women began to increase, his eldest Son Sevarias
appointed Laws for men to govern their actions, and to avoid all kind of
confusion. These Laws we can show you in our Registers, subscribed by all the
men of those days. In his time there happened some Sons of Noah to be carried
by the stormy winds upon these Coasts. At their landing one of them met with a
beautiful Virgin called Serissa, whom he ravished and got with child. She
brought forth Twins, a Boy named Bubo, and a Girl called Chrestona. These two
being crooked, could not meet with Matches amongst the Sevarambi, who despised
them: Therefore when they came to the Age of thirty, they matched and increased
strangely. When Sevarias our Lawgiver saw how numerous they were like to be,
being a just man, would not destroy them, neither would he suffer the pure Race
of the Sevarambi to be defiled or mixed with the filthy Generations of the
other part of the World. He sent a way Bubo and Chrestona with their old
European Father and their Mother Serissa, with all their Children and
Grandchildren to build the City of Sporunde, and to inhabit the Country on
this side the River, appointing a certain Tribute for us to pay as an
Acknowledgment that we are descended partly from the same stock: hence it is,
that we are all so deformed, and a little crooked, and that the true Sevarites
will not be persuaded to join with us in Marriage, and yet they love us as
brethren, and have a natural inclination for all men in general, which obliges
them to be courteous, kind, affable, liberal, and bountiful to them all when
they happen to fall into their hands. Sevarias our wise Lawgiver appointed to
us distinct Laws, and in some respects contrary to the rest of the Sevarites
according to the crookedness of our European nature, which he saw could not
live up to that natural Sanctity which became us as men. He gave us therefore
liberty to make the vilest of our female Sex Slaves for our convenience in
times of need, and in traveling up and down our Country; but such practices as
these are not agreeable with the strictness of the lives of the rest of the
Sevarambi, they abominate such mixtures; and though their Country inclines them
as much as any to the flesh, they cannot be persuaded to make use of it out of
the rules and ways prescribed to them. And if at any time they forget
themselves by chance, the Air and Country is so great an enemy to such
practices, that it distinguishes them from all the rest by some visible mark
upon their Noses or Foreheads, which causes them to be immediately banished
out of the Country to the Confines over another River on the other side of the
Kingdom, where they have the liberty to live deprived of all the pleasures of
this earthly Paradise. Thither are confined all the disorderly persons, the
lecherous, the filthy, and base, each sort have their distinct places of abode,
or Islands from whence they are not suffered to depart till they dye naturally:
For our wise and ever glorious Lawgiver commanded us not to put men to death
for any mistake, forgetfulness, or miscarriage of their lives. Killing is
permitted by our Laws only in defense of our own persons; all other Offenders
against the Municipal Laws of the Land are banished to the Borders, where they
live to repent them of their wickedness, and most times dye good men. I shall
give you a farther account of the excellent Laws and Manners of the Sevarites,
when we shall be on the other side amongst them; for they will not be persuaded
to venture over into these parts, for fear of infecting themselves with Foreign
Customs and Manners, and the vicious Air, which is every where but in
Sevarambe. But, Captain, said Sermodas to me, when we had walked about a mile
from our Company, it is time for us to visit them again, for yonder comes a
furious Company down the Mountains, which will force us to a retreat. I looked
and saw a Party of Jaccals followed by two old Lions and some young ones
running apace toward us, howling as if they had been mad: hunger makes them
more furious and greedy than otherwise they would be; for they increase so
fast, that in the Woods and Retreats there is not sufficient food for them all
to fill their Paunches every day. Toward the dawning of the day they burst out
of their Caves and Holes to seek their necessary provisions for them and their
young ones. The foremost were not above an hundred paces from us, when they
first declared their coming with fearful out-crys, which were signs to the
Lions round about, that they had discovered some prey. We were then without
Weapon, and never dreamed of any danger in so pleasant an abode. All the wild
Beasts understood the Alarm of their forerunners, and hasted to the place
where the Jaccals had made a noise. A mixture of all sorts followed them close
at the heels, Lions, Bears, Tigers, Elks, Leopards, and some other sorts which
I shall hereafter describe. It was not time for us to stay there any longer,
and see our danger hasten upon us. We took our selves to our heels, and ran
with Sermodas toward our Bower, where all the Sporvi had put themselves in a
posture of defense as soon as they heard the noise. But we could not make such
haste, but one of the foremost Leopards caught Maurice by the Coat, and tore
off a piece, which the furious beast devoured, and gave him time to escape;
another bit me by the Buttocks, and held me so fast, that I could not get away
from him. In the mean while all my Company run before, every one shifting for
himself. I thought my self lost, but I was resolved to struggle for my life.
The less hopes I saw of escaping, because several Companies of other ravenous
Beasts were near at hand. I turned therefore my self and pulled the Leopard by
the Ears, thrusting one of my fingers into his right Eye. The pain forced him
to let go his hold, which as soon as he had done, he leaped upon me with his
open Jaws, into which I thrust my right hand and took hold of the Tongue,
necessity adding more strength to my Arm, I plucked it by the root whiles the
beast held me with his Paws. At that instant six roaring Lions, and three
Bears, with an infinite number of Jaccals, had overtaken and surrounded me, but
none offered to touch me. I flung amongst them the Leopards tongue, which they
all greedily catched at with a short dispute, which of them should have it.
This gave me leisure to run about a dozen paces from them before they had ended
it. As soon as a Lion had taken it for his share, the rest fell foul upon the
Leopard, which was become so troublesome to them, because of his extraordinary
howling, that they minded me not so much, only an old Bear made after me, and
overtook me. When I saw Sermodas and Maurice, and all the Company hastening
with Weapons to my rescue, their sight and coming gave me some hopes of
escaping out of the Jaws of an unavoidable death. The Bear gallopped after me,
and was just at my very heels, when I stumbled and fell flat on my face, the
Bears fury caused him to run about a dozen paces beyond me over my body, before
it could stop; then were Sermodas, Maurice, and all the rest come in with their
Guns, and other Weapons, and one for my self. As soon as I had got a Sword in
my hand, I ran at the Bear, and wounded the beast in the right Thigh at the
first blow, but at the second I thrust it in at the breast, and wounded him at
the heart. In the mean while all our Company were not idle, they fell upon the
wild Beasts with their Swords and Halberts in their hands, and killed in a
short time twenty Lions, thirteen Bears, and forty Jaccals, with threescore
other sort of furious and ravenous Creatures. We found dead the next day one
like a Bull with six Horns, two small ones a little above the Nose, two a
little bigger under the Eyes, and two great ones upon his Head. This beast is
called Suja, and lives upon the spoils of other Animals. We saw another having
a Head like a Lion, a Skin like a Crocodile, and a Tail as a Fox as red as
blood, the Claws were bent in, but when they were stretched out, they were
about a foot long, and as sharp as Needles. Sermodas told me, that this was the
most furious beast in all the World; for nothing can escape out of its Jaws and
Claws, it tears in pieces all that it meets with, and were it not that it has
but a small appetite, it would devour all the Lions of the Woods. He told me,
that the Sporvi called it Forabab, and that there are no Females of them to be
found, because they are begot by a mixture of Lions and other Animals which
copulate together. We killed two other beasts as big as ordinary Masties, but
so extraordinary furious, that none are to be compared to them. We continued
the slaughter near two hours, rescuing one another when the wild beasts were
too hard for any of us, and had worsted us. The rest we put to flight, having
wounded most of them: three of the Sporvi in our company were bit in their
Limbs, and six of us run through the Arm with the Claws of the Lions. After
this fierce Encounter, which was not above three stones cast from our Bower, we
went, very joyful to have escaped the danger, to refresh our selves with a good
Supper of Roast meat and Fruit, which was ready prepared for us. Sermodas
embraced me and Maurice, expressing much joy for our escape out of this great
danger, because none of us had been devoured by these furious Inhabitants of
the Woods. After Supper he walked into the Air, and met with a Shrub tree upon
the bank of the River, called Mezola, he took a stick from it, and rubbed the
Wound of my Buttocks, and before the morning I was perfectly cured of my
Wounds, as all the rest of the men hurt by the beasts: For had he not applied
this to our Wounds, we should have been lame, and hindered thereby from passing
over the River into Sevarambe. We laid our selves down upon the Banks and Beds
of Earth made under the Bower for Strangers to rest themselves, and slept all
night, only we were interrupted by the howlings of strange Creatures and beasts
of prey, who ranged about the Bower, attempting to enter in, but we had stopped
the passages and ways, so that there was no entrance for any of them.

The next morning a large Boat was on this side to carry us over with five
grave Signiors, two came to our Bower to call to us before we were up, and
visit us. The chief Owner of the Boat was named Kibbus. As soon as we heard
them we rose and dressed our selves. Sermodas went out to give Kibbus an
account of our persons and misfortunes: which when he had understood, he entered
in with him, and took us by the hand and kissed us, bidding us be of good
cheer, and that his Prince would be joyful to see us. We went with him to see
the slaughter of the wild beasts which we stripped of their skins, because the
Sevarambi are great Lovers of Furs; and this was a noble Present, which we
intended to give to their King. As soon as we had dispatched our business,
Kibbus with his Companions called us one after another to ask us, whether we
had any infirmities or distemper in our bodies: after this he caused us to wash
in a Fountain hard by, and gave us green Gowns, which he had in his Boat on
purpose for all Travelers, buttoned before with rich Buttons of Jasper stones.
They were perfumed in such an extraordinary manner, that I never saw the like.
After this and some previous Ceremonies, we were admitted with our Unicorns
into his wide and large Boat, and in an instant we were carried over to a small
Town, where I beheld the most beautiful men and women of the World. They all
knowing us to be Strangers, of a Foreign Country, went to the banks of the
River to salute and welcome us. At the head of them was a grave Gentleman with
ruddy cheeks, and a comely countenance, and a long beard of bright hair, which
in the Sun shined as if they had been of gold: he was attended upon by six most
beautiful tall young Men, who were followed by four of the female Sex, whom I
cannot liken to any but to Angels: they surpassed all that lever beheld with my
eyes on Earth. These were his Children. They took Maurice and my self by the
hand, asked of our welfare and Country, and spoke to us in very good French. I
was glad to meet in so remote a place a man that spoke that Language, I desired
to know his Name: My Name, said he, is Zidi Marbet. All the rest of the Town
did him Obeisance when he passed by them; for he was a man of great Riches and
Authority, and of an excellent Memory and Wit. Sermodas had some private
discourse with him near the River; afterward he marched with us into his Town
to his Palace, the most glorious thing that I ever beheld, and yet that was
nothing to what I saw afterward. The Town lay upon the banks of the River, and
had six uniform Streets abutting to the Water. The Houses were for the most
part built all of white and black Marble, very curious to the eye: they were
covered over with a shining Slate, which seemed to be gilt with Gold before
every door. In a wide empty place grew several aromatic and excellent rare
Trees for pleasure and profit. We all admired to see the place, sometimes we
stood astonished at the beauty of the men and women, anon we were ravished with
the glorious and delightsom abodes. Wherever we cast our eyes, we saw nothing
but that which deserved our wonder and admiration. Zidi Marbet walked with us
with his company, and led us to his Palace, which excelled all the other houses
in beauty. At our entrance we saw two Posts of pure Ivory, ring'd round with
Gold, with a little Court paved with white and black Marble. The House was
built almost in the same manner as the rest, but surrounded with the most
beautiful Trees, and moted with a Drawbridge of black Wood like Ebeny, having
Chains of Gold instead of Iron. In the Water the Fish were in such plenty, and
so great, that we saw hundreds as we passed by. At our first entrance we stood
in amaze to behold the glory of the inside, we could not sufficiently admire
the beauty and splendour of the rich Movables, the Hangings and Tapistry
over-laid with Gold and precious Stones, with all other things which can never
be believed, if I should offer to relate them. Here we stopped seven days, till
we had News from Sevarinde, whither we had sent word of our Arrival, to know
the Kings Pleasure. In the mean while I cannot express the delights which were
given to every day; the sweet Concerts of Music, the pleasant Walks about the
Town, the Recreations of Hunting, Fishing, Hawking, and other Sports, were not
wanting to us, with many other Pasttimes. Zidi Marbet and his whole Family were
extraordinary civil to us. The Town were not wanting in their respects.

At the end of seven days, Sermodas our Guide, with the rest of our Company,
set forward toward Sevarinde, where we arrived in six days. The Journey was
the most pleasant that ever I had been in. There was scarce any manner of
Recreation or innocent Pleasure belonging to our bodies, but we found it in the
way. All our senses were ravished with their delights; the Ears with the sweet
Harmony and Tunes of all manner of Singing-birds, with the grateful Cries of all
sorts of Creatures: our Eyes beheld all the most glorious Sights which are to
be seen in all the Earth: the Fields, the Towns, and Cities, the Woods, the
Valleys, and Mountains refreshed our Eyesight with new objects of pleasure and
wonder at every moment: our Noses met with the rarest Perfumes; every Bush and
corner yielded to us new delights of this kind. For our Taste we had every
where such Dainties and rare Wines, that are not to be expressed. One thing I
took great notice of, That all those Creatures which are elsewhere, are to be
seen in this earthly Paradise; as Lions, Bears, Wolves, Jaccals, etc. and tame
beasts, as Sheep, Cows, Camels, Oxen, Horses, etc. but they are not of the same
nature, as elsewhere. The wild beasts, as soon as they swim over the River of
Rocara, lose all their fierce dispositions, and become as harmless and mild as
Lambs; for they feed upon grass and Insects, without offering to meddle with
any living Animal. Likewise they, as well as the tame beasts, have another cry,
not so harsh and unpleasant, as every where else. Their cries are more grateful
to the ear. All things, in a word, are so ordered, as if they were purposely
intended to delight and increase the pleasure of the Inhabitants We saw in our
Journey many strange birds and tame beasts, not to be seen in any other part of
the World. The Fields almost in every place are watered with fresh Streams and
Channels, full of all manner of fresh water fish: so that in every Town and
Village we saw many Fish Ponds encompassed about with the rarest Trees in
Nature. The ground is so extraordinary fruitful, that it is ordinary for them
to gather three or four Crops every year of several forts of grain. So that it
is no wonder, if men and creatures are here so numerous. Every two miles we met
with a good Town in our way, some more, some less glorious than the rest; but
built so regular and uniform, that I judged that these Sevarites were not
ignorant of the humane Sciences and Arts, which are imperfectly known in other
parts of the World. Sermodas informed me, that for Philosophy, the
Mathematics, Astrology, and the rest, they were all trained up in them from
their youth. They chiefly excel in all delightful Sciences and Arts, as Music
and the Mathematics. Every Child about fourteen years of age can play upon all
manner of Instruments, with that dexterity and nimbleness, that I have often
wondered to look upon them, and hear such ravishing Tunes and Airs, which our
Musicians are not acquainted with. They are not much skilled in Physic, nor in
those Arts, which men's Vices and Diseases cause the Europeans to inquire into;
for seldom any distemper seizes upon them, till they fall away with old age,
and drop into their graves. I never saw any deformity amongst them, but such
variety of Beauties both in men and women, that we were all ravished to look
upon them. These Beauties in the female Sex were not pitiful and effeminate, as
amongst our women; but accompanied with a great deal of Majesty, Modesty, and
Gravity together. It is not possible to instance all the several particulars
and instances of their beauty; for there was as great a variety in that
excellency of the body, as there is a variety and diversity in the deformity of
ours in Europe. Sermodas entertained us in our Road with many delightful and
satisfying Stories concerning these Sevarites. But I intend to represent them
in the several Chapters or Heads unto which they properly belong.

We had in our Journey a sight of many Eagles and Vultures; but I was told,
that they prey upon nothing but Insects: and for venomous creatures, there are
none to be found. They know not what it is to live always in fear, to be
poisoned by Asps, Scorpions, Snakes, or to be devoured by flying Serpents and
Crocodiles, which in other Kingdoms swallow man and beast. So that in all
respects this Country is the happiest, the most pleasant, and abounds with so
many necessaries to the life of man, that it is not possible to imagine any
thing more.

We saw many Diamant Rocks in our way, with which the Inhabitants imbellish
their Houses. We saw some Rocks of Jasper, of Sardonyx, of Beryl, and Emerald;
for Gold and Silver and Brass, they find these Metals, but rough, as
plentifully as we do in other Countries, stones. But as they never make use of
Money, they resine the Gold for no other purpose but to adorn themselves and
their Dwellings, and for other civil uses. Silver they have in great abundance,
and Brass much more easy to be purified than ours in Europe or America,
because Nature being hotter and more powerful, performs that in the bosom of
the Earth which belongs to our Refiners to do, and fits the Metal for their use
with a small alteration and labor. All manner of precious Stones are to be
found here in the Highways, in such abundance, that had our Merchants liberty
to trade into these parts, they would bring down the price of Jewels, that they
would not be looked upon as they are for such rich Commodities. The Cattle and
the Sheep here are far bigger and better than ours, and all their tame beasts;
but when they want any thing, they exchange with one another: and if they are
not able to purchase it in that manner, they have all that great love and
affection for one another, that they never deny things that may benefit the
public Society, or any of the Sevarites. There is amongst them so much love,
sincerity, good correspondence, that no Nation has the like besides
themselves. Hence it is, that poverty and want are not known amongst them. They
are great Lovers of Hospitality, and strive to excel one another in this
Virtue. An Example of this we had in our way to Sevarinde; for in a great Town,
named Bubasti, ten of the Chief men contended with one another in civil manner
to have us to lodge at their houses, which I may justly call Palaces: and to
content them all we were forced to divide ourselves, and to accept of all their
kindnesses neither could we get away from them in a day, they had so many new
inventions and Recreations to retard us till the Evening, and then they would
not suffer us to depart till the next morning.

Our first stage was at Foralar, thirty miles from the River, where we met with
Excellencies and Riches beyond all belief and imagination. The next was Fustad,
about five and thirty miles from Foralar. The third was Brobas, a large City
well walled, and so glorious to the eye when the Sun shines, that it dazles it.
The fourth night we reached as far as Crocarambe. The fifth we entered into
Bubasti: And the sixth day about noon we were received and welcomed into
Sevarinde. As soon as we were arrived and entered into the Palace appointed for
our abode, men and women of all sorts, but of rare and complete beauty, came in
to welcome us, bringing with them of the Fruits of the Country. Amongst them a
party of Musicians, a dozen in number entered the Hall, where we were refreshing
our selves, and admiring all the Excellencies before our eyes, and the Divine
Beauty of those incarnate Angels, the Women of that place. At the first they
saluted us with a short Speech to this purpose in their own Language, which was
immediately interpreted to us by a stander by in Spanish Welcome, noble
Strangers, to our City of Sevarinde, let not your misfortunes and losses grieve
you, the great Being of Beings has sent you to discover what I understand was
never known to your World. You shall see by experience the Generosity and brave
minds of the Sevarambi. We rejoice to have an occasion of imitating our
bountiful God, and express our Liberalities to his Creatures, and our kindness
to men, though of another World and Parentage. This brings me and my Companions
into this place, and at this time to mitigate your sorrows, and cause you to
forget your shipwreck and calamity* With these words he made a grave bow and
nodded to the rest of his Comrades and immediately the Music began to play so
sweetly, that we reckoned our selves in Heaven, and not upon Earth. This Sport
continued about two hours with an interruption of other Sports. We tasted there
also some of the most delicious Wines of the World; they grow not as ours upon
shrubs and short stumps, but upon great Trees as high as the Cedar and
Oak-trees neither have they any trouble with them to manure or cut them, for
the Wine-tree brings forth of its own accord plentifully. In an Orchard of
these kinds of Trees about the compass of an Acre, they have sometimes ten Tun
of this rare Wine, as clear as Crystal, but so extraordinary strong and
pleasant, that the Vin de la Cindad of Paris, nor the Rhenish, nor Frontiniack,
nor Florence, nor Canary, nor any other sorts of Wine of Asia, or Europe are to
be compared to this Divine Nectar, which so refreshes Nature, and strengthens
the body, that the oldest persons in that Country seem to be but young. Their
age is discoverable only by their gray hairs and long beards, which they are
not to cut by the Law of the Land. That evening Sevarminas sent us a Messenger
to know of our welfare, advising us to prepare our selves for the next morning
to wait upon him, for he was very desirous to see us. Sermodas had been with
him, and had given him an account of us, and of our behavior since our landing
in Sporumbe, and our entrance in Sevarambe. At his return to us, after Supper
we desired him to give us an exact account of the extent of the Dominions of
his King Sevarminas, and of the further most bounds of his Empire. In answer to
your request, said Sermodas to us, I must tell you, That we have now a Prince
called Sevarminas, lineally descended from our wise Lawgiver Sevarias: this is
the seventh thousand five hundred and ninth King, who has since that time
reigned in this Land. His Government between the Rivers are threescore and five
Principalities: the chief are Rostaki in the West, Shafstati on the North
toward the Pacifick Sea, Roblati on the East, and Manasti on the South. These
are the four principal Parts of the Kingdom commanded by four chief Officers,
who are to have an inspection over the other lesser Divisions. These wait upon
Sevarminas, and are of his Privy Council. The other Chieftains are to reside in
their several Principalities, and take care to do Justice, and punish all
Offenders with Banishment to their several places appointed for their retreat.
Besides these Jurisdictions within the Rivers, there are several other places
belonging to Sevarminas, which acknowledge him for their Supreme Lord; but they
are full of all banished men, Offenders of the Law, and Malefactors. There is
the Province of the Sporvi, which you have seen already, commanded by the Noble
Albicormas: the next to us is the Island of the Fornicators, whom these
Sevarambi cannot endure. These all appear with their rotten Noses and poisoned
Faces, so that they are ashamed to show themselves amongst perfect men. They
live in Woods and dark Caves, men and women promiscuously, without any regard
to their honesty, which they have had no care to preserve. They have an
ill-favored old Hag for their Governess, a filthy Bawd, named Brustana. Their
Country affords them many good things, so that they live without much labor;
but are so deformed and infectious, that none dares venture amongst them, who
has any regard to the safety of his own person or Honor. When amongst the
Sevarites any, either man or woman, breaks the Law by any such fleshly liberty,
they are immediately sent over and landed there, from whence they cannot
possibly return, because there is no Boat dares carry them from thence. In this
place they have a freedom to do what they list, and to please themselves with
the choice of persons of their own disposition and temper without any
restraint. The next Province is that of the Knaves, a cunning sort of men, who
are all upon catches, continually plotting the mischief of others. When there
is the least suspicion of any such person in a Province of the Sevarites, they
never leave till they have found him out, and sent him to this place, where he
is commanded by Marabo: when any excels in Knavery, he is there promoted in his
Court to Offices of Honor and Trust. These have the largest and best Province
belonging to Sevarminas beyond the River; for they are numerous and increase
daily in number of men and in Lands toward the South. They dispossessed
another Generation of covetous Rascals, who had been banished from among the
Sevarambi, and had laid great improvement upon their Lands, having built many
good Towns and Cities. When the Knaves, their Neighbors, had understood it,
they caught it from them, and drove them out of it by a Trick, sending the
Covetous to live in their Country empty of Inhabitants. The next is the
Province of disorderly persons troubled with the distempers of discontent,
fury, ambition, and other Vices. Sevarminas is forced to keep a Guard upon
their Borders, and to place next to them the stoutest and most warlike souls,
for fear of a sudden irruption. There are thirteen other large Provinces filled
with other kind of men; but I forbear to speak of them till I shall give you an
account of an attempt which the bordering Provinces made once to dispossess
King Sevarminas of his Throne, and to seize upon the Territories of the
unspotted Sevarites, who were forced to arm themselves, and drive those
disorderly Villains into their own Nests, where they are now confined. Since
that time care has been taken to build such Walls and Forts, as that they
cannot now easily pass over to trouble the Peace of the Sevarites. I had almost
forgotten to speak of the large Province of Fools, which lies directly South
from Sevarinde. If any person, by a mischance, becomes crack-brain'd or
distempered with any kind of folly, he is condemned to be transported to the
Island of Cracos, where he is to spend all his days in what Exercises please
him best. The Country affords him all Necessaries without pains: therefore the
Fools lead a pleasant life in the Woods and Medows. Before we go out of the
Kingdom, I will, said Sermodas, beg leave of Sevarminas to have a Guard, and
visit the Provinces of Knaves and Fools, where you shall see such Tricks and
Sports, as you never saw the like. And if you desire to visit any other part of
the Kingdom, I will desire leave from our mighty King, who will take care to
provide for your safety in going and coming. For though in this happy Paradise
there is nothing of evil, all things are answerable to the excellent and kind
nature of the Inhabitants; yet round about the Borders in the adjoining Islands
and Provinces, there is as much Disturbance, War, Tumult, and Unquietness, as
in any part of your Northern World; for the Sevarambi have a Law to send
thither all those persons who desire to cause any alteration in their
Government or Manners, or who live not according to the strict Rules which they
have received from their Forefathers, and which by no means they will be
persuaded to change. Some of these banished men, after a certain number of
years, and a visible sign of Reformation, have leave to return, and to be
admitted again amongst the Sevarambi; but others are so unquiet and unruly,
that they are a trouble to themselves, and all that are concerned with them.
Therefore our Princes and Governors will not admit them again, for fear they
should relapse into the same evils, and disturb this Kingdom, which for many
thousand years has continued in peace and prosperity without alteration by the
excellent Laws of our Great and wise Sevarias, the first Monarch of this happy
Land. Hence it is, that we never have any change of chief Governors or
Governments, every one knows his duty, his place and abilities, and is fully
satisfied with the advantages that he expects from thence. Here is no
oppression nor violence, the least inclination of that unnatural disposition
sends men away to the Borders to prevent future mischiefs. Neither have the
Sevarites that wicked custom of coining Money, and buying and selling all
things with money, the root of all Northern evils. They will not admit of any
such weed to grow in this Land, but things are exchanged for one another. And
you have seen since your entrance, there is so great an abundance of all good
things, that men must be lovers of wickedness, that can be evil in the midst of
such a plenty of goodness where it overflows. But I must tell you, said
Sermodas, of one thing more, which causes us to continue in peace: we are not
subject to the wicked attempts and temptations of any evil Spirit, as you are
in the Northern World. Those dangerous Imps care not to visit this Southern
part; for they have been so often caught in the snares here, that they dread
the very sight of the Sevarites, or of their Country. You, I understand, in the
Northern parts lay most of your miscarriages at the Devils door, who has a
room in many of your habitations, and a dwelling in every place and corner; but
we are altogether free from his company and temptations. Sometimes it is true,
he sends some loose Devils to debauch a few indiscreet persons, but then we
send them away immediately to their proper places with the Fiend in their
company. But, said Maurice, how can you keep the Devils out of your Land? They
fly in the empty Air, and go by night as well as by day. Sermodas answered, Our
eyes are better than yours, but the Sevarites of all men have the most refined
senses. They can see when the Spirits come amongst them; for this purpose there
is a constant Guard kept in all the usual Roads upon the Borders of the
Sevarites, four hundred Conspirers, if I may so call them, are kept in constant
Pay to drive away the Devil with Spells, when he ventures to approach upon the
Borders. They have a particular Art to command the evil Spirits, which no man
knows but themselves. It is true, some of the peeping and crasty Rascals creep
into this Land through by ways out of the usual Roads; but when the Sevarites
catch them, they torment them sufficiently, and deal with them as with Spies,
without any compassion of them: so that they seldom return to this place again,
but by their cruel entertainment they keep all their other Comrades from
entering in amongst the Sevarambi. I know that in your Countries you have not
that care nor vigilance of your selves for your own good. Hence it is, that all
sorts of Devils have so great an interest in your parts, and that you can
scarce stir without meeting one or many in your way. Besides, this Country
between the Rivers bears an aromatic Tree, which the Devils cannot endure; for
it sends up into the Air such a strong smell, that they are ready to choke when
they draw near to a place where it grows, and you shall see that the
Inhabitants have been advised by their wise Sevarias, to plant one in every
Garden and side of their Houses. The Tree is named Crassarabi, and bears a leaf
like a Palm-leaf, but is full of prickles as a Thorn and Bramble-bush. The
Sevarites have this way to torture the poor Devils that unhappily fall into
their hands: they tie them with a Cord invisible to you, but visible to them,
answerable to the substance of the Devils, which is airy, and then bind them to
this Tree, where they slash them with a Rod cut out of the branches, which
causes them to howl most dreadfully. We may chance to give you a sight of this
action, if you travel into the Country toward the Borders. Another way they
have to plague and imprison them, by making Gunpowder; for when the Devils
come into a Land, they always draw to that place where there is the greatest
noise and disturbance, for there they imagine they may make a good interest.
Now there is no greater noise in this Land than this of the Gunpowder, which
we make not as you do in Europe, but with a wheel, as you may see, if you
travel into the Land. Sometimes therefore it happens, that the silliest of them
prying too near into the work, either to understand the Art, or to know what
the Sevarites are doing, they are many times caught by their ears, and I have
known half a dozen wound into a grain of Gunpowder, and imprisoned so close,
that they could not possibly get away, till the powder took fire. The best and
strongest powder has always some of these airy Beings shut up. This causes
the destruction that follows when Gunpowder takes fire; for then the Devils
being released, break out with a vengeance, and tear in pieces all that dare
stand in their way. The Sevarites have many other ways to punish them for the
insolences and wickednesses which they have committed in the World; but when I
have an opportunity, I shall give you an account of that. I could wish, said
Maurice, that our Countrymen in Europe knew how to deal with these subtle
Creatures, and how to be revenged for the continual wrongs which they daily
receive from their malice and evil suggestions. It is a question, said I,
whether many of them would make use of that Art, if they knew it; for a great
many are so pleased with their company and suggestions, that they seek them
rather, than to endeavor to be rid of them. Well, said Sermodas, let them be
in love with their own mischief and danger, the Sevarites are seldom taken and
deceived by their allurements: and if at any time they are carried to any
wickedness, they are banished; and if the Devil be caught, he is severely
tortured. This good order and many others, when I shall speak to you of their
Laws, preserves happiness, peace, and prosperity in this Country.

This Discourse pleased us well, and caused us to entreat Sermodas to take some
other time to inform us of the Laws of the Sevarites. We asked him several
other questions concerning their Government within the Rivers, concerning their
Customs and Tributes, and whether all the Country was so happy and rich as that
which we had already beheld. He answered to all questions so exactly, that we
thought our selves much obliged to him for his singular favor. He was well
acquainted with all things, for he had been employed about the Affairs of
Sevarminas from his infancy, and was often sent to carry the Tribute to his
Court. He told us, that the Kings Revenues were certain, and that from all
parts men brought to him all sorts of Necessaries for him and his numerous
Court. That he never had any need to demand more, for his Expenses were as
regular as his Incomes; and that if he should want any thing more, there is
none of his Subjects, from the meanest to the highest, but would think himself
highly honored, if he would accept of all that they have. But as he is a great
Lover of Justice and Equity, he is content with the ancient Reversions of the
Provinces, which are sufficient to cause him and his Court to live in great
abundance and extraordinary Splendor, which all the Sevarites looked upon as
their greatest Glory. Sevarminas, said he, is a middle-aged man, and has
reigned in this place twenty two years, with the general love of all his
Subjects. He is adored by us all as our visible God. His Fathers name was
Seravino, a Prince of an extraordinary Beauty; he reigned amongst us thirty
years, and mightily enlarged the Palace and Dwelling of the Kings of this
Country. You shall see to morrow a place which has not its parallel on Earth
for Riches and humane Glory, and you shall see a Prince and such noble
Attendants, that your eyes never looked upon any thing, nor persons more
deserving admiration. After this discourse, Sermodas led us all to our
Chambers, where we had all things convenient for us, and showing us in a great
wide room hung with Cloth of Gold, each man's Bed of embroidered Silver for him
to rest till the next morning, he took his leave of us, and bid us good night.
We rested very sweetly without any disturbance till the next morning, when a
Concert of Music in the next Chamber awakened us. Sermodas opened first our
door, and entered our Room, desiring us to get up and put on the Apparel which
he had brought to us. Whiles we were dressing of our selves, a Messenger came
from King Sevarminas to hasten us away, because he intended to give us
Audience, and then to take some Recreation before Dinner. At the time of our
appearance he appointed ten Senators of his City, men of great Gravity and
Worth, to attend upon us, and lead us to him. We were conducted through the
Streets full of Sevarites, who seldom see Strangers in those parts. Their
curiosity caused them to throng together to look upon us: we marched thus about
half a mile through the most splendid places, and had the sight of so many rare
objects, that the World cannot afford the like. The number of Jewels and
precious Stones, the quantity of Gold, Silver, the excellency of the
Structures, Arches, Palaces, and Temples dedicated to their God, are beyond all
credit and imagination of men. But nothing surprised us so much as to look upon
the Royal Court and the glory of it. It stands upon a small rising encompassed
about with a deep River, and walled three times round with square stones cut
out of a Diamant Rock about six foot square, and polished so well, that at the
first approach our eyes could not endure the brightness of the place when the
Sun shines clear without a cloud. Some other precious Stones were intermixed of
green and red colors, but all transparent. There was but one entrance over the
River by a Bridge. The first Gate was full of Ivory Pillars and Supporters, and
embellished with large stones, black and white Marble. Round about in the void
space were delicate Walks, and Gardens full of strange sorts of Trees, some
yellow, others green, some black, others white, and showing to the eye such a
variety of beautiful colors, that it is the most glorious Prospect of the
World. The second Wall was all of a red stone, but bright and shining. The
third and innermost Wall was as white as Snow, like to our Alabaster, but of a
stone which is not to be found in any part of the Northern World. In the empty
places round about between the Walls, grew all manner of Trees for pleasure or
profit, with some that are not to be seen elsewhere. The Kings Palace stood
within these three Enclosures, having round about it a large Green with several
Walks of sandy Gold and stately Images of Alabaster and Porphyry, representing
all manner of shapes, as beasts, birds, and men in most actions of their life.
These Images stood upon Bases of Saphir, and the Images were all made of a
transparent hard stone as clear as Crystal. You may imagine, that at our first
entrance, the Sun shining in its greatest brightness upon them, we were cast
into a sudden maze, and surprised at the unexpected view of so many glorious
things. The Palace was perfectly round, with four long Galleries reaching from
side to side, and as many Gates. It was built of precious Stones, of all sorts
and sizes: the Tyling was of Gold and Silver, and the inside was so curiously
wrought, and so rich, that it is not to be imagined nor believed, if I should
here declare every particular. The King sat in an empty Court in the middle of
his Palace, under a beautiful Gallery enriched with all manner of Jewels: round
about him on the right and left stood his Counselors and Attendants: his Seat
was a Throne of six steps, over which there was a Canopy of State, before it
were six Bases upon which stood six Lions rampant of a red stone. To this place
we were conducted by Sermodas and the Ten Grandees, and led to the foot of the
Throne, where we were taught to do our Obeisance upon our knees. The King had a
rich Crown upon his Head, and a Scepter in his right Hand, and sat in a great
deal of Majesty and Glory. Sermodas advised me to speak to the King, as soon as
we had paid him that respect which was due to his Person and place. Therefore I
stood up, and addressed my self to him in this manner in the French Tongue,
which he understood well: Most glorious and mighty Prince, you see before you
poor Strangers cast upon your Coasts by a storm, which I know not how to name,
happy or unhappy; for since our Arrival in your Land, we have met with so many
civilities and expressions of kindness from your loving People, that we have
already received a compensation for the loss of our Ships and Goods. We are
come here to adore your Majesty in obedience to your Commands, and to receive
from you those Orders, which we shall punctually follow. We doubt not but
according to your wonderful clemency, your Majesty will look with compassion
upon such objects of pity as Providence has made us, and to raise us up from
our hard and low Fortune. As all things that we have hitherto met with in your
noble Kingdom, are beyond all belief and credit, we are persuaded that the King
of so glorious a Land, must needs have Virtues as extraordinary and Divine. We
humbly submit our selves therefore to your Majesty's Wisdom and Mercy, and that
when we shall have performed what your Majesty shall think fit to require from
us, you would out of your compassion and goodness, suffer us to depart into our
own Countries, that we may spread abroad all over the World the Riches, the
Excellency, and Wealth of this earthly Paradise, and the noble Virtues of your
most Glorious Majesty, and publish your Fame wherever the Sun appears with
his beams of Light. Sevarminas seemed to like our persons and our Speech, to
which he returned this Answer: That he had sent for us, not to offer any injury
to our persons: That he who was a Lover of Justice amongst his own Subjects,
could not do injustice to Strangers: That the Sevarites in general were of a
civil behavior, and inclinable to pity the miseries of other men; but that he
had given strict Orders to have a care of our persons, and furnishes with all
that we should want. He told us, That not only the curiosity of seeing us, who
were come out of remote Nations, famous for their industry and wit, had caused
him to send for us to discourse with us, and understand our Customs and
Manners; but also to discover to us his Kingdom and the Riches of it, that we
might report it in our own Lands, and encourage some to venture to trade with
his People: That for that purpose he would appoint a place or an Island in the
Pacifick Sea, where all the Commodities and Riches of the Sevarambi should be
transported, because the ancient Laws, as well as the good and preservation of
his Kingdoms Peace, Virtues, and Innocence, suffered him not to admit all
manner of Strangers into his Borders: That he had received a good report of us,
which inclined him the more to send for us, and that he hoped that our
conversation and behavior would be answerable to his expectation, and the
kindness that he would show. After this, he inquired of our Country, how long
we had been from it, who commanded in Chief, what Commodities we had of any
request, what Arts and Sciences of any use to the life of man. To all these
particulars, and many others, I gave him full satisfaction. So that, as a
gratification, he sent for a Box of Jewels, which he bestowed upon us, together
with Collars of Gold and Ambergriese, which he wished us to wear whiles we
should remain in that Country. After we had continued with him about an hour,
he rose up from his Throne, and commanded Zidi Parabas, the Master of his
Ceremonies, to lead us to Lodgings provided for us in his own Palace, and Zidi
Marlorat his Chancellor and chief Minister, to discourse with us about a Trade,
and the means to open it with us. During our abode in those parts, we had
several meetings with him, and assured him, that the Dutch Nation would be
overjoyed to meet with so civil a People, so sociable and amiable, and that
they would quickly embrace the first motion of a Trade with them. We extolled
our home-Commodities, and showed what advantage they would reap by a
conversation with us; but the Chancellor told me, That such as I was should
have liberty to enter into their Borders; but Russians and Rascals of an ill
life could not be admitted by the Laws of their Land. Yet they should have
leave to trade in Sporumbe, and in the Islands, which Sevarminds would appoint
for that purpose; but that none of the Sevarites should go thither, unless it
be such banished men as are sent away for their misdemeanors. I replied to
him, That if he would keep away from thence such as are banished out of
Sevarambe for their Knavery, we would trade with all the rest; for we and all
our Countrymen had rather deal with honest men than with Knaves. At last it
was concluded to prevent the inconveniences on both sides, That all the Dutch
should land amongst the Sporvi, and in an Island that is at the mouth of the
great River Rocara in the Pacifick Sea, about an hundred and thirty Lagues from
the Streights of Magellan. This Island is peopled with a generation of men
descended from the Sevarites, and banished out of the Country for their
inordinate love of women and men. There are three good Towns belonging to it,
and a capacious Harbor for Ships of the greatest burden. I acquainted the
Chancellor with our Art of Navigation, with many other knowledges which the
Europeans use with great profit and advantage to their Kingdoms. He seemed to
be well satisfied and mightily pleased with the account I had given him. Whiles
Sevarminas was gone to hunt and sport himself, Sermodas and Zidi Parabas led us
round about the Galleries and Walks, showing us the rare Fishponds, the stately
Orchards, the riches and beauty of the Buildings, and all things round about,
which caused us to wonder, and stand many times in a maze. The Art of Painting
is here also, and the Sevarites excel in that skill. Therefore the Galleries,
and generally all the Palace of Sevarminas, was adorned with many lively
Representations. Maurice, who was an excellent Painter, admired some Pictures,
and told us, that he thought they could not be made but by a Divine hand. The
Sevarites are excellent in Geometry and Astrology. They have differing names
for all the Stars that appear in their Hemisphere, and understand perfectly
well all their Motions and Virtues. As soon as we returned from our pleasant
Walk, we met with Sevarminas about dinnertime returned from his Hunting,
whereof I shall give this short account, for this Sport is not like to ours.
The Sevarites hunt not with Dogs, but with tame Foxes, of an extraordinary
swiftness; they hunt Rabbets, Hares, Deer; and all other wild beasts are hunted
with tame Leopards. In the morning that the King intends to see this Sport, the
chief Huntsman has orders to prepare all things for the diversion, twenty
Leopards are then let loose in a wide Park, where the wild beast is brought.
The King and all his Nobles are mounted upon their glorious Mules, of beautiful
colors, with Trappings of Silver and Gold, adorned with precious Stones. The
Leopards, at the sight of the Lion or the Bear, draw near to him by degrees,
and taking their opportunity, they run to him. When he feels himself
overpowered, he seeks his safety in his heels, and all the Mules gallop after
him. I am not able to represent all the various actions and delights that are
here expressed to the Beholders eyes; but this kind of Hunting is much esteemed
by the Sevarites, and none have the liberty to make use of it, but the King and
some of the prime Nobles; for it is a Royal Sport, and gives much satisfaction
to the Spectators. Sevarminas at his return entered into his Palace, accompanied
with all his Servants, in very rich Attire: some of them came and spoke to us
in the Spanish Tongue, and bid us welcome into their Country. We answered their
Civilities with respect, and followed the Train of Sevarminas that walked two
and two into the Palace, into a great Hall an hundred yards in length, and as
many in breadth, where Tables were ready covered with all manner of curious
Dainties, of all sorts. Sevarminas and his Queen, with three of his Sons, and
six of his Daughters, sat down at a Table, which stood at the upper end,
raised a little above the rest, under a large Canopy shining with Gold and
precious Stones, of an inestimable value. As soon as they were sat down, the
Music in the Galleries round about began to play such ravishing Tunes, that we
Europeans were astonished. Sermodas and Zidi Parabas invited us to sit down at
a Table not far from that of Sevarminas. To tell you of all the Glory and State
we beheld, the sweetness of the Wines, the various Services, and the dainty
Meats, of the excellent and ravishing Sights, I reckon it impossible, I could
fill up a Volume of those things that were then presented to our senses; so
many and such variety of objects, rare and wonderful, appeared before us, that
when Zidi Parabas saw how we were pleased with them, he inquired of us, whether
we had any such Delights in Europe. I answered, That the pleasures and delights
of the Europeans are many and curious, but they are not to be compared to what
we then saw. One of the Table inquired of us about some other particulars; and
because he was a Learned Philosopher, he proposed to us several learned
Questions relating to the Nature of things. Every one had liberty to speak his
mind and judgment. After all, he declared his opinion, with a repetition of
what every one had spoken, and then added his own solution with that Learning
and Gravity, that I never heard the like. This to me and Maurice was almost as
good as the Music and Meats; for at Table it is a modern as well as ancient
delight to feed the mind with rare instructions, as well as the body with meat
and drink. After Dinner Zidi Parabas went to wait upon Sevarminas, and
understand his pleasure. When he was returned to us again, he brought us up to
Sevarminas, who was then sitting on his Throne with his Queen Larida at his
right hand, and his Daughters and his Sons on the left. She was the most
beautiful Creature that I ever beheld. We paid them our respects according to
the mode of their Country. To please Queen Larida, Sevarminas asked us many
questions in Spanish, a Tongue which she understood: after all they seemed to
be well satisfied. Sevarminas sent us all Gifts and Presents of a great value.
When I was returned into Europe, I sold the Jewels and other Rarities, which
the King and Queen bestowed upon me, for above six millions of Gold. Maurice
and the rest of my Companions had Gifts according to their Qualities. We had
Orders to walk about the City, and take a view of the Rarities of that
wonderful place. To speak truth, every thing, if it were in our own Country,
would seem a rarity. I never beheld so much Glory and Riches, nor such
beautiful objects, nor such gravity, and comely Personages so full of Majesty
and goodness. They were so far from scorning or contemning us that were
Strangers, that they seemed they could not too much honor and respect us; for
Sevarminas had given that strict Order, to give us all the satisfaction that we
could desire.

Zidi Parabas led us to their public Halls through beautiful Streets, paved
with many transparent stones. When we entered into them, we saw their Court of
Judicature. On both sides were the Lawyers Cells or little Closets. These are a
certain number of men, who are locked up as Prisoners in this place, and not
suffered to range up and down the City, for fear they should infect the rest of
men with their idle notions and Quirks. They are here all kept, the Judges only
excepted, as our mad and crasie men in Europe, are confined to Bedlams, and as
the wild beasts to their dens; for by this Policy they preserve the City in
quiet. When we were in their vast Hall, and heard some entering in, they looked
all to see, whether we were fit for their turn, whether we had committed some
offense that deserved punishment; but when they saw that we viewed that place
only out of curiosity, they sneaked all in again, and would not so much as look
upon us all the time that we were there, till the Trumpet began to sound, and
the Judge sat upon his Seat. Then came in a company of Sevarites leading a
young Girl that had forgotten her self, and given liberty to a puny Fellow to
play the wag with her. They had both of them great punches of flesh growing
upon their Noses and Foreheads, which came up in the very act. As soon as their
Neighbors had beheld this superfluity, they understood the crime, and took
hold of them both to bring them to this Tribunal. The Lawyers, like Bees,
swarmed round about, all the petty Attorneys, Clerks, Bailiffs, Sergeants,
demy-Sergeants, Pleaders, Sollicitors, Probationers, etc. and such a gang of
them, that I pitied the poor Couple to fall into their unmerciful hands.
Amongst the Sevarites in every City they have a Hall or a Convent of these
persons, whom they all esteem no better than Butchers and Executioners, they
have not that honor as amongst us in Europe, nor that esteem of honest men,
with which many of them cozen our World. Zidi Parabas made me get up to hear
their Pleading, but I understood not their Language, only Sermodas gave me an
account of some passages. The crime was not to be denied, which caused them
both to look ashamed, because they had forgotten all honesty, and lost their
honor. The Judge asked them many questions. All the cruel Lawyers cried to
punish her with death, because she had not given them any thing to plead for
her; but the young man had got a bawling Lawyer to speak for him when his crime
came to be examined; but all would not do: he would have made the Judge
believe, that this Excrescence in his sace was only a natural deformity
proceeding from some other inward cause, and not from Lust. But the Judge, a
wise and brave man, of the Court of Sevarminas, convinced him of his error,
and made him at last confess, that the Girl had enticed him with her bewitching
Looks. In conclusion of the Trial, the lecherous couple were sent to the Island
of Whores and Rogues, where they were to live confined for ever from all
friends and acquaintances, and to spend their life in lust and debauchery, a
sufficient punishment, as they imagined, for their forgetfulness. I took no
great delight amongst the Lawyers; for I looked upon this place as the Hell in
the midst of the earthly Paradise of the Sevarites. After these two Fornicators
had been judged and condemned to perpetual banishment, where nevertheless they
live in great plenty, there was brought before the Judge a Thief, a sneaking
Fellow, differing in looks, as well as in manners, from the rest of the
Sevarambi. The Judge, whose name was Zidi Morasco, commanded him to be examined
before him by a crafty Lawyer. And it was proved plain against him, that he had
stole some Jewels and Gold from his Neighbor, with some Garments of Cloth of
Silver, covered over with precious Stones, of a great value. The Fellows
countenance since this deed was mightily changed; for every wicked action,
especially amongst the Sevarites, alters the countenances of men. The Eyes
being the windows of the Soul, through them it discovers all the inward
thoughts, fears, apprehensions, and displeasures that roll in the breast.
Besides, the Thieves have here in this Country a mark, which immediately
appears upon their Chins and Cheeks, a black spot very ugly to the eye. This
Fellow also was adjudged unworthy to live any longer amongst the religious
Sevarites. I asked Sermodas, why the Sevarambi suffered the Lawyers, who I told
him in our Country, were generally none of the best men in the World: What!
said he, have you any there? Yes, said I, to our sorrow, we cannot be quiet for
them. Captain, replied he, I must tell you, were it not for these Fellows, the
Sevarites would not be able to live so quiet as they do; nor so innocent as in
all other Countries: fear as well as shame must keep men in awe, and in the
performance of their duties to their Neghbours and Superiors. And though men
are not here so inclinable to wickedness as in Europe, because they proceed
from another stock and generation of men; yet the pleasures of the Country,
together with the inticements of some subtle Devils, whom we cannot always
perceive, many may be brought to do what is contrary to Law, Reason, Equity,
and Justice. It is therefore for the public Good, that these men are living
amongst us. And though they are as bad as those whom they plead against, they
are here confined in these and such like. Cells, where there is a public
provision made for them, to keep them from running up and down to breed
disturbances. Such amongst them as are honest, good, and merciful men, are
highly esteemed, but they are very rare; and if they were known to be honest
and good men amongst the Lawyers, the rest would not suffer them to come near
the Bar, but would banish them out of their Society, and deprive them of all
manner of Practice and liberty of Pleading. The greater Knaves they are, the
more esteemed amongst the Lawyers, though less valued by the rest of the
Sevarites. Therefore, to keep up their credit amongst both, is a hard Chapter,
and not to be done without some kind of dissimulation on some side. With that
he pointed at a great fat Fellow, who stood up in Court to see and look for his
Clients: Do you see, said he, that Knave? Do you see him? I turned my eyes
toward him, and beheld him steadfastly, and asked what he was: He is, said
Sermodas, one of the chief Attorneys of this Court, a cunning Fellow, his name
is Rekrap, a wicked Villain, and a great Oppressor of poor Fellows that fall
into his hands. After the Court had examined and tried all the Causes, the
Lawyers departed to their Dens; and Zidi Parabas taking me by the hand, led me
to the Shambles of the City, and to view all the Excellencies of that Noble
place. As I was passing one of their Temples, I entreated him to give me a
sight of that which I judged to be a Rarity, or rather full of Rarities; for it
was so glorious without, that I could not but think that the inside was far
more rich and splendid. Zidi Parabas made some difficulty to yield to my
request; but Sermodas persuaded him to grant it at last, when he had asked me
some questions concerning the Religion of our Country: Are you not, said he,
desiled with Idolatry, I mean with the Worshipping of Images; for I must tell
you, that this is a great abomination amongst the Sevarambi. We have Pictures
and Images in our Houses, but none in our Temples: we adore a great and
glorious Being, the Creator and Author of this earthly Paradise: he is an
infinite Spirit, not to be consined within our walls; therefore our Temples are
open on the top, when we are at our Devotions. He is not to be likened to any
outward Image or Representation; therefore our ever blessed Sevarias commanded
us to have no Images in our Temples, nor to liken God to any Creature or
Representation visible to the eye. If therefore you have never dishonored your
self with such kind of practices, you may be admitted to see and walk in our
Temples. I thanked him for his kind condescension, and assured him, that though
it was a wickedness that many Nations in Europe were guilty of, yet our
Countrymen abominate such kind of follies, and that for my own particular I
never was of that Religion which allows of Idolatry and Worshipping of Images.
When he understood this, he walked to the great Gate of the chief Temple, where
he met with a grave Priest standing at the door, unto whom he declared our
business: the Priest took me by the hand, and in Spanish told me, that I should
see the Temple of his God. I walked round, and saw so many glorious Sights and
such extraordinary Riches, that all Europe together cannot produce the like.
The Priests name was Ziribabdas. I desired him to tell me something of the
Religion of the Country, and of their Manners: for that purpose Zidi Parabas
took me by the hand, and led me to a by-place much like a Chancel, where when
we were all sat down, in Niches of beaten Gold in the Wall, Ziribabdas began
his Discourse in this manner: I perceive you are a stranger to this Country and
to the Customs of the Sevarites, I know not what Religion you have in your
Country, nor what thoughts you have of the Great God, who has made us all; but
I hope none of you are guilty of the foul sin of Worshipping of Images, which
we hear is universally practiced by the Europeans. I answered him, That there
were a great many Nations who did abominate and hate such practices as well as
the Sevarites. Well, said he, in regard you are free from that vice and
baseness, I will show you a great many Sacred Curiosities of this Temple, which
you have not yet seen, and I will give you a brief account of our Religion in
this Country. You must therefore know, that we acknowledge but one only Great
God, Maker of all things, Lord of Heaven and Earth, who sends us all those
good things that we enjoy: Reason teaches to worship and praise him for his
goodness and innumerable mercies. For that purpose we have Schools erected in
every corner of this City to train up Youth, and teach them the Principles of
Religion. All persons are obliged twice every week to assist at our public
Devotions, which are Songs made to praise our God, with Instruments of Music:
we have also Prayers, which I and my Brethren offer for the prosperity of
Sevarminas and of his Royal Family. Once a year every person is obliged to
present something upon a Table, which stands in the middle of this and other
Temples, as a token of gratitude to God: now this thing is always the richest
and best beloved thing that he has. By this means every one shows, that his
affection for God is greater than for any thing else. Religion amongst us is
the most sacred thing, and whatsoever belongs to Religion is highly valued by
every one. There is the greatest respect shown to religious persons and
religious things amongst all the Sevarites, you shall not hear Oaths and
Blasphemies, Cursing and Damning. The Rules of good living are registered in the
Book of our Law giver Sevarias; and since that time we are all so addicted to
it, and all our Generations so used and trained up in our obedience to these
Laws, that very few persons offer to break or violate them: and if at any time
any such be, he is carried away and banished into the Islands: by this means
peace, plenty, and good manners are here to be seen every where, and men take
not the liberty to do what they list. But the Rules of Reason are commonly
observed by all the Sevarites in their behavior and actions: so that you shall
not see any thing of Drunkenness, Gluttony, Quarrelling, Murders, and Villainies
committed scarce in a whole year all over the Empire. But for our better
Government in matters of Religion, besides our King, who is the chief Moderator
in all disputable matters, we have thirty Chieftains under six principal Heads,
who are always at the Court attending upon our Prince. These thirty live in
their Precincts and Jurisdictions, having under them such as have the care of
and inspection over every Town and Hamlet. We have besides, public Meetings
and Assemblies to consult about matters of high moment. Now there is such an
excellent order and harmony in all respects, that we enjoy Peace both in Divine
and Civil Affairs, and there is no jarring, disputations, and dissensions, as
amongst you in Europe, but a blessed concord and agreement. If any be suspected
to be otherwise disposed, he is immediately banished to the lonesom Islands,
where he can quarrel with none but with wild beasts that inhabit there. He is
never suffered after to set a foot in the Country of the Sevarambi; but there
in those Islands amongst the Woods and Caves he is confined, and obliged to
spend the rest of his days in fighting with the Lions, Jaccals, wild Dogs,
Bears, and such like furious Creatures. By this means you shall see we preserve
peace and quiet both in Church and State. But that our Governors might not act
in an arbitrary way, we suffer no man's Will to be a Law, but that of our
glorious Sevarminas and his lawful Successors; but for the rest of all our
Governors, they have Rules and Laws to act by in all occasions: neither can
they do any thing without the consent, advice, and concurrence of other wise
men appointed for that purpose. For our Belief, I must tell you, we know and
are taught by Nature as well as by the Works of our great Sevarias, that God
created all things in Heaven and Earth: That in the beginning this Paradise
stood in another part of the World; but when men began to abuse those good
things that it affords, it was transported hither upon the shoulders of Angels,
and all the Trees planted here, where they have increased: and that because the
first Generation of men was corrupt and wicked, there was another man and woman
made to inhabit here, and to live in this blessed Kingdom. We believe, that
when we come to dye, our Souls being of a spiritual substance, fly up to the
Firmament, where they rest till a certain time be appointed to join them again
together. Now our bodies decay not as yours, we lay them in places where they
continue thousands of years without any alteration. I shall show you our
Sepulchers, and that of our Kings, where you may see all the Princes who have
governed in these happy Regions since the beginning of the World, as fresh as
if they were yet all alive.

We believe, that when our bodies and Souls shall be again joined, your
generation and ours shall be received together into a place appointed for us,
such I mean of you as are honest and good men; but for the rest of you, I know
not what you are fit for, unless it be to be cast into the Sea, or banished to
a lonesom place, where they may live without doing harm. We believe that there
are good and evil Spirits above us, and that the Sun, Moon, and Stars are full
of Creatures answerable to their light and beauty. We believe, that when this
generation shall be transported somewhere else, other Creatures shall succeed
us in this Paradise, and in other parts of the World. We have many things that
we believe; but I must tell you, that our reason directs us, and rules our
judgments in all matters of Faith as well as practice; only some things of a
sublime nature, which our senses cannot attain to, we must submit to the Wisdom
of our Sevarias, who had them by Inspiration from the Angels, with whom he had
a familiar acquaintance, and therefore his body is not to be found in the
Sepulcher of our Kings; but it is thought they took him with them into the
place appointed for their abode, and that there he lives with them without fear
of death, in expectation that all his Posterity should come to him. But you
must take notice, That such of our Generation as are banished for their
misdemeanors, will be admitted one day to the same happiness, if they bear
patiently their punishment, and are sorry for their wickedness; but such also
must be purged in a fire which is in the Air, through which their bodies, as
well as ours, must pass to mount up to the highest station designed for us: but
with this difference, that the fire shall open to let us go by; but they must
burn a while there, till their bodies be freed from all corruption and filth,
some more, some less, according to their dispositions, but few stay there less
than twenty years, some an hundred, others a thousand, till such time as their
bodies be sublimated and fit for an higher abode. Such of us as are
incorrigible, shall be confined to a sad Pit, where they shall be up to the
Elbows in Mire and Dirt, and be deprived of all comforts of life. Whiles he was
speaking this, there happened an accident, which caused him to stop and put an
end to this good Discourse. Ziribabdas was called to receive a dead Sevarite,
and open the Caves, in which the deceased lay in Coffins of Ivory and Gold. He
excused himself, and told me, that he had much more to say concerning the
Religion of their Country, but could not remain with us any longer. I was glad
to have this opportunity to see their manner of burying the dead. At the great
Gate of the Temple stood near a thousand people with the friends of the
deceased. When Ziribabdas came to them, one who stood before the Corpse and the
Bearers, spoke to him in this manner, as was afterward interpreted to me. Most
holy Priest, we have brought to you our Neighbor Suffarali, a good man, and a
religious Sevarite, who has often expressed his Devotion in this place, and
his respects to your Holiness; we desire that he may be admitted amongst the
dead Sevarites, as he has lived amongst them with respect and honor.
Ziribabdas sat himself down in an Ivory Chair adorned with many precious
Stones, which stood in the Porch, and then he called the Friends of the
deceased, inquiring of them, whether he had committed no unworthy action in his
lifetime? Whether he had lived peaceably with his Neighbors? Whether he had
not been privately guilty of drunkenness, etc? Whether he had not at his
departure bequeathed something to the Church? How many children he had? What
were their names? And such like questions, to which they gave an answer, and
satisfied him fully. Afterward they carried in the Corpse into the Temple, and
laid it upon a long Table of an Emeraldstone, and the Priests anointed the body
all over with an excellent Oil, called the Oil of Botamine, which signifies in
their Language Uncorruption: For such is its extraordinary virtue, that it
keeps a body from all manner of corruption or alteration an hundred years. Now
this is a Sacred Oil, which only the Priests, who are learned in Chemistry,
make of several Ingredients; for this cause it is no where to be found but in
their Temples, unto which they have their Laboratories annexed. Now once in an
hundred years they anoint over all the bodies of the deceased from the
beginning of the World: by this means the bodies are kept fresh, and so lively
and beautiful, that if a dead body could stand upright, at a distance no man
could distinguish the dead from the living. When the body was well anointed,
they opened a large Cave of a thousand yards broad, and as many long. It had as
many Closets as there were houses in the City. Ziribabdas, at the opening of
the mouth of the Cave, caused some Ceremonies to be performed, and then marched
down a pair of stairs into this burying-place: the Corpse was carried after him,
and I and my Companions, with Sermodas, were admitted to behold the
subterranean Rarities, and to walk up and down in the Caves, so full of
transparent stones, that the light entering in by two or three holes, made on
purpose, caused it to be as light within, as if the Sun had shined there in its
Meridian. In the Cave were six hundred thousand separations, capacious enough
to hold above an hundred thousand bodies: they were all laid one upon another
in very good order. There were several Alleys and Walks between the
separations, unto which were doors of massy Gold, and in several places stood
great Pots full of that Oil of Botamine, which the Priests cast upon the
bodies, when they perceive any alteration in the bodies by their smelling. By
this means it happens, that there is not the least noisome smell; but there is
every where the most blessed Perfume in every corner, as if you were in a
Garden of Roses, or amongst blooming Beans. When we had well viewed the Caves,
I entreated Ziribabdas to show me the Sepulchers of their Kings; for that
purpose he led us out at another door, when all the company was departed, and
showed us all their Princes sitting in Chairs of State, as if they were alive;
but this place was not in the Cave, but round about their Temple, in Closets
made on purpose. The Princes were all clothed in their Royal Attire, which
they change once every year; for that purpose the King that reigns is bound to
send them Vestments according to the ancient Custom. Ziribabdas showed us all
the ancient Kings sitting in their gravity and Majesty, and pointed out to some
who had been very remarkable in their Lives for some noted Actions, by which
they had obliged the Nation of the Sevarites, and rendered their Names and
Memories more sacred than others amongst their Posterity. He showed us King
Bormarti, who was so great a Lover of Justice, that he banished his own Son for
committing a fault, and sent him to live and dye in the Islands. He told of his
King Robarmi, who invented the Art of Painting, and laid the Foundations of
Sevarinde. He showed us the Body of King Darti, who built the stately Palace
for the Kings of the Sevarites, and fetched the stones from the Diamant Rocks
and the Mountains of Saphyr, at a great distance from thence, upon Carts driven
with the Wind, with Sails as Ships. We saw King Marati, who taught the
Sevarites how to make Boats, and to fish in the Rivers. We saw the Bodies of
King Bumorli, Serabi, Cussori, Menari, Menasti, Nacri, Labomor, Apolori,
Ribolo, Staraki, Muraki, Amlorod, and many others, who had been reverenced for
some witty Invention or glorious Action, by which they had benefited Posterity
as well as their own Generation. Therefore their Closets were more beautiful
and richer than the rest, and they had the Honor to have their Images placed
in the noted Rendezvous of the City, for all men to look upon them, and for all
Posterity to reverence and respect them. By this Honor the succeeding Kings
were the more encouraged to do good, and abstain from all blame; they are the
more animated to deserve well from their Generation, and to invent something to
advantage their People. We walked about to see all the Rarities of this Royal
Sepulcher, which exceeded in glory the richest and stateliest Palaces of our
European Emperors and Kings. To speak of the rare Jewels, of the Gold and
precious Stones, and of the excellent things that were never brought over nor
seen in our World, I should be endless; for here in every place there are red,
yellow, white, and other transparent Stones of rare Virtues, not known to us in
Europe. Orient Pearls as big as Walnuts are as ordinary as Pebble-stones in our
Country. The common people polish them, and hang them in strings about their
Windows; but they seldom wear them, because they have rarer and more glorious
things to put about their necks and bodies as Ornaments, than these things,
which, for want of a name, I omit. Ziribabdas showed me next the Gallery of
their sacred Hieroglyphics, which is one of the rarest things of the World.
The Gallery is about half a mile long, joining to the Temple, standing upon an
Arch, under which are beautiful Walks and Closets, for the Learned Students in
all Arts and Sciences to spend their time, and employ themselves in their
searches into the Mysteries of Nature. The Wall is of a white transparent
stone, as clear as Crystal, and the Gallery is paved with Diamant stones
square, at every six foot is a great large Window of Crystal, and the top is
covered and arched over with Saphyr stone. Emeralds, Chrysolytes, Rubies,
Jaspers, Beryls, and other precious Stones not known to us, are without number
about in the Walls. This Gallery was built in the year 3406. after the Creation
of the World, by King Murabormati, a great Philosopher, and a Learned Student
of Natures Mysteries. In these Walls he caused the Rules of all sorts of
Sciences, and the Principles of all manner of Arts to be engraven in black in
the white stone of the Walls, not in Characters, but in Figures and dark
Enigmes and Representations. Here I beheld the shapes of all manner of
Creatures of this and our World in all kind of postures and actions of life,
put here to represent the sacred Mysteries thereby signified to the
understanding Reader. In this Gallery were several hundred Learned Students
beholding and searching into the directions that were given them by these
Hieroglyphics. And in some Closets, near adjoining, were several companies of
men discoursing and disputing about those things which were represented upon
the Wall. We were introduced amongst them to look and sit with them, and
observe their grave postures and mien; but for their Learned Lectures and
excellent Discourses, we understood nothing, only Sermodas told us, that here
were all the Wits and Learned men of the Sevarites gathered together; and that
for their better understanding of all manner of Sciences, and to perpetuate
Learning, and free it from forgetfulness, they had in the Gallery the Rules and
Axioms of all Arts, with all the Definitions and other matters of any moment,
needful to be known in relation to any Skill or Science; and that when any
Student doubted of any matter, in these Closets the great Doctors were met to
direct and teach the ignorant, and improve all Arts and Sciences; and that by
degrees as they improved Learning by new Discoveries, they were always engraven
upon the Walls, after a serious and judicial Examination of the Learned
Doctors, and their Approbation of such invented things and Rules: which
Hieroglyphics were graven with the names of their Authors for a perpetual
Memory. We walked three or four turns in the Gallery, and saw such variety and
number of new Objects and Representations, that I have often wondered, how any
one man can have that vast memory to give an interpretation to all those things
of different shapes, and to comprehend all the Mysteries of such Enigmes. In
some places of the Gallery the Wall was covered over with Plates of Silver, and
the Hieroglyphics were of Gold; but generally they were in black upon a white
clear stone, and so hard, that though, as I was informed by Zidi Parabas and
the Priest, some of the Hieroglyphics have been there put above a thousand
years ago, yet appear as fresh, as if they had been graven but yesterday. At
the end of the Gallery are two large Cabinets, of a curious workmanship, and
rare stone, of a reddish color, most beautiful to the eye, curiously cut and
graven. The Cabinets are full of Pictures and Images of all sorts of Creatures,
which serve the Learned in their Contemplations: here are also a great many
Skeletons of many Animals, with all manner of rare things, which are to be
found in this wonderful Country. Here I saw a great Sapphire stone, about the
bigness of a Goose, in which the Heavens and the Earth were represented very
lively to the eye. In an Emerald, about the bigness of a man's head, I found in
one side all manner of Birds graven with the finger of Nature, and in the other
all sorts of Beasts. I saw several other precious Stones, one having the Image
of a Man, another of a Horse, another of a Woman, another of a Camel, another
of an Eagle, another of a River, another of a Fish, another of other Creatures,
so curiously engraven, that no Artist could mend Natures work. These stones
were useful not only to satisfy men's curiosity, and please the sight of the
Learned; but also to teach them several things concerning those creatures,
which were thereby intimated to them. We found several Learned men observing
those things, and viewing them with leisure: For that purpose are several Seats
for them to sit down and contemplate. Here I saw also many Talismans, an Art
altogether lost in Europe, and not to be recovered but from the Learning of the
Sevarites; for Zidi Parabas showed me a round stone, hollow within, wherein I
saw, through many parts of it transparent, a perpetual motion of Trees, Woods,
wild Beasts, and many Animals, which he told me, was but a Talisman made to
direct such as are Learned in this Art, how to make others for the same
purpose. Some are so skilful, that with a Talisman they will kill any beast or
creature at a mile distance; but as the Sevarites are not for the destruction
of creatures, but for their preservation, they never make use of this Art to do
mischief, but save and comfort such creatures as are decaying, and to put life
into those that are dead. Only the venomous creatures and noisome Flies, if by
the procurement of any evil-spirited, such are introduced into the Country,
then the Philosophers have an Art to make such a Talisman, as will not only
destroy the Flies, and disarm the beast of his poisonous and ill qualities; but
severely punish the wicked Spirit, who has been so bold as to send in such
troublesome creatures into their Land. For this purpose I saw upon four corners
of the great Church a great Giant of black Marble, holding in his right hand a
pair of Rams horns, as they appeared to me; but in truth it was nothing but a
Talisman to keep off the Devils and evil Spirits from their Meeting Place and
holy Assembles. In his left hand he held a Book open, of white Marble, in which
some Characters were graven, as I was told, which the Devils cannot endure to
see, and therefore keep at a distance from such places. Besides, these Learned
in Talismanical Figures, have the Art to make those Talismans as have an
influence not only upon bodies corporeal, but also upon the subtle Spirits of
the Air, and will bind them to a good Behavior, or drive them with vengeance
off from the place, or else so benum their senses, that they can neither stir
nor move, but are as so many mazed creatures, without life or motion, when they
come within such a compass. For that purpose I saw upon the top of the Temple a
great Eagle of Gold standing with its wings abroad on the highest Pinnacle of
the Temple, which Ziribabdas told me, was nothing but a Talisman made to drive
away all subtle Spirits of the Air, or to hinder their malicious intents in
that Sacred place, and amongst the people of the City. He told me, that they
have some persons so well acquainted with that Art, that they can work wonders,
and do any Miracle by their Talismans, kill and make alive, cure distempers,
benum the minds and senses of men, draw together thousands of creatures and
birds, and make them perform any action that may be named. I entreated
Ziribabdas to let me see some of the skill of these Learned men in this Art. I
importuned him so much, that he went into one of the Closets from the Gallery,
and fetched to us a grave Signior about an hundred years of age, with a long
beard reaching down to his knees, and a pair of large whiskers each near a foot
long. He saluted me very gravely, and led me into a private Closet, which
belonged to him, out of it there was a way and a door into a stone-Balcony, of
a red transparent stone, with several Bosses or Apples of Gold. He had several
curious Inventions, Talismans, and other things of a wonderful Art. One thing
he took in hand, about the bigness of a Bushel, having several handles to it,
the substance, as I thought, was of Crystal: it had several large holes: in the
midst I could see many birds, all without motion, till the grave Philosopher,
whose name was Zidi Mufti, pulled a string, and set them all in a motion, then
did we hear the chirping of all manner of birds, so pleasantly, that we stood
in a maze and wondered; but much more, when we saw all the birds of the Air,
that can be named, flying a pace toward us into the Philosophers Closet: there
were Eagles, Cormorants, Magpies, Crows, Vulturs, Jack-daws, Kites, Sparrows,
Falcons, etc. I numbered above a thousand, which in less than a quarter of an
hour came into the Closet, and perched upon the Balcony and upon the Gallery.
When Zidi Mufti saw them all come, he played another tune, and all these Birds
began to dance two and two, and chirp according to their kind, very pleasantly.
This sport lasted about an hour, with such a variety of action, that we could
have wished it might have lasted longer. At the conclusion the Philosopher
dismissed them, neither at that time did any of them injure one another, but
were as quiet and harmless, as if there had been no enmity between them. When
they were gone, he took the Image of a man made in Wax; but showing all his
privy parts backwards, and with it he marched to the Balcony, where he sat up
and spoke two or three hard words, to the best of my remembrance they were
these, Bomralok Kostraborab Abrolakar Bourakabou Branbastrokobar Abrovora
Birikabu, and immediately there came a company of men and women of the
Sevarites that danced all naked before us in a beautiful Green: whiles he held
the Image in that place, they were not able to depart from thence, but
continued playing and dancing, and sporting with one another above an hour,
showing such antic tricks, as I never saw the like; for all this they were not
dishonest; but immediately as soon as the Image disappeared, every one of them
departed and run away; but whiles the Image stood still, they were neither
ashamed, nor could they stir from the place, so great a power these Talismans
have upon the minds of men, as well as the bodies of beasts and birds. It Is an
Art which can give as much delight as profit to those that understand it well;
for they can perform those things in Nature that are most wonderful, and
advantageous to the life of man. In the first Ages of the World this Art was
generally known amongst the Learned: and when I saw how perfect the Sevarites
were in it, I wished with all my heart, that we had but some insight into the
same Art and skill for the good of our Country; but our ignorance would slander
such knowledges, and think it to be Magic, if we did not understand the depth
of it, nor the causes that such men set a work, for many wonderful effects are
to be produced by the inferior causes, which are secret and hid to the most
part of men; for such is our natural unskilfulness, that we know not the
hundredth part of those things that we may easily attain to. This Learned
Philosopher gave me another diversion: he fetched his Instrument for that
purpose, and caused such musical Sounds and Voices to be in the Air round about
us at a distance, that we began to hang between fear and pleasure. When
Ziribabdas saw a change in our countenance, he desired us to be contented, and
assured us, that we should receive no harm. The noise and voices continued half
an hour, not in the Instrument, but at a distance, and with such a variety of
Sounds, that I could never imagine what it was. For whiles he stayed upon the
Balcony, he turned the Instrument round with a little wheel, which was in the
inside, but this had the power by the Talismanical Art to cause in the Air such
shrieks, cries, hollowings, and sometimes such curious and melodious voices,
that we were ravished and struck into admiration. We desired to know what it
was that made that noise in the Air; the Philosopher told us, that they were
airy Spirits, which this Talisman had the power to attract, and to oblige to
break out into those shrieks and cries. This caused us to wonder the more, that
this corporeal Instrument, which seemed to have nothing but material, should
draw together on a sudden such powerful Spirits, and oblige them to give sport
to men. I concluded from these Examples, that he that understands well the
Talismanical Art, is able to do any thing in Nature, to work wonders and
miracles, and to delight himself with any kind of sport when he pleases. After
these passages, I saw another Philosopher, very well skilled in this curious
Art, bring before Sevarminas threescore Lions roaring, with an hundred Bears,
twenty wild Horses, two hundred Mastiffs, thirty Leopards, forty wild Bulls,
which he caused first to cry every one according to his custom and nature, then
the Philosopher forced them to dance whiles he played upon a musical
Instrument, and they performed this as exactly, as if they had been taught on
purpose; but when he saw his time, he set them all together by the ears, the
Dogs, the Lions, and the Bears, every one pitched upon his Enemy, and began a
pleasant Fight, which lasted two full hours, with a great deal of variety of
sport, which caused Sevarminas and all his Court osttimes to laugh heartily.
When he has a desire to take any such diversion, he sends for some of these
men skilled in the Talismanical Art, and they answer his expectations in all
things, and bring before him whom, and what they please. We returned our thanks
to this worthy Philosopher for his great pains. He answered, that he was glad
to give us any delight, and that if we would visit him at some other more
convenient time, he would show us some more of his skill in acting greater
wonders, than what we had seen; but that he had done this only to divert us for
the present, because he saw that we could not stay with him long; but if we
would see more wonderful things, that we should do well to come to him some
morning, and to spend a whole day with him, and that then he would show us what
we had never seen, nor never should see but by his and his Companions means. We
returned him our thanks again for his great kindness, and then departed with
Ziribabdas, who led us next to see the Treasury of the Church, which is a large
Room joining to the Porch, all arched above, with six Windows on the top: the
Walls were of Diamant, niched with Saphirs and Emeralds, in it were Chests and
Coffers full of the rarest things in Nature, offered to the service of the
great God by the Citizens of Sevarinde. We beheld with admiration the rare
workmanship, the curious things, and the Excellencies that had been there laid
up by many Ages, and never made use of. Some Pictures were upon the Walls of
this Treasury, of an admirable hand: Ziribabdas told us, that the Painter was
an European, cast upon their Coasts by a storm at Sea, and that he lived and
dyed in that Country; and that the Father of Sevarminas had such an affection
for him, that he gave him a beautiful young Virgin to Wife, one of the most
considerable of his Court, and gave him an Estate to live on, having made him a
Citizen of Sevarinde: and that he lived there fifty years, till he was an old
man, leaving behind him many children, Girls and Boys, to perpetuate his name
amongst the Sevarites. His name was Simeon van Zurich, a Dutch man, who had a
great skill in Swimming; for when he was cast away, all the Ships company was
lost, but only him: they were at a distance from the shore, and could not so
well swim, or were devoured by the fishes. It was his fortune to be carried
stark naked on the Coast of the Sevarites, in an Island full of Ladies of
Pleasure, who had been banished thither for their incontinency. As soon as it
was day, he found himself surrounded by a whole Troop of the female Sex, who
had a great delight to see him, and came to draw him into the Country; but when
he saw no men, he was afraid to venture amongst them: this caused him to swim
up the River into the Land in the sight of these beautiful Creatures that
accompanied on the shore, and often made signs to him to land, and go no
further; but he continued on till he landed amongst the innocent Sevarambi, who
clothed and brought him to their King. He was by him entertained courteously
and nobly, and provided for the rest of his days. When we had taken notice of
the Treasury, and of all the great Rarities that are in it, we marched into the
Church or Temple again to see the excellent Workmanship, the Carving, and rare
things that adorn this excellent place. Ziribabdas caused us to take notice of
three Partitions in the Temple, the one, which is at the higher end, is only
for their Priests and their King: the second is for their Nobles: the third is
for all sorts of persons promiscuously without exception. By that time we had
seen all this, the night drew on apace, which caused us to withdraw toward our
Lodgings. Zidi Parabas led me, and Sermodas went with Maurice, our other
Companions followed us to our Lodgings. We took our leaves of the generous and
civil Ziribabdas, the Chief Priest of that stately and glorious
Cathedral-Temple of Sevarinde, and thanked him heartily for his great courtesy
showed to us. When we came to our Lodgings, we found our Supper ready, and we
were no less prepared for it; but Zidi Parabas returned to the Palace, to give
Sevarminas an account of his Commission and of our Walk, promising to return to
us the next day. Sermodas, my self, and Companions supped that night together,
the Music playing all the while we were eating. After Supper we had good store
of rare Wines brought to us, which we received and made good use of; but, as we
understood, that the Sevarites hate Drunkards and drunkenness, I advised all my
Companions to drink moderately, for fear of giving an offense to those noble
people. They followed my advice, and after an hour or two's discourse with
Sermodas, we went to our beds, where we had been the night before. Sermodas
brought us into the Chamber, and then bid us good night, telling us, that he
would call us up the next day, and show us some other diversions, as pleasant
as those of the day before. We thanked him, and told him, that we should be
ready to wait upon him, and that we had seen so many wonders already, that we
thought that we could never see any more: at those words he departed smiling.

The next morning Zidi Parabas and Sermodas, with twenty more Gentlemen of the
Kings Court, came to attend upon us, Sermodas only entering the room, the rest
stayed in a Chamber hard by till we were dressed. As soon as we were ready, two
Fellows, with Flutes in their hands, ready to play, saluted us, offering to
conduct us to the company that stayed for us: they marched before us, making
most curious Music, till we came to the company. A grave Signior of them stood
with Zidi Parabas, and told us, that we must that day ride with Sevarminas into
the Country, and that he had sent them to call upon us for that purpose.
Sermodas had caused some of the excellent Wines of the Country to be brought,
he caused some to be poured forth into a great shell of a Fish, which is the
ordinary Drinking vessels of that Country. He caused us to taste of it, and
obliged all the company, before we went out, to pledge us: which when we had
done, Zidi Parabas led us to the door, where we saw as many Dromedaries ready
sadled as we were men: we mounted upon them that were prepared for us; but when
I inquired for a Bridle, they bid me take hold of the Ears; for in this Country
these Creatures have Ears of an incredible length, they are commonly an Ell
long, but very slender: so that they are fastened together as the Reins of a
Bridle, at the end, with a Clasp, or some such thing. This men hold in their
hands, and with this they govern or turn them at their pleasure. I must
confess, I was afraid when I was first mounted upon this strange beast, which
is so swift, that in a day we rid over hedges and ditches and uneven places,
above one hundred and fifty miles. We went through the streets to the Kings
Palace, where we attended not long before there came out a great Train with
Sevarminas himself, I and my Companions alighted to salute and do him
reverence. He inquired how we had thrived, whether we wanted any thing; we
assured him, that amongst so courteous and obliging a People as his Subjects
were, we thought that we could not possibly want any manner of thing needful
for the life of man. He bid us get up again and ride along with him, we were in
all near a thousand, all on swift Dromedaries: the Kings was as white as Snow,
all the rest either red or black. It seems Sermodas had given the King an
account of the passages of the former day: so that, to increase the more our
wonder, he was resolved to show us the excellency of his Country, and many
other rare things; for that purpose he had appointed in our Road toward the
Confines, all the ingenious men to meet us at every Town with their Talismans
in their hands ready to show us their skill and sport. We had not gone above
two Leagues Southward, but we came to a Town called by the Sevarites Magmandi,
where thirty Philosophers met the King; and to welcome him, they had a Talisman
ready to make a Louse grow in an instant as big as a Camel. I saw the beast,
and admired how such things could be done by a man, and as they told me, that
they did it by the natural causes alone, without the concurrence of any other
thing. As soon as the Philosopher had turned the Louse into a Camel, he mounted
upon it, and offered his service to Sevarminas to wait upon him in his
Progress, which was accepted. And if I should say, that this strange Camel
gallopped, or rather flew, as fast as any of our Dromedaries, scarce any person
will believe it: yet true it is, that this new-made creature led the way before
us, and returned back with (...) the wing no signs of being weary: in(...)
Provender the Philosopher had (...) himself with a bottle of Spirits, (...) he
would sometimes, as I took (...), pour into the Camels Ears, and-by that means
kept the beast alive and vigorous. Another of these Philosophers had got a Flea
in his hand, which, with an Image of Wax, he turned into a Dromedary, so like
that which the King was upon, that I could not tell how to distinguish them. I
saw the Flea which he held in a silken string, he showed it to all our company,
and before us, by an application of the Talismanical Figure, the Flea began to
dilate it self into the body of a Camel, and out of the body the legs and ears
and head broke out almost like a Snail when it goes to creep, or like a
Tortoise. All this was done in less than a quarter of an hour. He also had a
Saddle ready to ride along with us in the company of the King and his Nobles. I
confess, I took these two Learned Sevarites for Conjurers, if not for Devils in
men's shape. When Zidi Parabas perceived in our way, that Maurice whispered to
me, he drew near to me, and assured me, that they could do more wonderful Feats
than that by their great Art, and that what they had done, was done by the
secret power of natural causes, set on work by the influence of the Talisman. I
told him, that I could wish, that we in our Country had the same skill and
knowledge: but he answered, That such Mysteries are not fit but for men of the
most refined Wits, and that no dull or vicious apprehensions can be capable of
the sublime Notions that such men must have to act such Wonders, and to find
out the way to make such strange Talismans. Another of these Philosophers, who
stood within some golden Rails adjoining to the Highway, had in his hand a
naked Image of Wax, representing a young Girl, which Image he turned about his
head, with some hard words which he uttered out of his mouth, and immediately
there came to the place all the young Maidens within a certain distance, and
threw off their garments with their modesty, in my judgment; but the religious
Sevarites are not ashamed to behold what Nature teaches other men to cover.
These Maidens leaped over the Rails about threescore in number, and began a
most pleasant Dance upon the green grass before all our company, the
Philosopher having appointed a Musician ready for that purpose, who played all
the while upon his Instrument of Music, according to which these Maidens
leaped and danced up and down, which gave Sevarminas much sport and to all his
Court; but when the Philosopher began to turn away, and cover the waxen Image,
they took all their garments again, and departed with much satisfaction,
because they had given some delight to their Prince, whom all the Sevarites
reverence as they do a visible God; they are therefore very joyful, when they
can do any thing to please and delight him. The rest of the Philosophers showed
every one in his turn what he was able to do. One held a Mouse by the tail in
one hand, and his Talisman in the other, and threw the Mouse behind Sevarminas
upon his Dromedary, which as soon as it was there, but a moment, it had the
power to attract one of the most beautiful Virgins, whom I saw straggling
behind the King. This thing caused the whole company to burst out in laughter;
for she was just putting on her Apparel with the rest of her Companions, when
the Talisman tied her hands and feet, and drew her on a sudden, so that she was
seen to leap all naked through the midst of us behind the King, where she
remained till the Philosopher drew her back with the Talisman, and caused her
to put on her cleaths and depart. Another of these Makers of Talismans was
blowing with a Pipe at the breech of a Cat, which swelled bigger than any
Elephant: when therefore he saw his time, he turned the tail toward the
company, and by a secret Talisman gave liberty to the wind to go softly out by
the same hole where it was put in. The noise was so delightful, that I never
heard more variety and sweoter Music in my days; for the Philosopher stroked
the Cats back and belly, and as he pressed it harder or softer, the wind would
go out and whistle all sorts of Tunes. The King himself and all the company
desired the Learned man to come to Court as soon as he should return, and give
them that sport, which they fancied very much. I looked upon the Cat, whether
it was alive, and I saw that it was a natural Cat, much like the Civet-Cats;
for besides the Music, the Air was filled with such excellent and glorious
smells, that we were all ravished and in a maze, how this could come to pass.
All the rest showed some trick or other, but for brevity sake I omit them, to
give an account of our Journey. I cannot here describe the number of beautiful
Fabrics, of Orchards full of all manner of Fruittrees, Gardens with all kind
of Flowers, Herbs, and Plants, both delightful to the eye, and useful to the
body. I cannot number all the other Rarities and Riches which this Country was
full of, with the pleasant Channels of Crystal-water, with the Bridges and
Arches in our way, with the many Towns walled and open, most of precious
Stones, and adorned with Gold and Silver, and Ivory, and all manner of Riches.
If I should give a particular account, no person can believe, unless he had
been himself an Eyewitness of the things that we saw then in our Journey. We
went through Parascali, a good Town, where the River Omer joins with Rocara.
The Inhabitants were so civil, that they met the King with rich Tables of Gold,
covered all over with Dishes of Sweetmeats, of a China substance and make.
Every Cavaliero had liberty to take what pleased him best. Whiles we stayed
there, some Philosophers stood in our way to give us some of the former sports:
at last he that was mounted upon his Camel, made of a Louse, caused two great
wings to grow out at the back, by the means of a Talisman, which he had brought
with him in his hand. As soon as they were perfected, the Camel flew up to the
top of the great Steeple of the Temple of Parascali, where it stood a while
with the Philosopher on its back: at last it returned to us again without any
harm either to the beast or the man. The next Town was Moramir, the third
Storax, the fourth Bolaciro, the fifth Memrak, the sixth Burino, where we stopped
to take a Dinner prepared for us. I must not forget to mention certain Images
that stood in the Highway, at the entering in of the Town; there were two
chief, a young Maid of Alabaster, and a Man of white Marble. The Philosophers
Camel would not go beyond them, till he began to prick the beast forward with a
Talisman. If it had not been for this accident, I should not have taken so much
notice of them, nor inquired after the cause of their being there. Zidi Parabas
gave me full satisfaction, and told me, that they were the Images of two
unfortunate Lovers of the Town of Burino, who had been constant to one another,
till death separated them, their love and constant affection caused their
deaths: For it happened, that their Parents would not consent to their
conjunction, which they dared not agree to without their leave, and the public
Solemnity, for fear of the disgrace which usually, as a consequence, attends
upon such kind of amorous indiscretions in the Country of the Sevarites. They
were therefore resolved to love one another tenderly, and to refuse all other
Matches and Proffers. They had been often tempted with other Proposals, and
with the Beauty and Riches of other Parties; but Ziricus and Malimna, so were
they named by Zidi Parabas, flighted all things but the sight and company of
one another, which they would endeavor to enjoy by stealth, because they were
narrowly watched by their jealous Parents, who by no means would suffer them to
come near together with their good will. Their love by this restraint increased
more and more, and their mutual affection found many Tricks and Arts to meet
together in spite of their Parents watchfulness. They found many back doors
and secret corners, to which their extraordinary Sympathy brought them
together: yet they would not be persuaded to violate the Law of the Sevarites.
This Love continued near forty years with a constancy worthy to be chronicled;
yet their Parents would never consent to their Marriage. At last when they saw,
that neither their affection, nor their resolution never to change could
prevail upon their cruel Parents, and their invincible obstinacy, they
consulted betwixt themselves to depart together out of the Kingdom, and to
marry in some other Land. Whiles they were in this resolution, they knew not
which way to go, because the passages were narrowly guarded. At a meeting
therefore, an old crafty Devil appears to them in the likeness of a man, and
offers them his service to assist them over the Seas. They agreed for a price
to be transported to an Island not inhabited, upon the Pacifick Sea, with some
Tools, and grain for their maintenance. The Devil, in the shape of a Sevarite,
promised to bring them a Ship in the dead time of the night to the great River
of Rocara; for they thought he had been some Seaman or Ship-master. The time
and place of departing was appointed. The young Couple, according to their
engagement, came to the place a little before the evening; and when they saw
that the Devil was rough to them, and had cloven feet, they began to suspect,
yet they were so passionate for one another, and therefore so blind, that the
woman first ventured her self in the Arms of the Devil to be carried through
the water to the Ship, which they saw in the River: the young man intending to
follow next; but the wicked Devil, instead of conveying the young Virgin safe
aboard, plunged and held her under water till she was stifled and dead, and
that in sight of her Sweetheart, who as soon as he heard her begin to shriek,
and saw what was practicing against her life and his, it is not to be imagined
what torments and trouble of mind he was in, sometimes with his Sword in his
hand he ran into the water up to the neck, again he would return up to the
bank, to see whether his dearly Beloved was yet alive, again he would run into
the River, till at last, when he perceived the wickedness of the counterfeit
Devil, he cast himself cesperately into the River; and though he had never any
skill to swim, his love for his Beloved, for whom he had a more tender
affection than for his own soul, made him venture, and found a means to get as
far as the body of his murdered Darling, which he brought ashore, and seeing no
sign of life, he killed himself, and fell upon her body. In remembrance of this
Tragedy the Town has dedicated these two Images, the one to Ziricus, and the
other to Malimna, with a great many lesser Images of young Men and Maidens,
that are all weeping for the misfortune of these two constant Lovers. This
story Zidi Parabas told me, whiles the Dinner was bringing in to the great Hall
of Ivory, where the King Sevarminas was to dine with all his Court. When we
were sat down, we had all things needful presented before us, with a Concert
of Music mingled with rare Voices of some Virgins of the City. After this, a
Philosopher brought in a Silver Chain, a great white Rat, about the bigness of
a good Rabbet, which leaped upon the Table near Sevarminas, and looked
wishfully upon him when he was eating; but when the Rat saw that the King said
nothing, the Rat reached forth its paw or foot, and took some of the meat. The
King was not a little surprised with the Rats boldness: How now! said he, did
your Master teach you this? The Philosopher by the Talismanical Art could make
it speak what he listed, for he could govern the tongue of the little creature
in that manner, that what was in his mind the beast would speak: By your leave,
my Lord, quoth the Rat to the King, I am hungry. The Rats speech surprised the
King, and all the company left their meat to hear the discourse between the
King and the Rat; for the Philosopher told his Majesty, That it would give him
any answer that he would desire. They not knowing from whence it proceeded no
more than we, they stood to see what the Rat would say: the Rat was neither
ashamed, nor afraid of the company, but went from one dish to another to taste
which was the best; it met with an Ostrich-Pye, on which it fell aboard without
any manners: the King bid it be gone, I Will fill my belly first, answered the
Rat, now I am here. King, I command thee to be gone. Rat, I love this company
too well to run away in haste. King, Make haste. Rat, We must do nothing
rashly. King, Thou will eat all. Rat, There is enough in the Land for you and
me too. King, Who tutored thee? Rat, My Master. Several other discourses past
between Sevarminas and this artificial creature, which was made to speak, not
by its own understanding, but by that of the Philosopher only; by the
Talismanical Art he could make use of the organ and tongue of the Rat to speak
what was according to his mind. This was a curious passage, and gave the whole
company great delight. The Philosopher told Sevarminas, That he could make any
beast, that was tame, to speak in that manner, and say any thing. We found this
to be too true; for afterward another Learned man had taught a Camel, another
an Ass, another a Dromedary, another a tame Lion to say any thing, with as much
reason, as if they had been rational creatures, whereas it was but the organ of
their tongue that was made use of by the strong power of a Talisman to turn
which way, and articulate whatsoever the Author of the Talisman pleased. We
stayed not long in the place; but as soon as we had all dined, and refreshed
our selves, we mounted upon our Dromedaries, and went on in our Journey. The
Louse, Camel, and the Flea turned into a Dromedary, going with us in our
company, we passed by a curious Town that stood upon an Hill, which had a
plentiful stream of water rising from the top, and falling from a steep place
upon a Diamant Rock, and then encompassed the Hill round with a deep Chanel,
over which there was a curious Bridge of precious Stones, with Silver Globes on
the top, and the sides of the Walls with a most beautiful Arch, the most
regularly built that I ever knew. The Towns name is Tiftani, commanded by a
Prince, the most considerable of all the Subjects of Sevarminas, he came out to
meet us with a beautiful Guard of young Gallants, all clothed in Cloth of
Silver. The Princess also came to the entering in of the Town with a beautiful
Attendance of Ladies in their rich Attire covered over with Pearls, and the
richest and most precious Stones. They made a low obeisance to King Sevarminas,
and offered him the Keys of their City, which he returned to the Prince
Muraski: that was the name of the Prince, who was young, about the age of
thirty years. We passed through the streets through the Acclamations and
Applauses of all the Common people, that are the happiest in the World in all
respects; for they pay but little or no Tribute, and have all things in such
abundance, glory, and plenty, that there is no want nor complaints in all the
Land, the poorest Sevarite has enough, and the richest can have no more than
they use, for all the rest is superfluous. The next Town was Tiptanicar, where
upon an high Tower stood a Talisman of Gold, for what intent I could never
learn. We went through Muramni, Borascot, Malavisi, and several other good
walled Towns in our way. We lodged that night in one of the Kings Palaces,
situate in a little Lake, about ten miles in compass, in an Island that stands
in the middle. Several Boats and Vessels waited for us to convey us and our
Dromedaries over to the Island. This place is one of the most pleasant abodes
of the World. Here we stopped above a fortnight, which we spent sometimes in
fishing, sometimes in hunting, walking about, and admiring the wonderful things
that appeared every where. Sometimes the Kings Philosophers together with the
Musicians, would make us such good sport, that we were never weary, we could
have spent the days and the nights in seeing such sports and passtimes.
Sevarminas all this while sent for me often, with De Nuits and Maurice, to
discourse with us, and inform himself concerning the Affairs, Commodities, and
Conveniences of our Country: in which particulars I always gave him such
answers as would increase his desire to entertain a Trade and Correspondency
with our Nation, and the other People of Europe. When we had lived here in this
Castle, and pleasant Island called the Isle of Foxes, and in the Sevarites
Language Cristako, we set forward for another place called the Mount Timpani,
where the Kings of the Sevarites have another House of Pleasure: it is about an
hundred Leagues distant toward the Southwest from Cristako. We passed through
many Woods, Valleys, and an open Country in our way to it, and had the sight of
several rare Towns, Seravi, Puteoli, Nanti, Quarok, Runtour, and several others
no less rich and beautiful than the former. I cannot forget to mention a rare
Invention which I saw at Seravi. There is a large River about two miles distant
from the Town, which stands upon a Hill without any water. The ingenious
Sevarites therefore have found an Art to convey this great River in an
artificial Chanel, built and supported upon an Arch of hard Diamant stone,
above two miles from one Hill to the other, over a deep Valley, into which the
River did run before; but because the Valley was not so wholesome an Air as the
top of the Mountain, they have built there their houses, and been at the
trouble to make for the River an artificial Chanel, so deep, that Boats of an
hundred Tun can sail up and down in the driest time of Summer; for there is
scarce any mud or dirt in the Chanel over the Valley: the water is as clear as
Crystal.

In another Town called Runtour, there was a company of Apes met us at the
entry in of the Town: they were so bold, that they leapt upon the backs of our
Dromedaries, and put us in no little danger to be cast to the ground. But one
of our Philosophers pulled out of his pocket a strange Talisman, of a yellow
color, through which there was a hole which he clapped to his lips, and whistled
away the Apes. They were not gone ten paces from us, but they all fell down
dead with the venomous Spirits which this Talisman conveyed to them without
hurting any creature else; for you must know, that what is a poison to one
creature, is not so to another, and these skillful men so well read in the
secret Mysteries of Nature, can direct their operations which way they please,
at a distance as well as near at hand. The King of the Sevarites has always
one or more of these Philosophers to accompany him when he goes into the
Country, for fear any accident might happen to his Person or Retinue.

We found a plentiful Dinner prepared for us at Nanti, where the Ladies of the
Town waited upon Sevarminas at the Table, and came to the rest of his Company
to offer their Services. The Governors name was Forabo, an old grave Signior
near fourscore years of age, he had twenty Sons comely and proper young men,
with five Daughters, all by one Woman, whose name was Pluralis: she was then a
grave Matron of a beautiful and grave countenance, her Daughters young Ladies
followed her when she came to salute Sevarminas and his Lords. We made no long
stay in this place, but marched next to the Mount Timpani, but could not get
thither till the next day at night; we lodged therefore in the Town of Durambi,
and the next day early in the morning we set forward in our Journey to mount
Timpani, where we arrived about Sunset. There happened nothing in this days
riding remarkable, only Maurices Dromedary being offended that he had kicked
her with his heel, cast him to the ground, and bruised his thigh and arm; but
the Kings Physician applying an Herb called Muroz, which he found in the fields
hard by, cured the wound, eased him presently of his pain, so that he never
complained afterward. The nature of these creatures is such, that they must be
gently dealt withal, otherwise they become furious and mad: but if the Rider
handles them softly, there is no beast so gentle, so easy, and useful.

Mount Timpani is a pleasant Hill crowned on the top with all manner of the
most beautiful Trees in Nature, bearing all sorts of Fruits. In the midst is
the Kings Palace moted round. The water runs from six great Fountains, which
are on the top of the Hill, unto which there is an easy ascent on the side of
the Hill: about half a mile from the Castle is a Town of the same name, very
glorious to the eye when the Sun shines. The Castle or the Kings Palace is
about a mile in circumference, with strong Walls of clear stones, of a white
and reddish color, such as I never saw the like before. It was well furnished
with all manner of Household Stuff, the richest that I ever beheld: the large
and spacious Rooms, Chambers, and Halls, and Galleries, with their Ornaments,
were not to be numbered. At our first arrival, the Governor of the Town, with
the chief Inhabitants, came to wait upon their King, who showed them a great
deal of respect as belonged to his loving Subjects. All this while he had
concealed the cause of his Journey to that place, and would not let any person,
not his own Son, nor any of his Privy Counselors understand any thing of it,
till three or four days after our arrival; for it becomes a great Prince, who
intends to act securely in weighty matters, not to let any man, not his
greatest Friends, know his intentions to the full. Sevarminas having here a
great business to put in execution, which concerned nothing less than the
safety and peace of his Empire, he concealed it from all the world, and gave
out, that he would make this Progress for his pastime and for his health. The
Governors name was Smuriamnas, a man of an ancient Family, lineally descended
from the great Sevarias, but young and very ambitious, and no less proud and
haughty amongst his Equals, which caused his People not to affect him so much
as otherwise they would have done. At our arrival he came to pay his Homage and
Respects to Sevarminas his Prince, and the next day invited him and all the
Court to a costly and sumptuous Banquet. I and my Companions, together with
Sermodas and Zidi Parabas, were lodged in a spacious Chamber, where were twenty
Beds of Ivory and Gold, with curious Curtains of Silk embroidered with Gold,
with the Walls hung with Pictures, very well and artificially drawn. After
Supper we went to take our leaves of King Sevarminas, and were immediately
conducted to our Chamber, where we rested sweetly, till the next morning the
noise of the Trumpets, Bag-pipes, Flutes, Viols, and Violins, Harps, Guitars,
and all manner of Music played at the Kings rising. This pleasant and
ravishing Harmony awakened us and our Chamberfellows, and obliged us to put on
our Apparel. We walked about the Chamber a while, discoursing of the strange
passages of our Journey, when in came a Messenger from the King to call us to
him. He had an intent to walk about his Parks, and view the Town before Dinner.
He was therefore willing, that we Strangers might go along with him, not only
for our satisfaction, but also to show his People men of foreign Nations come
to adore and worship him. The Parks were all walled round with many Lakes,
Ponds, Rivers, and Streams of Water full of all manner of wild and tame Fowl,
with all sorts of Beasts, Deer of all kinds, Rabbets, Hares, and a sort of
Creature named Buffoli, which has no joints in its forelegs, and nevertheless
runs as swift as any other beast. In the Parks we had the sight of many Trees
and Woods, where the Birds and wild Fowl and Beasts use to shelter themselves.
After this Walk we marched into the Town, all our Company, where the Governor
at the entrance received us with his Family; but the Citizens, with the chief
men, stood at a distance, crying out, men, women, and children in their
Language, Marabi, Marabi, Marabi, that is, Justice, Justice, Justice. I saw at
this sudden cry the Governors countenance change: he nevertheless drew near to
Sevarminas with all the respect imaginable; but he received him with a settled
countenance, and asked what the people meant by their Marabi. Before he had
time to answer, one of the chief of the Sevarites stepped forward, followed by
all the rest. They all fell upon their knees, and bowing to Sevarminas, they
humbly entreated him, that he would listen to and pity their grievance. What is
the matter? answered he. One of them stood up, and in the Governors presence
spoke to him in this manner: Most Noble and ever Glorious Monarch, we your
Subjects are heartily glad to see you amongst us, we have longed a great while
to have you here to free us from an intolerable burden. Prince Smuriamnas our
Governor forgetting the blessed Rules of our great Sevarias, oppresses us
contrary to all Law and Justice, and has spilled the innocent blood of many of
our friends, whose Souls will not suffer us to sleep in quiet, till their
deaths be revenged. We have often admonished him to recall him from his perverse
and wicked practices; but to all our admonitions he has returned nothing but
curses and blows without mercy: so that for these many years we have lived as
so many slaves; and unless your glorious Majesty will relieve us, we must
forsake him and his Principality, and seek our remedy in a retreat far from
him. But we expect from your Justice and Goodness that relief which you have
afforded to many of your poor Subjects in such like cases. This Speech made
Smuriamnas faint away, so that he fell down as dead before the whole company;
but Sevarminas caused him to be taken up, and his Physician to take care of
him. Sevarminas expected this complaint before he heard it. His coming was to
remove and punish Smuriamnas, and place in his stead his eldest Son Suricolis,
a young Man of an excellent beauty, who waited upon him from his youth. As soon
as he heard the peoples grievance, he assured them, that he would severely
punish him according to Law, and cause them to receive satisfaction, wishing
them all to depart home with this assurance, without noise or tumult, and to be
ready when his Judges should be ready to examine their Cause, to bring in their
Allegations and Proofs against Smuriamnas. In the mean while Sevarminas would
not go to the Palace of Smuriamnas as he was invited, nor to the Town Hall,
where the Chief of the Town promised to bring him a Dinner; but he returned
with all his Train to the Castle, where Dinner was ready for us. He gave Order,
that Smuriamnas should be kept in a close Prison, joining to the place of
Judicature, till the next day; for then he intended, with the Advice of his
Court, to punish him according to the Laws of the Land; for it seems he had
been guilty of Murder, and Violence, and Oppression, and had not observed the
sacred Laws of the Sevarites in his Jurisdiction. The next day we went down
into the Town to accompany Sevarminas, who sat down upon an high Throne
prepared for him, under a Canopy of Gold, embroidered; round about sat and
stood his religious Counselors and Judges. When it was noised about the Town,
that Sevarminas was sat in his Judgment Seat, for it was not above nine of the
clock in the morning, the whole Town came to the place, with intention to
accuse Smuriamnas, who was brought before the King with his hands tied behind
his back. Presently there came a Widow with four young Infants weeping, because
Smuriamnas had killed her Husband in his anger, for no other cause, but because
he would not comply with his irregular commands. She proved it against him by
no less than ten Witnesses, who were there present upon the place. Another
stepped up and said, That he had killed his Brother, producing sufficient
Witnesses that saw the Murder. Another complained of the destroying of his
Friend privately: others came forth to declare how Smuriamnas had oppressed
them with cruel Exactions. The King desired no other proof of these
Accusations, but the view of his body without a disguise, covering, or paint:
For, as I said before, as soon as men amongst the Sevarites have committed any
wickedness, there is immediately an alteration upon the body and skin of the
Offender, that declares what he has done. That this might not appear,
Smuriamnas had made use of the Talismanical Art and of Painting, by the one to
keep down all tumors and rising in his face and hands, and by the other to
cover all ugly colors that were upon his skin. Therefore the King commanded
him to be stripped naked, and carried into a Bath, and there to be rubbed and
washed, which accordingly was done. When he was brought back, I never saw such
a disfigured Creature, his arms were as black as pitch, his hands all gore
blood, his face as green as grass, his legs as yellow as saffron, on his back
and legs appeared two Tumors about the bigness of Walnuts. When he appeared so
odious to the company, the King passed his Sentence upon him, to the great joy
of the Inhabitants: and because blood requires blood, and no other Crime is to
be punished with death but Murder amongst the Sevarites, the King delivered him
to the will of the aggrieved parties to put him to death. They took him first
and whipped him, till his body was full of scars and wounds, which they
anointed with honey, and then tied him upon an high place in the middle of
their Town with his face upwards. As soon as he was there, a Swarm of Wasps and
Bees flew about him, with some Vulturs and Eagles, which devoured him in two
days: so that there was nothing remaining of his body but the bones. The King
condescended to this exemplary punishment, the rather, because Smuriamnas had a
design to alter the Government of the Sevarites, and revolt from his obedience:
for that purpose he had endeavored to persuade some other petty Princes to
join with him against their Sovereign King Sevarminas. Yet he was so gracious
to call his Son in the prefence of all the Chief men of the Town, and to
restore him to his Fathers Estate and Goods, without the least diminution of
any thing. He gave him this admonition in the prefence of a multitude of
people: Suricolis, said the King, thou have seen a severe Example of Justice
upon thy Father for abusing his Power and Authority, I might make that use of
his Crime, to deprive all his Family from any such opportunity of doing a
mischief; but I consider, that thy Religious inclinations have often caused
thee to disallow thy Fathers proceedings, and to blame him for the liberty he
took contrary to Justice and Law. I consider, that thou art as likely to do as
much good as Smuriamnas has done mischief. I restore thee not only to thy
Fathers Estate, but likewise to his Authority and Command. Take heed that thou
followest not thy Fathers Example: let not thy Glory puff thee up with pride,
nor thy Power cause thee to act contrary to Reason and Law: remember that there
is a punishment for evil doers, as there are rewards for the just: behave thy
self with that discretion and moderation, that thou may have the commendation
rather than the condemnation of thy Countrymen, that thou may deserve well
from me and them. This Clemency and Justice made Sevarminas to be praised in
all parts amongst the Sevarites; for thereby all persons were obliged, and
thereby secured from such like violences, and the noble Family of Smuriamnas
continued in its Splendor and Glory, only a rotten Member was taken out of the
way for the Public good.

After this piece of Justice, we remained there about a month, which Sevarminas
spent in regulating all those things-that were amiss in the Government of
Smuriamnas through his ill Management of Affairs. Afterward he left there the
new Governor Suricolis to do Justice in his absence, commanding him to be
impartial in all his public Actions, and to abstain from the Vices unto which
his Father was inclinable, which cast him into the dangerous precipice of
destruction.

We departed from thence with the blessings and good wishes of all the
Inhabitants, and in three days we returned to Sevarinde, where our coming was
expected with much impatience; for in the Kings absence that City could not be
governed well by any other person. Some disorders therefore had happened, which
the Viceroy could not pacify without the Kings Authority and Presence. The
whole City met us at two miles from the place, and in a most beautiful order
marched along with us into Sevarinde.

I continued in the City about half a year, which I spent in inquiring after
the Conveniences of the Country, the Seaports, the Commodities and Riches
that it brings forth, that I might give that information to my Countrymen,
which might benefit them in future Ages after my return to my own Country; for
we were in expectation of a Ship from Batavia, whither we had again sent some
of our men with a Vessel, which we had recovered amongst the Sporvi, to desire
the Governor of Batavia to send a Ship that might convey away our Goods and
persons.

But whiles I stayed there, a young Lady of Sevarinde, who had lost her Husband
by death, fell in love with Maurice, and often treated us very nobly in her
house. Manrice was no Sevarite, and could not refrain from some amorous
embrances, which the Lady gladly accepted of; for it was not lawful by the Law
of the Sevarites to match with any other generation. But to cover their
actions, the Lady had made use of the skill of the Philosophers to keep down
the Tumors in her skin and body, and to paint Maurices face and hands, which
hindered their secret correspondency from being known abroad. I must needs
confess, that Maurices happiness caused me to look abroad, and see whether I
could meet with the same Fortune: For that purpose I walked about the City
often, early and late, to see what I should by chance meet with. About a month
before our departure from Sevarinde, a young Gentlewoman, who had Father and
Mother, and never knew a man, invited me into a Garden, where she was alone, in
the Spanish Tongue. I was glad of this opportunity, we walked therefore several
turns together, talking of diverse matters: at last she opened her mind to me in
this manner. Sir, I understand by your countenance, that you are a Stranger,
our King Sevarminas has a great esteem for you, as well as my Father and
Mother: we have often talked of you and your religious behavior since your
coming into our Country; we shall therefore be glad to be acquainted with you;
for in my Fathers name I will bid you welcome, and will assure you, that he
will give you a kind reception; for he is a Merchant, and conveys Commodities
from City to City amongst the Sevarites. Sir, modesty will not give me leave to
tell you more of my mind; but when we shall be better acquainted, I hope --
With these words she broke off with a modest blush upon her Cheeks. The young
Woman was most beautiful, and was clothed in white Silk, with a Girdle of pure
Gold, all beset with precious Stones about her middle. She inquired whether I
were not married in my own Country, I assured her, that I was not: upon this,
she confessed her amorous inclinations for me, but withal told me, that every
thing must be performed in due time, and that she would not precipitate the
business, but wished me to ask her Fathers consent, assuring me, that she would
willingly leave all to live and dye with a man of that sweet temper and
disposition that I was of. Her loving Complements I answered with Caresses, and
assured her, that I should think my self happy in her enjoyment. We spent some
time together to begin our acquaintance, and to inform ourselves of one
another Conditions and Estate; but the night obliged me to leave her for that
time, and return to my Lodgings. When I gave Maurice an account of all
particulars, he advised me not to neglect the offer, but to visit her in her
Fathers house; for himself and his Lady, he told me, that he was resolved to
carry her with him to Batavia, where he intended to live and dye with her: and
though Women amongst the Sevarites are forbidden Goods, and that it is not
lawful to transport them to other Countries, he was persuaded by the means of
friends with Sevarminas, to get that liberty and privilege, which was never
granted to any before. This discourse and his hopes made me conceive the same.
I went therefore often to see the young Lady, who entertained me and my
Companions very courteously, as well as her Father and Mother. After several
Visits, I opened the matter to the Parents in their Daughters absence; they
made some difficulty, because of the Laws of the Country, and my inclinations
to return into my own Country. But when I told them, that we had Plantations in
Batavia, not far from thence, and that I would live and dye with her there,
they began to yield to my request, in case Sevarminas would dispense with the
Law of the Land, and suffer me to carry her away. This I told them, that I
would endeavor to obtain from his goodness. I cannot give an exact account of
all our pleasant meetings, of the rare things she discovered to me, of the
delightful Walks, and other things which pass all imagination. But certainly
her company and sweet Conversation made me spend my time with great
contentment. In order to our Marriage, when the Portion was agreed upon, I
caused Zidi Parabas and Ziribabdas, my two intimate Friends, to open the
business to King Sevarminas, that we might have his approbation and consent to
that which was not agreeable with the ancient Laws of the Sevarites. But in
regard we had behaved our selves so religiously since our being in the Country,
he thought it no disgrace to grant us more liberty than ordinary. After this
business had been debated in his Privy Council, it was resolved that this
course should be taken to oblige us the more, and invite our Country men to
trade with his People. Therefore I had a leave to marry publicly my young
Mistress, and Maurice also had a Dispensation to take to Wife his courteous
Lady. When all these things were agreed upon, the day was appointed, for both
King Sevarminas, and all the Nobles of his Court, assisted at the Solemnity,
and brought us to his Royal Palace, where he bestowed upon us most rich and
glorious Gifts, and entertained our new and young Wives with a sumptuous Feast,
at which they had the Honor to sit next the Queen. The Ceremony of Marriage
was performed in the great Temple of Sevarinde, by breaking of bread, and
joining of hands, with many Prayers and Blessings from their Priests. It was
concluded with a Dance and Music, where all the young Ladies of the Court
showed their activity.

Before the Marriage was concluded, a Ship was arrived amongst the Sporvi from
Batavia, where Mien Here van Plumerick commanded in Chief. As soon as we had
news of this Ship, we went and gave an account of its arrival to Sevarminas,
who desired us to send for the Captain Van Plumerick, and promised, that then
we should have liberty to depart along with him, with our Wives, and such
things as belonged to us, to Batavia, or whither we had a mind to go. We
thanked him for his great and extraordinary Civilities, and told him, that we
would spread his Fame all over the World. According to this Order, Sermodas was
sent back to Sporunde, to fetch Captain Van Plumerick, whose Ship had Orders to
get into the River of Rocara. He came with some kind of reluctance, not knowing
the Civilities and good Entertainment that we had found amongst the Sevarites.
But when he was arrived, and saw the Riches and Happiness of the People and
Country, and found them, as well as we, to be men of Faith, good Behavior, and
Honesty, he was not sorry for his condescension to this request. After his
arrival to Sevarinde, we remained there two months, which we spent in merry
Sports, Feasts, Banquets, Hunting, Hawking, and all manner of Delights,
according to the custom of that glorious Court. Sevarminas was well pleased
with the Conversation of Van Plumerick; for he was a gallant Man, and knew so
well how to hit the humor of Sevarminas, that the King gave him very rich
Presents. His Ship had Orders to draw near to the Borders of the Sevarites into
the River Rocara, because we might more conveniently load our Goods, and
because Sevarminas had a great desire to go on board, and see the manner and
fashions of our Ships of War, and the great Guns that were on board. To comply
with his desire, we all went to the banks of the River Rocara, where the Ship
rode at an Anchor, trimmed and flourishing with Garlands and Pendents of all
colors. Sevarminas, accompanied by all his Court, was carried in the Captains
Pinnace that waited for him, with several other Boats: when he was aboard, the
Cannon and Trumpets bid him welcome. The Captain presented him with some
Rarities, which they have not in that Country. He gave him a Watch, a Clock,
Guns of an extraordinary make, with many other things of Europe. After a
Banquet in the great Cabin of the Ship, he returned to the shore, very well
satisfied with his Entertainment. He desired one or two of our great Guns; for
he intended to have some cast of Silver, because he had no Brass nor Bell-metal
in all his Country.

We returned with him to Sevarinde, and then taking our farewell of all our
Friends and Relations, we carried away our Goods, and shipped them aboard. Van
Plumericks Ship, with our Wives, and all our Company, set sail toward Batavia;
but a storm, or rather a Hurricane at Sea, had a most driven us back again on
the shore. We escaped narrowly by the great skill of the Mariners, and the
watchfulness and vigilance of the Captain: so that in six days, or thereabouts,
after the storm, we had sight of a Cape in Batavia, where we landed, to the
great joy of all our Countrymen, who were desirous to see the new Country that
we had discovered, when we showed them our Riches and Jewels, and gave them an
account of the excellent People that inhabit there.

FINIS.
A Catalogue of some Books Printed for, and Sold by H. Brom, since the
dreadful Fire of London, to 1676.
DR. Woodford on the Psalms. -- His Divine Poems.

The Reformed Monastery, or the Love of Jesus.

Bishop Wilkins Natural Religion.

130 Sermons by Mr. Farindon, in three Vol. in Folio.

Dr. Heylin on the Creed, Fol.

A Guide to Eternity, by John Bona.

Practical Rules for a Holy Life.

Dr. Du Moulins Prayers.

A Guide to Heaven, with a Rule of Life.

Bishop Wilkins Real Character.

A Companion to the Temple, or a help to Public Devotion, by Dr. Comber, in
Octavo, 4 Vol.

Holy Anthems of the Church.

A Looking-glass for Loyalty.

The Fathers Legacy to his Children, being the Whole Duty of Man.

Gerhard's Meditations in Latin.

Several Sermons at Court, etc. Papal Tyranny, as it was exercised over England
for some Ages, with two Sermons on the fifth of November. And several Tracts
more against Popery.

Histories.
The Life of the Duke of Espernon, the great Favorite of France, from 1598.
where D' Avila leaves off, to our times, by Charles Cotton Esquire in Folio.

The History of the Charter House.

The State of the Ottoman Empire, with Cuts, by P. Ricaut Esquire in Octavo.

The Lives of the Grand Viziers.

Bishop Cousin against Transubstantiation.

The Common Law Epitomized.

The Commentaries of Mr. Blaiz de Montluck, the great Favorite of France, in
which are contained all the Sieges, Battles, Skirmishes, for three Kings
Reigns, by Charles Cotton Esquire in Folio.

The Fair One of Tunis, a new Piece of Gallantry, by C. C. Esquire in Octavo.

Erasmus Coll. in English, Octavo.

Poems.
Elvira, a Comedy by the Earl of Bristol.

Mr. A. Bromes Songs and Poems, Octavo.

Horace his Works Englished by several Persons.

Virgil Travestie, by C. C. Esquire.

Lucian's Dialogues, Burlesque.

Horace, with a Song at every Act, by Charles Cotton Esquire.

Mr. Cowlys Satyr against Separatists.

Dr. Guidet's History of Bath.

Dr. Barbettes and Dr. Deckers excellent Practice of Physic, and Observations.

Sir K. Digby, his excellent Receipts in Physic and Surgery, and of Drinks
and Cookery.

The Anatomy of the Elder-tree.

Dr. Glisson, De Vita Naturae, Quarto.

-- His Anatomia.

The Universal Angler, in three Parts.

Lord Bacons Advancement of Learning.

The Planters Manual, very useful for such as are curious in Planting and
Grafting, by C. Cotton, Esquire.

The Complete Gamester.

Dr. Skinner's Lexicon, in Folio, 1 l. 5 s.

Papists no Catholics.

The Jesuits Loyalty answered.

16 Controversial Letters, in Quarto.

The Growth of Knavery and Popery.

Essays of Love and Marriage, Duod.

Dr. Moulin's Education of Children.

The Vindication of the Clergy.

Toleration discussed.

A Treatise of Humane Reason, in 12.

School-Books.
Nolens Volens, or you shall make Latin.

Pools Pernassus in English.

Centum Fabulae, in Octavo.

Artis Oratoriae.

The Scholars Guide from the Accidence to the University.

Sir James Dyer's Reports, Folio.

The Exact Constable Enlarged.

The Plague of Athens, by Dr. Sprat.

Six Witty Conversations.

Mr. Sarazins Ingenious Works.

Coke of Trade.

Sir Ph. Meadows Wars of Denmark and Sweden.

The Geographical Dictionary.

Vossius's Motion of the Seas and Winds.

Mr. Sympsons Compendium of Music.

-- His Division Viols.

Banisters New Airs and Dialogues.

Old Father Christmas Arraigned and Condemned.

Leyburns Arithmetical Recreations.

Dr. Fords Discourse on the Man whose Hands and Legs rotted off, for stealing a
Bible, and denying it.

Five Love Letters.


