Former Ages never Heard of, AND After Ages will Admire. Or a Brief Review of
the most Material PARLIAMENTARY TRANSACTIONS. Beginning, Nov: 3. 1640. WHEREIN
The Remarkable Passages both of their Civil and Martial Affairs, are
continued unto this present Year.

Published as a Breviary, leading all along successively, as they fell out in
their several years: So that if any man will be informed of any remarkable
Passage, he may turn to the year, and so see in some measure, in what Month
thereof it was accomplished. For Information of such as are altogether ignorant
of the rise and progress of these Times. A Work worthy to be kept in Record,
and communicated to Posterity.

Who is wise, and he shall understand these things? prudent, and he shall know
them? for the ways of the Lord are right, and the just shall walk in them: but
the transgressors shall fall therein. Hosea 14. 9. LONDON: Printed by M. S. for
Tho: Jenner, at the South-Entrance of the Royal EXCHANGE, 1654.

The Chronology.
IN the first year of King Charles his Reign, a Parliament being called at
Oxford, two Subsidies were granted, no grievances removed, but the said
Parliament soon dissolved. The sad effects which the dissolution of this
Parliament produced, were the loss of Rochel, by the unhappy help of Englands
ships. The diversion of a most facile and hopeful war from the West Indies, to
a most expensive and succeslesse attempt on Cales. The attempt on the Isle of
Ree, and thereby a precipitate breach of peace with France, to our great loss.
A peace concluded with Spain, without consent of Parliament, contrary to a
promise formerly made to the Kingdom by King James, a little before his death;
whereby the cause of the Palatinate was altogether most shamefully deserted by
us. The Kingdom suddenly billetted with Soldiers, and a concomitant project
set on foot for Germane Horses, to force men by fear to fall before arbitrary
and tyrannical Taxations, continually to be laid upon them.

2d Parliament. The dissolution of a second Parliament at Westminster, in the
second year, after a declarative grant of no less then five Subsidies, and the
sad issues that flowed to the Kingdom thereupon. As first, the violent exacting
from the people that mighty sum of the five Subsidies, or a sum equal to it by
a Commission for a Royal Loan. Many worthy Gentlemen imprisoned and vexed, that
refused to pay it. Great sums extorted by Privy Seals and Excises, and the most
hopeful Petition of Right blasted.

3d A third Parliament called, and quickly broken in the fourteenth year of the
King, the best Members clapped up close Prisoners, denied all ordinary and
extraordinary comforts of life; and so that Parliament was dissolved.
Opprobrious Declarations published to asperse the proceedings of the last
Parliament, yea Proclamations set out to those effects, thereby extremely to
dishearten the Subjects, yea, and plainly forbidding them once to name a
Parliament, or to desire them any more. Whence immediately gushed out the
violent inundations of mighty sums of money, got by that strange project of
Knight hood, yet under a color of Law. The most burdensome Book of Rates, the
unheard of Taxation of Ship Money, the enlargement of Forests, contrary to
Magna Charta, the injurious Taxation of Coat and Conduct money, the forcible
taking away of the Trained Bands Arms, engrossing Gunpowder into their hands in
the Tower of London. The destruction of the Forest of Dean, which was sold to
Papists, whence we had all our timber for Shipping. Monopolies of Soap, Salt,
Wine, Leather, and Sea Coal; yea, almost of all things in the Kingdom of most
necessary and common use. Restraint in trades and habitations, for re^^sall of
which foresaid heavy pressures, many were vexed with long and languishing sui^s,
some fined and confined to Prisons, to the loss of health in many, of life in
some; some having their Houses broken open, their Goods leized on, their
Studies or Closets searched for Writings, Books, and papers to undo them: some
interrupted also in their Sea-Voyages, and their Ships taken from them.

The crushing cruelties of the Star Chamber Court, and Council Table, where the
Recorder of Salisbury was greatly fined for demolishing the Picture of the
first person in the Trinity, in their great Cathedral. Thus far for the
miseries of the Commonwealth; Popish Ceremonies, Romish innovations, and such
like outrages of the Arch Prelate of Canterbury, and his Prelaticall Agents and
Instruments, over the whole Kingdom, in matters of Religion, Divine worship,
and spiritual cases of conscience. Additions in the Oath administered to the
King, at his first inauguration to the Crown, by the Archbishop. Fines,
Imprisonments, stigmatizings, mutilations, whippings, pillories, gagges,
confinements, and banishments; yea, and that into perpetual close
imprisonments, in the most desolate, remote, and (as they hoped and intended)
remotest parts of the Kingdom, Mr. Burton, Mr. Bastwicke, Mr. Prin. The
ruinating of the ^^eoffees for buying in of Impropriations, and the advancing
to Ecclesiastical livings Arminians, silencing with deprivations,
degradations, and excommunications, almost all the most pious Pastors over the
Land, whom they could catch in their snares, and all this under a pretense of
peace, unity, and conformity Printing Presses set open for the Printing and
publishing of all Popish and Arminian Tenets, but shut up and restrained from
printing sound Doctrines.

Nay, not only thus lamentably molested in England, but attempted the like in
Scotland, endeavoring to impose upon them a New Liturgy, and a Book of Canons.
They refusing of them, were called and counted Rebels and Traitors; yea, so
proclaimed in all Churches in England, and an Army was also raised to oppress
and suppress them. A mighty and tumultuous rising of Apprentices and young men
in Southwark and Lambeth side, with Clubs and other weapons, especially at the
Arch Bishops house, which put him in such a fright, as made him fly to
Croyden, to convey himself to some more private and remote place: And although
Pharoahs Magicians were so honest, that at the sight of the dust of the earth
turned into lice, they cried out, It was the finger of God; but he grew more
and more outrageous, and caused one to be hanged and quartered, and his head
set on London Bridge, who said at his execution, he came there by accident, and
he must dye.

Scotland raising an Army in their own just defense, and by force of Arms The
Arch-Prelate of St Andrews in Scotland reading the new Service-booke in his
pontificalibus assaulted by men and Women, with Crickets stools Sticks and
Stones.

The rising of Prentises and Seamen on Southwark side to assault the
Archbishop of Canterbury's House at Lambeth.

enforcing their own peace. A first pacification being then made by the King,
and some of his Nobility, and ratified under Hand and Seal, 'twixt them and the
Scots, yet was it shortly after quite broken off by the Arch-Prelate of
Canterbury, and the E: of Strafford, and burnt by the Hangman at the Exchange.

4 Parliament. A fourth Parliament was thereupon shortly after called again, by
those complotters means, but to a very ill intent, and another Parliament
summoned also at the same time by the Earl of Strafford in Ireland, both of
them only to levy and procure moneys to raise another Army, and wage a new War
against the Scots. The Ships and Goods of Scotland, were in all parts and Ports
of this Land, and of Ireland also, surprised and seized on for the King, their
Commissioners denied audience to make their just Defense to the King, and the
whole Kingdom of Scotland, and England too, hereupon much distracted and
distempered with levying of moneys, and imprisoning all amongst us that refused
the same. This Parliament also refusing to comply with the King, Canterbury,
and Strafford, in this Episcopal War against the Scots, was soon dissolved and
broken up by them, and thereupon they returned to their former ways of wast
and confusion, and the very next day after the Dissolution thereof, some
eminent Members of both Houses had their Chambers and Studies, yea their
Cabinets, and very pockets of their wearing Clothes (betimes in the morning,
before they were out of their Beds) searched for Letters and Writings, and some
of them imprisoned, and a false and most scandalous Declaration was published
against the House of Commons in the Kings Name.

A Forced Loan of money was attempted in the City of London, to be made a
president (if it prevailed there) for the whole Kingdom, but some Aldermen
refusing, were sorely threatened and imprisoned. In which interim, the Clergies
Convocation continuing, (notwithstanding the Dissolution of the Parliament) New
Conscience oppressing Canons were forged, and a strange Oath with an etc. in it
was framed for the establishing of the Bishops Hierarchy with severe
punishments on the refusers to take it. The OATH.
That I A. B. do Swear that I do approve the Doctrine and Discipline or
Government established in the Church of England, as containing all things
necessary to Salvation. And that I will not endeavor by my self or any other,
directly or indirectly, to bring in any Popish Doctrine, contrary to that which
is so established: Nor will I ever give my consent to alter the Government of
this Church, by Archbishops, Bishops, Deans, and Arch Deacons, etc. as it
stands now established, and as by right it ought to stand. Nor yet ever to
subject it to the usurpations and superstitions of the Sea of Rome. And all
these things I do plainly and sincerely acknowledge and swear, according to
the plain and common sense, and understanding of the same words, without any
equivocation, or mental evasion; or secret reservation whatsoever. And this I
do heartily, willingly, and truly upon the faith of a Christian. So help me
God in Jesus Christ.



In this Convocation sore Taxations were also imposed upon the whole Clergy;
even no less then six Subsidies, besides a bountiful Contribution to forward
that intended War against Scotland. For the advancing of which said sums for
this War, the Popish were most free and forward; yea, and a solemn Prayer was
composed and imposed by the Bishops on their Ministers every where, to be used
and read in all Churches, against the Scots, as Rebels and Traitors. The
Papists also in a high measure enjoyed even almost a total Toleration, and a
Popes Nuncio suffered amongst us to act and govern all Romish affairs, yea a
kind of private Popish Parliament kept in the Kingdom, and Popish
Jurisdictions erected among them. Commissioners were also (secretly) issued out
for some great and eminent Papists, for Martial Commands, for levying of
Soldiers, and strengthening their party with Arms and Ammunition of all sorts,
and in great plenty. His Majesty's Treasure was by these means so extremely
exhausted, and his Revenues so anticipated, that he was forced to compel (as
it were) his own Servants, Judges, and Officers of all sorts, to lend him
great sums of money, and Prisons filled with refusers of these and the other
illegal payments; yea many High-Sheriffs summoned in the Star Chamber, and to
the Council board, and some of them imprisoned for not being quick enough in
levying of Ship Money, and such like intolerable Taxations.

In sum, the whole Land was now brought into a lamentable and languishing
condition, of being most miserably bought and sold to any that could give and
contribute most of might and malice against us, and no hope of humane help, but
dolor, desperation, and destruction to be the portion of all. In which
interim, the Scots being entered our Kingdom for their own defense, the King
had advanced his Royal-Standard at York, where the cream of the Kingdom,
Nobles and Gentry being assembled, and a Treaty betwixt the prime of both
Armies had at Rippon, for a fair and peaceable accommodation, the King was, at
last, enforced to take his Nobles Council, and in the first place a cessation
of Arms agreed on, and then a fifth Parl. was necessitously resolved on to
begin, Nov: 3. 1640.

5th Parliament. Letters from the King, Queen, Popish Earls, Lords, Knights,
and Gentry, post into all parts of the Kingdom, to make a strong party for
them. Shortly after, a very formidable Spanish Fleet, or Armado, appeared on
our English narrow Seas, in sight of Dover, and was coming in (as was on very
strong grounds more then probably conjectured) as a third party, to help to
destroy us; the Spaniards hoping that by this time, we and the Scots were
together by the ears, but they were by Gods mercy, beaten off from us by our
Neighbors of Holland, and we fighting against them, fought against our friends.

The Soldiers in their passage to York turn Reformers, pull down Popish
Pictures, break down rails, turn Altars into Tables, and those Popish
Commanders, that ware to command them, they forced to eat flesh on Fridays,
thrusting it down their throats, and some they slew. In the time of ours and
the Scots Armies residing in the North, which was in June, 1641. Malignant
Lords endeavored to bring it out of the North, Southward, and so to London, to
compel the Parl. to such limits and rules as they thought fit, whereupon the
Parl. entered upon this following Protestation. Die Veneris, 30 July, 1641.
WE the Knights, Citizens, and Burgesses of the Commons House in Parl. finding
to the great grief of our hearts, that the designs of the Priests, Jesuits,
and other adherents to the Sea of Rome, have of late been more boldly and
frequently put in practice then formerly, to the undermining and danger of the
ruin of the true Reformed Protestant Religion, in his Majesty's Dominions
established: And finding also that they have been and having just cause to
suspect that there are still even during this sitting in Parliament, endeavors
to subvert the fundamental Laws of England and Ireland, and to introduce the
exercise of an Arbitrary and Tyrannical Government, by most pernicious and
wicked counsels, practices, plots, and conspiracies: And that the long
intermission, and unhappy breach of Parliam. has occasioned many illegal
Taxations, whereupon the subject has been prosecuted and grieved: And that
diverse Innovations and superstitions have been brought into the Church,
multitudes driven out of his Majesty's Dominions, jealousies raised and
somented betwixt the King and his people, a Popish Army levied in Ireland, and
two Armies brought into the bowels of his Kingdom, to the hazard of his
Majesty's Royal person, the consumption of the Revenues of the Crown and
Treasure of his Kingdom: And lastly, finding great cause of jealousy that
endeavors have been, and are used to bring the English Army into a
misunderstanding of this Parl. thereby to incline that Army with force to bring
to pass those wicked Councels, Have therefore thought good to join our selves
in a Declaration of our united affections and resolutions, and to make this
ensuing Protestation.

The Protestation.
I A. B. Do in the presence of Almighty God, Promise, Vow, and Protest to
maintain and defend, as far as lawfully I may, with my life, power, and state,
the true Reformed Protestant Religion, expressed in the Doctrine of the Church
of England, against Popery and Popish Innovations, within this Realm, contrary
to the same Doctrine, and according to the duty of my Allegiance, his Majesty's
Royal Person, Honor, and Estate, as also the power and privileges of
Parliament, the lawful rights and liberties of the Subject, and every person
that makes this Protestation; in whatsoever he shall do, in the lawful
pursuance of the same. And to my power, and as far as lawfully I may, I will
oppose, and by all good ways and means endeavor, to bring to condign
punishment, all such as shall either by force, practice, counsels, plots,
conspiracies, or otherwise, do any thing to the contrary of any thing in this
present Protestation contained. And further, that I shall in all just and
honorable ways endeavor to preserve the union and peace between the three
Kingdoms of England, Scotland, and Ireland, and neither for hope, fear, nor
other respect, shall relinquish this Promise, Vow, and Protestation.



At the beginning of the Parliament ( Nov. 3. 1640.) there was a diligent
inquisition after oppressions and oppressors, and first upon the Petition of
Mris Bastwicke, and Mris Burton, two widowed wives, and a Petition exhibited in
the behalf of Mr Pryn, Dr. Laighten, Mr. Smart, Mr. Walker, Mr. Foxley, Mr.
Lilburn, and many others, set at liberty, some being banished, and all close
Prisoners, others fast fettered in irons, and their wives debarred from coming
to them.

December. 1640. The Earl of Strafford, and Laud Archbishop of Canterbury,
impeached of High Treason; Wren Bishop of Norwich, of Treason, Windebank and
Finch fled. The Scots ships that were taken before the Parl. began, restored,
and 4000. l. given to rig them, 300000. l. toward their losses, and all Books,
Libels, and Proclamations against the Scots called in. February, A Bill signed
for Trienniall Parl. ^ix Subsidies, Poll money, and a personal assesment of
the whole Kingdom. May, a Bill signed that the Parl. should not be dissolved
without their consent; Lord Strafford beheaded, the High Commission Court, and
Star Chamber put down, the Parl. proceeded against Delinquent Judges about
Ship Money. The Earl of Strafford's Speech on the Scaffold, May 12. 1641.
MY Lord Primate of Ireland, (and my Lords and the rest of these Gentlemen) it
is a very great comfort to me, to have your Lordship by me this day, in regard
I have been known to you a long time, I should be glad to obtain so much
silence as to be heard a few words, but doubt I shall not; my Lord, I come
hither by the good will and pleasure of Almighty God, to pay the last debt I
owe to sin, which is death, and by the blessing of that God to rise again
through the mercies of Christ Jesus to eternal glory; I wish I had been
private, that I might have been heard; my Lord, if I might be so much beholding
to you, that I might use a few words, I should take it for a very great
courtesy; my Lord, I come hither to submit to that judgment which has past
against me, I do it with a very quiet and contented mind, I do freely forgive
all the world, a forgiveness that is not spoken from the teeth outward (as
they say) but from my heart, I speak it in the presence of Almighty God, before
whom I stand, that there is not so much as a displeasing thought in me, arising
to any creature; I thank God I may say truly, and my conscience bears me
witness, that in all my services since I have had the honor to serve his
Majesty in any employment, I never had any thing in my heart, but the joint and
individual prosperity of King and people, if it has been my hap to be
misconstrued, it is the common portion of us all while we are in this life, the
righteous judgment is hereafter, here we are subject to error, and apt to be
The Earl of Strafford for treasonable practices beheaded on the Tower Hill.

mis-judged one of another. There is one thing I desire to clear my self of,
and I am confident I speak it with so much clearness, that I hope I shall have
your Christian Charity in the belief of it, I did always think that the Parl.
of England were the happiest constitutions that any Kingdom or any Nation
lived under, and under God the means of making King and people happy, so far
have I been from being against Parliaments: For my death, I here acquit all the
world, and pray God heartily to forgive them; and in particular, my Lord
Primate, I am very glad that his Majesty is pleased to conceive me not meriting
so severe and heavy a punishment as the utmost execution of this sentence; I am
very glad, and infinitely rejoice in this mercy of his, and beseech God to turn
it to him, and that he may find mercy when he has most need of it; I wish the
Kingdom all the prosperity and happiness in the world, I did it living, and
now dying it is my wish. I do now profess is from my heart, and do most humbly
recommend it to every man here, and wish every man to lay his hand upon his
heart, and consider seriously whether the beginning of the happiness of a
people should be writ in Letters of blood, I fear you are in a wrong way, and I
desire Almighty God, that not one drop of my blood may rise up in judgment
against you. My Lord, I profess my self a true and obedient Son to the Church
of England* to the Church wherein I was born, and wherein I was bred,
prosperity and happiness be ever to it: and whereas it has been said, that I
have inclined to Popery, if it be an objection worth answering, let me say
truly, that from the time since I was twenty one years of age, till this hour,
now going upon forty nine, I never had thought in my heart, to doubt of the
truth of my Religion in England, and never any had the boldness to suggest to
me contrary to the best of my remembrance; and so being reconciled to the
mercies of Christ Jesus my Savior, into whose bosom I hope shortly to be
gathered; to that eternal happiness that shall never have end, I desire
heartily the forgiveness of every man, both for any rash or unadvised word, or
deed, and desire your prayers: And so my Lord farewell, farewell all the things
of this word: Lord strengthen my faith: give me confidence and assurance in the
merits of Jesus Christ. I desire you that you would be silent, and join in
prayers with me, and I trust in God that we shall all meet, and live eternally
in Heaven, there to receive the accomplishment of all happiness, where every
tear shall be wiped from our eyes, and every sad thought from our hearts: And
so God bless this Kingdom, and Jesus have mercy upon my Soul, Amen.



August, 1641. The King went to Scotland. October. The Irish Rebellion began,
whereby above 100000 Protestants were murdered. November. and December. The King
came from Scotland to London, and was entertained with most pompous solemnity,
and after went to Hampton Court, the Earl presented a Remonstrance, wherein was
expressed the Kingdoms grievances, they desire a Guard. Sir Will. Belford was
displaced, and Cottington made Constable of the Tower, but he was soon
displaced, and Col. Lunsford was made Lieutenant of the Tower, but he also was
displaced, and Sir John Byron was made Liev. of the Tower in Lunsfords stead,
but he also with much ado removed, and Sir John Conyers was put in his place.

To the Kings most Excellent Majesty, and the Lords and Peers now Assembled in
Parliament.
The Humble Petition and Protestation of all the Bishops and Prelates now called
by his Majesty's Writs to attend the Parliament, and present about London and
Westminster for that Service.
THat whereas the Petitioners are called up by several and respective Writs and
under great penalties to attend the Parl. and have a clear and indubitable
right to Vote in Bills, and other matters whatsoever debatable in Parl. by the
ancient Customs, Laws, and Statutes of this Realm, and ought to be Protected
by your Majesty, quietly to attend and prosecute that great Service. They
humbly Remonstrate and Protest before God, your Majesty, and the noble Lords
and Peers now assembled in Parl. that as they have an indubitate right to Sit
and Vote in the House of Lords, so are they (if they may be protected from
force and violence) most ready and willing to perform their duties
accordingly. And that they do abominate all actions or opinions tending to
Popery, and the maintenance thereof; as also all propension and inclination to
any Malignant party, or any other side or party whatsoever, to the which their
own reasons and conscience shall not move them to adhere. But, whereas they
have been at several times violently menaced, affronted and assaulted by
multitudes of people, in their coming to perform their services in that
honorable House, and lately chased away, and put in danger of their lives, and
can find no redress or protection, upon sundry complaints made to The High
Commission-Court and Starr-Chamber voted down, and pluralities and non
residencies damned by Parliament.

both Houses in these perticulars. They likewise humbly protest before your
Majesty, and the Noble House of Peers, that saving unto themselves all their
Rights and Interests of Sitting and Voting in that House at other times, they
dare not Sit or Vote in the House of Peers, until your Majesty shall further
secure them from all affronts, indignities, and dangers in the premises.
Lastly, whereas their fears are not built upon fantasies and conceits, but upon
such grounds and objects as may well terrify men of good resolutions, and much
constancy. They do in all duty and humility protest before your Majesty, and
the Peers of that most Honorable House of Parl. against all Laws, Orders,
Votes, Resolutions, and Determinations, as in themselves null, and of none
effect, which in their absence since the 27th of this instant Month of December.
1641. have already passed, as likewise against all such as shall hereafter pass
in that most Honorable House, during the time of this their forced and violent
absence from the said most Honorable House; not denying but if their absenting
of themselves were wilful and voluntary, that most honorable House might
proceed in all their premises in their absence, and this Protestation
notwithstanding. And humbly beseeching your most Excellent Majesty to command
the Clerk of the House of Peers to enter this their Petition and Protestation
among their Records.

They will ever pray to God to bless, etc. Jo Ebor. Th. Dures. Rob. Co. Lich.
Jo. Norw. Jo. Asa. Gul Ba. and Wels. Geo. Heref. Rob. Ox. Ma. Ely. Godf. Glouc.
Jo Peterb. Mor. Land.


Twelve Bishops were impeached of high Treason, and ten imprisoned in the
Tower, and afterward all disabled from ever sitting in the Parl. they are Voted
down root and branch, Nulla contradicente: The same night there were bonefires
and ringing of Bells. All Popish Recusants inhabiting in and about the City, all
disaffected persons, and such as being able men, would not lend any money for
the defense of the Commonwealth, should forthwith confine themselves to their
own Houses, and not to go forth without special license. An Ordinance to
apprehend disaffected persons in the City, whereof were four Aldermen put in
safe custody in Crosby House, and some in Gressam College. A letter sent to
Mr. Pym.
Mr. Pym.
Do not think that a guard of men can protect you if you persist in your
traiterous courses and wicked designs: I have sent a Paper-messenger to you,
and if this does not touch your heart, a Dagger shall, so soon as I am recovered
of my plaguesore. In the mean time you may be forborne, because no better man
may be endangered for you.

Repent Traitor.



Jan: 1641. The Irish proclaimed Rebels, the King demands five Members,
Lunsford assaulteth the Citizens at Westmin: an Act to carry on the War in
Ireland till it were reduced. Febr: King signs the Bill for taking away Bishops
Votes. March, the Queen went to Holland, one of her ships sprung a leak, and
much treasure lost, and when she returned, there was a great storm, Van Trump's
Mast broke, and after eight days turmoil driven back again, broke and lost 3
ships. The King went to Theobalds, where a Petition from the Par. was
presented, desiring him to let the Militia abide near Lon: and not carry the
Prince away, he being at Newmarket the House presented a Declaration, the King
went to York, sends a message to the Parl. that he would raise 2000 Foot and
200 Horse at Hull, and go for Ireland, Sir John Hotbam denies the King
entrance, in April and May some Members leave their seats, and go to the King at
York Binion a Silk-man, the Kentish Malignants, and Sir Edw: Deering frame
petitions against the Parl. but rejected, fined, and imprisoned. The King
interdicts the Militia, but the Messenger was hanged at the Exchange. The Lords
and Gentry of Ireland and Scotland, petition the King to return to his Parl.
the Gentry of York shire do the like, but rejected. The K. set on foot a
Commission of Array. June, The Great Seal carried to the K. The Earl of
Warwick Adm. Money and Plate brought in for the Cause; the King besieges Hull,
500 men went from London to it: Proclamations and Declarations against the
Parliament read in all Churches and Chapels within the K. power. July, An Army
raised, and Essex made General, the Lord Major of London imprisoned for causing
the K. Commission of Array to be proclaimed; many Proclamat: from the K. and
Declar: from the Parl. By water the Ship-masters and Mariners made ready a
great number of Long-boats furnished with Ordnance, Muskers, and other
Sea-warlike instruments, their Vessels gallantly adorned with Flags and
Streamers, together with martial music, Drums and Trumpets; when they came to
White Hall, and understood that the Parl. were safely arrived, the Trained
Bands by Land, and the Seamen by water, let fly their thundering shot both
small and great, their Trumpets sounding, and their drums beating in a
triumphing and congratulory manner, was a singular testimony of their cordial
affections.

The same day Buckinghumshire men, both Gentlemen, Ministers, and others of
that Country on Horsback, with their Protestations in their Hats, for
Reformation of evils in Church and State, and to assure their best services and
assistance to the Parl. on all just occasions; and out of Essex, Hartford,
Bark-shire, Surrey, and other Counties of the Kingdom, came one after another.
At Edge hill 16 pieces of Canon shot against 80 of the Earl of Essex
Lifeguard, and not one man hurt, and those 80 brake in upon 1600 of the K.
four of the Parl. Regiments ran away, and sixteen Troops of Horse, so we were
6000 and they 18000. yet we took their Standard, and cleft Sir Edw. Varney
Standard Bearer in the head, and slew the Lord Lindsey General of the Field.
Lord Gen: Magazine of powder to have been blown up, and Sir John Hotham killed,
by one David Alexander, but prevented. Commis. granted to popish Recusants to
levy men and arms against the Parl. The K. received the Irish Rebels petition,
and permitted their persons with great favor and allowance about him, calling
them good Catholic subjects, but rejecting the petition for peace. November. A
Treaty of peace intended by the Parl. but pretended by the K. where was that
bloody bickering at Brainford by the K. party. New High-Sheriffs, for the
better collecting of the 400000. l. Subsidies, intended to have been confirmed
to the K. crossed. Jan 1643. Newcastle twice routed, K. party worsted near Henly,
Scots come into Engl. March, Lichfield Close taken, the K. sends the Earl of
Glamorgan into Irel. with power to conclude. Dr. Bastwick and Cap. Lilburn to
be tried at Oxford, but preserved. A letter to all the Freemen Journeymen, and
Apprentices of the City, to assemble at their several Halls, to be persuaded
not to yield to the Parl. voted scandalous.

The 2 of May 1643. ye Cross in Cheapeside was pulled down, a Troop of Horse
and 2 Companies of foot waited to guard it and at ye fall of ye tope Cross
dromes beat tru^pets blew and multitudes of Capes wayre thrown in ye Air, and
a great Shoute of People with joy, ye 2 of May the Almanake says, was ye
invention of the Cross, and 6 day at night was the Leaden Popes burnt, in the
place where it stood with ringinge of Bells, and a great Acclamation and no
hurt done in all these actions.



Mr. Pryn sent to search Canterburies Chamber and Study, found the Original
Scotch Service book with his own handwriting, the cause of all the Scots wars.
London to have been betrayed under a pretense of peace, by Mr. Waller, a Member
of Parl. Mr. Tomkins, Mr. Challenor, but Waller fined 10000. l. and perpetual
banishment, Tomkins and Challenor hanged, the one at the Exchange, and the
other in Holborn. Sir Io: Hotham attempted the betraying of Hull unto the
Queen. December. An Order to demolish Altars, to remove the Communion Table from
the East end, and to take away all Tapers, Candlesticks, and Basins, and to
demolish all Crucifixes, Crosses, and all Pictures and Images of the Trinity
and Virgin Mary, both within and without all Churches and Chapels. A plot for
betraying of Lincoln by the two Purfries, but preserved. Gloucester admirably
freed by the City Regiments. A Rebellion by the Kentish Malignants about
Tunbridge. A ship bound from Denmark to the K. of about 300 Tun richly laden
with arms and ammunition; another ship bound from Newcastle to Holland, laden
with Sea coals, but in the midst thereof was found between 3 or 4000 l. hid in
the Coals, sent to buy Arms for the K. a third ship of 400 tun, carrying 24
piece of Ordnance, taking by the Parl. Scotland with an Army of at least 2000
Horse and Foot, invited by the Parl. when they marched up to the middle in
snow, and brought their Artillery over the Ice of the frozen River of Tyne, and
the Citizens of London lent the parl. 100000. l. for the Scots first pay, to
encourage their advance to help us against the K. forces. The Queen pawning the
Jewels of the Crown in Holland, and therewith buying Arms to assist the war
against the parl. and her own actual performances with her popish Army in the
North, was High treason, and transmitted to the Lords. Images, Crucifixes,
papistical Books in Somerset, and Iameses were burnt, and five Capuchin Friars
sent away. May, an Ordinance for the making of Forts, Trenches, about the City.
July, the assembly of Divines met, Dr. Twisse prolocutor, 120 the total,

The Bishop of Canterburies first Prayer on the Scaffold, Jan. 10. 1044.
OEternal God, and merciful Father, look down upon me in mercy, in the riches
and fulness of all thy mercies look upon me, but not till thou have nailed my
sins to the Cross of Christ: look upon me, but not till thou have bathed me in
the blood of Christ, not till I have hid my self in the wounds of Christ, that
so the punishment that is due to my sins may pass away, and go over me; and
since thou art pleased to try me to the uttermost, I humbly beseech thee, give
me now in this great instant, full patience, proportionable comfort, a heart
ready to dye for thine honor, and the K. happiness, and this Churches
preservation; and my zeal to these, far from arrogance be it spoken, is all
the sin, humane frailty excepted, and all incidents thereunto, which is yet
known of me in this particular, for which I now come to suffer. I say in this
particular of treason, but otherwise my sins are many and great, Lord pardon
them all, and those especially whatsoever they be, which have drawn this
present judgment upon me, and when thou have given me strength to bear it, then
do with me as seems best in thine own eyes, and carry me through death, that
I may look upon it in what vilage soever it shall appear to me; and that there
may be a stop of this issue of blood in this more then miserable Kingdom; I
shall desire that I may pray for the people too, as well as for my self: O
Lord, I beseech thee give grace of repentance to all people that have a thirst
for blood, but if they will not repent, then scatter their devices so, and such
as are or shall be contrary to the glory of thy great name, the truth and
sincerity of Religion, the establishment of the K. and his posterity after him,
in their just rights and privileges, the honor and conservation of parl. in
their ancient and just power, the preservation of this poor Church in her
truth, peace, and patrimony, and Sr Alexander Caron, Sr. John Hotham, Captin
Hotham and the Arch Bishop of Canterbury, beheaded on Towerhill for Treason
against ye Parliament 1645.

the settlement of this distracted and distressed people, under the ancient
Laws, and in their native liberties; and when thou have done all this in mercy
for them, O Lord fill their hearts with thankfulness, and with religious
dutiful obedience to thee and thy Commandments all their days: So Amen, Lord
Jesus, and I beseech thee to receive my soul to mercy. Our Father, etc.

His last Prayer on the Scaffold.
LOrd I am coming as fast as I can, I know I must pass through the shadow of
death before I can come to see thee, but it is but umbra mortis, a mere shadow
of death, a little darkness upon nature, but thou by thy merits and passion
have broke through the jaws of death, so, Lord receive my soul and have mercy
on me, and bless this Kingdom with peace and plenty, and with brotherly love
and charity, that there may not be this effusion of Christian blood among them,
for Jesus Christ his sake, if it be thy will.

And when he said, Lord receive my soul, which was his sign, the Executioner
did his Office.

A design to starve the City, by breaking into Surrey, Sussex, Kent, but
disappointed by Sir Will: Waller, and the City Regiments. Feb: the King granted
a cessition of arms with the bloody Rebels of Ireland. March, a Solemn League
and Covenant taken by the Lords and Commons, city of London, and all parts
within the Parl. power. Nottingham Town and Castle to have been betrayed, but
prevented by Col. Hutchinson. A ship from Denmark of 300 Tuns laden for the
most part with Roundheads, being half pike-slaves, with a knob at the end,
full of iron spikes, sent to the King, but that year the Swedes fell into
Denmark, and took half his Country from him A plot against the City of London
by Sir Basil Brook, Col. Read, Mr. Ripley, and Mr. Vil^^, two Citizens of
London, and others, but prevented. Our Army in Cornwall preserved with the
loss of our Artillery. A peace pretended at Vxbridge, and a petition from
Buckinghamshire, wherein Sir John Lawrence was a great stickler, but
frustrated. Melcomb Regis to have been betrayed, Col. Goring and Sir Lewis
Dives were agents therein, the Town and Forts recovered, and two ships with
rich prizes from Rhoan in France were seized on to make amends for their
trouble. The Service Book Voted down. Earls and Lords from Oxford, submitted
themselves to the Parl. June, 1645. The famous Victory of Naisby over the Kings
Forces, 5000 prisoners taken, a Jewel of 500. l. sent to Genesis Leven by the
Parl. all the K. Commissioners taken at Shaftsbury. Basing house taken and
burnt. August, A plot in the west against the Parl. by the Clubmen. A sudden
plot upon Scotland by Montrosse, but as suddenly recovered again by Gen: David
Lesley. A Treaty with the Parl. for a well grounded peace, and yet at that time
the Earl of Glamorgan had a Commission to the ruin of all the protestants in
Ireland, and consequently in England also. The Great Seal broken before the
Lords and Commons, on Tuesday, the 11 of August, 1646.

The King Escapes out of Oxford in a disguised manner



Ordered, That whosoever conceals the Kings person, shall be a Traitor.

A Letter concerning the Kings coming to the Scots Army, May 5. 1646.
RIght Honorable,
the discharging our selves of the duty we owe to the Kingdom of Engl: to you
as Commissioners from the same, moves us to acquaint you with the Kings coming
in to our Army this morning, which having overtaken us unexpectedly, has
filled us with amazement, and made us like men that dream; we cannot think that
he could have been so unadvised in his resolutions, as to have cast himself
upon us, without a real intention to give satisfaction to both Kingdoms, in all
their just and reasonable demands, in all those things that concern Religion
and righteosnesse; whatsoever be his dispositions or resolutions, you may be
assured, that we shall never entertain any thought, or correspondency with any
purpose, or countenance any endeavors that may in any circumstance incroach
upon our League and Covenant, or weaken the union or confidence betwixt the
Nations, that union to our Kingdom was the matter of many prayers, and as
nothing was more joyful unto us then to have it set on foot, so hitherto have
we thought nothing too dear to maintain it, and we trust to walk with such
faithfulness and truth in this particular, that as we have the testimony of a
good conscience within our selves, so you, and all the world shall see, that we
mind your interest with as much integrity and care as our own, being confident
you will entertain no other thought of us.

Signed, May 5. 1646. LOTHIAN.


A Remonstrance exhibited in the name of the Lord Major, Aldermen, and
Common Counsel of the City of London, to the High Court of Parl. 1 That some
strict and speedy course may be taken for the suppressing of all private and
separate Congregations. 2 That all Anabaptists, Brownists, Heretics,
Schismatics, Blasphemers, and all such Sectaries as conform not to the public
discipline established, or to be established by the Parl. may fully be declared
against, and some effectual course settled for proceeding against such persons.
3 That as we are all Subjects of one Kingdom, so all may be equally required
to yield obedience to the Government either set or to be set forth. 4 That no
person disaffected to the Presbyterian Government set or to be set forth by the
Parl. may be employed in any place of public trust.

The King gave speedy Order to several Officers for the surrender of the
Towns, Castles, and Forts, which then were in the hands of the Kings
Commanders, viz Oxford, Worcester, Litchfield, and Wallingford. A Petition
delivered to his Excellency from the Officers and Soldiers in the Army,
touching their faithfulness in the Parl. service, doing Summer Service in the
Winter season, etc. Further presented several desires of theirs. 1 That an
Ordinance of indemnity with the Royal assent be desired. 2 That satisfaction
may be given to the petitioners for their arrears, both in their former
service, and in this Army before it is disbanded. 3 That those who have
voluntarily served the Parl. may not be pressed to serve in another Kingdom,
etc. 4 That those who have lost their lives, limbs, or estates, may be provided
for, and relieved.

The Apology in answer to his Excellencies Letter, relating their sense of a
second storm hanging over their heads, by the malice of a secret enemy, worse
then the former now vanquished, expressing their sorrow that they cannot desire
their own security without hazard to his Excellency, etc.

Concerning the abuse to diverse well affected to the Army, by imprisonment, to
the ruin of their estates, and loss of their lives. And for their candid
intentions and endeavors, declared no less then troublers and enemies to the
state and Kingdom, resolving rather to dye like men, then to be enflaved and
hanged like dogs, etc.

A Letter from his Excellency to the Earl of Manchester, concerning the Votes
of both Houses, as also his grief of heart for the distractions between the
Parliam: and the Army, defiring that all things may be determined in love, etc.

June, 1647. The King taken from Holmby and carried along with the Army, the
House ordered that the King should reside at Richmond, but the next day from
the General and Council of Officers, was brought an Impeachment against eleven
Members. A particular Charge against the 11 Members impeached by the Army.
1 THat Mr. Denzil Hollis being one of the special Commission: for the Parl. to
present Propositions to the King at Oxford, made private addresses to the Kings
party then in Arms against the Parl. and did secretly plot and advise them
against the Parl. etc. 2 That the said Mr. Denzil Hollis, and Sir Phillip
Stapleton during the late war, when the Earl of Lindsey went from the Tower to
Oxford, sent several Messages to the Earl of Dorset, etc. 3 That the said Mr.
Hollis, Sir Phillip Stapleton, Sir Will. Lewis, Sir John Clotworthy, Sir Will:
Waller, Sir John Maynard, Maj. Genesis Massy, Mr. Glyn, Mr. Long, Col. Edward
Harley, and Anthony Nicholas, in the months of March, April, May, and June
last, in prosecution of their evil designs, met in diverse places with persons
disaffected to the State, for holding correspondency with the Queen of England
now in France, and encouraged her party there. 4 And endeavored to bring in
Foreign Forces, and Listed diverse Commanders and Soldiers there, to raise and
levy a new War. 5 and affronted diverse Petitioners that came in a peaceable
manner, boysterously assaulting them, etc. 6 Imprisoned some Members of the
Army, to dis-oblige them from the Parl. The solemn Engagement of the Citizens,
Commanders, Officers, and Soldiers, etc. This was the Treasonable Engagement.

WE do solemnly Engage our selves, and Vow unto Almighty God, That we will to
the utmost of our power, cordially endeavor that his Majesty may speedily come
to his Houses of Parliament, with honor, safety, and freedom, and that
without the nearer approach of the Army, there to confirm, such things as he
has granted the twelfth of May last, in answer to the Propositions of both
Kingdoms, and that with a personal Treaty with his two Houses of Parl. and
the Commissioners of Scotland, such things as are yet in difference may be
speedily settled, and a firm and lasting peace established.



The Army marching toward the City, Orders were given to the trained Bands to
go to the Works The Auxilaries are raised to defend the City. A Proclamation
by beat of drum for all that are able to bear Arms, and are not listed to
come to receive them. The House of Commons, and the Lords likewise, met
according to the order of adjournment, July 30. but nether of the Speakers

At length they proceeded to a new election, and Voted Master Pelham a
Counselor, and Member of the Commons House, Speaker pro tempore.

The Lords made choice of the Lord Gray to be Speaker of their House pro
tempore. The Sargeant at Arms being absent with the Mace when the Commons chose
their Speaker, had the City Mace, and chose Master Norfolk Sergeant at Arms.
After which, proceeding to debate the great affairs touching the City and
Kingdom, they voted as follows.

1 That the King come to London. 2 That the Militia of the City shall have full
power to raise what Forces they shall think fit to the same. 3 That they may
make choice of a Commander in chief to be approved of by the House, and such
Commander to present other Officers to be approved of by the Militia. The
Common council made choice of Major Genesis Massey to Command in chief all the
City Forces. Ordered by the Militia that all Reformadoes and other Officers
should the next day at two of the clock be listed in St. Iameses fields, where
was a great appearance. Order given for slaying of Horses in the City, and many
listed. Most of the eleven Members sat in the House, and in the afternoon Maj.
Genesis Massey, Sir William Waller, and Col. Genesis Poyntz, were at listing the
Reformadoes. Declaration of the Lord Major, Aldermen, and Common Council. A
brief of which that his Majesty was surprised at Holmby, and no place for his
Majesty's residence allowed by the Army nearer then their Quarters, therefore
to settle peace, and establish true Religion, ease the Kingdoms burdens,
establish his Majesty's just rights, maintain the Parl. privileges, and
relieving Ireland, they profess the main of their enterprise, etc.

At which time Col. Genesis Poyntzs and other Officers of the new List, attending
for their Orders upon the Militia, came into Guild-hall-yard, and most cruelly
hackt and hewed many of the aforesaid Petitioners, diverse whereof were mortally
wounded, whereof some since dyed. Lord Say, Lord Magresie, and others, with
many of the House of Commons, came to the Head quarters, desiring the Generals
protection. Six Aldermen and twelve Common Counsel men sent with a letter to
the Gen: declaring their unwillingnesse to a new War. A letter from Southwarke
relating their withstanding the design of raising a new War, desiring
protection. Massey sends Scouts, but near Brainford thirty chased by ten, and
took four of Massies.

Col. Rainsborough, Col. Hewson, Col. Pride, and Col Thistlwet; marched into
Southwarke, the Fort yielded without opposition. The Memberr forced away
return, the Houses being sat with their old Speakers, Thomas Lord Fairfax made
High Constable of the Tower. He marches through the City from 11 until 8 at
night.

A Letter from Liev: Gen: Cromwell, that his Majesty had withdrawn himself at 9
the last night.

His Majesty's last Letter,
Hampton Court; Nov. 11. 1645.
LIberty being that which in all times has been; but especially now is the
condition, the aim and desire of all men, common reason shows that Kings less
then any should endure captivity, yet I call God to witness with what patience I
have endured a tedious restraint, which so long as I had any hopes that this
sort of my suffering might conduce to the peace of these three Kingdoms, or
the hindering of more effusion of blood, I did willingly undergo, but now
finding by too certain proofs, that this my continued patience would not only
turn to my personal ruin, but likewise be of much more prejudice to the
furtherance of the public good, I thought I was bound as well by natural as
political Obligations, to seek my safety, by retiring my self for some time
from public view both of my friends and enemies; and I appeal to all
indifferent men to judge, if I have not cause to free my self from the hands
of those who change their principles with their condition, and who are not
ashamed openly to intend the destruction of the Nobility, by taking away their
Negative voice, and with whom the Levellers doctrine is rather countenanced
then punished; and as for their intentions to my person, their changing and
putting more strict Guards upon me, with the discharging most of all the
servants of mine, who formerly they admitted to wait upon me, do sufficiently
declare: nor would I have this my retirement mis-interpreted, for I shall
earnestly and uncessantly endeavor the settling of a safe and well grounded
peace, wherever I am or shall be, and that (as much as may be) without the
effusion of more Christian blood, for which how many times have I pressed to be
heard, and yet no ear given to me; and can any reasonable man think (according
to the ordinary course of affairs) there can be a settled peace without it, or
that God will bles those that refuse to hear their own King? surely no, I must
further add that (besides what concerns my self) unless all other chief
interests have not only a hearing, but likewise just satisfaction given to them
(to wit, the Presbyterians, Independents, Army, those who have adhered to me,
and even the Scots) I say there cannot (I speak not of miracles, it being in my
opinion a sinful presumption in such cases to expect or trust to them) be a
safe and lasting peace: now as I cannot deny but that my personal security is
the urgent cause of this my retirement, so I take God to witness, the public
peace is no less before mine eyes, and I can find no better way to express
this my profession (I know not what a wiser man may do) then by desiring and
urging that al chief interests may be heard, to the end each may have just
satisfaction; as for example, the Army (for the rest, though necessary, yet I
suppose are not difficult to consent) ought (in my judgment) to enjoy the
liberty of their conscience, and have an Act of Oblivion or Indemnity (which
should extend to the rest of all my subjects) and that all their arrears should
be speedily and duly paid, which I will undertake to do, so I may be heard, and
that I be not hindered from using such lawful and honest means as I shall
choose: To conclude, let me be heard with freedom, hono^r, and safety, and I
shall instantly break through this cloud of Retirement, and shall show my self
to be Pater Patriae,

C. R.


A great tumult, insurrection, and mutiny in London, breaking open diverse
Houses, and Magazines of Arms and Ammunition, seizing on the D^^ms, Gates,
Chains, and Watches of the C^^y, assaulted and shot into the Lord Mayors House,
and killed one of his Guard, etc.

May 16. 1648. Surrey Petitioners came to Westminster, and made a great shout,
and cried, Hey for King Charles, we will pull the Members out by the Ears,
disarmed two Sentinels, knocked them down, one Sentinel refusing to be
disarmed, the Petitioners got within his Arms, one of them drew his sword and
run him through, and the Petitioners drew their swords, and said, Fall on for
King Charles now or never; but a party of 500 Foot did take some: Of the
Petitioners were slain four or five, of the Soldiers two.

The old Lord Goring proclaimed General at the head of the Kentish Army, upon
the Hill near Aluford, consisting of 8000 besides those in Maidstone, there
were near 300 slain, and about 2300 prisoners, many of them taken in the Woods,
Hop-yards, and fields, also Gentlemen of good quality. There were about 500
Horse, 3000 Arms, 9 Foot colors, and 8 pieces of Canon, with store of
Ammunition taken; their Word at the Engagement was King and Kent, ours Truth.
They being routed marched over Rochester Bridge, toward Black Heath, with
about 3000 Horse and Foot, most Cavaleers, Prentises and Watermen, and fled
over the water into Essex, by Woollidge and Greenwich.

The Duke of Buckingham, Lord Francis, Earl of Holland, Lord Andrew, Lord
Cambden, and others, rose in Surrey, and made Proclamation that they expected
the Parl. would settle the Kingdom, but because they have not, they would
fetch the King, and live and dye with him to settle it.

July 11. 1648. Pembroke Castle surrendered.

(...) Scots Army of 21000. Invaded England Duke ^ambletons Standard had Motto
Date Cefari, Foot Standard (...) Covenant, Religion, King and Kingdoms;
Riseing in Kent, Revolting of the Navy, Redusing Colchester; And Quelling the
insurection in Pembroke Shire all in 1648:



The Scots entering the Kingdom, July 11. 1648. Maj. Genesis Lambert sent this
Letter to Duke Hamilton.
MY LORD,
HAving received Information that some Forces of Horse and Foot are marched out
of Scotland into this Kingdom under your Excellencies Command, I have sent
this Bearer unto you, desiring to know the truth and intent thereof, and
whether they are come in opposition to the Forces in these parts raised by the
Authority of the Parl. of England, and now in prosecution of their Commands. I
desire your Lordships speedy answer, and rest

Your Excellencies humble Servant. J. LAMBERT.


Duke Hamilton's Answer.
Noble Sir,
I Received yours of the 11 of this instant, in answer whereunto I shall only
say, the information you received is true, for according to the Commands of the
Committee of Estates of the Parl. of Scotland, there are Forces both of Horse
and Foot come into this Kingdom under my conduct, for prosecution of the ends
mentioned in my Letter of the 6th, to which I refer you, intending to oppose
any that are or shall be in Arms for the obstructing of those pious, loyal,
and just ends, and so remain,

HAMBLETON.




The Town of Colchester delivered up, Sir Charles Lucas, and Sir George Lisle
shot to death.

Liev: Col: Lilburn revolted at Newcastle, declared for the King, Sir Arthur
Hasterigge stormed the Castle, Lilburns head was set upon a pole.

June 5. 1648. The Lord of Warwick went to Portsmouth, to bring into obedience
the mutinous Seamen; there was with the Lord of Warwick, the Phoenix, Mary,
Rese, Robert, Nonesuch, Lilly, Lion, Bonadventure, Antilope, Swift sure,
Hector, and Fellowship.

A short Abridgment of the Engagement made by the Common Council, Commanders,
Soldiers, and Commission Officers in London.
WE declare to engage as much as in us lies, to defend the King and Parl: from
all violence, and to the end we may be enabled to perform the same, We humbly
offer, that the Forces in the line may be one Militia, and no Forces may be
raised, but by Authority of the said Militia, by consent of the Common
Council. We desire no Forces in Arms might come within thirty miles of London,
during the Treaty, and for those within, what persons soever shall make any
tumult, shall be put to death. Ordered, That the Common Council men and
Commanders shall within their several Precincts go from house to house, to
receive concurrence to the said Engagement.

December. 1648, The House having notice of the Kings carrying to Hurst Castle,
Voted, That the seizing his person was without their advice or consent.

Dec. 5. The House Voted, That his Majesty's concessions to their Proposals,
was ground sufficient to settle the peace of the Kingdom.

Dec. 6. Col. Rich, and Col. Prides Regiment guarded the Parl. and seized some
Members.

Dec. 12. Maj. Genesis Brown Sheriff of London, was apprehended.

Dec. 13. The House Voted, That the Lords and Commons declare they will make no
further Addresses to the King, nor none, shall be by any person whatsoever,
without leave of the Parl. and if any make breach of this Order, they shall
incur the penalty of high Treason, and that they will receive no more any
Message from the King, to both or either Houses of Parl.

An Ordinance sent to the Lords for the Trial of the King, but they rejected
the Commission, and adjourned eight days, after that they never sat more.

Sergeant Dendy, Sergeant at Arms to the Commissioners, rode into
Westminster Hall, with the Mace belonging to the House of Commons on his
shoulder, and some Officers attending him all bare, and six Trumpeters on
Horsback, a guard of Horse and Foot attending in the Palace yard and
Proclamation was made, All that had any thing for matter of Fact against Charles
Stuart, King of England, to bring it in to the Commissioners.

Jan: 19. 1648. That this present Seal of England should be broken in pieces,
and a new one forthwith made, and ordered that the Arms of England and Ireland
should be engraven on the one side, and on the other side a Map of the Parl.
with these words in it, The first year of Freedom by Gods blessing restored,
1648.

The Charge of the Commons of England, against Charles Stuart King of England.
THat the said Charles Stuart being admitted King of England, and therein
trusted with a limited power, to Govern by and according to the Laws of the
Land, and not otherwise; and by his truth, Oath, and Office, being obliged to
use the power committed to him, for the good and benefit of the people, and for
the preservation of their Rights and Liberties, yet nevertheless out of a
wicked design to erect and uphold in himself an unlimited and tyrannical
power, to rule according to his will, and to overthrow the Rights and Liberties
of the people; yea, to take away and make void the foundations thereof, and of
all redress and remedy of mis government, which by the fundamental
Constitutions of this Kingdom, were reserved on the peoples behalf, in the
right and power of frequent and successive Parl. or National meetings in
Councels; He, the said Charles Stuart, for the accomplishment of such his
designs, and for the protecting of himself and his adherents, in his and their
wicked practices to the same ends, has traitorously and maliciously levied War
against the present Parl. and the people therein represented. Particularly,
upon or about the 30 of June, in the year 1642. at Beverley in the County of
York, and about the 30 of July in the year aforesaid, in the County of the
City of York; and upon the 22 of August, at Nottingham, where he set up his
Standard of War; and also about the 23 of October, in the same year at
Edgehill, and Keintonfield, in the County of Warwick; and near the 30 of Nov.
in the same year, at Brainford in the County of Middlesex; and near the 30 of
Aug. 1643 at Cavesham Bridge near Redding, in the County of Berks; and near the
30 of October. in the same year, near the City of Gloucester; and about the 30 of
Nov. the same year, at Newbury in the County of Ber. and about July 31. 1644.
at Cropredy Bridge in the County of Oxen. and Sept. 30. the same year, at
Bodmin, and other places in the County of Cornwall; and Nov. 30. the same year,
at Newbery; and about June 8. 1645. at Leicester; and the 14. at Naseby field.
At which several times and places, or most of them, and at many other places
in this land, at several other times within the years aforementioned. And in
the year 1646. he the said Charles Stuart has caused and procured many
thousands of the free people of the Nation to be slain, and by diversions,
parties, and insurrections within this land, by invasions from foreign parts,
endeavored and procured by him, and by many other evil ways and means, he
the said Charles Stuart has not only maintained and carried on the said War,
both by Land and Sea, during the years before mentioned, but also has renewed,
or caused to be renewed the said War against the Parl. and good people of this
Nation, in this present year, 1648. in the Counties of Kent, Essex, Surrey,
Sussex, Middlesex, and many other Counties and places in England and Wales, and
also by Sea; and particularly, he the said Charles Stuart has for that purpose
given Commission to his Son the Prince, and others, whereby, besides multitudes
of other persons, many such as were by the Parl. entrusted and employed for the
Nation, being by him or his Agents corrupted to the betraying of their trust,
and revolting from the Parl. have had entertainment and Commission for the
continuing and renewing of War and Hostility against the said Parl. and people
as aforesaid. By which cruel and unnatural Wars by him the said Charles
Stuart, continued and renewed as aforesaid, much innocent blood of the free
people of this Nation, has been spilt, many Families have been undone, the
public Treasury wasted and exhausted, Trade obstructed and miserably decayed,
vast expense and damage to the Nation incurred, and many parts of the Land
spoiled, some of them even to desolation.

And for farther prosecution of his said evil Designs, he, the said Charles
Stuart does still continue his Commission to the said Prince, and other Rebels
and Revolters, both English and Foreigners, and to the Earl of Ormond, and to
the Irish Rebels and Revolters associated with him, from whom further invasions
are threatened, upon the procurement, and on the behalf of the said Charles
Stuart.

All which wicked Designs, Wars, and evil practices of him the said Charles
Stuart, have been and are carried on, for the advancing and upholding of the
personal interest of will and power, and pretended prerogative to himself and
his Family, against the public interest, common right, liberty, justice, and
peace of the people of this Nation, by and for whom he was entrusted as
aforesaid.

By all which it appears that he the said Charles Stuart, has been and is the
Occasioner, Author, and Contriver of the said unnatural, cruel, and bloody
wars, and therein guilty of all the Treasons, Murders, Rapines, Burnings,
Desolations, Damage, and mischief to this Nation, acted or committed in the
said Wars, or occasioned thereby.

And the said John Cook, by Protestation (save on the behalf of the people of
England, the liberty of exhibiting at any time hereafter, any other Charge
against the said Charles Stuart, and also of replying to the answers which the
said Charles Stuart shall make to the premises, or any Charge that shall be so
exhibited) does, for the said Treasons and Crimes on the behalf of the said
people of Engl: impeach the said Charles Stuart, as a Tyrant, Traitor,
Murderer, and a public and implacable enemy to the Commonwealth of England,
and pray, That the said Charles Stuart King of England, may be put to answer all
and every the premises, that such Proceedings, Examinations, Trials, Sentence,
and Judgment, may be thereupon had, as shall be agreeable to Justice.

The Kings Speech made upon the Scaffold at White Hall, Jan. 30. 1648.
I Shall be very little heard of any body here, I shall therefore speak a word
unto you here; indeed I could hold my peace very well, if I did not think that
holding my peace would make some men think that I did submit to the guilt as
well as to the punishment; but I think it is my duty to God first, and to my
Country, for to clear my self both as an honest man, and a good Christian. I
shall begin first with my innocence, in troth, I think it not very needful for
me to insist long upon this, for all the world knows I never did begin a War
with the two Houses of Parliament, and I call God to witness, to whom I must
shortly make an account, that I never did intend for to incroach upon their
privileges, they began upon me, it was the Militia they began upon, they
confessed that the Militia was mine, but they thought it fit for to have it from
me; and to be short, if any body will look to the dates of Commissions, both
theirs and mine and likewise to the Declarations, will see clearly that they
began these unhappy troubles, not I, so that as for the guilt of these enormous
Crimes that are laid against me, I hope in God that God will clear me of it, I
will not, I am in charity; God forbid that I should lay it upon the two Houses
of Parl. there is no necessity of either, I hope they are free of this guilt;
for I do believe that ill instruments between them and me, has been the cause
of all this bloodshed; so that by way of speaking, as I find my self clear of
this, I hope (and pray God) that they may too: yet for all this, God forbid
that I should be so ill a Christian, as not to say that Gods judgments are
just, upon me, many times he does pay justice by an unjust sentence, that is
ordinary; I will only say this. That an unjust Sentence that I suffered to
take effect, is punished now by an unjust Sentence upon me; that is, so far I
have said, to show you that I am an innocent man.

Now for to show you that I am a good Christian, I hope there is a good man
(pointing to Dr Juckson) that will bear me witness that I have forgiven all
the world, and those in particular that have been the chief causers of my
death, who they are God knows, I do not desire to know, I pray God forgive
them. But this is not all, my charity must go further, I wish that they may
repent, for indeed they have committed a great sin in that particular, I pray
God with Saint Stephen, that this be not laid to their charge; nay, not only
so, but that they may take the right way to the peace of the Kingdom: So
(Sirs) I do wish with all my soul, and I do hope (there is some here will
carry it further) that they may endeavor the peace of the Kingdom.

Now (Sirs) I must show you how you are out of the way, and will put you in a
way; first, you are out of the way, for certainly all the way you ever have had
yet as I could find by any thing, is in the way of Conquest, certainly this is
in an ill way, for Conquest (Sir) in my opinion is never just, except there be
a good just Cause, either for matter of wrong, or just Title, and then if you
go beyond it, that makes it unjust at the end that was just at first: But if
it be only matter of Conquest, then it is a great Robbery, as a Pirate said to
Alexander, That He was the great Robber, he was but a petty Robber; and so,
Sirs, I do think the way you are in, is much out of the way. Now Sir, for to
put you in the way, believe it, you will never do right, nor God will never
prosper you, until you give God his due, the King his due, (that is, my
Successors) and the people their due, I am as much for them as any of you: You
must give God his due, by regulating rightly his Church (according to his
Scriptures) which is now out of order, for to set you in a way particularly now
I cannot, but only this, a National Synod freely called, freely debating
among themselves, must settle this; when that every Opinion is freely and
clearly heard.

For the King indeed I will not, the Laws of the Land will clearly instruct
you for that; therefore, because it concerns my own particular, I only give
you a touch of it.

For the people, and truly I desire their liberty and freedom as much as any
body whomsoever; but I must tell you, that their Liberty and their Freedom
consists in having of Government; those Laws, by which their life and their
goods may be most their own. It is not for having share in Government (Sir)
that is nothing pertaining to them, a Subject and a Sovereign are clean
different things, and therefore until they do that, I mean, that you do put
the people in that Liberty as I say, certainly they will never enjoy themselves.

Sirs, it was for this that now I am come here: If I would have given way to an
Arbitrary way, for to have all Laws changed according to the power of the
Sword, I needed not to have come here; and therefore I tell you (and I pray God
it be not laid to your charge) That I am the Martyr of the people.

In troth Sirs, I shall not trouble you much longer; for I will only say this
to you, that in truth, I could have desired some little time longer, because
that I would have put this that I have said in a little more order, and a
little better digested then I have done, and therefore I hope you will excuse
Me.

I have delivered my conscience, I pray God, that you do take those courses
that are best for the good of the kingdom, and your own Salvation.

The Biship of London minding him to say something concerning his Religion.

King. I thank you very heartily (my Lord) for that, I had almost forgotten it.
In troth Sirs, my Conscience in Religion, I think, is very well known to all
the world, and therefore I declare before you all, That I die a Christian,
according to the profession of the Church of England, as I found it left me by
my Father, and this honest man I think will witness it.

Then turning to the Officers, said, Sirr, excuse me for this same, I have a
good cause, and I have a gracious God, I will say no more. Then turning to Col.
Hacker, he said, Take care that they do not put me to pain, and Sir, this and
it please you. But then a Gentleman coming near the Ax, the King said, take
heed of the Ax, pray take heed of the Ax. Then the King speaking to the
Executioner, said, I shall say but very short prayers, and when I thrust out my
hands -- Then the King called to Dr Iuxon for his night cap, and having put it
on, he said to the Executioner, does my hair trouble you, who desired him to
put it all under his Cap, which the King did accordingly, by the help of the
Executioner and the Bishop, then the King turning to Dr Juxon, said, I have a
good Cause, and a gracious God on my side.

Dr Jaxon, There is but one stage more, this stage is turbulent and
troublesome, it is a short one, but you may consider it will soon carry you a
very great way, from Earth to Heaven, and there you shall find a great deal of
cordial joy and comfort.

King. I go from a corruptible to an incorruptible Crown, where no disturbanc
can be

Doct. You are exchanged from a temporal to an eternal Crown, a good exchange.

Then the King took off his Cloak and his George, giving his George to Dr.
Juckson, saying Remember, it is thought for the Prince, and some other small
Ceremonies past, after which, the King stooping down, laid his neck upon the
block, after a very little pause, stretched forth his hands, the Executionr at
one blow severed his head from his Body, his Body was put in a Coffin covered
with black Velvet, and removed to his Lodging Chamber at White Hall.

An Act prohibiting the Proclaiming of any person to be King of England, etc.
Whereas Charles Stuart King of England, being for the notorious Treasons,
Tyrannies, and Murders, committed by him in the late unnatural and civil
Wars condemned to death, whereupon, after execution of the same, several
pretenses may be made, and Title set on foot unto the Kingly Office, to the
apparent hazard of the Public Peace. For the prevention thereof, Be it
Enacted and Ordained by this present Parliament, and by the Authority of the
same, That no person or persons whatsoever do presume to Proclaim, Declare,
Publish, or any way promote Charles Stuart, Son of the said Charles, commonly
called Prince of Wales, or any other person to be King or chief Magistrate of
England or of Ireland, or of any the Dominions belonging to them, or any of
them, by color of Inheritance, Succession, Election, or any other claim
whatsoever, without the free consent of the people in Parliam: first had, and
signified by a particular Act or Ordinance for that purpose, any Law, Statute,
Usage, or Custom to the contrary notwithstanding. And be it further Enacted
and Ordained, and it is hereby Enacted and Ordained, that whosoever shall
contrary to this Act, Proclaim, Declare, Publish, or any way promote the said
Charls-Stuart the Son, or any other person to be King, or chief Magistrate of
England, or of Ireland, or of any the Dominions belonging to them, or to either
of them, without the said consent in Parliament, signified as aforesaid, shall
be deemed and adjudged a Traitor to the Commonwealth, and shall suffer the
pains of death, and such other punishments as belong to the Crime of High
Treason. And all Officers, as well Civil as Military, and all other
well-affected persons, are hereby authorized and required forthwith to
apprehend all such Offenders, and to bring them in safe custody to the next
Justice of the Peace, that they be proceeded against accordingly.

H. Scobel, Cler. Parl. D. Com.

Dk. Hambleton, E: of Cambridg, E: of Holland, and Lord Capell be headed Mar:
9. 1649 And their speeches on the scaffold



The Speech of Duke Hamilton Earl of Cambridge, on the Scaffold in the Palace
yard, the ninth of March, 1649.
I Think it is truly not very necessary for me to speak much, there are many
Gentlemen and Soldiers there that see me, but my voice truly is so weak, so
low, that they cannot hear me, neither truly was I ever at any time so much in
love with speaking, or with any thing I had to express, that I took delight in
it; yet this being the last time that I am to do so, by a Divine providence of
Almighty God, who has brought me to this end justly for my sins; I shall to
you, Sir, Master Sheriff, declare thus much, as to the matter that I am now to
suffer for, which is as being a Traitor to the Kingdom of England: Truly Sir,
it was a Country that I equally loved with my own, I made no difference, I
never intended either the generality of its prejudice, or any particular man's
in it; what I did was by the Command of the Parliament of the Country where I
was borne, whose Command I could not disobey, without running into the same
hazard there, of that condition that I now am in.

It pleased God so to dispose that Army under my Command, as it was ruined; and
I, as their General, clothed with a Commission, stand here, now ready to dye;
I shall not trouble you, with repeating of my Plea, what I said in my own
Defense at the Court of Justice, my self being satisfied with the Command that
is laid upon me, and they satisfied with the justness of their procedure
according to the Laws of this Land. God is just, and howsoever I shall not say
any thing as to the matter of the Sentence, but that I do willingly submit to
his Divine providence, and acknowledge that very many ways I deserve even a
worldly punishment, as well as hereafter, for we are all sinful, Sir, and I a
great one; yet for my comfort, I know there is a God in Heaven that is
exceeding merciful, I know my Redeemer fits at his right hand, and am
confident (clapping his hand on his breast) is mediating for me at this instant,
I am hopeful through his free grace, and all-sufficient merits, to be pardoned of
my sins, and to be received into his mercy, upon that I rely, trusting to
nothing but the free grace of God through Jesus Christ: I have not been tainted
in my Religion I thank God for it, since my infancy, it has been such as has
been professed in the Land, and established, and now it is not this Religion or
that Religion, nor this or that fancy of men that is to be built upon, it is
but one that is right, one that is sure, and that comes from God, Sir, and in the
free grace of our Savior. Sir, there is truly somewhat that ( he then
observing the Writers) had I thought my Speech would have been thus taken, I
would have digested it into some better method then now I can, and shall desire
these Gentlemen that do write it, that they will not wrong me in it, and that
it may not in this manner be published to my disadvantage, for truly I did not
intend to have spoken thus when I came here.

There are, Sirs, terrible aspersions that have been laid upon my self, truly
such, as I thank God, I am very free from; as if my actions and intentions had
not been such as they were pretended for, but that notwithstanding what I
pretended it was for the King, there was nothing less intended then to serve
him in it. I was bred with him for many years; I was his domestic servant, and
there was nothing declared by the Parl. that was not really intended by me; and
truly, in it I ventured my life one way, and now I lose it another way: and
that was one of the ends, as to the King; I speak only of that, because the
rest has many particulars; and to clear my self from so horrid an aspersion as
is laid upon me: neither was there any other design known to me by the
incoming of that Army, then what is really in the Declaration published. His
person, I do profess, I had reason to love as he was my King, and as he had
been my Master: It has pleased God now to dispose of him, so as it cannot be
thought fl^ttery to have said this, or any end in me for the saying of it, but
to free my self from that Calumny which lay upon me: I cannot gain by it, yet
Truth is that which we shall gain by for ever.

There has been much spoken, Sir, of an invitation into this Kingdom, it is
mentioned in that Declaration, and truly to that I did and do remit my self:
and I have been very much labored for discoveries of these inviters; it is no
time to dissemble, how willing I was to have served this Nation in any thing
that was in my power, is known to very many honest, pious, and religious men,
and how ready I would have been to have done what I could to have served them,
if it had pleased them to have preserved my life, in whose whose hands there
was a power: They have not thought it fit, and so I am become unusefull in that
which willingly I would have done. As I said at first (Sir) so I say now
concerning that point, I wish the Kingdom happiness, I wish it peace, and
truly Sir, I wish that this blood of mine may be the last that is drawn: and
howsoever I may perhaps have some reluctance with my self, as to the matter of
my suffering, for my Fact, yet I freely forgive all, Sir, I carry no rancour
along with me to my Grave, his will be done that has created both Heaven and
Earth, and me a poor miserable sinful Creature now speaking before him. For me
to speak, Sir, to you of State business, and the Government of the Kingdom, or
my opinion in that, or for any thing in that nature, truly it is to no end, it
contributes nothing: My own inclination has been to peace, from the
beginning, and it is known to many, that I never was an ill instrument betwixt
the King and his people; I never acted to the prejudice of the Parl. I bore no
Arms, I meddled not with it, I was not wanting by my prayers to God Almighty for
the happiness of the King; and truly I shall pray still, that God may so
direct him, as that may be done which shall tend to his glory, and the peace and
happiness of the Kingdom

For my Religion, that which I said was the established Religion, and that
which I have practiced in my own Kingdom where I was born and bred; my Tenets
they need not to be expressed, they are known to all and I am not of a rigid
opinion; many godly men there are that may have scruples which do not concern
me at all at no time; they may differ in opinions, and more now then at any
time; differing in opinion does not move me (not any man's) my own is clear:
Sir, the Lord forgive me my sins, and I forgive freely all those that even I
might as a worldly man, have the greatest animosity against; We are bidden to
forgive, Sir it is a Command laid upon us (and there mentioned) Forgive us our
trespasses, as we forgive them that trespass against us.

Then the Earl turning to the Executioner, said, Shall I put on another Cap?
Must this hair be turned up from my Neck? There are three of my Servants to
give satisfaction; he also asked him which way he would have him lie.

The Executioner pointing to the front of the Scaffold, the Earl replied, what,
my head this way?

After a little discourse in private with some of his Servants, he kneeled
down by the side of the Scaffold and prayed a while to himself.

Then with a cheerful and smiling countenance (embracing Dr. Sibbalds) he
said, truly Sir I do take you in mine arms, and truly, I bless God for it, I
do not fear, I have an assurance that is grounded here (laying his hand upon
his heart) now that gives me more true joy then ever I had. I pass out of a
miserable world, to go into an eternal and glorious Kingdom; and Sir, though
I have been a most sinful creature, yet Gods mercy I know is infinite, and I
bless my God for it, I go with so clear a conscience that I know not the man I
have personally injured.

Then embracing those his Servants which were there present, said to each of
them, You have been very faithful to me, and the Lord bless you.

And so turning himself to the Executioner, he said, I shall say a very short
prayer unto my God, while I lie down there, and when I stretch out my hand (my
right hand) then Sir, do your duty, and I do freely forgive you, and so I do
all the world.

Then the Earl of Cambridge said to the Executioner, Must I lie all along, he
answered, yes, and 't please your Lordship. Then he said, when I stretch out my
hands -- but I will fit my head, first tell me if I be right, and how you would
have me lie, and being told he must lie a little lower, he said,

Well, stay then till I give you the sign. And so having lain a short space
devoutly praying to himself, he stretched out his right hand, whereupon the
Executioner at one blow severed his head from his body, which was received by
two of his Servants then kneeling by him, into a Crimson Taffety Scarf, and
that with the body immediately put into a Coffin brought upon the Scaffold for
that purpose, and from thence conveyed to the House that was Sir John
Hamilton's at the Mews.

The Speech of the Earl of Holland upon the Scaffold.
IT is to no purpose (I think) to speak any thing here, which way must I speak?
and then being directed to the front of the Scaffold, he (leaning over the
rail) said, I think it is fit to say something, since God has called me to
this place.

The first thing which I must profess, is, what concerns my Religion and my
breeding, which has been in a good Family, that has been ever faithful to
the true Protestant Religion, in the which I have been bred, in the which I
have lived, and in the which by Gods grace and mercy I shall dye.

I have not lived according to that Education I had in that Family where I was
borne and bred: I hope God will forgive me my sins, since I conceive that it is
very much his pleasure to bring me to this place for the sins that I have
committed.

The cause that has brought me hither, I believe by many has been much
mistaken, They have conceived that I have had ill designs to the State, and to
the Kingdom, truly I look upon it as a judgment, and a just judgment of God;
not but I have offended so much the State and the Kingdom, and the Parliament,
as that I have had an extreme vanity in serving them very extraordinarily. For
those actions that I have done, I think it is known they have been ever
faithful to the public, and very particularly to Parliam: my affections have
been ever expressed truly and clearly to them. The dispositions of affairs now
have put things in another posture then they were when I was engaged with the
Parl. I have never gone off from those principles that ever I have professed, I
have lived in them, and by Gods grace will I dye in them.

There may be alterations and changes that may carry them further then I
thought reasonable, and there I left them: But there has been nothing that I
have said or done, or professed either by Covenant or Declaration, which has
not been very constant, and very clear upon the Principles that I ever have
gone upon, which was to serve the King, the Parl. Religion (I should have said
in the first place) the Commonwealth, and to seek the peace of the Kingdom.

That made me think it no improper time, being pressed out by accidents and
circumstances, to seek the peace of the Kingdom, which I thought was proper,
since there was something then in agitation, but nothing agreed on for sending
Propositions to the King, that was the furthest aim that I had, and truly
beyond that I had no intention, none at all. And God be praised, although my
blood comes to be shed here, there was I think scarcely a drop of blood shed in
that action that I was engaged in.

For the present affairs, as they are I cannot tell how to judge of them, and
truly they are in such a condition, as (I conceive) no body can make a judgment
of them: and therefore I must make use of my prayers, rather then of my
opinion, which are, that God would bless this Kingdom, this Nation, this
State, that he would settle it in a way agreeable to what this Kingdom has
been happily Governed under; by a King, by the Lords, by the Commons, a
Government that (I conceive) it has flourished much under, and I pray God the
change of it bring not rather a prejudice, a disorder, and a confusion, then
the contrary.

I look upon the Posterity of the King, and truly my conscience directs me to
it, to desire, that if God be pleased that these people may look upon them with
that affection that they owe, that they may be called in again, and they may
be, not through blood, nor through disorder, admitted again into that power,
and to that glory that God has in their birth intended to them. I shall pray
with all my Soul for the happiness of this State, of this Nation, that the
blood which is here spilt, may be even the last which may fall amongst us, and
truly I should lay down my life with as much cheerfulness as ever person did,
if I conceived that there would no more blood follow us; for a State, or
affairs that are built upon blood, is a foundation for the most part that does
not prosper.

After the blessing that I give to the Nation, to the Kingdom, and truly to
the Parliament, I do wish with all my heart, happiness, and a blessing to all
those that have been authors in this business, and truly that have been authors
in this very work that brings us hither: I do not only forgive them, but I
pray heartily and really for them; as God will forgive my sins, so I desire God
may forgive them.

I have a particular relation, as I am Chancellor of Cambridge and truly I must
here, since it is the last of my prayers, pray to God that that University may
go on in that happy way which it is in, that God may make it a Nursery to
plant those persons that may be distributed to the Kingdom, that the Souls of
the people may receive a great benefit and a great advantage by them; and (I
hope) God will reward them for their kindness, and their affections that I
have found from them. (Looking toward Mr. Bolton.)

I have said what Religion I have been breed in, what Religion I have been born
in, what Religion I have practiced, I began with it and I must end with it.

I told you that my actions and my life have not been agreeable to my breeding,
I have told you likewise that the Family where I was bred, has been an
exemplary Family (I may say so I hope without vanity) of much affection to
Religion, and of much faithfulness to this Kingdom, and to this State.

I have endeavored to do those actions that have become an honest man, and
which became a good Englishman, and which became a good Christian. I have been
willing to oblige those that have been in trouble, those that have been in
persecution, and truly I find a great reward of it, for I have found their
prayers and their kindness now in this distress, and in this condition I am
in, and I think it a great reward, and I pray God reward them for it.

I am a great sinner, and I hope God will be pleased to hear my prayers, to
give me Faith to trust in him, that as he has called me to death at this
place, he will make it but a passage to an eternal life through Jesus Christ,
which I trust to, which I rely upon, and which I expect by the mercy of God.
And so I pray God bless you all, and send that you may see this to be the last
execution, and the last blood that is likely to be spilt among you. And then
turning to the side rail, he prayed for a good space of time.

God has given me (speaking to Mr. Bolton) long time in this world, he has
carried me through many great accidents of Fortune, he has at last brought me
down into a condition, where I find my self brought to an end, for a
dis-affection to this State, to this Parl. that (as I said before) I did
believe no body in the world more unlikely to have expected to suffer for that
Cause. I look upon it as a great judgment of God for my sins. And truly Sir,
since that the death is violent; I am the less troubled with it, because of
those violent deaths that I have seen before: Principally my Savior that has
showed us the way, how and in what manner he has done it, and for what cause,
I am the more comforted, I am the more rejoiced. It is not long since the King
my Master passed in the same manner, and truly I hope that his purposes and
intentions were such, as a man may not be ashamed not only to follow him in
the way that was taken with him, but likewise not ashamed of his purposes, if
God had given him life. I have often dispu^ed with him concerning many things
of this kind, and I conceive his sufferings, and his better knowledge and
better understanding (if God had spared him life) might have made him a Prince
very happy toward himself, and very happy toward this Kingdom. I have seen
and known, that those blessed souls in Heaven, have passed thither by the gate
of sorrow, and many by the gate of violence: And since it is Gods pleasure to
dispose me this way, I submit my soul to him, with all comfort, and with all
hope, that he has made this my end, and this my conclusision, that though I be
low in death, yet nevertheless this, lowness shall raise me to the highest
glory for ever.

Truly, I have not said much in public to the people concerning the particular
actions that I conceive I have done by my Counsels in this Kingdom, I conceive
they are well known, it were something of vanity (me thinks) to take notice of
them here, I Will rather dye with them, with the comfort of them in mine own
bosom; and that I never intended in this action, or any action that ever I did
in my life, either malice, or bloodshed, or prejudice to any Creature that
lives. For that which concerns my Religion, I made my profession before of it,
how I was bred, and in what manner I was bred, in a Family that was looked upon
to be no little notorious in opposition to some liberties, that they conceived,
then to be taken; and truly there was some mark upon me, as if I had some taint
of it, even throout the whole ways that I have taken: every body knows what my
affections have been to many that have suffered, to many that have been in
troubles in this Kingdom, I endeavored to oblige them, I thought I was tied
so by my Conscience, I thought it by my charity, and truly very much my
breeding; God has now brought me to the last instant of my time, all that I
can say, and all that I can adhere unto is this, That as I am a great sinner,
so I have a great Savior, that as he has given me here a fortune to come
publicly in a show of shame in the way of this suffering, (truly I understand
it not to be so) I understand it to be a glory, a glory, when I consider who
has gone before me, and a glory when I consider I had no end in it but what I
conceive to be the service of God, the King, and the Kingdom, and therefore my
heart is not charged much with any thing in that particular, since I conceive
God will accept of the intention, whatsoever the action seem to be. I am going
to dye, and the Lord receive my soul, I have no reliance but upon Christ for my
self, I do acknowledge that I am the unworthiest of sinners, my life has been
a vanity, and a continued sin, and God may justly bring me to this end, for the
sins I have committed against him, and were there nothing else but the
iniquities that I have committed in the way of my life, I look upon this as a
great justice of God to bring me to this suffering, and those hands that have
been most active in it, I pray God forgive them, and that there may not be many
such Trophies of their Victory. I might say something of our Trial, which I
think has been extraordinary, but because I would not seem as if I made some
complaint, I will not so much as mention it, because no body shall believe I
repine at their actions, or my own fortune; it is the will of God, it is the
hand of God under whom I fall, I take it entirely from him, I submit my self to
him, I shall desire to roll my self into the arms of my blessed Savior.

And when I come to this place (pointing to the Block) when I bow down my
self there, I hope God will raise me up, and when I bid farewell, as I must
now to hope and to Faith, that Love will abide, I know nothing to accompany the
Soul out of this World but Love, and I hope that Love will bring me to the
Fountain of glory in Heaven, through the Arms, Mediation, and the Mercy of my
Savior Jesus Christ, in whom I believe, O Lord help my unbelief.

I shall make as much have as I can to come to that glory, and the Lord of
Heaven and Earth take my soul: I look upon my self entirely in him, and hope
to find mercy through him, I expect it, and through that Fountain that is
opened for sin, and for uncleanness, my soul must receive it, for did I rest
in any thing else, I have nothing but sin and corruption in me; I have nothing
but that, which instead of being carried up into the Arms of God and Glory, I
have nothing but may throw me down into Hell.

And here is the place where I lie down before him, from whence I hope he will
raise me to an eternal Glory through my Savior, upon whom I rely, from whom
only I can expect mercy: into his arms I commend my spirit, into his bleeding
arms, that when I leave this bleeding body that must lie upon this place, he
will receive that Soul that arises out of it, and receive it into his
Eternal mercy, through the Merits, through the Worthiness, through the
Mediation of Christ that has purchased it with his own most precious Blood.

Christ Jesus receive my Soul, my Soul hungers and thirsts after him, clouds
are gathering, and ^^^ust in God through all my heaviness: and I hope through
all impediments, he will settle my interest in him, and throw off all the claim
that Satan can make unto it, and that he will carry the soul in despite of
all the calumnies, and all that the Devil and Satan can invent, will carry it
into eternal mercy, there to receive the blessedness of his presence to all
eternity.

That Lamb of God, into his hands I commit my soul; and that Lamb of God that
sits upon the Throne to judge those 24 that fall down before him, I hope he
will be pleased to look downward, and judge me with mercy that fall down before
him, and that worship him, and that adore him, that only trusts upon his mercy
for his compassion, and that as he has purchased me, he would lay his claim
unto me now, and receive me.

Indeed if Christ justify, no body can condemn, and I trust in God, in his
justification, though there is confusion here without us, and though there are
wonders and staring that now disquiet us, yet I trust that I shall be carried
into that mercy, that God will receive my soul.

Then the Earl of Holland looking over among the people, pointing to a
Soldier, said, This honest man took me Prisoner, you little thought I should
have been brought to this, when I delivered my self to you upon conditions; and
espying Capt. Watson on Horse back putting off his Hat said to him, God be with
you Sir, God reward you Sir.

Here must now be my Anchor, a great storm makes me find my Anchor, and but in
storms no body trust to their Anchor, and therefore I must trust upon my
Anchor (Upon that God, said Mr Bolton, upon whom your Anchor trusts) yea, God,
I hope, will Anchor my soul fast upon Christ Jesus: and if I dye not with that
clearness and heartinesse that you speak of, truly, I will trust in God though
he kill me, I will rely upon him, and the mercy of my Savior.

Then the Earl of Holland embraced Liev: Col: Beecher, and took his leave of
him: After which, he came to Mr Bolton, and having embraced him, and returned
him many thanks for his great pains and affections to his soul, desiring God
to reward him, and return his love into his bosom, Mr Bolton said to him, The
Lord God support you, and be seen in this great extremity, the Lord reveal and
discover himself to you, and make your death the passage unto eternal life.

Then the Earl turning to the Executioner, said, Here my friend, let my Clothes
and my Body alone, there is ten pounds for thee, that is better then try
Clothes, I am sure of it.

Execut. Will your Lordship please to give me a sign when I shall strike? And
his Lordship said, you have room enough here, have you not? Execut. Yes.

Then the Earl of Holland turning to the Executioner, said, Friend, do you
hear me, if you take up my Head, do not take off my Cap. Then turning to his
Servants, be said to one, Fare you well, thou art an honest fellow, and to
another, God be with thee, thou art an honest man, and then said, Stay, I will
kneel down and ask God forgiveness, and then prayed for a pretty space with
seeming earnestness. Then speaking to the Executioner, he said,

Which is the way of lying? (which they showed him) and then going to the Front
of the Scaffold, he said to the people, God bless you all, and God deliver you
from any such act as may bring you to any such death as is violent, either by
war or by these accidents, but that there may be peace among you, and you may
find that these accidents that have happened to us, may be the last that may
happen in this Kingdom; it is that I desire, it is that I beg of God, next the
saving of my soul; I pray God give all happiness to this Kingdom, to this
people, and this Nation: And then turning to the Executioner, said, How must I
lie? I know not.

Execut. Lie down flat upon your Belly: and then having laid himself down, he
said, Must I lie closer? Execut. Yes. and backwarder.

I will tell you when you shall strike, and then as he lay seemed to pray with
much affection for a short space, and then lifting up his head, said, where is
the man? and seeing the Executioner by him, he said, Stay while I give the
sign, and presently after stretching out his hand, and the Executioner being
not fully ready, he said, Now, now, and just as the words were coming out of
his mouth, the Executioner at one blow severed his Head from his Body.

The Speech of the Lord Capel upon the Scaffold.
THe Conclusion that I made with those that sent me hither, and are the cause
of this violent death of mine, shall be the beginning of what I shall say to
you: When I made an Address to them, (which was the last) I told them with much
sincerity, That I would pray to the God of all mercies, that they might be
partakes of his inestimable and boundless mercy in Jesus Christ, and truly I
shall pray that prayer, and I beseech the God of Heaven forgive any injury they
have done to me, from my soul I wish it. And truly, this I tell you as a
Christian, to let you see I am a Christian: But it is necessary I should tell
you somewhat more, That I am a Protestant, and truly I am a Protestant, and
very much in love with the profession of it, after the manner as it wa^
established in England by the thirty nine Article^, a blessed way of
profession, and such a one, as truly, I never knew none so good: I am so far
from being a Papist, which some body have (truly) very unwo^thily at some time
charged me withal, that truly I profess to you, that though I love Good
Works, and commend Good Works, yet I hold, they have nothing at all to do in
the matter of Salvation; my Anchor-hold is this, That Christ loved me, and gave
himself for me, that is it that I rest upon. And truly something I shall say
to you as a Citizen of the whole world, and in that consideration I am here
condemned to dye: truly, contrary to the Law that Governs all the world, that
is, The Law of the Sword, I had the protection of that for my life, and honor
of it; but truly I will not trouble you much with that, because in another
place I have spoken very largely and liberal about it, I believe you will hear
by other means what arguments I used in that case: But truly, that that is
stranger, you that are English men, behold here an English man now before you,
and acknowledged a Peer, not condemned to dye by any Law of Engl. not by any
Law of England; nay shall I tell you (which is strangest of all) contrary to
all the Laws of Engl: that I know of. And truly I will tell you, in the matter
of the civil part of my death, and the Cause I have maintained, I dye (I take
it) for maintaining the fifth Commandment, enjoined by God himself, which
enjoynes reverence and obedience to Parents: All Divines on all hands, though
they contradict one another in many several opinions, yet all Divines on all
hands, do acknowledge that here is intended Magistracy and Order, and
certainly I have obeyed that Magistracy and the Order under which I have lived,
which I was bound to obey; and truly, I do say very confidently that I do dye
here for keeping, for obeying that fifth Commandment given by God himself,
and written with his own finger.

And now Gentlemen, I will take this opportunity to tell you, that I can not
imitate a better nor a greater ingenuity then his, that said of himself, For
suffering an unjust judgment upon another, himself was brought to suffer by
an unjust judgment. Truly Gentlemen, that God may be glorified, that all men
that are concerned in it, may take the occasion of it, of humble repentance to
God Almighty for it, I do here profess to you, that truly I did give my Vote
to that Bill of the E. of Strafford, I doubt not but God Almighty has washed
that away with a more precious blood, and that is, with the blood of his own
Son, and my dear Savior Jesus Christ, and I hope he will wash it away from all
those that are g^ilty of it: Truly this I may say, I had not the least part nor
the least degree of malice in the doing of it: but I must confess again to
Gods glory, and the accusation of mine own frailty, and the trailty of my
nature, that truly it was an unworthy Cowardice, not to resist so great a
torrent as carried that business at that time. And truly, this I think I am
most guilty of, of not courage enough in it, but malice I had none; but
whatsoever it was, God I am sure has pardoned it, has given me the assurance
of it, that Christ Jesus his blood has washed it away; and truly, I do from
my soul wish, that all men that have any stain by it, may seriously repent,
and receive a remission and pardon from God for it. And now Gentlemen, we have
had an occasion by this intimation to remember his Majesty, our King that last
was, and I cannot speak of him, nor think of it, but truly I must needs say,
that in my opinion that have had time to consider all the Images of all the
greatest and vertuousest Princes in the world, and truly in my opinion there
was not a more virtuous, and more sufficient Prince known in the world, then
our gracious King Charles that dyed last; God Almighty preserve our King that
now is, his Son, God send him more fortunate, and longer days; God almighty so
assist him, that he may exceed both the virtues and sufficiencies of his
Father: For certainly, I that have been a Counselor to him, and have lived
long with him, and in a time when discovery is easily enough made, for he was
young (he was about thirteen, fourteen, fifteen, or sixteen years of age) those
years I was with him, truly I never saw greater hopes of virtue in any young
person, then in him; great Judgment, great Understanding, great Apprehension,
much Honor in his Nature, and truly a very perfect Englishman in his
Inclination; and I pray God restore him to this Kingdom, and unite the
Kingdoms one unto another, and send a happiness both to you and to him, that
he may long live and Reign among you, and that that Family may Reign till thy
Kingdom come, that is, while all Temporal Power is consuminated: I beseech
God of his mercy, give much happiness to this your KING, and to you that in it
shall be his Subjects, by the grace of Jesus Christ.

Truly, I like my beginning so well, that I will make my conclusion with it,
that is, That God Almighty would confer of his infinite and inestimable grace
and mercy, to those that are the causers of my coming hither, I pray God give
them as much mercy as their own hearts can wish; and truly for my part I will
not accuse any of them of malice, truly I will not, nay, I will not think there
was any malice in them; what other ends there are, I know not, nor I will not
examine, but let it be what it will, from my very soul I forgive them every
one: And so, the Lord of Heaven bless you all, God Almighty be infinite in
goodness and mercy to you, and direct you in those ways of obedience to his
Commands to his Majesty, that this Kingdom may be a happy and glorious Nation
again, and that your King may be a happy King in so good and so obedient
people. God Almighty keep you all, God Almighty preserve this Kingdom. God
Almighty preserve you all.

Then turning about, and looking for the Executioner (who was gone off the
Scaffold) said, Which is the Gentleman? Which is the man? Answer was made, he
is coming, he then said, stay, I must pull off my Doublet first and my
Wastcoat: And then the Executioner being come upon the Scaffold, the Lord Capel
said, O friend, prithee come hither: Then the Executioner kneeling down, the
Lord Capel said, I forgive thee from my soul, and not only forgive thee, but I
shall pray to God to give thee all grace for a better life: There is five
pounds for thee, and truly for my Clothes and those things, if there be any
thing due to you for it, you shall be very fully recompensed, but I desire my
body may not be stripped here, and no body to take no^^ce of my body but my own
Servants: Look you Friend, this I shall desire of you, that when I lie down,
you would give me a time for a particular short prayer.

Liev. Col. Beecher, Make your own sign my Lord.

Capel. Stay a little, which side do you stand upon (speaking to the
Executioner) stay I think I should lay my hands forward that way (pointing fore
right) and answer being made yet, he stood still a little while, and then said,
God Almighty bless all this people; God Almighty stench this blood, God
Almighty stench, stench, this issue of blood, this will not do the business,
God Almighty find out another way to do it.

And then turning to one of his Servants, said, Baldwin, I cannot see any thing
that belongs to my wife, but I must desire thee to beseech her to rest wholly
upon Jesus Christ, and be contented and fully satisfied: And then speaking to
his Servants he said, God keep you, and Gentlemen, let me now do a business
quickly, privately, and pray let me have your Prayers at the moment of death,
that God would receive my soul.

Capel. Pray at the moment of striking, join your prayers, but make no noise
(turning to his Servants) that is inconvenient at this time.

Servant. My Lord, put on your Cap.

Capel. Should I, what will that do me good? stay a little, is it well as it
is now? And then turning to the Executioner, he said, Honest man, I have
forgiven thee, therefore strike boldly, from my soul I do it.

Then a Gentleman speaking to him, he said, Nay, prithee be contented, be quiet
good Mr -- be quiet.

Then turning to the Executioner, he said, Well, you are ready when I am ready,
are you not? And stretching out his hand^, he said, then pray stand off
Gentlemen, then going to the front of the Scaffold, he said to the people,
Gentlemen, though I doubt not of it, yet I think it convenient to ask it of
you, that you would all join in prayers with me, that God would mercifully
receive my soul, and that for his alone mercies in Christ Jesus.

Execut. My Lord, shall I put up your Hair?

Capel. I, I, prithee do; and then as he stood, lifting up his hands and eyes,
he said, O God, I do with a perfect and a willing heart submit to thy will, O
God, I do most willingly humble my self: then kneeling down, said, I will try
first how I can lie, and laying his head over the block, said, Am I well now?

Execut. Yes.

And then as he lay with both his hands stretched out, he said to the
Executioner, Here lie both my hands out, when I lift up my hand thus, then you
may strike.

And then after he had said a short prayer, he lifted up his right hand, and
the Executioner at one blow severed his head from his body, which was taken up
by his Servants, and put (with his Body) into a Coffin, as the former.

March 19. 1648. An Act for Abolishing the House of Peers.
THe Commons of England Assembled in Parl finding by too long experience that
the House of Lords is useless and dangerous to the people of England to be
continued, have thought fit to Ordain and Enact, and be it Ordained and Enacted
by the present Parliam: and by the Authority of the same, That from henceforth
the House of Lords in Par. shall be, and is hereby wholly abolished and taken
away; and that the Lords shall not from henceforth meet or sit in the said
House of Lords, nor shall Sit, Vote, Advise, Adjudge or Determine of any matter
or thing whatsoever, as a House of Lds in Parl. Nevertheless it is hereby
Declared, That neither such Lords as have demeaned themselves with Honor,
Courage, and Fidelity to the Commonwealth, their Posterities who shall
continue so, shall not be excluded from the Public Councels of the Nation, but
shall be admitted thereunto, and have their free Vote in Parl: if they shall be
thereunto Elected, as other persons of interest Elected and Qualified thereunto
ought to have: And be it further Ordained and Enacted by the Authority
aforesaid, That no Peer of this Land, not being Elected, Qualified, and sitting
in Parl. as aforesaid, shall claim, have, or make use of any Privilege of
Parl. either in relation to his Person, Quality, or Estate, any Law, Usage, or
Custom to the contrary notwithstanding.

Hen: Scobel, Cler: Parl.

On Thursday, July 25. 1650. The General and Army Marched from Mordington to
Coppersmith, Col. Hackers Regiment being drawn up in the way, his Excellency
made a Speech to satisfy them concerning Capt. Ogles Troop being sent back
into Northumberland, in regard of his interest in that County, and that Cap.
Greenwoods Troop appointed for Berwick should March with the Regiment in the
stead thereof, which gave great satisfaction. Col. Bright's Regiment being
drawn up; Maj. Genesis Lambert appointed Colonel thereof, coming to the head of
the Regiment, was received with great Acclamations.

A List of the Regiments of Horse and Foot Randezvouzed and Marched with the
Lord Gen: Cromwell, into Scotland.
Eight Regiments of Horse.
THe Lord Generals, in number 663 Maj. Genesis in number 663 Col. Fleetwoods in
number 663 Col. Whalies in number 663 Col. Twisden in number 663 Col. Lilburn
in number 663 Col. Hackers in number 663 Col. Okey in number 744 Consisting
with Officers, in all 5450
Ten Regiments of Foot.
THe Lord Generals, in number 1307 Col. Pride 1307 Col. Bright 1307 Col.
Maliveryr 1307 Col. Ch: Fairfax 1307 Col. Cocks 1307 Col. Dunell 1307 Col. Sir
Arthur Hasterigs 5 Companies 550 Col. Fenwicks 5 Companies 555 Consisting with
Officers, in all 10249 The Train 690
The whole thus:
The Train 690 The Horse 5450 The Foot 10249 The Total 16354

A Letter from Liev: Gen: David Lesley, to the Lord Gen: Cromwell.
My Lord;
I Am Commanded by the Committee of Estates of this Kingdom, and desired by
the Commissioners of the General Assembly, to send unto your Excellency this
enclosed Declaration, as that which contains the State of the Quarrel:
wherein we are resolved, by the Lords assistance, to fight your Army, when the
Lord shall please to call us thereunto. And as you have professed you will not
conceal any of our Papers, I do desire that this Declaration may be made known
to all the Officers of your Army; And so I rest,

Bruchton, 13 Aug. 1650. Your Excel: most humble Servant, DAVID LESLEY.

For his Excellency the Lord General Cromwell.

The Declaration of the Commissioners of the General Assembly of Scotland, as
follows.
THe Commission: of the General Assembly considering, That there may be just
ground of stumbling, from the Kings Majesty's refusing to subscribe and emit
the Declaration offered unto him by the Committee of Estates, and Commissioners
of the General Assembly, concerning his former carriage, and resolutions for
the future, in reference to the Cause of God, and the Enemies and Friends
thereof: Does therefore Declare, That this Kirk and Kingdom do not own nor
espouse any Malignant Party, or Quarrel, or Interest, but that they fight
merely upon their former Grounds and Principles, and in defense of the Cause of
God, and of the Kingdom, as they have done these twelve years past. And
therefore as they do disclaim the sin and guilt of the King and of his House;
so they will not own him, nor his interest, otherwise then with a
subordination to God, and so far as he ownes and prosecutes the Cause of God,
and disclaimes his, and his Fathers opposition to the work of God, and to the
Coven, and likewise all the Enemies thereof. And that they will with convenient
speed take into consideration the Papers lately sent unto then from Oliver
Cromwell, and vindicate themselves from all the fa^shoods contained therein,
especially in these things, wherein the Quarrel betwixt us and that party is
mis-stated, as if we owned the late Kings proceedings, and were resolved to
prosecute and maintain his present Majesty's interest, before and without
acknowledgement of the sins of his House and former ways, and satisfaction to
Gods people in both Kingdoms.

West Kirk, Aug. 13 1650. A. Ker.

August 13. 1650.
THe Committee of Estates having seen and considered a Declaration of the
Commission: of the General Assembly, anent the stating of the Quarrel,
whereon the Army is to fight, Do approve the same, and heartily concur therein.

Tho: Henderson.

The Lord Generals Answer to the former, as follows.
I Received yours of the thirteenth instant, with the Paper you mentioned
therein enclosed, which I caused to be read in the presence of so many Officers
as could well be gotten together, to which your Trumpet can witness, we
return you this Answer, by which I hope in the Lord it will appear, That we
continue the same we have professed our selves to the honest people of Scotland,
wishing to them as to our own souls, it being no part of our business to hinder
any of them from worshipping God in that way they are satisfied in their
Consciences by the Word of God they ought (though different from us) but shall
therein be ready to perform what obligations lie upon us by the Covenant; but
that under the pretense of the Covenant, mistaken and wrested from the most
native intent and equity thereof, a King should be taken in by you, to be
imposed upon us, and this called The Cause of God and the Kingdom, and this
done upon the satisfaction of Gods people in both Nations, as is alleged,
together with a disowning of Malignants, although he who is the head of them in
whom all their hope of comfort lies, be received; who at this very instant has
a Popish pa^ty fighting for and under him in Ireland, has Prince Rupert (a man
who has had his hand deep in the blood of many innocent men of England) now in
the head of our Ships stolen from us upon a Malignant account; has the French
and Irish ships daily making depradations upon our Coasts: strong combinations
by the Malignants in England, to raise Arms in our bowels, by virtue of his
Commissions, who having of late issued out very many to that purpose, and how
the interest you pretend you have received him upon, and the Malignant interest
in the ends and consequences entering in this man, can be secured, we cannot
discern; and how we should believe, that whilst known and notorious Malignants,
fighting and plotting against us on the one hand, and the declaring for him on
the other, should not be an espousing of a Malignant party, quarrel, or
interest, but be a mere fighting upon former Grounds and Principles, and in
defense of the Cause of God, and of the Kingdom, as has been these twelve
years last past (as ye s^y) for the security and satisfaction of Gods people in
both Nations, or the opposing of which should render us enemies to the godly
with you, we cannot well understand, especially considering, That all these
Malignants take their confidence and encouragement from the late Transactions
of your Kirk and State with your King; for as we have already said, so we tell
you again, it is but satisfying security to those that employ us, and are
concerned in that we seek, which we conceive will not be by a few formal and
feigned submissions from a person who could not tell otherwise how to
accomplish his Malignant ends, and therefore Councel'd to this compliance, by
them who assisted his Father, and have hitherto acted him in his most evil
Designs, and are now again by them set on foot; against which, how you will be
able, in the way you are in, to secure us or your selves, is (forasmuch as
concerns our selves) our duty to look after.

If the state of your quarrel be thus, upon which, as you say, you resolve to
fight our Army, you will have opportunity to do that, else what means our abode
here? And if our hope be not in the Lord, it will be ill with us. We commit
both you and our selves to him, who knows the heart and tries the Reins, with
whom are all our ways, who is able to do for us and you, above what we know,
which we desire may be in much mercy to this poor people, and to the glory of
his own great Name.

And having performed your desire in making your papers so public as is before
expressed, I desire you to do the like, by letting the State, Kirk and Army have
the knowledge hereof. To which end I have sent you enclosed two Copies, and rest

From the Camp at Pencland Hills, Aug. 14. 1650, Your humble Servant, O:
CROMWELL.

The Victory at Gladsmore in Scotland, July 30, 31. 1650. M G. Montgomery
slain, 200 Arms taken, 80 Troopers, 500 wounded, 4 Colors, 15 Troops routed,
500 Font routed at Muscleburrough. The Victory at Dunbar, Aug. 30. 1650, 4000
killed, 10000 Prisoners, 2000 Horse, 290 Commission Officers, 15000 Arms, 200
Colors, 32 pieces of Ordnance. Of ours that engaged 5000 Horse and Foot; their
word, The Covenant, ours, The Lord of Hests.

November. 1650. Insurrections in Norfolk, for which 24 were condemned, and 20
executed. Col. Ker routed and taken, and the Town of Air. December. 25. The
strong Castle of Edinburgh delivered up, 53 pieces of Ordnance, whereof 15
Iron, the (...) Braste, about 8000 Arms, with store of Ammunition and Provision.

Nov. 22. A Squadron of Ships Commanded by Genesis Blague, surprised a
considerable part of the Portugal Brasit Fleet fraighted with Sugar, and sent
them to England, and after pursued the revolted ships beyond Alligant, where
they took 7 of Prince Ruperts Fieet, and pursued him to Thoulon one of the
surthest Havens of France, having but two ships left. Jan. 30. 1650. A day of
public Thanksgiving in England, Wales, and Town of Berwick

Jan. 1. 1650. The Scots King was Crowned at Schone, he is General of the Army,
D. Hamilton Lieut. Genesis of the Scotch Army, David Lesley M. G. Middleton L. G.
of the Scotch Horse, and Massey M. G. of the English.

Jan. 4. 1650. The King of Spain sent his Ambassador for the ^^knowledging of
this State, whose Authority and Sovereignty reads in this Parl. of the
Commonwealth of England, and to stablish a good friendship with it. The
Portugal sent his Agent also to the like effect.

March 6. 1650. Sir Henry Hide Beheaded at the Exchange for receiving and
acting by virtue of a Commission from Charles Stuart the Second, and King of
Great Britain, France, and Ireland, as his Agent to the Great Turk, with an
intent to destroy the Trade of the Turkey Company, and the Parl. interest, not
only in Constantinople, but in Mitylene, Anatolia, and Smyrna, in which
Conspiracies he was a Commissioner, and likewise to seize upon our Merchants
Goods for the use of the King of Scotland, and procured audience of the Grand
Vizier, and raised great fears and uproars among the Merchants.

A Speech made by K. Charles ye. 2d. at his Coronation: i. January. 1650 I will
by gods assistance bestow my life for your defense wishing to live no longer
then that I may see this Kingdom flourish in happiness.

The Oath, I do promise and vow in ye presence of ye eternal god yt I will
maintain ye true Kirk of god religion right preaching and administration of ye
Sacraments now received and preached within this Realm in purity; And shall
abolish and gain-stand all false Religions and sects contrary to ye same. And
shall rule ye people comi^ted to my charge, according to ye will of god, and
laudable laws and constitutions of ye Realm; causing justice and equity to be
ministered without partiality.



Brown Bushelt, Beheaded under the Scaffold on Tower Hill, Mar. 29. 1651. for
delivering up Scarborough.

June 2. 1651. The surrender of Scilly Islands.

June 24. Insurrection in Cardiganshire, 40 slain, 60 prisoners taken.

July 29. Burnt Island surrendered.

The Scotch King invaded England with 16000 Horse and Foot, and a light Tran of
Artillery, and, caused himself to be proclaimed K. of England, Scotland, and
Ireland, in Lancashire.

August 23. Charles the First erected his Standard at Nottingham, and Charles the
Second erected his Standard at Worcester, Aug. 22. 1651.

Sept 3. Old Lesley, Crawford, Linsey, Ogleby, with diverse of quality, besides
(...) taken that were making levies to raise the Siege at Dundee Aug. 2, 165^.
St Johnston surrendered. Aug. 19. The Castle of Ste^^^ surrendered (...) pieces
of Ordnance, 27 fair brass pieces, a great iron G^^^, 11 Leather Guns
provision of Meal to serve 500 men about twelve months, 40 or 50 Barrels of
Beef, 500 Arms, new Muskets and Pikes, 26 Barrels of powder, 20 or 30 Vessels
of Claret Wine, and Strong waters, great store of Match and other Ammonition,
Lantes Guns, a thousand Flats and other instruments of War of that nature, all
the Records of Scotland, the Chair and Cloth of State, the Sword, and other
rich furniture of the Kings. Aug. 25. The total rout and overthrow of the Earl
of Darby in Lancashire, by Col. Robert Lilburne.

A full Narrative of the late Dangerous Design against the State; written with
Master Love's own hand, and by him sent to the Parliam: declaring the several
Meetings, and secret Actings, with Major Alford, Major Adams, Colonel Barton,
Master Blackmore, M Case, M Cauton, Dr. Drake, M Drake, Capt. Far, M. Gibbons,
M. Haviland, Maj Huntington, M. Jenkins, M. Jaquel, M. Jackson, Liev. Jackson
Cap. Massey, M. Nilton, Cap. Potter, M. Robinson, M. Sterks, Col. Sowton, Col.
Vaughan, and others.
COnsidering how a clear and full Narrative may satisfy the State (al^hough it
may prejudice my self) I am willing with an ingenuous freedom, and opennesse
of heart to make known the whole matter, so far as I distinctly know and well
remember, humbly hoping that this large acknowledgment of mine (which is more
then any in the world can prove against me) shall not be taken as an
aggravation of my fault, but as a demonstration of my ingenuity. Before I
mention the matters of Fact, I humbly crave leave to signify the time when,
and manner how I came to be entangled in this unhappy business.

As for the time, it was after the breaking off the Treaty between the King and
the Scots at Jersey; for before that time (to the best of my remembrance) I was
not privy to, or acquainted with any meetings about the sending of Captain
Titus (whose face I never saw) to Jersey, or sending Letters to him, or
receiving Letters from him, while he was there; or about sending any Letters
to, or receiving any Letters from the King, Queen, Jermyn, Piercy, or any other
persons in foreign parts during the Treaty at Jersey, but after that Treaty
was ended, Mr. Will: Drake came to me, told me he had News to impart, and to
that end, he desired to know (if he could get friends together) whether I was
willing that they should meet at my house (it being conveniently situate in
the midst of the City) that so he might communicate what he heard of affairs
abroad. To satisfy my curiosity to hear News, I was content to let him, with
those he should bring to meet at my house. Thus for the time when, and manner
how I came to be present at any meetings about Intelligence.

I now come humbly and truly to relate the matter of Fact, which is as
follows: It appeared to me by the testimony of the Witnesses, that there were
freequent meetings by Mr. Drake, Alford, Titus, Adams, and others, soon after
the death of the late King, and applications made to the King of Scots, the
Queen his Mother, to Jermyn, and Piercy, both before and during the Treaty at
Jersey, of which I know nothing, nor was I present: But the first meeting I was
at, was at my House (and as I remember) at the reading of a Letter which came
from Captain Titus, after the Treaty was ended at Jersey; the Contents of that
Letter were (if I mistake not) to this effect: That the Treaty at Iersey was
broken off through the violent and evil Counsels of desperate Malignants; and
that he had something of concernment to communicate, which he durst not do in
person, being not safe for him to come over into England, nor could he well do
it by writing, he judging it not fit or safe to send by the Common Post scaring
a miscarriage; wherefore he desired some body to be sent over to him to Calice,
to whom he might give an account of all proceedings. Upon the reading of this
Letter, Mr. Drake moved that some person should be desired to go to Calice;
for said he, we shall hear the whole relation of the business at Iersey;
whereupon Major Adams or Capt. Far were moved by Mr. Drake to go. There was
mention of Major Alford to go, though he was not then present that I know of,
nor was he ever within my house, as I remember, until after he returned from
Calice: so that there was none that I know of was gone, Mr. Drake told me,
Major Alford was the fittest man to go over to Calice, having business of his
own to go into France, to look after his Prodigal Son, so that it was (said
he) a plausible pretense to concea^e his going over to meet with Titus. There
were present at this first meeting, M. Drake, M. Ienkins, Maj. Adams, D. Drake,
Cap. Far, Capt. Potter, and my self, with some others, but who more I cannot
remember.

About 2 or 3 days after Maj. Alfords return from Calice, M. Drake told me he
was come to London, and told me he would go to several Ministers and
Citizens, to desire them to meet at my House, that so we might hear what News
Maj. Alford brought with him from Calice; accordingly the next day in the
evening they met at my house, Mr. Drake brought Maj. Alford with him, who gave
an account of his conference with Titus, and his receiving a Copy of the Kings
Letter from him, as also a Narrative of the Treaty at Iersey, and said, that he
brought not over the Letters himself, but delivered them to a Passenger that
came in the Ship, least himself should be searched; but after he came into
England he received the Letter and Narrative from him (but who he was I know
not) and so brought them to London, whether the Copy of the Kings Letter was
read at my house, in my hearing, I remember not; yet I deny not but it was read
there; I am sure I heard the Contents of it were to this effect, That he took
in good part the affections and loyalty of those who formerly had Petitioned to
him (of which Petition I know nothing) and if ever God restored him, or put him
in a condition, he should remember them. The Narrative read in my House, was to
this effect, He made a large description of the Scots, commending his prudent
carriage, and good inclinations to an agreement with the Scots, but that his
bad Council about him hindered it; also he made a rehearsal of his lusterings
from the Cavaliers at Jersey, how he was imprisoned in a close Room. There were
present at this meeting, Maj. Alford, M. Drake, Mr. Case, Maj. Adams, Mr.
Jaquel, Mr. Jackson, Mr. Jenkins, Dr. Drake, Capt. Potter, Mr. Sterks, Capt.
Far, and my self, with others, but who. I do not remember.

A little before the Treaty at Bieda, there was a meeting at my House, Mr Drake
proposed, that we should think of some way to promote the agreement between
the King and the Scots; where by the way I desire humbly to give notice, that
this was the first and only meeting of this nature, at my house. Mr Drake took
out some papers out of his pocket written in Characters, which he read in my
Study, which went under the name of a Commission and Instructions to be sent to
the Lord Willoughby, Alderm: Bunce, Massey, Graves, and Titus, to appoint them
to advise with, and use their interests in persons of honor, to provoke the
King to agree with the Scots, and take the Covenant; as also to advise with the
Scots Commissioners, and persuade them, That in their agreement with their
King, they would have special respect to the interest of Religion, and terms
of the Covenant; the Commission ran in this form, as if it were in the names of
all the Presbyteriall party in England: after I heard it read, I was against it
alleging several reasons, chiefly, that it was an act of high presumption for
private persons to send a Commission with Instructions; and an act of notorious
falsehood, to say this was in the name of all the Presbyteriall party of
England, when but a few persons knew thereof; many in the company also expressed
a dislike thereof: Mr. Drake also read a Letter in this meeting, but to whom it
was I know not, neither know I the Contents of it, I was at least a dozen times
called out of the Room, whiles the Company were there, so that I am not able to
give so full and particular an account of the Contents of the Letter, and of the
Commission and Instruction: What Mr. Drake did about the Commission and
Instructions after he was gone from my house, I know not, what and by whom he
sent I know not, until Maj. Alford declared before the High Court, That he
received the Papers from Mr. Drake, carried them to Gravesend, and delivered to
one Mason, and he carried them to Holland. There was at this meeting, Maj.
Huntington, M. Drake, D. Drake, M. Jackson, M Jenkins, M. Cauton, Maj. Alford,
M Gibbons, Maj. Adams, Cap. Far, and my self, with others, whom I cannot
remember. There is one thing more I make bold to mention, That there are other
persons besides those I have named, who did now and then come to my house, as
M. Robinson, M. Nalton, M. Haviland, M. Blackmore, Col. Vaughan, Col. Sowton,
were present at one time or another, but at what particular meeting, I cannot
positively say.

Thus I have clearly laid open the whole matter of Fact, so far as I well
remember, and distinctly know of passages about these meetings and Transactions
at my House.

Tower of London, July 22. 1651. I attest the truth of this Narrative under my
hand. Christopher Love.

Mr. Love's Speech made on the Scaffold on Tower Hill. August 22. 1651.
BEloved Christians, I am this day made a Spectacle unto God, Angels, and men;
and among them I am made a grief to the godly, a laughing stock to the wicked,
and a gazing stock to all; yet blessed be my God, not a terror to my self;
although there be but a little between me and death, yet this bears up my
heart, there is but a little between me and Heaven: It comforted Dr. Tailor,
the martyr, when he was going to Execution, That there were but two styles
between him and his fathers house; there is a lesser way between me and my
fathers house, but two steps between me and glory, it is but lying down upon
the block, and I shall ascend upon a Throne: I am this day sa^ling toward the
Ocean of Eternity, through a rough passage, to my Haven of rest, through a red
Sea, to the promised Land: methinks I hear God say to me as he did to Moses,
Go up to Mount Nebo and dye there, so go thou up to Tower Hill, and dye there
Isaac said of himself, That he was old and yet he know not the day of his
death, but I cannot say thus, I am young, and yet I know the day, the kind, and
the place of my death also; it is such a kind of death as two famous Preachers
of the Gospel were put to before me, John the Baptist, and Paul the Apostle, we
have mention of the one in Scripture story, of the other in Ecclesiastical
History: and Rev. 20.4. The Saints were beheaded for the word of God, and for
the testimony of Jesus. But herein is the disadvantage which I am in in the
thoughts of many, who judge that I suffer not for the Word or Conscience, but
for meddling with State matters. To this I shall briefly say, That it is an old
guise of the Devil, to impute the cause of Gods peoples sufferings to be
contrivements against the State. The Rulers of Israel would put Jeremiah, to
death upon a Civil account, though it was the truth of his Prophecy made them
angry, because he fell away to the Chaldeans, so Paul must dye as a mover of
sedition. The same thing is laid to my charge, whereas indeed it is because I
pursue my Covenant, and will not prostitute my p^inciples to the lusts of men.
Beloved, I am this day to make a double exchange, I am changing a Pulpit for a
Scaffold, and a Scaffold for a Throne; and I might add a third, I am changing
this numerous multitude upon Tower Hill, for the innumerable company of angels
in the holy hill of Zion; and I am changing a guard of Sould^ers for a guard of
angels, which will receive me and carry me into Abraham's bosom. This Scaffold
is the best Pulpit I ever Preached in, for in the Church Pulpit God through his
grace made me an instrument to bring others to heaven, but 'in this he will
bring me to heaven; and it may be this Speech upon a Scaffold may bring God
more glory then many Sermons in a Pulpit.

Before I lay down my neck upon the block, I shall lay open my Case, and that
without animosity or revenge; God is my record, whom I serve in the spirit, I
speak the truth, and lie not, I do not bring a revengefull heart unto the
Scaffold this day; before I came here, upon my bended knees I have begged mercy
for them that denied mercy to me, and I have prayed God to forgive them who
would not forgive me: I have forgiven from my heart, the worst enemy I have in
all the world, and this is the worst that I wish to my Accusers and
Prosecuters, who have pursued my blood, that I might meet their souls in Heaven.

I have no more to say, but to desire the help of all your prayers, that God
would give me the continuance and supply of Divine grace to carry me through
this great work I am now to do; that I, who am to do a work I never did, I
may have a strength that I never had; that I may put off this body with as much
quietness and comfort of mind, as ever I put off my Clothes to go to bed. And
now I am to commend my soul to God, and to receive my fatal blow, I am
comforted in this, though men kill me, they cannot damn me, and tho they
thrust me out of the world, yet they cannot shut me out of heaven. I am now
going to my long home, to heaven my fathers house, to the heavenly Jerusalem,
to the innumerable Company of Angels, to Jesus Christ the Mediator of the new
Covenant, to the spirits of just men made perfect, to God the Judge of all, in
whose presence there is fullness of joy, and at whose right hand there are
pleasures for evermore.

Then he kneeled down and made a short Prayer privately.

Then after rising up, he said, Blessed be God I am full of joy and peace in
believing, I lie down with a world of comfort. And then saying The Lord bless
you, he lay down with his head over the block, and when he stretched out his
hands, the Executioner did his office.

The humble Petition of William Jenkins, Prisoner.
Most humbly shows;
THat your Petitioner is unfeignedly sorrowful for all his late miscarriages,
whether testified against him, or acknowledged by him, and for the great and
sinful unsutablenesse of them to his Calling and Condition.

That upon earnest seeking of God, and diligent enquiry into his will, your
Petitioner is convinced, that the alterations of Civil Governments are ordered
by, and founded upon the wise and righteous providence of God, who removes
Kings and sets up Kings, rules in the Kingdoms of men, and gives them to
whomsoever he will.

That the providence of this God, have in the judgment of your Petitioner, as
evidently appeared in the removing of others from, and the investing your
Honors with the Government of this Nation, as ever they appeared in the taking
away, or bestowing of any Government in any History of any age of the World.

That he apprehends, that a refusal to be subject to this present au^hority,
under the p^etence of upholding the Title of any one upon earth, is a refusal
to acquiesce in the wise and righteous pleasure of God, such an opposing of the
Government set up by the Sovereign Lord of Heaven and Earth, as none can have
peace, either in acting in, or suffering for, and that your Petitioner looks
upon it as his duty, to yield to this authority, all active and cheerful
obedience in the Lord, even for Conscience sake, to promise (he being required)
truth and fidelity to it, and to hold forth the grounds of his so doing to any
as God shall call him thereunto.

That though an imprisonment, accompanied with the loss of Estate, and to be
followed (without your gracious prevention) with a speedy Arraignment before a
high and eminent Judicatory, are far from being pleasant to flesh and blood,
and though the enjoyment of your grace and favor, be a blessing most deserving
to be reckoned among the best of temporals, yet that neither the feeling, and
fearing of the former, nor the expectation of the latter, could have induced
your Petitioner against the light of his own judgment, and the prepondering
part of his own conscience to have made, or presenting this acknowledgment, he
sadly fore-casting, that a whole skin is but a contemptible recompense for a
wounded conscience.

WILL: JENKIN.

Sept. 3. 1651. A Victory obtained over the Scotch Army at Worcester. This day
twelve months was glorious at Dunbar, but this day has been very glorious
before Worcester; the Word was, The Lord of Hosts, and so it was now; the same
signal we had now as then, which was to have no white about us, yet the Lord
has clothed us with white Garments though to the Enemy they have been bloody,
only here lies the difference, that at Dunbar our Work was at break of day,
but now it began toward the close of the evening, 10000 taken and 3000 slain
of the Enemy, about 200 of ours. The General hazarding himself, rode up to the
Enemies Forts, offering them Quarter, whereto they returned no answer but shot.

Sept. 1. Dundee taken by storm, 60 ships in the Harbor, 40 Guns.

The Scots King beaten at Worcester, gets into a hollow Tree, remains there a
night, next day in a Wood, cuts his hair short, shipped for Havre de Grace, and
so to Paris.
Sir,
The Scottish King came hither on Monday the last of October, N. S. and being
demanded by his Mother and the Duke of Orleans, how he escaped the Fight of
Worcester, gave them this account.

That about six a Clock in the evening, his Army being in all likelihood lost,
he quitted Worcester. Town, with a party of Horse, and marched toward Lancashire,
but being fearful of being pursued, and o the Scottish Officers that might
deliver him up, he with the L: Wilmot quitted their Horses, and betook
themselves next day to a Tree, where they staid till night, and then marched,
the third day they lay in a wood, and at night marched toward Lancashire, a
Lady receiving them, furnished them with Clothes for a disguise, and cut off
their hair. Having reposed 2 or 3 days, she endeavored to ship them out of
England, and she riding behind the King, and Wilmot as another Servant by, they
went to Bristoll, but finding a narrow inquiry there, resolved to go for
London, where they stayed 3 week. The King one day went into Westminster Hall,
where he saw the States Arms, and Scots Colors; my Lord Wilmot procured a
Merchant to hire a ship of forty Tuns to transport them, which cost them a
hundred and twenty pounds, but where they took shipping is not known: but as
soon as my Lord was entered the Barque, and the King as his Servant, the Master
came to him, and told him that he knew the King, and in case it should be
known, he could expect no mercy: which saying troubled them, but at length,
what with money and promises, they prevailed, and so set sail for Havre de
Grace, where they landed, and from thence to Roven, where they clothed
themselves, and writ to Paris. His arrival there will put them to new
Counsels, since, now they cannot send their Ambassadors, which was concluded on
before his coming. The Duke of Orleans fetched him into Town, and expressed
much as to serve him. Yesterday, he, with Thurenne, Beaufort, and the D. of
Guise came to him to the Louvre, where the King told them, that they should
endeavor to reconcile the breach between the Prince and the King of France,
for, said he, to my knowledge the English will visit you with an Army in the
Spring.


October. 15. 1651. Earl of Darby Beheaded at Bolton in Lancashire. October. 30.
The Isle of Jersey taken. Nov. 16. The Isle of Man taken.

Resolv: That the time for the continuance of this Parl. beyond which they
resolve not to fit, shall be Nov. 3. 1654.

The Parl. of the Commonwealth of England Declare;

1 THat no Power, Jurisdiction, or Authority, otherwise then from the Parl. of
Engl: be used, exercised, or enjoined within Scotl: or the Isles, or any of the
Territories thereof.

2 That they do forbid, annull, and make void the use and exercise of any
Power, Jurisdiction, and Authority whatsoever, within Scotl: or the Isles, or
any of the Territories thereof, other then such as shall be so derived.

An Act of General Pardon and Oblivion, Feb. 24. 1651.


THe Parl. of England having had good experience of the affections of the
people to this present Government, by their ready assistance against Charles
Stuart Son of the late Tyrant, and the Forces lately invading this Nation
under his Command; and being much afflicted with the miserable and sad effects
which the late unnatural War has produced, and resolved to settle the peace
and freedom of this Common wealth; and being desirous that the minds, persons,
and Estates of all the people of this Nation might be composed, settled, and
secured, and that all rancour and evil will occasioned by the late
differences, may be buried in perpetual Oblivion, Be it Enacted by this
present Parl. and by Authority of the same, That all and every person or
persons of or within the Commonwealth of England, the Isles of Iersey and
Garnsey, the Town of Berwick upon Tweed, and the Heirs, Execut: and Admin: of
them and every of them, and all and singular bodies in any manner incorporated,
Cities, Buroughs, Shires, etc. and every of them are, and shall be acquitted
and pardoned, of all Treasons, Fellonies, Offenses, etc. done bebefore Sept. 3.
1651. not in this present Act hereafter not excepted nor fore-prized. And the
said Keepers of the Liberties of England, grants and freely gives to every
of them, all Goods, Debts, Chattels, Fines, which to the said Keepers of the
Liberties of England, do belong or appertain, before Sept. 3. and which be not
hereafter in this Act foreprized and excepted. And it is further Enacted, That
this Pardon shall be taken in Courts of Justice, available to all and singular
the said persons. etc. shall be arrested, etc. for any thing acquitted by this
Act, every person so offending, shall pay to him offended, his treble damages,
and 10. l. to the State. Excepted all High-Treasons (other then for words only)
and all levying of war, rebellions, insurrections, and conspiracies committed
against the Par. since Ian. 30. 1648. And all concealments of the said
offenses. And all voluntary Murders, petty Treasons, poisoning, piracles,
buggeries, rapes, ravishments, marrying any one against her will. And also all
persons now attained for petty treason, murder, poisoning, conjurations,
witchcrafts, charms, detainments of Customs, and sums of money due upon
Composition, Excise, or New-Imposts; all Conditions, Covenants, and penalties
of forfeitures due to the Parl. or the late K. since Ian. 30. 1648. All first
fruits, and Tithes, and all offenses and misdemeanors, whereof any sentence or
judgment has been given in Parl. since Ian. 30. 1648. And all offenses of
Bribery, perjuries, and subordination of Witnesses, counterfeiting Deeds,
Debenters, Bills of Public Faith, Escripts, or writings whatsoever, carrying
over Seas any Coin or Jewels, melting down of Gold or Bullion, etc. detaining
the Goods, etc. of the late King or Queen, all offenses committed by any
Jesuit, any Outlawries upon any writ of Capion ad satisfaciendum, and all,
except such persons as were Ian. 28. 1651. in prison by Order of Parl. and all
proceedings concerning common Highways, all Free-farm-rents, and arrerages
due since June 24. 1645. all moneys imprested since Nov. 3. 1638. Provided all
Acts of Hostility between the late King and Parl. or between any of the people
of this Nation, or falling out by reason of the late troubles, shall in no time
after June 18. 1651. be called in question.

The DECLARATION of the Lord General and his Council of Officers showing the
Grounds and Reasons for the Dissolving the Parliament, April 20. 1653.
AFter it had pleased God not only to reduce Ireland, and give in Scotland but
so marvellously to appear for his people at Worcester, that these Nations were
reduced to a great degree of peace, it was matter of grief to many well
affected, in the Land, to see the Cause of God so little forwarded by the Parl.
whereupon they applied to the Army, expecting redress by them, notwithstanding
which, the Army being unwilling to meddle with the Civil Authority, in matters
so properly appertaing to it, it was agreed, That his Excellency and Officers
of the Army should be desired to move the Parl. to proceed vigorously in
reforming what was amiss in Government; which having done, we hoped that the
Parl. would seasonably have answered our expectations, but finding delays
therein, we renewed our desires in a Petition in August last, and although they
signified their good acceptance thereof, and referred the particulars to a
Committee of the House, yet no considerable effect was produced, but there more
and more appeared among them an aversion to the things themselves, with much
bitterness and opposition to the people of God; which grew so prevalent, that
those persons of honor and integrity who had eminently appeared for God and
the public good, were rendered of no further use in Parl. then by meeting with
a corrupt party to give them countenance to carry on their ends For which
purpose, they frequently declared themselves against having a New
Representative, and when they were necessitated to take that Bill into
consideration, they resolved to make use of it to recruit the House with
persons of the same temper, thereby to perpetuate their own sitting, which
intention diverse of the most active did manifest, laboring to persuade others
to a consent therein; and diverse Petitions preparing from several Counties for
the continuance of this Parl. were encouraged by them. For obviating these
evils, the Officers of the Army obtained several Meetings with some of the
Parl. to consider what fitting means might be applied to prevent the same; but
such endeavors proving altogether ineffectuall, it became most evident to the
Army, that this Parl. would never answer those ends, which God, his people, and
the whole Nation expected from them. But that this Cause must needs languish
under their hands, and be wholly lost. All which being sadly considered by the
honest people of this Nation, as well as by the Army, and wisdom and direction
being sought from the Lord, it seemed to be a duty incumbent upon us to
consider of some more effectual means to secure the Cause which the good
people of this Common wealth have been so long engaged in, and to stablish
peace in these Nations. And after much debate it was judged necessary, that the
Supreme Authority should be devolved upon known persons, men fearing God, and
of approved integrity, and committed unto them for a time, as the most hopeful
way to encourage and countenance all Gods people, reform the Law, and
administer justice impartially, hoping thereby the people might forget
Monarchy, and have the Government settled upon a true Basis, without hazard to
this glorious Cause, and necessitating to keep up Arms for the defense of the
same. And being still resolved to use all means possible to prevent
extraordinary courses, we prevai'ed with about twenty Members of Parl. to give
us a Conference, with whom we freely and plainly debated the necessity and
justness of our Proposals, and did evidence that these would most probably
bring forth something answerable to that work, the foundation whereof God
himself has laid. The which found no acceptance, but it was offered, that the
way was to continue still this Parl. as being that from which we might
reasonably expect all good things; and this being insisted upon, did much
confirm us in our apprehensions, That not any love to a Representative, but the
making use thereof to perpetuate themselves, was their aim. They being plainly
dealt with about this, and told, that neither the Nation, the honest interest,
nor we our selves would be deluded by such dealings, did agree to meet again
next day in the afternoon, and nothing in the mean time should be done, that
might frustrate the Proposals. Notwithstanding the Parl. next morning did make
more have then usual in carrying on their said Act, being helped therein by
some of the persons engaged to us the night before, none of them endeavoring
to oppose the same, and being ready to put the main Question for consummating
the said Act, whereby our Proposals would have been made void. For preventing
whereof, we have been necessitated to put an End to this Parliament. And desire
that all men, as they would not provoke the Lord to their own destruction,
should wait for such issue as he shall bring forth, and to follow their
business with peaceable spirits, wherein we promise them protection by his
assistance.

FINIS.

