THE LIFE Of the Learned and Reverend Dr. Peter Heylyn, CHAPLAIN to Charles I.
and Charles II. MONARCHS of GREAT BRITAIN.

Written by GEORGE VERNON, Rector of Bourton on the Water in Glocestershire.

Majorum gloria posteris lumen est, neque mala eorum in occulto patitur, Sal.
Bell. Jug. Illum quidem nulla oration ex animi sententia laedere potest: quippe
vera, necesse est vera praedicet; falsam, vita moresque illius superant, ibid.
LONDON: Printed for C. Harper, at the Flower-de-luce over against St. Dunstan's
Church, in Fleetstreet, 1682.

To the Worthy and my ever Honored Friends, HENRY HEYLYN of Minster-Lovel, Esquire
Nephew; AND HENRY HEYLYN Gentleman, Son, to Dr. Heylyn.
I Know no persons in the Nation, that have a more unquestionable right unto
these Papers, than you; who have not only running in your Veins the Blood, but,
which is more material, abiding in your minds the Endowments of the Great Man,
whose Life is now perfected and exposed to public view. In which it must be
acknowledged there is sufficient matter for an useful History: And either of
you might have named the man, who had been more able to have undertaken the
Writing of it than my self; it being a very bold attempt for any one to give an
account of the Actions and Sufferings of Dr. Heylyn, beside Dr. Heylyn; or at
least such an one, who inherits his Natural, if not his Acquired
Accomplishments, and to whom an equal, if not a double portion of his Spirit is
imparted.

However, it is no small satisfaction to me, that I have in this Composure
obeyed your Commands, and in some measure answered your expectations in doing
right to the memory of your very learned Ancestor, if your Friendship and
Affection did not put a veil upon your Judgments, when you first read what I
now again offer to your perusal.

There is little doubt, but in the publication of these Papers, the very name
of Dr. Heylyn will raise the Blood, and exasperate the Passions of some
quarrelsom and unquiet spirits, who like Ghosts and Goblins fight with those
that are dead, as well as affright others that are living. But whatever hard
censures or harder names the Writer of these Papers meets with, it is no more
than he expects from those who are such enemies unto peace, that
notwithstanding all their pleadings for it, yet their souls are so
connaturaliz'd to turbulency and contention, that rather than have no enemy,
they will fall out and fight with their own shadows. And who can expect but
that the peace and quiet of private men should be ruffled and discomposed by
those, whose business it is to embroil a whole Nation? And yet these persons
must by all means be accounted the only True Protestants. A name, tho it
imports little in it of the positive part of Christianity (it being only a
rejecting or protesting against the abominable Errors and Superstitions of the
Roman Church) yet it is too honorable a Title to be bestowed upon many that
boast of it.

It was in April, 1529. when Reformed Christianity obtained the glorious name
of Protestantism; Sleid. Com. l. 6.
which in a short time spread it self not only over the German Empire, but most
of the European Nations. And here in England (especially) it prevailed over
Popish Darkness and Superstitions by Peaceableness, Meekness, Modesty,
Humility, Mercifulness; and by teaching men to be studious of doing good, and
averse to vice and doing evil. What right then have those to it, who are
Turbulent, Contentious, Malicious, Proud, Merciless, Wrathful, etc* Why should
those be celebrated for zealous Protestants, who question the Being, and
blaspheme the name of God* Who deny the only Lord that bought them? Who
renounce all the Offices and Institutions of Christianity, and whose lives are
a direct contradiction to all Moral as well as Evangelical Virtues. In a word,
why should the Independents with some other Sects now reassume this Renowned
Title, when in the days of ihe late Usurper they absolutely renounced it,
calling those, who would not list themselves as members in their Schismatical
Assemblies, Queen Besses Protestants?

The words of the devout Salvian are with a little variation applicable unto
these Professors, In vobis patitur Christus opprobrium, in vobis patitur lex
Protestantium maledictum. The name of Protestancy which heretofore commanded
veneration from ingenuous (tho professed) enemies, is now profaned and
blasphemed through these persons and stinks amongst Papists and Infidels:
either of which Sects do as much deserve the name of Catholics, as some do
that of Protestants. When it is bestowed on them, it is only Titular, and a mere
nickname. They are Pseudo-Protestants, as Papists are Pseudo-Catholicks.
Neither is it material what way of Religion is embraced by them; whether True
or False, Christian or Pagan, Protestant or Popish, any or none, or all.

God be praised, notwithstanding the great declensions of true Goodness amongst
us, we have many persons of Eminency and Honor in the Nation, who are not
carried away from their Loyalty to their Prince, and Love to the Church by any
popular Artifices of those Zealots who lie in wait to deceive unstable and less
discerning minds. Amongst whom I heartily rejoice that both you are in the
number; and I shall pray to God ever to continue you in that holy Fellowship,
and to preserve you from the evil of this world, whilst you remain in it; as
also to reward you for the many charitable and friendly Offices, which you have
expressed and conferred upon

Gentlemen, Your most devoted and for ever faithful Servant, George Vernon.

TO THE READER.
HAD it not been for the indiscretion of some persons, and the forwardness and
ostentation of others, no one had been put to the trouble of reading, or
expense of buying a second Impression of Dr. Heylyn's Life; this very Account
of it having been writ on purpose to be printed with that learned Volume of his
works that has been lately collected and exposed to public Light: wherein the
Reader may reap the benefit of being satisfied in various Points, both
Theological and Political. As, 1. In the way and manner of the Reformation of
the Church of England; and that both against the Papists who tell us we had too
little of the Pope, and too much of the Parliament; and against the Genevizers,
who affirm, that we had too little of the People, and too much of the Prince
therein. 2. In the sacred Offices of the public Liturgy; wherein is presented
to the Reader a History of Liturgies from the Patriarchs, Jews, Gentiles and
Christians; as also an Account of the Dedication of Churches, and the
Anniversary Feasts occasioned thereby. 3. In the Churches Patrimony, and the
Right of the Clergy to receive Tithes from the People. 4. In her Government;
wherein both from the sacred Scriptures and Ancient Fathers is evinced by way
of Historical Narration, (and matter of Fact cannot be so easily evaded as bare
Logical Argumentation) the Imparity of Ministers in the Christian Church; the
Foundation of which was laid in Episcopacy. 5. In the Time set apart for Divine
Worship; wherein the constant Practice of the Church of God from the Creation
to the Year 1635. is Learnedly and Laboriously represented in that matter. 6.
In the Doctrine of the Western Churches, concerning the five Controverted
points; an Historical Account of which is given out of the Public Acts and
Monuments, as well as the most approved Authors in those several Churches. 7. In
the Kings Supreme Dignity and Authority against that Stumbling Block of
Disobedience and Rebellion, laid by Mr. Calvin about the Ephori of Sparta, the
Tribunes of Rome, and the Demarchi of Athens; than which Treatise few more
Rational or Learned have seen the light upon that subject. And lastly, in the
Bishops Right of Peerage; a Treatise written in the Year 1640. when it was
Voted in the House of Lords, That no Bishop should be of the Committee for the
preparatory Examination of the Earl of Strafford: this Tract was never before
Printed; and as for the rest that were, they could rarely be met with to be
sold; and those that could, were not to be purchased at any ordinary or easy
rates. And there is no Reason, but that the old Books (Learned and useful as
they are) reprinted, should meet with as kind reception from the World, as new
Books composed with less judgment out of old ones; unless it be that some
finical Readers will have their fancies gratified by the novelty of a Title
Page, even like some Ladies that are always affecting new Modes and Fashions in
their Garbs and Garments: And there are Botchers in Books as well as Clothes,
that have the knack to make new ones out of old ones.

I shall not attempt to particularize or rectify either the mistakes or
omissions, that are in the Life, as it stands before the collected Treatises
now specified. The Reader may easily discern both, by comparing what is there
writ, with the Memorials now published. In which, I have made use of no
materials out of the Printed Folio, except these two, viz. The charitable zeal
which the Doctor exerted in saving the Parish Church of St. Nicholas in
Abingdon from being laid even with the ground, and the Dream that he had
immediately before his fatal Sickness: neither of which came unto my knowledge
before I met with them before the Collection, And I hope he that favored the
World with the publication of them will pardon my presumption; since what I
have made use of, tends to the adorning of the memory of so near a Relation;
and since also many more particular passages were excerpted out of my Papers
(the very words as well as matter) when he had them in his Custody; as any
Reader may easily discern, who will be at the pains of comparing the Life now
Published, with what is extant before the Keimelia Ecclesiastica.

The truth is, though I did with some unwillingness and regret undertake the
writing of what is here offered to the World, yet I was the more easily induced
to it, not only out of Reverence to the memory of a right Learned man, and the
honor that I owe to some of his nearest Relatives; but also from those black
Clouds of darkness, which have of late threatened our public Peace and Common
Interests; deeming that it would be beneficial unto my self, and not
unacceptable unto Loyal Englishmen (especially those of the Clergy) if their
minds were fortified with Courage and Resolution to suffer and submit unto the
Will of God in the times that might happen, by calling to remembrance what
others have done in the days that are past. For God does not only know the
Frame of our Bodies, that they are dust, but the temper of our minds, viz. how
averse they are to exercise patience under heavy Persecutions, and how unable
to contend with the infelicity of an unrighteous World, unless he did now and
then represent unto our view some fresh example of his righteous servants, who
by their faith and patience, have beat out a path and made the way plain before
us. And whoever reads over the following Account given of Dr. Heylyn, will find
few of his Quality and Profession, who survived the fury of that storm that was
raised in the Unnatural War, and who brought their Vessel to safe shore and
landing at the last, that endured more numerous and violent Hurricanes, than he
did. And what can be more seasonable or advantageous against that (...), that
languishing and faintness of spirit which may possibly seize on us under the
Cross, than that being in a tendency to endure and encounter with the like
hardships, we should arm our selves with the same Resolution of mind, as the
person did, treated of in these papers? Perhaps the persecutions that are here
mentioned are not of so wide an extent, as to furnish any one with a Panoplie
against all the Evils, that this inconstant World may bring upon us, But
although they may not in all respects parallel those sufferings which may be
our Portion and Lot, yet they may be of that efficacy to mind us of our duty;
and to prepare us for the vicissitudes of Providence, that whenever our Fiery
Trial comes, we may not think it strange or unusual; but by some preparatory
exercises of Piety and self-denial we may be mortifying in our selves all that
softness, tenderness and effeminacy of temper, which will render Affliction
grievous and intollearable to us. The blessed Apostle acquaints us what good
effect his passive fortitude produced in some new Converts to Christianity,
when they became possessed of the very same zeal and constancy as he had; for
waxing confident by his bonds, they were much more bold to speak the word
without fear, Phil. 1. 14. God be praised, as yet we have no sharper
persecutions to exercise our Christian Virtues, than what have befallen the
holiest Christians in the most flourishing Condition of the Church. The Sun
shines upon our Tabernacles, and notwithstanding all the outcries about
Property and Liberty, yet there is no such irruption into either, as to
occasion complaining in our streets. But we know not how soon our Fate may be
the same with Dr. Heylyn's; to be brought before the Rulers of the darkness of
this World for the sake of the Christian Righteousness. And whenever it is our
lot, it concerns us to behave our selves with that Faith and Courage, that we
neither violate the Oaths we have taken, nor disgrace the Religion we profess,
nor forfeit the happiness we hope for and expect. We see with our eyes, or hear
with our ears, with what resolution men suffer for evil doing. And if a natural
Sturdiness or Fool-hardiness does sustain the spirits of men against the
Terrors of a violent Death, notwithstanding those black guilts of Schism,
Faction, Sedition, Treason, Murder, etc. which lie upon their consciences;
What a disgrace will it be unto our profession, for us to be weary and faint in
our minds, when any external evils or dangers make disquieting impressions on
them? And there is no better way for us to prevent that dishonor, than by
looking unto Jesus the Author and Finisher of our Faith, and by taking those
who have spoken in his Name for an example of suffering Affliction and of
Patience, Iam. 5. 10.

But although Dr. Heylyn spoke in Name of the Lord, yet few will be prevailed
with to take him for a pattern in suffering persecution, who believe those
black Characters, that have been of late given him by some of the Writers of
this pre^ent Age. And amongst the rest, it is matter of just wonder that Mr.
Baxter, who writes so frequently of Death and Judgment, and the account that
must be given of all the hard speeches that are either spoke or writ against
his Fellow Christians, should not be desirous to leave the troublesome stage of
this world in a peaceable and calm temper, and let those sleep quietly in their
Graves, whom he So he did in a Letter to Dr. Heylyn.
wished he had let alone, when alive; and unto whose learned labors he has not
vouchsafed to return one word of Answer for above these two and twenty years.
And yet so it is, that in his Preface to the Abridgment of Church History he
represents Dr. Heylyn to be a man of a malicious and bloody strain, and one who
spoke of blood with pleasure, thirsting after more, etc. I shall say little of
that Book of Mr. Baxters, understanding that it is taken into consideration by
another hand. But this I will not be afraid to affirm, that if an impartial
Pagan were to pass his judgment upon Christianity from those matters of Fact,
that are recorded in the Abridgment, he would look upon it with a more
uncharitable eye than Mr. Baxter does upon Dr. Heylyn; and conclude it the most
horrid Imposture in the world. For what kind of Religion and Church was that,
which had little or nothing but Covetousness, Ambition, Oppression, Simony,
Anarchy, Tyranny, Cruelty, etc. prevailing in it for so many centuries of
years, and no persons or conventions of men that had Wisdom and Power all that
while to manage its affairs and concerns, and to put it into any Apostolical or
tolerable Order, till an Army-Black-Coat, who first almost dreined his Veins of
their Blood against his Prince, and then courted and caressed a Tyrant and
Usurper; and since that time has been employing his Spleen against the Church;
I say, till such an one arose in the world, and in affront to all the laws of
Modesty and good Manners, first prescribed a Platform of Civil Polity or
Holy-Commonwealth to the State, and then Rules of Government or Polity to the
Church, which should bind all Christians, and be a Standard to all Superiors?
Let but any one seriously peruse the Abridgment, and then judge, whether Herod
endeavored with more malice to suppress the Genealogies of the Jewish Nation
(and especially those of the Royal Family) that he himself might reign with
more security, than Mr. Baxter has done, in throwing dirt upon Antiquity:
whereas a Divine, of all men in the World ought to be very tender, how he
exposed the Nakedness of the Ancient Fathers, lest he thereby exposed
Christianity it self to scorn and contempt. And we do not live in such an Age
of piety and modesty, but that some men would be very glad from the Abridgment
(if they had patience to read it) to fix the like Infamy upon the Christian
Faith, as Cham did when he proclaimed the Nakedness of his Aged Father.

For my own part I never had the Hon^ur either to know Dr. Heylyn, or to be
known by him. But those who were his Familiars represent him to be one of a
tender compassionate Spirit, and that few men put a more candid construction
upon Persons and Actions, than he did. It Is true, he writ of a bloody Sect; but
with a purpose to prevent the shedding of more Blood. He vindicated the
Monarchy and Hierarchy from the Calumnies of that Faction, that was and is the
implacable and sworn enemy of both. And for this the Ashes of his Grave must be
disturbed by one, who (as Tullie speaks) does not consider but cast Lots in
writing Books, and whose voluminous Treatises are no more to be compared with
the Learned Writers of this Church, than the stuff of Kiderminster is to be
valued at the same rate with the best Arras.

Dr. Heylyn was no more a Man of Blood, than St. Paul was a Mover of Sedition.
And if he had, it is to be hoped, he might have been as well Canonized for
fighting for his Prince, as some others are celebrated for Saints in the
Everlasting Rest, who died in the very Act of Rebellion against him. But it is
no new thing for those who cut a purse, to cry stop the Thief.

Mr. Baxter may be pleased to call to mind, what was done to one Major Jenning
the last War, in that Fight that was between Lynsel and Longford in the County
of Salop; where the Kings Party having unfortunately the worst of the day, the
poor Major was stripped almost naked and left for dead in the Field. But Mr.
Baxter and one Lieutenant Hurdman taking their walk among the wounded and dead
Bodies, perceived some Life left in the Major, and Hurdman run him through the
Body in cold blood; Mr. Baxter all the while looking on, and taking off with
his own hand the Kings Picture from about his Neck; telling him, as he was
swimming in his gore, That he was a Popish Rogue, and that was his Crucifix.
Which Picture was kept by Mr. Baxter for many years, till it was got from him
(but not without much difficulty) by one Mr. Summerfield, who then lived with
Sir Thomas Rouse, and generously restored it to the poor man, now alive at Wick
near Parshore in Worcestershire, although at the Fight supposed to be dead;
being, after the wounds given him, dragged up and down the Field by the
merciless Soldiers, Mr. Baxter approving of the Inhumanity, by feeding his eyes
with so bloody and barbarous a spectacle.

I Thomas Iennings subscribe to the truth of this Narrative above mentioned,
and have hereunto put my Hand and Seal, this second day of March 1681/2.

Tho. Iennings.
Signed and Sealed, March 2. 1681/2. in the Presence of John Clarke Minister of
Wick, Thomas Dark. And now let it be left to the Readers Judgment, who is of a
more malicious and bloody strain, Dr. Heylyn or Mr. Baxter. Whatever ill
opinion the Doctor gained in the World, was for the service which he did for
his King, his Country and the Church. And it need not be told who says, Nemo
pluris ^estimat virtutem, qu^m qui boni viri famam perdidit, ne conscientiam
perderet^ i. e. He puts the best value upon virtue, who to preserve the
Integrity and Peace of his Conscience sacrifices the endearments of his
Reputation.



ERRATA
in the Preface.
PAge 3. line penult, dele the, P. 7. l. an^ep. for tender, r. tenderness.

In the Life.
Page 41. l. 23. r. Bounty design^d and Mr. -- p. 60. l. 3. r. Geneva, p 92. ^.
12. for Jury, r. ^^uire, p. 100. l. 16. r. Reader, p. 118. l. ult r. Rallery,
p. 119. l. 12. r. some few others, p. 1^. l. 16. r. Bodmin, p. ^37. l. 16. r.
ejecting, p. 169 r. Warrant, p. 220. l. 1. for in, r. upon, p. ^49. l. 12. for
that, r. may pass -- p* 262. 1. 5. d^le and, and r. God Almighties wise -- p.
^63. l 9. r. man, for men, p 268. l 11. for acutum, r. oculatum, p. ^^9. l. 23.
^or lips, r. lusts, p. 287. l. 13. for partialis, r. Paritatis.

Some Books Printed for, or Sold by Charles Harper at the Flower-de-l^ce over
against St. Dunstan's Church.
THe Historical and Miscellaneous Tracts of the Reverend and Learned Peter
Heylyn, D. D. Now collected into one Volume: 1. Ec^lesia Vindicata, or the
Church of England justified. 2. The History of the Sabbath: in two parts. 3.
Historia Quinquarticularis, 4. The Stumbling Block of Disobedience and
Rebellion. 5. A Treatise De Iure Paritatis Episcoporum, with an exact Table to
the whole.

All the Statutes at large, to the Year 1681. By Keeble; with an exact Table to
the whole: being the last Impression.

The Lord Cokes Eleven Reports in English, with a Table. Printed 1680.

The Lord Cokes Institutes, the three last Parts. Printed 1680.

The Lord Hobart's Reports, with Additions in English. Printed 1678.

There is now in the Press, Bishop Usher's Power of the Prince, and Obedience
of the Subject; with Bishop Sanderson's Preface to it: and will be Published
speedily. Printed for Charles Harper.

THE LIFE OF Dr. Peter Heylyn.
IF any Augury or Conjecture could be made of the Course and Fortune of Men's
Lives by the Calculation of their Nativity, the Birth of Dr. Peter Heylyn,
according to the Rules of our Astrologers, presaged firm Constitution of Body,
and prosperous Success in the Civil Affairs of Humane Life. For it was November.
29. 1599. at Burford, in the County of Oxon, between Eight and Nine in the
Morning. At which time the Sun was in the Horoscope of his Nativity, and the
Houses very well disposed. But our Almanac Prognostications about Weather,
etc. show what inconsiderable Influence the Stars have upon the inanimate-part
of the Creation, much less upon free and discerning Agents; especially upon men
Wise and Learned: For Wisdom has an Empire over Stars and Constellations,
according to that Adagy, (...) And this Reverend Man was in this particular
fortunate, that he ^ad the honor to carry the mark of the Cross, which was
imprinted on him at the Font, through the most considerable part of his
Pilgrimage; having frequent opportunities in Suffering for a Righteous Cause,
to manifest his Passive, as well as his Active Courage; as will sufficiently
appear in the subsequent Circumstances and Account of his Life.

He was the second Son of Henry Heylyn, Gentleman, descended from the Ancient
Family of the Heylyns of Pentre-Heylyn in Montgomery-shire, then part of
Powes-land; from the Princes whereof they were derived, and unto whom they were
Hereditary Cup-Bearers: For so the word Heylyn does signify in the Welsh or
British Language. After which Office, they were in great Authority with the
Princes of North Wales; as plainly appears from Llewellyn, the last Prince of
that Country, who made choice of Grono-Ap-Heylyn to Treat with the
Commissioners of Edward the First, King of England, for the Concluding of a
full and final Peace between them. And Pentre-Heylyn continued the Seat of this
Ancient Family till about the Year 1637. at which time Rowland Heylyn, Alderman
and Sheriff of London, and Cousin-German to our Doctors Father, dying without
Issue-Male, the Seat was transferred to another Family, into which some of the
Heiresses were Married: But the Doctor designed to repurchase it, and had
infallibly effected it, had not Death prevented the Execution of his Purpose.

His Mother was Elizabeth Clampard, Daughter of Francis Clampard of Wrotham in
Kent, Gentleman, and of Mary Dodge his Wife; Descended in a direct Line from
that Peter Dodge of Stopworth in Cheshire, unto whom King Edward the First gave
the Seigneury or Lordship of Padenhugh in the Barony of Coldingham in the Realm
of Scotland, as well for the especial Services done by him in the Sieges of
Barwick and Dunbar, as his Valor showed in diverse Battles; Encontre son grand
Enemy and Rebelle le Baillol Roy d' Escoce and Vassal d'Angleterre, as the
words are in the Original Charter of Arms, given to the said Peter Dodge by
Guyen King of Arms at the said Kings Command, dated April 8. in the 34th. year
of King Edward the First. Neither is this unworthy of observation, that one of
the Descendents from the said Peter Dodge was Uncle to Doctor Heylyn's Mother,
and gave the Manor of Lechlade in Glocestershire, worth 1400 l. per ann. to
Robert Bathurst Esquire Uncle to our Reverend Doctor, and Grandfather to that
honest and modest Gentleman Sir Edward Bathurst Baronet, now living.

In the sixth year of his Age, he was committed to the Tuition of Master North,
Schoolmaster of Burford; under whose Instructions he so well profited, that in
a short time he was able to make true Latin: and his Improvements were so very
considerable, that in a little space after he was advanced a Form higher than
his Fellows; with which he kept pace and arrived to the ability of making
Verses: to which excellency, together with History, his Genius did so naturally
incline him, that at the Age of ten years he framed a Story in Verse and Prose
upon a ludicrous Subject, of which he himself was Spectator. And he Composed it
in imitation of the History of the Destruction of Troy, and some other Books of
Chivalry, upon which he was then very studious and intent. The Story was
exceedingly prized by his School-Fellows, and afterward by one Master Hinton,
Fellow of Merton-College, unto whom it was communicated by his Father. And I
presume to specify it as an Argument of the prodigious pregnancy of those
Endowments which God had bestowed upon him. For he may truly be accounted one
of the Praecoces Fructus, the forward Fruits of his time, that was soon ripe,
and contrary to the Proverb, of a lasting duration. It may be truly affirmed of
him, as once of Lipsius, Ingenium babuit docile, and omnium capax: Memoria non
sine praeceptorum miraculo (etiam in puero) quae senectute non defecit.

But his proficiency in Letters was very much retarded by a Distemper that
seized on his Head; the Cure of which was not effected under the space of two
years; and therefore occasioned great loss of time, as well as infinite pain
and torture of Body to one so young and tender. For by reason of the
unskilfulness of Country Empericks who first undertook him, the Flesh in the
forepart of his Head rotted to the Skull, where never any Hair came afterward.
And the Distemper again returning upon him as the Flesh grew up, he was in the
13th. year of his Age sent to London by his Father, to be under the Cure of Dr.
Turner (Husband to that Gentlewoman that had a hand in the Death of Sir Tho.
Overbury) who keeping him to a strict Diet and frequent Sweatings, sent him
back into the Country after four Months time. But his Distemper again
returning, he was fain once more to apply himself unto his old Doctor, before a
Cure could be completed.

Upon his return to Burford, he found his old Master dead, and was committed to
the Care of a Successor, viz. Mr. Davis, a Reverend good man; who
notwithstanding his long discontinuance from School, found his Scholar not to
have misspent or mis-employed any time, that gave him the least Relaxation
from his Distemper, and therefore placed him Third in the ^ppermost Form. Mr.
Davis spared no diligence that might tend to the cultivating of a Plant so
flourishing and hopeful, making him fit for the University by having him but
twelve Months under his Tuition: A kindness so gratefully resented by our
Doctor, that he dedicated to him one of his Books, called Ecclesia Vindicata;
and had it not been for the misfortune of the War, had given better Testimonies
of a thankful and generous mind in preferring him to some considerable Benefice
or Dignity in the Church.

He was the beginning of December, 1613. in the 14th. year of his Age sent to
Oxford, and placed under the Tuition of Mr. Joseph Hill, an ancient Bachelor
in Divinity, once one of the Fellows of Corpus Christi College, but then
Commoner of Hart-Hall; by whom Mr. Walter Newberry (afterward a zealous
Puritan) was made choice of to instruct him in Logic, and other Academical
Studies, as far as the tenderness of his Age rendered him capable. And he made
such progress in them, that upon the 22d. of July, 1614. he stood Candidate for
a Demies place in Magdalen College, having no other Recommendations than Sir
John Walters, then Attorney General to the Prince, and afterward Lord Chief
Baron of the Exchequer, Grandfather to that worthy Gentleman Sir William
Walter now of Sarsden in the County of Oxford, Baronet. Dr. Langton, President
of the College, put Mr* Heylyn the Eighth upon the Roll; which was the first
place of the second Course; but it succeeded not till the year following, being
then Elected First upon the Roll, and having very much endeared himself to the
President and Fellows by a facetious Latin Poem upon a Journey that he made
with his two Tutors, unto Woodstock.

But immediately after his admission into that noble Foundation, he fell into a
Consumption, which constrained him to retire to his Native Air, where he
continued till Christmas following. He was a year after his Admission made
Impositor of the Hall; in which Office he acquitted himself with so much
Fidelity, that the College-Dean continued him longer in it, than any ever
before; by which means he contracted a great deal of Hatred and Enmity from
those Students that were of his own standing, being called by them the
Perpetual Dictator. But he diverted the violence of the Storm by the assiduity
of his Studies, and particularly by Composing an English Tragedy, called
Spurius; which was so well approved of by some learned persons of that
Foundation, that the President caused it to be privately acted in his own
Lodgings.

In July 1617. he obtained his Grace for the degree of Bachelor of Arts, but
was not Presented to it till the October following, by reason of the absence of
one of his Seniors, holding it unworthy to prejudice another person for his own
Advancement. After the performance of the Lent-Exercises for his Degree, he
fell into a Fever, which increasing with great violence, at last turned into a
Tertian Ague, and caused him again to retreat unto his Country Air; which he
enjoyed till the middle of July following, and then according to the College
Statutes (which require that Exercise to be performed every long Vacation by
some Bachelor of Arts) he began his Cosmographical Lectures, and finished them
in the end of the next August. His Reading of those Lectures drew the whole
Society into a profound admiration of his Learning and Abilities; insomuch that
before he had ended them, he was admitted Fellow upon Probation, in the place
of one Mr. Love. And that he might give a Testimony of his grateful mind for so
unexpected a Favor, he writ a Latin Comedy, called Theomachia, which he
Composed and Transcribed in a Fortnights space. On July 29. 1619. he was
admitted in verum and perpetuum Socium; and not long before was made Moderator
of the Senior Form, which he retained above two years: And within that compass
of time he began to write his Geography, accordingly as he designed when he
Read his Cosmographic-Lectures; which Book he finished in little more than two
months, beginning it Feb. 22. and completing it the 29th. of April following.
At the Act, Ann. Dom. 1620, he was admitted Master of Arts; the honor of which
Degree was the more remarkable, because that very year the Earl of Pembroke,
Chancellor of the University, signified his pleasure by special Letters, that
from that time forward, the Masters of Arts, who before sat bare, should wear
their Caps in all Congregations and Convocations; unto which Act of Grace his
Lordship was induced by an humble Petition presented to him by the Regent
Masters in behalf of themselves and Non-Regents; as also by Dr. Prideaux then
Vice Chancellor, who being preacquainted with the business, gave great
encouragement to proceed onward in it; and lastly by the indefatigable pains of
one Master Clopton, junior, of Corpus-Christi-Colledge, who was the principal
Solicitor in that Affair.

His Geography was committed by him to the perusal of some Learned Friends, and
being by them well approved, he obtained his Fathers consent for the Printing
of it; which was done accordingly, November 7. 1621. The first Copy of it was
presented by him to King Charles the First, then Prince of Wales, unto whom he
Dedicated it; and by whom, together with its Author, it was very graciously
received; being introduced into the Princes Presence by Sir Robert Carre, one
of the Gentlemen of his Highnesses Bedchamber, and since Earl of Ancram; unto
whose Care Master Heylyn was commended by the Lord Danvers, then at Cornbury by
reason of some bodily Indisposition. But after this Sunshine of Favor and
Honor darted on him by the Prince, there followed a Cloud which darkened all
his Joys: for in a few months after, his Father died at Oxon with an Ulcer in
his Bladder, occasioned by the Stone, with which he had been for many years
grievously afflicted: His Body was conveyed to Lechlade in Glocestershire,
where he was buried near his Wife, who died six years before him of a
Contagious Fever, and lay in the Chancel of that Parish Church.

September. 15. 1622. he received Confirmation from the hands of Bishop Lake, in
the Parish Church of Wells; and in a short space after exhibited a Certificate
to Doctor Langton concerning his Age; by which means he obtained a
Dispensation, notwithstanding any Local Statutes to the contrary, that he
should not be compelled to enter into Holy Orders till he was Twenty four years
of Age, according to the time appointed, both in the Canons of the Church, and
the Statutes of the Realm. And such were his fears to enter upon the Study, as
well as undertake the profession of Divinity, that it was not without great
Reluctance and Difficulty on his own part, as well as many weighty Arguments
and Persuasions of a very Learned and Reverend person (Mr. Buckner) that he
applied himself unto Theology. Thus Moses pleaded his Inability, and
notwithstanding the express command of the Almighty, refused to be sent upon
the Divine Embassy, persevering in his unseasonable modesty, till God
threatened him with his Anger, as he had before encouraged him with his
promises. But as the difficulties in Divinity made Mr. Heylyn for some time to
desist, so the sweetness and amabilities of that Study allured him to undertake
the Profession. And therefore he received the Orders of Deacon and Priest (but
at distant times) in St. Aldates Church in Oxon from the Right Reverend Bishop
Howson. And when he was Ordained Priest, he Preached the Ordination Sermon upon
those words of our Blessed Savior to St. Peter, Luke 22. 32. And when thou art
converted, strengthen thy Brethren. What course and method he observed in his
Theological Studies, he tells of with his own Pen; When I began my Studies in
Divinity, Theol. Vet. Pref. to the Reader.
I thought no course so proper and expedient for me, as the way commended by
King James (which was, that young Students in Divinity should be excited to
study such Books as were most agreeable in Doctrine and Discipline to the
Church of England, K. James Instructions to the University, Ian. 18. 1616.
and to bestow their time in the Fathers and Councils, Schoolmen, Histories,
and Controversies, and not to insist too long upon Compendiums and
Abbreviators, making them the grounds of their Study) and opened at the charges
of Bishop Montague, though not then a Bishop. For though I had a good respect
to the memory of Luther, and the name of Calvin, as those whose Writings had
awakened all these parts of Europe out of the ignorance and superstition in
which they suffered, yet I always took them to be men: men as obnoxious unto
Error, as subject to humane Frailty, and as indulgent too unto their own
Opinions, as any others whatsoever. The little knowledge I had gained in the
course of Stories, had pre-acquainted me with the Fiery Spirit of the one, and
the Busy Humor of the other; thought thereupon unfit by Archbishop Cranmer
and others, the chief Agents in the Reformation of this Church, to be employed
as Instruments in that weighty Business. Nor was I ignorant how much they
differed fsom us in their Doctrinals and Forms of Government. And I was apt
enough to think, that they were no fit Guides to direct my* Judgment in order
to the Discipline and Doctrine of the Church of England; to the establishing
whereof they were held unuseful; and who both by their Practices and Positions
had declared themselves Friends to neither.

The Geography was in less than three years Reprinted; and in this second
Edition Enlarged and again Presented by him to the Prince of Wales, and by him
received with most affectionate Commendations of the Author. But it met with a
far different entertainment from K. James. For the Book being put into the
hands of that learned Monarch by Dr. Young Dean of Winton (who thereby designed
nothing else but the highest kindness to Mr. Heylyn) the King at first
expressed the great Value he had for the Author: but unfortunately falling on a
passage, wherein Mr. Heylyn gave Precedence to the French King, and called
France the more Famous Kingdom, King James became very much offended, and
ordered the Lord Keeper that the Book should be called in. The good Dean gave
notice to Mr. Heylyn of his Majesty's Displeasure, advising him to repair to
Court, and to make use of the Princes Patronage, as the best lenitive to
prevent the rankling of this wound, lest it festered and became incurable. But
he rather chose to abide at Oxon, acquainting the Lord Danvers with the
business, and requesting his Advice and Intercession, and sending afterward an
Apology and Explanation of his meaning to Doctor Young, the substance of which
was, That some crimes are of a nature so unjustifiable, that they are improved
by an Apology; yet considering the purpose he had in those places, which gave
offense to his Sacred Majesty, he was unwilling that his Innocence should be
condemned for want of an Advocate: The burden under which he suffered was
rather a mistake than a crime, and that mistake not his own, but the Printers.
For if in the first line of page 441. was be read instead of is, the sense runs
as he designed it: And this appears from the words immediately following; for
by them may be gathered the sense of this corrected reading, When Edward the
Third quartered the Arms of France and England, he gave Precedence to the
French; first, because France was the greater and more famous Kingdom.
Secondly, That the French, etc. These Reasons are to be referred to the time of
that King, by whom those Arms were first quartered with the Arms of England,
and who desired by this honor done unto their Arms to gain upon the good
opinion of that Nation, for the Crown and Love whereof he was a Suitor. For at
this time (besides that it may seem ridiculous to use a Verb of the present
Tense in a matter done so long ago) that Reason is not of the least force or
consequence; the French having so long since forgot the Rights of England, and
our late Princes claiming nothing but the Title only.

The place and passage so corrected, I hope (says Mr. Heylyn) I may without
detraction from the Glory of this Nation affirm, That France was at this time
the more famous Kingdom. Our English Swords for more than half the time since
the Norman Conquest had been turned against our own Bosoms; and the Wars we
then made (except some fortunate Excursions of King Edward the First in France,
and King Richard in the Holy Land) in my conceit were fuller of Pity than of
Honor. For what was our Kingdom under the Reign of Edward the Second, Henry the
Third, John, Stephen and Rufus but a public Theater, on which the Tragedies of
Blood and civil Dissentions had been continually acted? On the other side, the
French had exercised their Arms with Credit and Renown both in Syria,
Palestine, and Egypt; and had much added to the Glory of their Name and Nation
by Conquering the Kingdoms of Naples and Sicily, and driving the English
themselves out of all France, Guyen only excepted. If we look higher, we shall
find France to be the first Seat of the Western Empire, and the Forces of it to
be known and felt by the Saracens in Spain, the Saxons in Germany, and the
Lombards in Italy; at which time the Valor of the English was imprisoned in
the same Seas with their Island: And therefore France was at that time, when
first the Arms were quartered, the more famous Kingdom. It Is true indeed, since
the time of those victorious Princes, those Duo Fulmina Belli, Edward the Third
and the Black Prince his Son, the Arms of England have been exercised in most
parts of Europe. Nor am I ignorant how high we stand above France and all other
Nations in the true fame of our Achievements. France it self diverse times
overrun, and once Conquered, the House of Burgundy upheld from Ruin, the
Hollanders Supported, Spain Awed and the Ocean Commanded, are sufficient
testimonies, that in pursuit of Fame and Honor, we had no Equals. That I was
always of this opinion my Book speaks for me (and indeed so unworthy a person
needs no better an Advocate) in which I have been no where wanting to commit to
memory the honorable performances of my Country. The great Annalist Baronius
pretending only a true and sincere History of the Church, yet tells the Pope in
his Epistle Dedicatory, that he principally did intend that work, pro Sacrarum
Traditionum Antiquitate, and Authoritate Romanae Ecclesiae. The like may I say
of my self, though not with like imputation of Imposture. I promised a
Description of all the World, and have according to the measure of my poor
Abilities fully performed it: yet have I apprehended withal every modest
occasion of enobling and extolling the So^^ers and Kings of England. Besides
that I do not now speak of England as it now stands augmented with, by the
happy Addition of Scotland, I had had it from an Author, whom in poverty of
reading I conceived above all exception, viz. Cambden Clarencieux, that general
and accomplished Scholar in the fifth part of his Remains, had so informed me.
If there be error in it, it is not mine but my Authors. The Precedence which he
there speaks of is in General Councils. And I do heartily wish it would please
the Lord to give such a sudden Blessing to his Church, that I might live to see
Mr. Cambden Confuted by so good an Argument as the sitting of a General
Council.

Thus Mr. Heylyn was the interpreter of his own words; and by these
demonstrations of his integrity, King James's indignation was appeased, and his
own fears were ended: Only he took care to have these offensive words blotted
out of his Book, as the Dean of Winton advised him.

In the year 1625. he took a Journey with Mr. Levet of Lincoln's Inn into
France, where he visited more Cities, and made more Observations in the space
of five weeks (for he staid there no longer) than many others have done in so
many years. The particulars of this Journey he put in Writing, and some years
after gratified his Country with the Publication of it, together with some
other very excellent Remarks made by him, when he attended upon the Earl of
Danby to the Isles of Guernsey and Iersey, Anno Dom. 1628. Had King James lived
to have perused that Book, Mr. Heylyn had needed no other Advocate to have
restored him to his Princely Favor and Protection. For never was the Vanity
and Levity of the Monsieurs, and the Deformity and Sluttishness of their
Madames more ingeniously exposed both in Prose and Verse, than in the Account
that he gives of his Voyage into France.

On April 18. 1627. he opposed in the Divinity-School, and the 24th. day
following he answered pro Forma upon these two Questions, viz. An. Ecclesia
unquam fuerit invisibilis?
An Ecclesia possit errare?
Both which he determined in the Negative: And in stating of the first, he fell
upon a different way from that of Doctor Prideaux in his Lecture de
Visibilitate Ecclesiae, Appendix to the Adv. on Mr. Sanderson's Histories.
and other Tractates of and about that time; in which the visibility of the
Protestant Church (and consequently of the Renowned Church of England) was no
otherwise proved, than by looking for it into the scattered Conventicles of the
Berengarians in Italy, the Waldenses in France, the Wickliffs in England, and
the Hussites in Bohemia; which manner of proceeding not being liked by Mr.
Heylyn, because it utterly discontinued that Succession in the Ecclesiastical
Hierarchy, which the Church of England claims from the Apostles; he rather
chose to look for a continual Visible Church in Asia, Aethiopia, Greece, Italy,
yea and Rome it self; as also in all the Western Provinces then subject to the
power of the Popes thereof: And for the proof whereof he showed, 1. That the
Church of England received no Succession of Doctrine or Government from any of
the scattered Conventicles before remembered. 2. That the Wickliffes, together
with the rest (before remembered) held many Heterodoxies in Religion, as
different from the Established Doctrine of the Church of England, as any point
that was maintained at that time in the Church of Rome. And 3. That the Learned
Writers of that Church, and Bellarmin himself among them have stood up as
cordially and stoutly in maintenance of some Fundamental points of the
Christian Faith against Socinians, Anabaptists and Anti-Trinitarians, and other
Heretics of these Ages, as any of the Divines and other Learned men of the
Protestant Churches; which point Mr. Heylyn closed with these words, viz.
Vtinam quod ipse de Calvino, sic semper errasset nobilissimus Cardinalis. And
this so much displeased the Doctor of the Chair, that so soon as our young
Divine had ended his Determination, he fell most heavily upon him, calling him
by the most odious names of Papicola, Bellarminianus, Pontificius, etc.
bitterly complaining to the younger part of his Audients (unto whom he made the
greatest part of his Addresses) of the unprofitable pains he had took amongst
them, if Bellarmin, whom he had labored to decry for so many years, should now
be honored with the Title of Nobilissimus. The like he did within a few days
after ( Tantaene animis coelestibus irae?) when the Respondent became prior
Oppenent, loading him with so many Reproaches, that he was branded for a Papist
before he understood what Popery was. And because this Report should not
prepossess the minds of some great Persons, the Disputant went to London; and
after the Lord Chamberlain had ordered him to Preach before the Kings Household,
Archbishop Laud, then Bishop of Bath and Wells, took notice of the passages
that had happened at Oxford. But Mr. Heylyn told him the story at large, and
for a farther testimony of his Judgment and Innocence, gave him a Copy of his
Supposition; which, when it was perused, the Disputant waited on him, and his
Lordship made him to sit down by him, and after enquiry made into the course of
his Studies, told him, That his Supposition was strongly grounded, and not to
be over thrown in a fair way of Scholastic Arguing, That he would not have him
be discouraged by noise and clamor. That he himself had in his younger days
maintained the same Positions in Disputation in St. John's College, for which he
was much blamed by Archbishop Abbot, then Vice Chancellor, and made a Byword
and Reproach in the University. Finally he exhorted him to continue in that
moderate course, telling him, That as God had given him more than ordinary
Gifts, so he would pray to God that he might employ them in such a way and
manner, as might make up the Breaches in the Walls of Christendom. The
Discourse between them continued for the space of two hours, Amotis Arbitris.
For he ordered his Servants that no one should come to him on any occasion
before he called.

But this was not all that was done then by our young Divine to secure himself
from the Reproach of a Papist. For in November next following, he Preached
before the King on those words, John 4. 20. Our Fathers worshipped on this
Mountain. In which Sermon he declared himself with such warm zeal against some
Errors and Corruptions in the Roman Church, that he showed himself to be far
enough from any inclination to the Roman Religion, But his innocence in that
matter will be made more apparent in some following passages of his Life.

Unto one of the most principal parts of which the Reader is now invited, viz.
his Marriage, which was so far from being Clandestine and Clancular (as it was
objected to him in Print above thirty years after its solemnization) that he
ordered it to be performed upon St. Simon and Iudes day, between ten and eleven
of the Clock in the morning in his own College-Chappel, which by his
appointment was set out with the richest Ornaments, in the presence of a
sufficient number of Witnesses of both Sexes, according to Law and Practice.
The Wedding-Dinner was kept in his own Chamber, some Doctors and their Wives,
with five or six of the Society being invited to it. Mrs. Bride was placed at
the head of the Table, the Town-Musick playing, and himself waiting most part
of the Dinner, and no Formality wanting which was accustomably required (even
to the very giving of Gloves) at the most solemn Wedding. These things are more
particularly related, because some of his Enemies, having nothing else with
which they could blast his Reputation, were pleased to accuse him of a
Clandestine Marriage, and that he was obliged in Conscience to restore all the
Emoluments that he had received from his Fellowship between that time and his
Resignation. But what shall be given to thee, or what shall be done unto thee,
thou false tongue? It seems it must be injustice in Mr. Heylyn to receive his
share of an half-years Divident, which was usually allowed to persons in his
circumstances, but it was no act of unrighteousness in other men to take bread
out of the mouths of young Students, and send them to wander in solitary ways,
being hungry and thirsty, and their souls ready to faint in them. The Ceremony
was performed by his faithful and ingenuous friend Dr. Allibond; and the person
that he made choice of for his Wife was Mrs. Laetitia Heygate, third Daughter
of Thomas Heygate of Heys Esquire one of his Majesty's Justices of Peace for the
County of Middlesex (who in his younger days, whilst his elder Brother was
alive, had been Provost-Marshal-General of the Army under the Earl of Essex at
the Action of Cales) and of Margery Skipwith his Wife, one of the Daughters of
-- Skipwith of -- in the County of Leicester, a Family of good note and credit
in those parts. Which said Thomas Heygate the Father was second Son of that
Thomas Heygate, who was Field-Marshal-General of the English Forces before St.
Quintins, under the Command of the Earl of Pembroke, Anno Dom. 1557. and of --
Stonner his Wife, a Daughter of the ancient Family of the Stonners in
Oxfordshire.

These particulars are set down by our learned Doctor in his little Manuscript
to this end, That Posterity might know from what Roots they sprang, and not
engage in any thing unworthy their Extraction. It Is an inestimable blessing for
any one to be well Born and Descended, but the present guilt and future account
of that person will be increased who blemishes and stains his Family by
unworthy and ill-done actions.

Continuing this time, Mr. Heylyn had no very considerable subsistence for
himself and his new Companion. For the Portion which he was to have by her
(being a thousand pounds) was never paid, many irreparable losses and
misfortunes happening to her eldest Brother, which he was not able to recover,
though left by his Father in the possession of 800 l. per Annum. His Fellowship
he resigned, and although he had the Advowson of Bradwel, a very good Living in
Glocestershire, left him by his Father, together with a Rentcharge of
Inheritance paid him out of the Manor of Lechlade, yet he was constrained for
a while to wrestle with some necessities and frowns of Fortune. He parted with
his Title to Bradwel, resolving to lay the foundation of his future Felicity in
this world by his own honest industry, and not bury himself in the obscurity of
a Rural Life. His noble Friend, the Earl of Danby, whom he attended in the
quality of a Chaplain to the Isles of Guernsey and Iersey (his own Chaplains
modestly refusing a Voyage which they conceived to be troublesome and
dangerous) was not a little troubled to see such extraordinary merits continue
still discouraged and unrewarded; and therefore out of his generous Nature
presented him to the great Judge and Mecoenas of Learning, Archbishop Laud,
then Bishop of London; who making a second and more narrow enquiry into his
Temporal concerns, appointed him to meet him Court, which not long after was to
remove to Woodstock. But his Lordship fell sick at Reading; and Mr. Heylyn met
with some rude usages in the Kings Chapel, which was talked of the more at
Oxon, the interest he had at Court being universally known in that University.
But it was not very many months after, that power was given him to revenge the
Affront, being admitted Chaplain in Ordinary to the King, and into great Favor
with the Grandees of that time. But a soul enobled with the principles of
Gratitude and Generosity is as averse to retaliate, as to do an injury. The
first person therefore, unto whom he paid his thankful Acknowledgments for his
honorable Preferment, was the Earl of Danby, who presently told him, That those
thanks were not in the least due unto himself, but to the Lord Bishop of
London, unto whose generous and active mind the whole of that Dignity was to be
ascribed. Upon which hint he attended upon the Bishop; who after he had wished
him happiness in his new Preferment, gave him some particular Instructions for
his behavior in it, which he carefully observed the whole time of his
Attendance upon the Sacred Person of his gracious Master.

Having thus gained the advantage of this rising ground, he found out an honest
Art by which he might recommend himself to the Patronage of some noble mind;
and that was to assert the History of St. George, Patron of the most noble
Order of the Garter, A business (as he tells the King in his Epistle
Dedicatory) of so intricate and involved a nature, that he had no Guide to
follow, nor any Path to tread, but what he had made unto himself. Neither had
that Task ever come to perfection, had not so able an hand undertaken it, whose
industry and abilities were superior to every thing but themselves. Many
enemies the Book met withal, when it came first to light. But it is more easy
to load learned Authors with Railing and Reproaches, than to Encounter and
Confute their Arguments.

The Historian had the honor to be introduced by the Bishop of London into his
Masters Bedchamber, unto whom he presented his Book, which his Majesty
graciously accepted, and held some conference with the Author about the
subject matter contained in it. He also gave Copies of the History to all the
Knights of the Order, that were then attending at Court, who all used him with
respect suitable to his merits, except the Earl of E. who called him a begging
Scholar; of which words he was afterward very much ashamed, when the incivility
unbecoming a Nobleman and Courtier, came to the knowledge of those that were of
hiw own Quality. Against this History Doctor Hackwel appeared in Print; of
which the King was presently informed, and sending for Mr. Heylyn, commanded
him to consider the Arguments of his Antagonist, and withal sent him to Windsor
to search into the Records of the Order. This occasioned a second Edition of
the History, wherein were answered all the Doctors Arguments and Allegations,
but no Reply made to his Invectives, which were too frequently interspersed in
the Book of that learned Writer; of whom Mr. Heylyn heard no more till his very
excellent Book about the Supposed Decay of Nature came out in a new Edition,
wherein there was a Retractation made of those passages that related to St.
George.

Mr. Heylyn began now to conceive some hopes of not being any longer unkindly
dealt withal by the hand of Fortune, having a Presentation given him by one Mr.
Bridges to the Parsonage of Meysie-Hampton in the Diocese of Gloucester; unto
the Bishop of which he made Application, but found him already pre-engaged to
further the pretended Title of Corpus Christi College in Oxon. However his
Lordship promised not to give Institution to any person, till the Title was
cleared; advising Mr. Heylyn to leave his Presentation with him, and to enter a
Caveat in his Court. But he who was false to God and his Mother Church, could
never be faithful to those engagements thich (...) made to man; the one he
deserted by turning Papist, being the only Bishop of the English Hierarchy, who
renounced a Persecuted Church to embrace the Errors and Idolatries of the Roman
Communion: And as for his promises to Mr. Heylyn, those he violated, giving one
Mr. Iackson who was presented by C.C.C. Institution so soon as ever he
requested it. This engaged our young Married Divine in a tedious Suit at Law,
which occasioned him great trouble, and that which he could not well at that
time undergo, vast charge and expense; especially if we consider the bad
success that attended it. For by reason of the absence of many of the Jury, and
the supply of Tales (who attended upon the Trial as Watermen wait for a Fare)
together with the Tergiversation or rather Treachery of one of his Council,
upon whose Wisdom and Integrity the Client most relied, the Cause went against
him, though affirmed by all Standers-by, and by the Council himself the night
immediately preceding the Trial, to be as fair and just an Action as ever was
brought to Bar. But indignus es felictate, quem fortuitorum pudet. It was not
the first time that a poor man was oppressed and a righteous Cause miscarried.
And God ever rewards the quiet submission of his faithful Servants to his wise
and unsearchable Providence with far more valuable Blessings, than those which
he deprives or withholds from them. Joseph had never met with those signal
honors and dignities in Pharaohs Court, had not he been first sold by his
Brethren for a Bond-slave into Egypt.

Neither was this the only disappointment he met with in his way to Preferment.
For not long after, Preaching at Court in his second Attendance, his Majesty
expressed a very high opinion of him to many noble Lords about him, and in a
few months after gave him a Presentation to the Rectory of Hemingford in the
County of Huntington. But this also missed of the desired effect, which his
Majesty's Bounty and Mr. Heylyns necessities required. For the Bishop of
Linclon, unto whom he made Application with his Presentation, would not allow
the King to have any Title to the Living; so that the poor man was fain to
return to London re infecta. The Bishop was much offended as well as surprised
that a young Divine should have so comprehensive a knowledge of the Law. For he
made good the Kings Right upon the passages of the Conveyances of the other
party. But the King soon understood the entertainment his Chaplain met with at
Bugden, and sent him this gracious Message, That he was sorry he had p^t him to
so much charge and trouble, but it should not be long before he would be out of
his debt. And he soon performed his Royal promise; for within a week after, he
bestowed on him a Prebe^dship of Westminster (void by the death of Dr. Darrel)
to the extreme vexation of his Lordship, who was then Dean of the same Church.
And that which added to the honor of this Preferment, was his not only being
the same day ini^iated into the friendship of the Attorney General, Mr. Noye,
but the condescending Message that came along with the Royal Gift, viz. That he
bestowed that Prebendship on him to bear the charges of his last Journey, but
he was still in his debt for the Living. When Moses was deserted by his Parents
for fear of Pharaohs fury, God was pleased to provide him a Savior and a
Nurse; and he was taken out of the Bul-rushes, and fed and preserved in
despite of all his enemies.

Being possessed of this Preferment, he began the repairing and beautifying of
his House, with many other things, so far as his narrow contracted Fortune
would permit him. And the first honorable Visit that he received in his new
Habitation, was from the learned Lord Falkland, who brought along with him one
Captain Nelson, that pretended a new Invention, viz. The Discovery of the
Longitude of the Sea. The Captain had imparted his design to many learned
Mathematicians, who by no means could approve of, or subscribe to his
Demonstrations. But the King referred him to Mr. Heylyn, who told that noble
Lord, That his Majesty was mistaken in him; his skill and knowledge lying more
in the Historica^ than Philosophical part of Geography* His Lordship seemed
much offended with the answer, conceiving that out of a supercilious disdain of
the old Captain, Mr. Heylyn declined the business. But he presently rectified
his Lordships mis-apprehensions, assuring his Honor that he would confer with
some learned men about that Hypothesis, and by previous Study fit and prepare
himself to discourse it with them, and in a short time give the King and his
Lordship an account of what he did in the business. With this his Lordship went
away satisfied, and commended to Mr. Heylyn he acquaintance of Mr. Oughtred, as
he ablest person to be consulted in an affair of that nature. Some Letters also
passed between his Lordship and Mr. Heylyn, in which his Lordship commended the
honest old Captain to his Religious and Judicious care and consideration,
telling him that in the credibility of that Phenomenon, his Majesty's
Resolution would be very much guided by his Judgment, which he found would be
of special Authority with him: That he pressed the point the oftener to him,
because he conceived it a duty which he owed to the Truth it self to have it
made manifest one way or other; that is, either to be freed from the Captains
Imposition and Pretense, if upon trial it appeared to be fallacious; or else to
be approved and declared for right and perfect (if such it be) to the perpetual
silencing of all malicious impugners thereof, that the world may be deprived no
longer of the participation and use of so public and common a Benefit.

Mr. Heylyn being backward in nothing, wherein he might be really serviceable
to any one part of Learning, went to Mr. Oughtred, with whom he had much
discourse concerning the Captains Hypothesis. Mr. Oughtred told his Visitant,
that the Captain was very much mistaken in his Principle; which he made
afterward appear unto the Captain at London, and gave this following account of
it in a Letter to Mr. Heylyn. -- I asked him the ground whereon he went, and
tol^ him the difficulties which other^ found. His ground, he said, was by the
Nodes of the Moons Circle, because the Moon accompanies the Earth, having it
the Center of her Orb. The difficulties which others imagined was the finding
out of the place of the Node or upon the superficies of the Earth. His
Princ^ple I determine to omit till more le^sure (for I had but one whole day
(...) stay in London.) The difficulty of the place of I saw factible at Sea,
an^ accordingly let him understand (...)* Now being at London, I desired
conference with him, and thus I pr^ceeded. You require for the discov^ry of the
Longitude, the place of (...) upon the earth. Well, imagine you were now at Sea
in an unknown place, and what I gave you in degrees of Longitude, the distance
of from that place where you are; what will you conclude? He was entering into I
know not what by-demands of If this, or If that; but I held him to the Question
in the Hypothesis, telling him he had what he required. At last he answered,
Why methinks you have done it already your self. You have the distance of in
the degrees of Longitude of from an unknown place, and therefore the difference
of the is also unknown, except to that place only. But we required the distance
from the other known place which you promised to argue. At last he began to be
sensible of his mistake, and I advised him to desist from such undertakings;
and being of so great an Age, to labor the Discovery of another Voyage, or
rather only labor to attain to the blessed end thereof, being already opened
to us by our Savior. And this was the end of our Communication, and will be I
suppose of that business also. I wonder how the Captain for these twelve years,
wherein he has mused upon this, and has had conference with so many learned
men, would receive no answer. But it seems they gave him too much liberty of
digression; and he having a very ill expression of his of his confused
Conceits, entangled himself more and more in perplexities.

Thus this business ended; but before it was brought to this issue, there was
an end put to the life of that learned Lord. However Mr. Heylyn continued his
endeavors in the business, till the Captain was convinced of his mistake. Had
the poor Captain lived unto these days, wherein Philosophy has met with such
wonderful improvements, it is not unlikely but that he might have had the honor
of giving the first hint of the truth of that Hypothesis. For I have been
informed from a good hand, that Mr. Hook the great pattern of modesty and
industry, did not many years since in his Lectures at Gresham-College read upon
this very subject; and diverse of his Auditors as well as himself were of
opinion, that he had really found out and demonstrated the Seas Longitude. And
perhaps what is here inserted from Mr. Oughtred may invite him to oblige his
Country with what he was written upon that Hypothesis.

But to make our return unto the subject of these Papers; whose mind was intent
rather upon useful than notional Learning; and therefore about this time he
began with great diligence to read over the Statute-Laws of the Nation, and to
compare them with the times and circumstances that occurred in Story: and this
he did with the greatest care, to enable himself for the service of his Royal
Master, who then had the Smallpox appearing on him, but soon recovered of that
Distemper: and our young Divine to testify his joy, turned Poet, making a Copy
of English Verses, which were presented by one of his Friends to his Majesty;
and they were so well liked, that both their Majesty's gave him the honor of
their thanks.

But the King found Improvement rather for the Judgment than Fancy of his
Chaplain; and therefore Ian. 27. 1632. s^nt for him to the Council Table, where
he received his Royal Commands to read over that Book of Mr. Pryns, called
Histriomastix; and to collect thence all such passages, as were scandalous or
dangerous to the King or State, and to reduce them into method. The Book was
delivered to him, and a fortnights time assigned him to perform the task
imposed. But he had learned from the wisest of men, That diligence in business
and a quick dispatch of it would qualify him for the service of Kings, and not
mean persons. And therefore he performed what he undertook, and carried it to
the Secretary of State in less than four days; for which he had his Majesty's
thanks, as also new Commands to revise his Papers, and to write down such
logical Inferences as might naturally arise from the Premises of Mr. Pryn.
Which task was accordingly done by him, but either the Papers were lost, or at
least pretended to be so. And he received a third Command to deliver his own
Copy to the Attorney General; and about this time, and upon this occasion wrote
a small Tract touching the punishments due by Law, and in point of practice
unto such Offenders as Mr. Pryn. And this was observable in the Trial of that
person, that nothing was urged by the Counil to aggravate his Faults, but what
was contained in the Collections made by Mr. Heylyn.

For a reward of these and other Services, his Majesty bestowed on him the
Parsonage of Houghton, in the Bishopric of Durham, now let for above 470 l.
per ann. and made void by the preferment of Dr. Lendsel to the Sea of
Peterborough; and ordered Mr. Secretary Windebank to take care for the Broad
Seal; but within a few hours after intimated his Royal Pleasure to him by the
Bishop of London, that it should be exchanged for some other Living nearer
hand, and more for the convenience of his Chaplain, his Majesty conceiving that
he might have frequent occasion to make use of his service, and therefore was
unwilling that he should have any Preferment that was so far distant from his
Court. Upon this Dr. Heylyn entered into a Treaty with Dr. Marshal for the
Parsonage of Alreford in Hampshire; where the first thing he did after
Instistution and Induction, was to order the daily Reading of Morning-Prayer,
being a populous Market Town, which gave very great content unto the people.
And being Ordinary of the place, he removed the Communion Table to the East end
of the Chancel; the decency of which act, he not only justified by Reason,
convincing the people how much it had been profaned by sitting on it, Scribbling
and casting Hats on it in Sermon time, and at other times passing the Parish
Accounts, and disputing businesses of like nature; and which was worst of all,
by Dogs pissing against it, and sometimes snatching away the Bread that was
provided for the use of the Blessed Sacrament, but by the place and posture
which the Communion Table and Altars had been situated in former times. And in
a short time after, this act of his was justified and confirmed by what his
Majesty determined in the case of St. Gregory's Church near St. Paul's, London.

But before these things happened, he took his Degree of Bachelor in Divinity,
viz. In July 1630. his Latin Sermon was upon those words, Mat. 4. 19. Faciam
vos fieri piscatores hominum. Upon the Sunday followi^g (being the time of the
Act) ^e Preached in the Afternoon on Matthew. 13. 25. In which Sermon he
discovered the great Mystery of Iniquity that lay under the specious pretext of
Feoffees for buying in of Impropriations. And he was the first person that ever
gave notice of the danger of it to the undeceiving of the people. What he said
concerning it made a loud clamor throughout the whole Nation, and was one of
the first things that exposed him to the implacable hatred and malice of a
restless Faction. At first he looked upon the project with as great reverence
and affection, as any that were deceived and abused by it; and could not but
congratulate the felicity of those times, in giving birth to a design of such
signal merit. But when he looked more narrowly into the mannagement and conduct
of it, he apprehended it to be (as indeed it was) the most pernicious imposture
that ever since the Reformation was imposed upon the people; and the most
dangerous device to subvert the Church and undermine Episcopal Power and
Jurisdiction. And having satisfied himself in the danger of it, he conceived it
his bounden duty to give notice of it to other men; that being once discovered
and set out in its proper Colors, it might be taken into deeper consideration,
than had been to that time observed if it. The Sermon was Preached July 11. and
the passage in it which concerned the Feoffees was in these words, Planting of
Pensionary-Lecturers in so many places where it needs not, and upon days of
common labor, will at last bring forth those fruits, that will appear to be a
Tare indeed, though now no Wheat be accounted fairer. For what is that which is
most aimed at in it, but to cry down the standing Clergy of this Kingdom, to
undermine the Public Liturgy by Law Established, to foment Factions in the
State, Schisms in the Church, and to have ready Sticklers in every place for
the Advancement of some dangerous and deep Design? And now we are fallen upon
this point, we will proceed a little farther in the proposal of some things to
be considered. The Corporation of Feoffees for buying of Impropriations to the
Church, does it not seem in the appearance to be an excellent piece of Wheat, a
noble and gracious part of Piety? Is not this Templum Domini, Templum Domini?
But blessed God! that men should thus draw near to Thee with their mouths and
be so far from Thee in their hearts! For what are those entrusted in the
managing of this great Business? Are they not most of them the most active and
best affected men in the whole cause, and Magna partium momenta, chief Patrons
of this growing Faction? And what are those that they prefer? Are they not most
of them such men as are and must be serviceable unto their dangerous
Innovations? And will they not in time have more Pref^rments to bestow than all
the Bishops of the Kingdom? And so by consequence a greater number of
Dependents to promote their Interest? yet all this while we sleep and slumber
and fold our hands in sloth, and see perhaps, but dare not note it. High time
it is assuredly you should be awaked and rouse up your selves upon the
apprehension of so near a danger. The noise and calumnies that were raised and
fixed upon Mr. Heylyn after this Sermon, incited him to make a more narrow
search into the matter, and to multiply as well as strengthen his former
Arguments, which he delivered to his endeared Friend Mr. Noye, who undertook
the suppression of the Feoffees in the Kings name; and they were accordingly
suppressed in a judicial way of proceeding in the Exchequer-Chamber, Feb. 13.
1633.

In which year Mr. Heylyn commenced his Degree of Doctor in Divinity; an honor
not usually in those days conferred upon men of such green years; but he
verfied those excellent words of the Son of Syrach, Wisdom 4. 8, 9.
That honorable Age is not that which stands in length of time, nor that which
is measured by number of years, but Wisdom is the gray hair unto men, and an
unspotted life is old age. He entertained some hopes that those prejudices and
heats which for some years past he had fe^t at Oxon, had been cooled and
allayed; and that the remembrance of them was quite buried by Dr. Prideaux,
having so long a tract of time as from 1627. to 1633. to forget them. In his
first Disputation he had insisted on the Churches Visibility; and now he
resolved to assert and establish its Authority: and to that purpose made choice
to answer upon these three Questions for his Degree of Doctor, An Ecclesia
habeat Authoritatem,
In determinandis Fidei Controversiis? Interpretandi Scripturas? Decernendi
Ritus and Ceremonias?
All which he held in the Affirmative, according to the plain and positive
Doctrine of the Church of England in the 20th. Article, which thus runs in
terminis, viz. Habet Ecclesia Ritus sive Ceremonias statuendi Ius, and in Fidei
Controversiis Authoritatem, etc. But the Regius Professor was as little pleased
with these Questions, and the Respondents stating of them, as he was with the
former: And therefore that he might the more effectually expose him, he openly
declared how the Respondent had falsified the public Doctrine of the Church,
and charged the Article with that Sentence, viz. Habet Ecclesia Ritus sive
Ceremonias, etc. which was not to be found in the whole Body of it; and for the
proof thereof, he read the Article out of a Book which lay before him beginning
thus, Non licet Ecclesiae quicquam instituere quod verbo Dei scripto
adversetur, etc. To which the Respondent rea^i^y answered, That he perceived by
the bigness of the Book which lay upon the Doctors Cushion, that the Article he
read was out of the Harmony of Confessions published at Ceneva, Anno Dom. 1612.
which therein followed the Edition of the Articles in the time of King Edw. 6.
Anno Dom. 1552. in which that Sentence was not found; but that it was otherwise
in the Articles agreed on in the Convocation, Anno Dom. 1562. to which most of
us had subscribed in our several places; but the Professor still insisting upon
that point, and the Respondent perceiving the grea^est part of his Auditory
dissatisfied, he called to one Mr. Westly, who had formerly been his
Chamber-Fellow in Magdalen College, and desired him to fetch the Book of
Articles from some Adjacent Booksellers; which being observed by the Professor,
he declared himself very willing to decline any farther Debate about that
business, and to go on directly in the Disputation; But the Respondent was
resolved to proceed no further, Vsque dum liberaverit animam suam ab ista
calumnia, (as his own words were) till he had freed himself from that
Imputation. And it was not long before the coming of the Book put an end to the
Controversy; out of which he read the Article in English in his* verbis, The
Church has power to decree Rites and Ceremonies, and Authority in
Controversies of Faith, etc. which done, he delivered the Book to one of the
Auditors who desired it of him, the Book passing from one hand to another till
all were satisfied. And at this point of time it was, that the Bishop of
Angolesme, Lord Almoner to the Queen, left the Schools, professing afterward,
That he could see no hope of a fair Disputation from so foul a beginning.

It has been laid to Doctor Heylyn's charge, that at this time he was Hissed,
because he excluded King and Parliament from being parts of the Church: But he
never denied either to be parts of the Diffusive Body of the Church, but only
to be parts of the Church Representative, which consists of the Bishops and
Clergy in their several Councils. For neither King nor Parliament are Members
of the Convocation, as he then proved and asserted. The Articles ascribe to the
Church of England Represented in a National Council power of decreeing Rites
and Ceremonies, and Authority of determining Controversies in Faith, as well as
other Assemblies of that nature. And this neither deserved nor met with any
Hiss. Perhaps a Hiss was then given, but it was when the Regius Professor went
to prove, that not the Convocation, but the High Court of Parliament had power
of ordering matters in the Church, in making Canons, ordaining Ceremonies, and
determining Controversies in Religion. And he could find no other medium to
make it good, but the Authority of Sir Edw. Coke in one of the Books of his
Reports. An Argument unto which the Respondent returned no other Answer than
Non credendum est cuique extra suam Artem; upon which immediately he gave place
to the next Opponent, which put an end to the heats of that Disputation. But it
did not so to the Regius Professors passion against Dr. Heylyn. For conceiving
his Reputation somewhat lessened in the eye of the world, he gave an account in
a paper of the whole transaction, that tended very much to the Doctors
disgrace, as well as his own Justification. But Dr. Heylyn well knew upon what
bottom he stood, and therefore in his own Vindication caused the Professor to
be brought before the Council Table at Woodstock, where he was publicly
rebuked for the mis-representations that he had made of him. And upon the
coming out of the Kings Declaration concerning Lawful Sports, Dr. Heylyn took
the pains to translate the Regius Professors Lecture upon the Sabbath into
English, and putting a Preface before it, caused it to be Printed; A
performance which did not only justify his Majesty's proceedings, but abated
much of that opinion, which Dr. Prideaux had amongst the Puritanical Faction in
those days.

Pass we now from the University, the School of Learning and Study, to the
Court, the Seat of Breeding and Business; where Dr. Potter (afterward Dean of
Worcester) presented to the King a very learned Treatise, called Charity
Mistaken; and for a reward of his great Abilities, had a Prebendship of Windsor
designed for him, which was then likely to become vacant by the promotion of
the Bishop of Gloucester to the Sea of Hereford. Many of Dr. Heylyn's Friends
were very zealous with the King on his behalf, especially Dr. Neile then
Archbishop of York. But his Lordship stuck faster to his Bishopric, than he
did to his Principles, and so the business ended. But whilst it was in
agitation, it occasioned this merry Epigram from our young Doctor, who was
conceived by every one to have missed that Prebendship upon the supposed
Vacancy; When Windsor- Prebend late disposed was,
One asked me sadly how it came to pass,
Potter was chose and Heylyn was forsaken?
I answered, 'twas Charity Mistaken.
But the Doctors Juvenile humor was presently converted iuto a far less
pleasing passion. For Mr. Attorney General Noye left this world for a better,
very much to the sorrow, but much more to the loss of Dr. Heylyn. He kept his
Whitsontide in 1634. with the Doctor at Brentford, where he used all imaginable
arguments and entreaties to dissuade him from going to Tunbridge-Waters the
following Vacation, importuning him to accompany him to Alresford, where he
would be certain to find a better Air, and a more careful Attendance. But we
are very often wise to our own hurt, and stand in that light which would guide
us to safety and felicity. But whatsoever damage our Doctor sustained by the
loss of so invaluable a Friend, some persons else have gained well by it,
having two large Manuscripts of Mr. Noys own handwriting: The one contains the
Collections he made of the Kings maintaining his Naval power accroding to the
practice of his Royal Predecessors: The other about the Privileges and
Jurisdictions of Ecclesiastical Courts. These two Books Doctor Heylyn had a
sight of from Mr. Noye about two months before the death of that learned man.
And it would be a generous act and highly conducive to the honor of Mr. Noy's
memory, as well as the Kings and Churches interest, if such Treasures were
communicated to the benefit of all his Majesty's Subjects, which are now only
useful to some single persons.

Neither was this all the trouble that Dr. Heylyn met with at this ^ime. For
some enemies then living added to the sorrow and disturbance that he had for
his departed Friend. The grievances which the Collegiate Church of Westminster
suffered under the Government of John Lord Bishop of Lincoln, then
Commendatory-Dean thereof, became so intolerable, that our Doctor was
constrained for the common safety of that Foundation, to draw up certain
Articles (no less than 36.) against his Lordship by way of charge; which he
communicated to Dr. Thomas Wilson, Dr. Gabriel Moore, and Dr. Ludovicus Wemmys,
Prebendaries of the said Church, who embarked themselves in the same bottom
with him, and resolved to make complaint by way of Petition; which was drawn up
and presented to the King by all four together in the Withdrawing-Chamber at
Whitehal, March 31. 1634. And a Commission was issued out thereupon to the
Archbishops of Centerbury and York, the Earl of Manchester Lord Privy Seal,
Earl of Portland Lord high Treasurer, the Lord Bishop of London, Lord
Cottington, and the two Secretaries of State, viz. Sir John Coke and Sir
Francis Windebank; authorizing them to hold a Visitation of the Church of
Westminster to examine particular charges made against John Lord Bishop of
Lincoln, and to redress such Grievances and Pressures as the Prebendaries of
the said Church suffered by his Mis-government. The Articles were returned to
Dr. Heylyn to be put in Latin, and the Commission bore date April 20. But the
whole thing lay dormant till December 1635. at which time the Bishop began
again to rage in his Province of Westminster, dispossessing the Prebendaries of
their Seats, neglecting to call the Chapter to pass accounts, conferring Orders
in the said Church within the space of a month, permitting a Benefice in the
gift of the said Church, and lying within his Diocese, to be lapsed unto
himself; with many other Grievances which caused the forementioned Prebendaries
to present a second Petition to his Majesty, Humbly beseeching him to take the
ruinous and desperate estate of the said Church into his Princely
consideration, as it is worded in the Petition it self.

Upon which the former Commission was revived and delivered to the Lords whom
it did concern; and a Citation fixed upon the Church-doors of Westminster
accordingly. Upon January 25. they were warned by the Sub-Dean to meet the
Bishop in Ierusalem-Chamber, where amongst other matters his Lordship desired
to know what those things were that were amiss, that so he might presently
redress them. To whom Dr. Heylyn replied, That seeing they had put the business
into his Majesty's hands, it would ill become them to take it out of his into
their own* Ian. 27. both parties met before the Lords in the Inner
Star Chamber, where the Commission was tendered and accepted, and the whole
business put into a methodical course; each following Monday being appointed
for the day of hearing, till the whole was concluded. Feb. 1. The Commissioners
with the Plaintiffs and Defendant met in the Council Chamger at Whitehal, where
it was ordered that the Plaintiffs should be called by the name of
Prebendaries-Supplicant. That they should be admitted upon Oath as Witnesses.
That they should have a sight of all Registers, Records, Books of Accounts,
etc. That the first business that they should proceed in should be that of the
Seat, because that made the breach or difference more visible and offensive to
the world, than those matters that were more private and domestic, and finally
that the Prebendaries-Supplicant should have an Advocate, who should plead
their Cause, defend their Rights, and represent their Grievances. And the
person that they unanimously made choice of was Dr. Peter Heylyn.

Feb. 8. the Dean put in his Plea about the Seat or great Pew under Richard the
II. and the Advocate being appointed by the Prebendaries-Supplicant to speak in
the defense of their common Interest, in the Seat now controverted, and of
which the Bishop of Lincoln had most disgracefully dispo^sessed them, he made
choice to represent to the Lord Commissioners, 1. Their Original Right. 2.
Their Derivative Right, and lastly their Possessory Right.

Their Original Right he proved from the Charter of their Foundation, from
Queen Elizabeth their Foundress, who declared by Act of Parliament made in the
first year of her Reign, the Abbey of St. Peter in Westminster fell into her
hands, and that being seized thereof, and of all the Lands thereunto belonging,
she did by her Letters Patents erect the said dissolved Abbey into a Collegiate
Church, consisting of a Dean and twelve Prebendaries; and that the said Dean
and Prebendaries should be both in re and nomine unum corpus corporatum, one
only Body Politic; that they should have a perpetual Succession, a Common
Seal; and that they should Call, Plead and be Impleaded by the name of the Dean
and Chapter of the Collegiate Church of St. Peter in Westminster. -- So that by
this Donation the Dean has no propriety in the said Church (his own Stall
excepted) but is joynt-Owner with the Prebendaries of the Site and Soil. Nor
did the Queen bestow upon them the Church alone, but bestowed it jointly upon
them, una cum omnibus antiquis privilegiis, libertatibus, ac liberis
consuetudinibus; and those to be enjoined in as full a manner, as ever tho
Abbot and Convent did before enjoy the same. By which it appears, that all the
Ecclesiastical Jurisdiction of the Church of Westminster is vested jointly in
the Dean and Chapter, and not in the Dean alone. For as the Dean and Chapter
are one Body, so they make one Ordinary; and as one Ordinary, have a common and
joint Power to dispose of Seats.

Their Derivative Right, he proved from their Original Right: For the Queen
giving the Dean and Prebendaries with their Successors all Rights, Possessions,
Privileges and Immunities, they need only to prove their Succession in the
Church of St. Peter; and then whatever Right was in their Predecessors
Original, must be on them derived.

As for their Possessory Right, he desired their Lordships pardon, if he should
fail in the proof of it. For the Book of the Chapter-Acts was missing, which
was very necessary in order to it. And although one offered to take his Oath,
that the Bishop of Lincoln never saw it; yet the Oath was so desperate, that
either the person who offered to take it had an hand in making away the Book,
or else that he durst swear whatever the Bishop of Lincoln said or asserted.
But being deprived of that Evidence, he proceeded to Testimony; where he did
not make use of such Witnesses as were summoned by the Dean, viz.
Col^ege-Servants and Tenants, who were obnoxious to him; but indifferent men,
that were no way Friends to the Complainants, but only to the Truth; some of
them Bishops, some Doctors in Divinity, all of them of unquestioned Credit, and
such as spoke upon certain and affirmative knowledge.

Finally, the Advocate (than whom never any Orator or Lawyer did better acquit
himself) urged, that however things were in time past, yet the Bishop by his
Non-Claim had pre-judged himself; and that the possession of the Prebendaries
since his Lordship became Dean of Westminster was sufficient to create a Right,
though they had never any right before. And this he made good by particular
Cases and Decisions in the Civil, Canon, and Common Laws.

First, for the Civil Law it was determined by the Laws of the twelve Tables,
That a continued and quiet possession which any man had gained in a Personal
Estate, for one year only, or for two years together in matters Real, which
they call Immovable, should create a Right; (those times being thought
sufficient for any man to put in his Claim.) And so it held in Rome many
hundred years, till that upon some inconveniences which did thence arise, it
pleased Justinian to set out his Edict (which is still extant in the 7th. Book
of his Code) and in that Edict to Decree, That a possession of three years in
matters Personal should beget a Right: and as for Real Estates, it was
determined that a possession of ten years inter praesentes, and twenty years
inter absentes should conclude as much. And in almost all Nations Christened,
the same Law has continued to this very time. So that if this be applied to my
Lord of Lincoln, he is gone in Civil Law: For being resident here continually
for fifteen years together, he never made his Claim to the Seat in question,
and so has lost his Right, if ever he had any.

Next for the Canon Law, it yields as many ruled Cases and Decisions, by which
to regulate this point as the former. But the Advocate instanced only in one.
The Church of Sutry in Tuscany being void, the Canons go to the Election of a
Bishop, and make choice of one whom they desire to have confirmed. The Clergy
of the Convents about the City interpose their Claim, and make it manifest, Eos
Electionibus trium Episcoporum qui immediate praefuerunt, etc. interfuisse, i.
e. that they were present at the Election of the three last Bishops, and did
give their Voices. The Pope thereupon determined, that seeing the Witnesses on
the Canons part did seem to differ among themselves, Et quod negativam
quodammodo astruere satagebant, and that they went about to prove the Negative,
viz. that the said Clerks had no Voices in the three last Elections, or were
not present in the same: (which negative proof it seems was taken for a strange
attempt.) And seeing on the other side, that it was manifest how the said
Clerks were present at the three last Elections, and had their Voices in the
same, the former Election was made void, and the said Clerks put into that
possession which they had before. A Case (says Dr. Heylyn) that is very
parallel to our present business, we claiming, that if not before, yet in the
time of the three last Deans we had possession of this Seat, and therefore are
to be restored unto that possession, out of which we had been cast by my Lord
of Lincoln.

Lastly, for the Common Law, however, there is nothing against which the Laws
do provide more carefully, than the preventing or removing of a Force; nor any
thing wherein they do proceed with more severity than in punishing of the same;
yet by the Laws it is enacted, that they which keep their possessions by Force
in any Lands or Tenements whereof they or their Ancestors, or they, whose
Estate they have in such Lands or Tenements, have continued their Possession by
the space of three years or more, be not endangered by any former Statutes
against Force, Forcible Entries, and Forcible Detainers. So careful are the
Laws to preserve Possession, that in most cases they do prefer it before Right;
at least till Right be cleared and Judgment be pronounced in favor of it. And
albeit in the Common Laws there is no ruled Case in the present business, as
being merely of Ecclesiastical Cognizance and Jurisdiction, yet in the Common
Law, there is one Case which comes very near it; and it is briefly this. If
there be two Ioynt-Tenants, or Tenants in Common of certain Lands, and one of
them does expel or put forth the other out of Possession of the said Lands by
force, he that is so expelled may either bring his Writ of Assize of Novel
Disseisin, and so recover treble damages, or have his Action of Trespass of
Forcible Entry against his Companion that did so expel him, and thereupon shall
have a Writ of Restitution. This Case is very near ours, as before is said, the
Dean and Prebendaries being Ioint-Tenants, or Tenants in Common of the Seat in
question, out of which we are expelled forcibly by my Lord of Lincoln, and now
desire the benefit of the Law for our Restitution.

But (says the Advocate) my Lord objects, that the Prebendaries are in
subjection to him, that they swear Canonical Obedience to him, and therefore
should not sit in the same Seat with him. But to both we answer with an Absque
hoc, we are not in subjection to him; for we are made Ioynt-Governors with him
in every thing pertaining to the Church, and in the Statutes are entitled
Primarii and principes viri, and are to be Assistants to him, and Associates
with him in the common Government of the same. Nor do we swear Canonical
Obedience to him, as is pretended. We only make Oath that we shall give him
dignam debitamque Reverentiam, and that we swear to give to all Officers: So
that if Digna Reverentia is ^o be construed Canonical Obedience, we owe
Canonical Obedience to the Archdeacon, the Treasurer, the Sub-Dean and
Steward, as well as to the Bishop of Lincoln.

Much more was spoken by Dr. Heylyn viva voce in this matter, which will be too
tedious to be inserted in his Life. But when he had ended his Speech, the Lord
Commissioners expected that the Bishop would have made a Reply: but after a
long pause, he said no other words than these, If your Lordships will hear that
young fellow prate, he will presently persuade you that I am no Dean of
Westminster. But upon hearing the proofs of both sides, it was ordered by
general consent of the Lord Commissioners, that the Prebendaries should be
restored to their old Seat, and that none should sit there with them but Lords
of the Parliament and Earls Eldest Sons, according to the ancient custom. After
this, there was no Bishop of Lincoln to be seen at Morning-Prayer in the
Church, and seldom at Evening. Feb. 15. the Lord Commissioners went on in
hearing the particulars of the second Petition, and so they proceeded from one
Monday to another, till Monday April 4. and then adjourned till the 25th. of
the same month: upon which day the business was again re-sumed, and the Bishop
of Lincoln appeared not so well to the Lord Commissioners; except those of the
Laity, who were apparently inclined to favor him; and therefore those of the
Clergy thought it neither fit nor safe to proceed to Sentence; and upon that
the Commission was put off sine die.

The Advocate's Activity in this Affair procured him a great deal of enmity and
ill will both in Court and Country, as every man's Zeal will do, that will be
true to his Principles, and faithful in his Station. For whoever does
impartially administer, or peremptorily demand public Justice, will as
certainly be exclaimed of, as a Patient will cry out of that Surgeon that
Lances a gangrened or fester'd Wound. But Dr. Heylyn gained these two
advantages by his zeal in this business, viz. That he justified the Privileges
of the Prebendaries, out of whose Revenues the Bishop kept a plentiful Table;
inviting to it the chiefest of the Nobility, Clergy and Gentry; the
Prebendaries having no other advantages by his Hospitality, than to fill their
bellies with the first Course, and then after the manner of great men's
Chaplains, to rise up and wait till the coming in of the second: And the other
was, that by his frequent and extempore Debates before the Lords Commissioners,
he was at last brought to such an habit of speaking, that Preaching became more
easy and familiar to him, than it had been in the first part of his life.

I will not (as I before promised) mention all the Grievances that were
complained of concerning that great person. One thing more it may not be amiss
to insert in these Papers, and that is Dr. Heylyn's Refusal to sit in the
Choire of Westminster, according to Academical Decrees. For the Bishop of
Lincoln having taken a Resolution, that the twelve Prebendaries should sit in
the Choire according to their Degrees in the University, our Doctor
remonstrated against it, giving these Reasons for his Refusal.

1. In the Charter of the Foundation of that Church, the Prebendaries are
distinguished by Primus, Secundus, Tertius, etc. as now by Prima, Secunda,
Tertia Praebenda, etc. according unto which account, both in the Treasurers
Book, and in the Chanters, I am reckoned as the sixth Prebendary, and do preach
accordingly, as Successor to Edmund Schambler, the Sextus Prebendarius here
first established.

2. In the same Charter of the Foundation, William Young being of no Degree is
placed before Gabriel Coodman, Master of Arts, which makes it evident, there
was no purpose that for the aftertimes, the Order of Academical Degrees should
be observed in marshalling the Prebendaries places.

3. The Statutes of the College give to the new succeeding Prebendaries the
Stall and House belonging to their Predecessors in the same Prebend, according
to these words thereof, Succed^nt Prebendarii praedecessoribus suis in eadem
praebenda tam in Stallo, loco and voce in Capitulo, quam in domo eidem
Praebendae annexis. By which it is apparent, that the Stalls as well as Houses
are annexed to the Prebendaries. But the Prebendaries by this Statute take not
their places in the Chapter House by any such Seniority as is pretended; nor
have two several Chapter-Acts been found of any force to sever the Houses from
the Prebendaries, and therefore not their Stalls neither.

4. His Majesty's Letters Patents, whereby I claim whatsoever I hold in
Westminster, give me Praebendam illam quae vacat per mortem, G. Darrel (which
was the sixth Prebend) cum omnibus juribus and praeheminenti^s, with all Rights
and Pre-eminences thereunto belonging; and so by consequence the sixth Stall
also, as the pre-eminenee appertaining to it.

5. The Mandat in those Letters Patents is, that I be installed fully and
absolutely in the same Prebend which was then vacant ( In eandem Praebendam
plenarie installari faciatis, as the Patent goes) which is not done at all,
either plenarie or in eandem, if this order hold.

6. The Mandat issuing out with the said Letters Patents, is, that I be
Installed prout moris est, according to the ancient custom. But such a custom
by sitting according to degrees of Schools was never yet known in Westminster,
nor in any Church out of the University that I can hear of, and is not kept in
many Colleges of the University, which I am sure of: therefore that clause
reflects upon such a custom as has formerly been used in Westminster, and has
both the Statute and the Charter for the ground thereof.

7. Your Lordship did determine the last Chapter, that the way of sitting by
Prima, Secunda, Tertia Praebenda, etc. was most agreeable to Statute; and that
if any man should take his place accordingly, he could not be hindered from so
doing; to which determination there was then a full assent in Chapter, and
diverse of the Prebendaries have since sat accordingly.

8. Whereas your Lordship took a Corporal Oath at your Admission into this
Deanery to govern this Collegiate Church ex his Statutis, according to the
tenor of these very Statutes which are now in use; and that the Prebendaries
have all of them taken a several Oath faithfully to observe the same Statutes;
and whereas the Statute is most plain, that the new Prebendaries are to have
the Stalls of their Predecessors in the same Prebend, I cannot see how
prossibly this new order can stand with the same Statute, and so by consequence
with out Oaths, who have sworn to keep them.

9. Upon this new order there will follow such confusion in the Church, that
upon the coming in of a new Prebendary, the greatest part of the company will
be still troubled to remove their Stalls higher or lower from one side to
another, according as the New-comer is in Seniority; and so instead of order,
we shall bring disorder into our Church.

10. This new order is an Innovation never before known in this Church, and
has no ground in Statute or in Custom, which, as your Lordship noted, is
optimus Insterpres Legis; but is quite contrary thereunto. Unto which Statute
and his Majesty's Letters Patents I refer my self; humbly desiring that these
just reasons of my refusal to yield to such an order, as neithe^ stands with
Statute, or with Custom, nor any other true ground of Reason, may find a
favorable Interpretation and Admission.

Whilst these hot contests continued, out came our Doctors History of the
Sabbath; the Argumentative or Scholastic part of which subject was referred to
Bishop White of Ely; the Historical part to Dr. Heylyn, who had before that
time given ample Testimony of his knowledge in the ancient Writers. The History
is divided into two parts: The first whereof begins with the Foundation of the
World, and carries on the story till the destruction of the Temple at
Jerusalem. The second begins with our Savior Christ and his Apostles, and is
drawn down to the year 1633. It was Written, Printed and Presented to the King
(by whose Special Command he undertook it) in a less space of time than four
months, and had a second Edition within three months after: and notwithstanding
the polemical Debates upon that Argument, there was never any one yet that had
the courage to return an Answer to that History. And whoever peruses it with
serious and unprejudiced thoughts, will find that its Author principally
designed to withdraw his Countrymen from a Iudaical Observation of the Lords
day, i. e. from Dedica^ing the whole of that time to the services and offices
of Religion; and refusing to engage in any business, which our own or our
Neighbors Conveniences or Necessities might exact from us. And when all that
our voluminous Writers have said upon this Argument is summed up together,
there are none of them but will subscribe to the truth of these two
Propositions: 1. That worldly cares and bodily Recreations tend very much to
discompose and rarifie men^ spirits, and to fill them full of froth and
worldliness, of gaiety and wantonness; so that they cannot fix their thoughts
upon Christian Duties with any serious or continued Attention. 2. That it is
impossible for the minds of the generality of Christians, who are not used to
Contemplation to be for a whole Lords day, or the greatest part of it, intent
upon Religious Exercises. And besides, if all Refreshments and Recreations were
absolutely unlawful upon that day. poor Servants and the laborious part of
mankind would be highly prejudiced, for whose benefit the Sabbath was first
instituted and appointed.

No sooner had the Doctor perfected this History, but the Dean of Peterborough
engages him to answer the Bishop of Lincloln's Letter to the Vicar of Grantham.
He received it upon Good Friday, and by Thursday night following discovered the
Sophistry, Mistakes and Falsehoods of it; and yet did not for all that intermit
any of the public Religious Exercises of the holy Feast of Easter. It was
approved by the King; by him given to the Bishop of London to be Licensed and
Published under the Title of A Coal from the Altar. -- In less time then a^
twelvemonth the Bishop of Lincoln writ an Answer to it, entitled, The Holy
Table, Name and Thing: but pretended it was writ long before by a Minister in
Lincolnshire against Dr. Cole, a Divine in the days of Queen Mary. Our Reverend
Doctor received a Massage from his Majesty to return a Reply to it, and not in
the least to spare the Author, April 1. 1637. And he obeyed the Royal Command,
in the space of seven weeks, presenting it ready Printed to the King the 20th.
of May following, and called it Antidotum Lincolniense. And although the
Bishops Book was (from the dissatisfaction of the times, the subject matter of
the Book it self, and the Religious esteem of the Author who was held in high
Veneration) looked upon to be unanswerable, and sold for no less than 4 s. yet
upon the coming out of the answer, it was brought to less than one. But before
this, he answered Burtons Seditious Sermon, being thereunto also appointed by
the King; which Book although he dispatched in a fortnight, yet it was not
published till June 26. 1637. being kept in readiness till the Execution of the
Star Chamber Sentence upon the Triumviri; Pryn, Burto^, Bastwick.
that so people might be satisfied as well in the greatness of the Crimes, as
the necessity and justice of the punishment inflicted upon those Offenders.

In July, 1637. the Bishop of Lincoln was Censured in the Star Chamber for
tampering with Witnesses in the Kings Cause, being suspended a Beneficio and
Officio, and sent to the Tower, where he continued three years, and did not in
all that space of time hear either Sermon or Public Prayers. Not long after
this, Dr. Heylyn was chosen Treasurer for the Church of Westminster, and
continued in that Office all the while of the Bishops Imprisonment and
Suspension. And he made use of the power with which that place invested him to
the best advantage of that Foundation. For first he regu^ated the Disorders of
the Jury by exacting the Sconces or Perdition-money, and dividing it amongst
those that were most diligent and devout. Then he proceeded to repair the
Timber-work of the great West Isle, which was ready to fall down; caused the
new Arch over the Preaching-place to be new Valuted, and the Roof thereof to be
raised to the same height with the rest of the Church; the Charge whereof
amounted to 434 l. 18 s. 10 d. and lastly, made the South Side of the lower
West-Isle to be new Timbred, Boarded and Leaded, being fallen into great decay.
Thrice he assisted in the Election at Westminster-School, and every time had an
opportunity of bringing in a Scholar into that Royal Foundation; for two of
which he was never spoke unto: and for his kindness unto all three he never had
the value of one pint of Wine, nor any thing of less moment.

Whilst he continued Treasurer, the Parsonage of Islip became vacant by the
Death of Dr. King, unto which he was presented by the Chapter. But he deferred
receiving Institution by reason of its great distance from Alresford, being
advised to exchange it for some other that was more near and convenient. After
many offers, he at last exchanged with Mr. Atkinson of St. John's College in
Oxon for South-Warnborough, which was eight miles distant from his other
Living; and the perpetual Patronage of which Archbishop Laud had bestowed upon
that forementioned Society. But that Gentleman enjoyed Islip but a few weeks;
and those of his College conceiving themselves prejudiced by the change, our
Doctor was so generous, as to obtain for one of the Fellows a second
Presentation to Islip, for which he never received so much as the least civil
Acknowledgment.

But he had other things to afflict his spirit at that time, his whole Family
being visited with a contagious Fever, and no person in it, except one Servant,
but were all sick at one and the same time. The Doctor did as narrowly escape
death, as St. Paul and his Companions did Shipwreck, when they went to Rome.
The Fever had so seized upon his spirits, that after the abatement of its
Paroxisms, he had many dull and sleepless nights: and returning upon him with
greater violence a twelvemonth after, he was reduced to so extreme a weakness,
that all his Friends together with himself supposed him fallen into a deep
Consumption. And yet even at this time his mind was not idle or unactive. For
now it was that he first meditated of a project of Writing a History of the
Church of England since the Reformation. And no sooner had he recovered some
measure and degrees of strength, but he prepared materials for it; and upon his
return to London, obtained the freedom of Sir Robert Cotton's Library, and by
the recommendation of Archbishop Laud had liberty granted him to carry home
some of the Books, leaving 200 l. apiece as a pawn behind him.

About this time it was, that the Commotions began to be hot in Scotland, and
the Archbishop of Canterbury designing to put out an Apology for vindicating
the Liturgy, that he had recommended to that Kirk, desired our Doctor to
translate it into Latin; that being published with the Apology, the world
might be satisfied in his Majesty's Piety, as well as his Graces care; as also
that the rebellious and perverse temper of the Scots might be apparent unio
all, who would raise such tumults upon the recommendation of a Book that was so
venerable and Orthodox^ Our Reverend Doctor undertook and completed it; but
the distemper and troubles of those times were the occasion that the Book went
no farther than the hands of that learned Martyr.

In Feb. 1639. Dr. Heylyn was put in Commission of the Peace for the County of
Hampshire; into which he was no sooner admitted, but he occasioned the
discovery of an horrid Murder, that had been committed many years before in
that Country. April following he was elected Clerk of the Convocation for the
College of Westminster. At which time the Archbishop of Canterbury sending a
Canon to that Assembly for the Suppressing the further growth of Popery, and
bringing Papists to Church, our Reverend Doctor moved his Grace that the Canon
might be enlarged for the greater satisfaction of the people, as well as the
protection of the Church, viz. That all persons entrusted with Care of Souls,
should respectively use all possible Care and Diligence by open Conferences
with the Parties, and by Censures of the Church in inferior Courts, as also by
Complaints unto the Secular Powers, to reduce all such to the Church of England
as were misled into Popish Superstition. This and much more was offered by Dr.
Heylyn, as may be seen more at large in his Life of the Archbishop. Page 426.
And about the same time he drew up a Paper wherein he offered a mutual
Conference by select Committees between the House of Commons and the Lower
House of Convocation: And this he did that the Representatives of the Clergy
might give satisfaction to the Commons in point of Ceremonies, and in other
matters relating to the Church, if the motion was accepted; but if refused,
that they might gain the advantage of Reputation among knowing and wise
persons. But the unhappy Dissolution of the Parliament prevented all things of
this nature: The news of which was so unwelcome and amazing to Dr. Heylyn, that
being then busied at the Election for the School at Westminster, the Pen fel^
out of his hand; and it was not without some difficulty before he could
recollect his thoughts in the business about which he was engaged.

The Convocation, according to usual custom, had expired the next day after the
Parliament, had not our Reverend man gone to Lambeth, and there displayed to
the Archbishop the Kings necessities, and acquainted him with a precedent in
the Reign of Queen Elizabeth, for granting Subsidies or a Benevolence by
Convocation to be taxed and levied without help of Parliament. Upon which
proposal the Convocation was adjourned till Wednesday, May 13. on which day the
Bishops met in full Convocation, and a Commission was sent down to the
Lower House, dated May 12, which enabled the Prelates and Clergy then Assembled
to treat of, and conclude upon such Canons as they conceived necessary for the
good of the Church. The greatest part of the Clergy very much scrupled this
matter, conceiving the Convocation to end with the Parliament. But our Reverend
Divine being well skilled in the Records of Convocations, showed the
distinction between the Writ, Archbishops Life, page 429.
for calling a Parliament, and that for assembling a Convocation; their
different Forms, the independence of one upon the other, as also between the
Writ, by which they were called to be a Convocation, to make Canons and do
other business. He proved also, that although the Commission was expired with
the Parliament, yet the Writ continued still in force; by which they were to
remain a Convocation till they were Dissolved by another Writ. With this
distinction he satisfied the greatest part of those who scrupled to sit after
the Parliaments Dissolution. But the King proved the best Casuist in the case;
who being acquainted with these scrupulosities, called the most learned in the
Laws to consult about them; by whom it was determined, That the Convocation
being called by the Kings Writ, notwithstanding the Dissolution of the
Parliament, was to be continued till it was Dissolved by the Kings Writ, And
this was subscribed by Finch, Lord Keeper, Littleton Lord Chief Justice of the
Common Pleas, Banks, Attorney General, Whitfield, etc.

It will be too tedious to insert into these Papers all the Debates that were
in this learned Assembly; most of them are to be seen in the Life of the
Archbishop. Page 430.
Suffice it to acquaint the Leader, that few or none of those propositions
which either concerned the Institution, Power, or Privileges of Sovereign
Kings, or related to the Episcopal Power, Doctrine, or Discipline of the
English Church, but were either first proposed, or afterward drawn up by Dr.
Heylyn, though he ou^ of his great modesty and worth ascribes them to other
persons. It was the Clerk of the Church of Westminster, who was placed on
purpose by the Prolocutor to speak last in the Grand Committee for the Canon of
Uniformity, and to answer all such Arguments as had been brought against any of
the Points proposed, and were not answered to his hand. It was he who made a
proposition for one uniform Book of Articles to be used by all Bishops and
Archdeacons in Visitations, to avoid the confusion that happened in most parts
of the Church for want of it; those Articles of the Bishops many times everting
those of the Archdeacons, one Bishop differing from another, the Successors
from the Predecessors, and the same person not consistent to those Articles
which himself had published; by means whereof the people were much disturbed;
the Rules of the Church contemned for their multiplicity; unknown by reason of
their uncertainty, and despised by reason of the inconstancy of those that made
them. The motion backed by these Reasons did so well please the Prolocutor,
with the rest of the Clergy, that they desired the Doctor in pursuit of his own
project to undertake the Compiling of the said Book of Articles, and to present
it to the House with all convenient speed. It was the same learned man who took
into consideration the great Excesses and Abuses, which were crept in, and
complained of Ecclesiastical Courts: the redress and Reformation of which
Grievances, was brought within the compass of these seven Heads. 1. Concerning
Chancellors Patents, and how long their virtu^ was to continue. 2. That
Chancellors were not alone to censure the Clergy in sundry cases. 3. That
Excommunication and Absolution were not to be pronounced but by a Priest. 4.
Concerning Commutations and the way of disposing of them. 5. Concerning
Concurrent Jurisdictions. 6. Concerning Licenses to Marry. 7. Against Vexatious
Citations. Some other things were proposed and designed, but never put in
execution; there being intended an English Pontifical, which was to contain the
Form and Manner of the Coronation of King Charles I. and to serve as a standing
Rule to succeeding Ages on the like occasions. Another Form to be observed by
all Archbishops and Bishops for consecrating Churches, Churchyards and
Chapels. And a third for reconciling such Penitents as either had done open
Penance, or had revolted from the Faith of Christ to the Law of Mahomet. Which
three, together with the Form of Confirmation, and that of ordering Bishops,
Priests and Deacons, (which were then in force) were to make up the whole Body
of the Book intended. But the troubles of the times increasing, it was thought
expedient to defer the prosecution of it till a fitter conjuncture. And yet
notwithstanding all the storms that were then rising, this excellent person
went through the Book of Articles; the compiling of which gave no obstruction
to him from attending the service of the Committee upon all occasions. And for
the better Authorizing of the Articles, he placed before every one of them in
the Margin, the Canon, Rubric, Law, Injunction, or other Authentic Evidence
upon which they were grounded: Which being finished, were by him openly read in
the House, and by the House approved and passed without any alteration; only
that exegatical or explanatory clause in the fourth Article of the fourth
Chapter touching the reading of the Communion-Service at the Lords Table, was
desired by some to be omitted, which was done accordingly. Finally, it was Dr.
Heylyn who proposed a Canon for enjoining the said Book to be only used in
Parochial Visitations, for the better settling of Uniformity in the outward
Government and Administration of the Church, and for preventing of such just
Grievances as might be laid upon the Churchwardens and other sworn men by any
impertinent, inconvenient, or illegal Enquiries in the Articles for
Ecclesiastical Visitations.

Neither were these the only Fruits of his labors and travels in this
business; there being six Subsidies granted to the King; and the Bishops and
Clergy in Convocation upon the 20th. of May received his Majesty's Letters,
Sealed with his Royal Signet, and attested by his Sign Manual, which required
and authorized them to proceed in making Synodical Constitutions for levying of
those Subsidies which had been before granted. And this was easily done, there
being nothing to be altered but the changing of the name of Subsidy into that
of Benevolence. Friday, May 29. the Canons were formally subscribed unto by the
Bishops and Clergy, no one dissenting except the Bishop of Gloucester (who died
in the Communion of the Roman Church, and was all that part of his life in
which he revolted from the Church of England, a dear Favorite and Servant of
Oliver Cromwell, unto whom he dedicated some of his Books) for which he was
voted worthy of Suspension by the Convocation, and was accordingly Suspended by
the Archbishop of Canterbury. Which being done, the Convocation was dissolved.

Proceed we now from the Active to the more Passive part of Dr. Heyly's life.
For the Long Parliament, the Churches as well as the Kings Scourge, began to
sit at Westminster, and a general Rumor was spread both in City and Country,
that our Doctor being conscious to himself of many Crimes, durst not stand the
brunt of their displeasure, and therefore had made use of his heels as his best
weapons of defense; being run away out of a fear and foresight of an
approaching storm. When these rumors were raised, he was at his Parsonage of
Alresford, from whence he hastened with all conveni^nt speed, confuting the
Calumny, by showing himself the very next day after his coming to London in his
Gown and Tippet in Westminster Hall. And upon a Vote passed in the House of
Lords, that no Bishop should be of the Committee for the Preparatory
Examinations in the Cause of the Earl of Strafford, under color that they were
excluded from acting in it by some ancient Canons, as in cause of Blood, our
learned Divine did thereupon draw up a brief Discourse, entitled, De jure
Paritatis Episcoporum (now inserted in the Reprinted Volume of his Works)
which he presented unto many of the Bishops to assert all their Rights of
Peerage (and this of being of that Committee among the rest) which either by
Law or ancient custom did belong unto them.

The Parliament began their Session November. 3. 1640. and upon the 9th. of
December following, upon the Complaint of Mr. Pryn, our Doctor was called
before the Committee of the Courts of Justice; who accosted him with that
fierce fury, that no one could have withstood the Torrent, but one whose Soul
was fortified with Innocence equal to his Courage. The Crime objected against
him, was, that he had been a subservient Instrument under the Archbishop of
Canterbury all the sufferings of Mr. Pryn, having read the Histriomastix, out
of which he had furnished the Lords of the Council and many other persons with
matter to proceed against its Author. But our Doctor made a bold and just
Defense for himself, telling his Accusers, That the Task was imposed upon him
by Royal Authority, which he would readily prove, if they would have so much
patience as to allow him time for that purpose. Great hopes they had to squeeze
something out of him concerning his being engaged in it by the Archbishop: but
he was too wary to be ensnared by any of their Artifices, and being faithful to
his Friend and Patron, was kept four days under Examination, suffering for the
two first the brutish Rage of the People, more perhaps than St. Paul did at
Ephesus; for that blessed man did not adventure himself amongst those Savages.
But our poor Doctor was tossed up and down by the fury of an ungoverned
multitude, and railed at as he passed through them by their lewd and ungoverned
tongues. But God who sets bounds to the Waves of the proud Ocean, rebuked their
rage, and rescued him from their malice.

But alas! what civility can be expected from the ill-bred Rabble unto
Clergymen, when they themselves like the Eagle in the Greek Apologue wound one
another with Arrows feathered with their own Plumes. For four days after he had
received order to appear before the Committee, he preached his turn in the
Abbey at Westminster, and in the midst of his Sermon was insufferably affronted
by the Bishop of Lincoln, who knocking the Pulpit with his Staff, cried out
aloud, No more of that Point, No more of that Point, Peter. This happened to
the poor man in very ill circumstances, for it occasioned new clamours, and
animated his enemies to proceed on with greater violence against him. But
notwithstanding all their united malice, he held out bravely, sending the whole
passage of his Sermon as he designed to Preach it both to his Friends at Court,
and Enemies in Parliament: and taking Sir Robert Filmore, with some other
Gentlemen that were his Auditors, out of the Church along with him to his
House, where he immediately sealed up his Sermon-Notes in their presence, they
setting their Seals to them, that so there might not be the least Alteration in
the Sermon, nor any ground to suspect it. Nay he made choice of one Mr. White,
the fiercest man in the Committee, to be judge of the affront offered to him,
desiring him in his Letter, That he would recommend him to the House of
Commons, that they might so far take him into their protection, as might
consist with the Honor and Justice of their House; otherwise he would rather
choose to put himself upon their Censure for a Contempt in not appearing, than
be again exposed to the fury of an outrageous people, whose malice is most
merciless because most groundless: That after he was dismissed from the
Committee, he was set upon by the rude and uncivil Multitude with thrustings,
justlings, spurnings, and worse than that, with such opprobrious and reviling
language, that as he never endured the like before, so he was confident it
would add much to the esteem and reputation of that honorable House, if neither
he nor any other honest man do endure it more. And lastly, whereas he was
intertupted in his Sermon by the Bishop of Lincoln, and thereupon might justly
think that there was some strange matter like to follow, which might enforce
him to such an unusual course, therefore he entreated him to accept of the
whole passage, as it should have been spoken verbatim out of the original Copy.

And the whole passage I shall here transcribe, as being that which may at
least gratify the curiosity, if not inform the judgment of the Reader. Such
also should the correspondence and affections be between the Members and
particular Assemblies of the Church Militant* all which, though many and of
different natures, make but one Body in the whole; and therefore to be so
affected each to other as the bodily members. Now God has so disposed the
members in the body natural, that they should have the same care of one
another; and though they be of several qualities, yet do endeavor the
subsistence of the whole composition, that so there may be no Schism nor
dangerous division in the body of man. An excellent Item unto us, to teach us
our behavior to our Fellow Members in the Church of Christ; that we aim all of
us at Gods glory, and the Churches peace, raising no Schism, nor making any
Division in this blessed body. But we alas! neglect this Item, and hearken not
to those instructions of peace and unity which every member of the Body does
even preach unto us. Men of dull spirits in the Lord, who will not give an ear
to his word and works, when now the very flesh is become a preacher to them.
How comes it else to pass, that in the very Church of Christ there be almost as
many Schisms as Nations; such differences not alone in points of Doctrine, but
also in the Forms of our Devotions? The Christian Church divided into the
Eastern and Western: the Western into Popish and Protestant: the Protestant
into the Lutheran and Zuinglian: the Zuinglian into Calvinist and Remonstant.
Not to say any thing of any other Sects, or Subdivisions into the same Sects,
more dangerous though not so notable. And how comes this to pass, but that
forgetting that we make together one Body only, we would have every member be a
several Body, and thereby make our Savior Christ more monstrous than the Giant
Gerion, and not to have three Bodies only, but three hundred thousand.

That so it is, who knows not that knows any thing? But why it should be so we
must ask our selves. Is it not that we are so affected with our own Opinions,
that we condemn whoever shall opine the contrary? And so far wedded to our own
wills, that when we have espoused a Quarrel, neither the Love of God, nor the
God of Love shall divorce us from it? Instead of hearkening to the voice of the
Church, every man hearkens to himself, and cares not if the whole miscarry so
that himself may bravely carry out his own devices. Upon which stubborn height
of pride, what quarrels have been raised! What Schisms in every corner of this
our Church! (to enquire no further) some rather putting all into open tumult,
than that they would conform to a lawful Government derived from Christ and his
Apostles to these very times. At these words the Bishop knocked with his Staff
on the Pulpit.
Others combining into close and dangerous Factions, because some points of
Speculative Divinity are otherwise maintained than they would have them. All so
regardless of the common peace, that rather than be quiet, we will quarrel with
our Blessed Peacemaker for seeking to compose the differences, though to the
prejudice of neither party. Thus do we foolishly divide our Savior, and rent
his Sacred Body on the least occasion; vainly conceiving that a difference in
point of Judgment must needs draw after it a dis-jointing of the affection
also, and that conclude at last in an open Schism. Whereas diversity of
Opinions if wisely managed, would rather tend to the discovery of the Truth,
than the disturbance of the Church; and rather whet our Industry than excite
our Passions. It was S. Cyprian's Resolution, Neminem, licet aliter senserit, a
communione amovere; not to suspend any from the Churches Communion; although
the matter then debated was (as I take it) of more weight than any of the
points now controverted. Which moderation, if the present age had attained
unto, we had not then so often torn the Church in pieces, nor by our frequent
broils offered that injury and inhumanity to our Saviors Body, which was not
offered to his Garments by those that Crucified him.

These were the feuds that passed between these two Clergymen; and it is worthy
of remark, that although both of them were at so wide a distance in the
prosperous condition of the Church, yet there was a closure made when the heavy
storm fell upon it. For a motion being offered by Dr. Newel, but coming
originally from the Bishop of Lincoln, Dr. Heylyn, with the privity and consent
of the Archbishop paid the respects of a Visit to his Lordship at his Lodging
in Westminster, where he met rather* with a ceremonious than a kind Reception.
A short Recapitulation there was made of some past differences between them,
and a proposal for atonement of all faults, viz. the calling in of the
Antidotum Lincolniense, and that too by the Kings command. Unto which our
Doctor answered, That it was Writ and Published by the Kings Command, and
therefore it was improbable that he would call it in; however he would try all
possible ways to give his Lordship satisfaction; and then presented to him his
Papers about the Peerage of Bishops, which he then read over and approved.
After this there was no more meeting between them, till about a year following
the Doctor gave his Lordship a Visit in the Tower, which he received so kindly,
that for ever after a fair correspondence passed interchangeably between them.

And the passage in the Sermon had as kindly an effect upon the Committee, as
his Visit had upon the Bishop. For he found those fierce Gentlemen, after the
perusal of his Notes, much more favorable and respective than before. They
demanded a Copy of the Charge which he drew up against Mr. Pryn, which being
delivered, Mr. Pryn accused him of Libelling and Preaching against him; for
proof of which he produced in Court some of the Doctor's Books, urging many
passages out of them; but all concluded nothing. That which was at last most
insisted on was a Sermon Preached some years before Mr. Pryn's Censure in the
Star Chamber before his Majesty. but the sense of his past dangers before the
Committee was in some measure recompensed by this days mirth and jollity. For
Mr. Pryn resolving effectually to damnifie the Doctor, produced a company of
Butchers to bring in Evidence against him about a Sermon formerly Preached by
him. And after the Testimony of these great Critics had been managed to the
best advantage of Raillery and Mirth, the Criminal was favorably dismissed and
never more called before them. It Is true, many attempts were made to create him
new Disturbances, some being employed to make a severe inquisition into his
Life and Manners, which they found too spotless for their spleen and malice.
Others engaged his Neighbors at Alresford to draw up Articles against him;
which was accordingly done by two of them, and few others of the most
inconsiderable Inhabitants; who were prevailed on to make their Marks (for
Write they could not) by telling them it was a business, in which the Town were
very much concerned. But when the Articles were produced before the Committee,
they appeared so foolish and frivolous, as not to be deemed worthy of
consideration, and upon that were returned to be amended upon a Melius
Inquirendum: and this being done in a more correct and enlarged Edition, they
were again returned to the Committee, and a set day was appointed for a
Hearing: And that being come, the Complaint was put off sine die, and a Copy of
the Articles delivered to the person accused, together with those newly put in
against him by Mr. Pryn, collected out of his Printed Books. But the poor
Doctor being quite tired with Business and Attendance, obtained leave of the
Chairman to retire into the Country, who freely promised to send a private
Messenger to him, if there were any occasion for his return. Upon which he
removed his Study to Alresford, setting his House for no more than 3 l. a year,
with a purpose never more to come back to Westminster, whilst those two
incomparable Friends remained in it, viz. the House of Commons, and Bishop of
Lincoln. At his coming to Alresford the people were amazed to see him, having
been persuaded that they should never more fix eye on him, unless they took a
journey to a Goal or a Gallows.

About this time it was that Doctor Hacwel taking advantage of the innumerable
troubles and enemies of this learned man, published a book against him
concerning the Sacrifice of the Eucharist. It was not without some difficulty
that he obtained one of them to be sent to him in the Country, where he wrote a
speedy Answer to it. But Dr. Hackwel's Friends thought fit to call in the Book,
so soon as it first came into light, and then our Doctor was easily persuaded
to suppress his Answer, diverting his Studies to more pleasing and no less
necessary subjects, viz. The History of Episcopacy, and the History of
Liturgies. The first was Printed presently after it was written, and Presented
to the King by Mr. Secretary Nicholas, and Published under the name of
Theophilus Churchman; but the other, although sent to London, and received by
the Bookseller, was not Printed till some years after.

For now there was more employment found out for the Sword than the Pen, the
noise of Bellona and Mars silencing the Laws of God and Men; and Christians
conceiving it their duty rath^r to spill the Blood of their Countrymen for
Religion, than to part with one drop out of their own veins, and to plunder the
Goods of their Neighbors than to endure the spoiling of their own. Sir Will.
Waller sent eighty of his Soldiers to be quartered at the Doctors house, with
full Commission to strip him naked of all he had: But his fair and affable
carriage toward them did so mollify the Austerity of their natures, that they
quite dismissed all thoughts of violence and revenge: So were Esau's bloody
resolutions quite converted into kindness and respect by the humble deportment
as well as noble presents that were made to him by his Brother Jacob. But
notwithstanding the Diversion of this storm, the Reverend man was early the
next morning brought before Sir William by his Provost-Marshal; by whom he was
told that he had received Commands from the Parliament to seize upon him, and
send him Prisoner unto Portsmouth. The Doctor had the like privilege with St.
Paul, being permitted to plead for himself, and by his powerful reasoning did
so far prevail upon the General, as to be dismissed back to his house in
safety. But prudently foreseeing that this would only be a Reprieve till a
further mischief, within a few days he left Hampshire and went to Oxon; where
he no sooner arrived, but he received his Majesty's Commands by the Clerk of
his Closet to address himself to Mr. Secretary Nicholas, from whom he was to
take directions for some special and important Service; which was at last
signified to Dr. Heylyn under the Kings own hand, viz. to write the Weekly
Occurrences which befell his Majesty's Government and Armies in the unnatural
War that was raised against him. The Reverend Man was hugely unwilling to
undertake the employment, conceiving it not only somewhat disagreeable to the
Dignity and Profession that he had in the Church, and directly thwarting his
former Studies and Contemplations; but that by a faithful discharge of his Duty
in that Service, he should expose both his Family and himself to the implacable
malice of those persons, whose very mercies were Cruelty and Blood. But no
Arguments or Intercessions could prevail to have him excused from that
Employment, at least for some time, till he had made it facile by his own
diligence and example. Neither were dangers or difficulties of any moment with
him, when the Service of his Prince and Master required his Labors and
Assistance. Tacit. in Vit. lul. Agr.
Discere a peritis, sequi optimos, nihil appetere ob jactationem, nihil ob
formidinem recusare, simulque anxius and intentus agere, is a Character as
truly applicable to Dr. Heylyn, as to the brave Roman of whom it was first
written. For he desired no employment out of vainglory, and refused none out
of fear, but equally was careful and intent in whatever he undertook; and at
that time too, when he was denied the poor Deanery of Chichester, for which his
Majesty was earnestly importuned in his behalf by Mr. Secretary Nicholas. The
Weekly Occurrences that were wrote by him, he called by the name of Mercurius
Anglicus; which name continued as long as the Cause did for which it was
written. And besides these weekly Tasks, being influenced by the same Royal
Commands, he writ diverse other Treatises, before he could obtain his Quietus
est from that ungrateful Employment, viz. 1. A Relation of the Lord Hopton' s
Victory at Bodwin. 2. A View of the Proceedings in the West for Pacification.
3. A Letter to a Gentleman in Leicestershire about the Treaty. 4. A Relation of
the Queens Return from Holland, and the seizing of Newark. 5. A Relation of the
Proceedings of Sir John Gell. 6. The Black Cross, showing that the Londoners
were the cause of the present Rebellion, with some others that were never
Printed.

These zealous services produced the very same effect, that he foresaw when he
first undertook them. For in the space of six months, he was voted a Delinquent
in the House of Commons; this being given for a reason, viz. that he resided
and lived at Oxon. Upon which, an Order was sent to the Committee at Portsmouth
to Sequester his whole Estate and seize upon all his Goods. And Reading being
taken by the Earl of Essex, a free and easy passage was opened for the
Execution of those unrighteous Decrees. For in a short space after, his Corn,
Cattle and Money were taken by one Captain Watts, and all his Books carried to
Portsmouth. Colonel Norton's hand being set to the Warrant of his
Sequestration, he twice Petitioned to have some Reparation out of his Estate;
but was denied the first time, and put off in a more Courtly manner the last.
Before he left Alresford, he took care to hide some of his choicest and most
costly Goods, designing the first opportunity to have them conveyed to Oxon.
But either by ill luck, or the treachery and baseness of some of his
Neighbors, the Cart with all the Goods were taken by part of Nortons Horse,
and carried to Portsmouth; himself also violently pursued, and by Divine
Providence delivered from the snare of those Fowlers, who thirsted after his
Blood and lay in wait for his Life. The Cart with all contained in it was
carried to Southampton, and delivered unto Norton (Saintship then being the
ground of Propriety, as it afterward was of Sovereignty.) A loss great in it
self, but much more so to a poor Divine; and chiefly to be ascribed to a
Colonel in the King's Army, who denied to send a Convoy of Horse for the
guarding of his Goods, although the Marquess of Newcastle gave Order for it.
And these Oppressions which he suffered from his Enemies were increased by as
unjust proceedings of those who ought to have been his Friends. For part of the
Royal Army defaced his Parsonage-House at Alresford, making it unhabitable and
taking up all the Tithes; for which he never had the least satisfaction, unless
it was the Manumission of himself from the troublesome Employment under Mr.
Secretary Nicholas, and at his going off, at the request of that worthy
Gentleman, he writ a little Book called The Rebels Catechism.

Being thus dismissed from business so disagreeable to his Genius, he found
leisure to employ his Contemplative thoughts about subjects more weighty and
serious. And having obeyed the Commands of his Superiors, he endeavored to
satisfy the doubts of his Friends; and particularly of one whose thoughts were
confusedly perplexed about our Reformation. And to do this, he drew up a
Discourse in answer to that common but groundless Calumny of the Papists, who
brand the Religion of our Church with the nickname of that which is
Parliamentary. But our Reverend Doctor Demonstrates in that Book how little, or
indeed nothing the Parliament acted in the Reformation. For some years indeed
that are past, there have been Parliaments that have had a Committee for
Religion, which is to have an Apostolical care of all the Churches. And our
Reverend Doctor observes that this custom was first introduced into the House
of Commons, when the Divinity-School in Oxon was made the Seat of their
Debates. For the Speaker being placed in or near the Chair in which the Kings
Professor of Divinity did usually read his public Lectures and moderate in
Observations on the History of the Reign of K. Charles, 34.
all public Disputations, they were put into a conceit, that the determining
in all Points and Controversies in Divinity did belong to them. As Vibius Rufus
having married Tullies Widow, and bought Caesar's Chair, conceived that he was
then in a way to gain the Eloquence of the one, and the Power of the other.
For, after this we find no Parliament without a Committee for Religion, and no
Committee for Religion but what did ^h^nk it self sufficiently instructed to
manage* the greatest Controversies in Divinity which were brought before them:
And with what success to the Religion here by Law Established, we have seen too
clearly. -- Tractent fabrilia fabri. Let things of a spiritual nature in the
name of God be debated and determined by Spiritual persons. Doctrinal matters
are proper for the cognizance of a Convocation* not of a Committee; which does
often consist of wise men, but the common Title given to Committee of
Affections.
some of them, does at least prove that those wise men are not always either
the best Christians or greatest Clerks.

Neither were these things the only Subjects of the vast mind and contemplative
^ thoughts of this great man. For toward the latter end of this year (being
1644.) he Presented to his Majesty a Paper containing the Heads of a Discourse
writ by him, called, The Stumbling Block of Disobedience removed -- in answer
to and examination of the two last Sections in Mr. Calvin's Institutions,
against Sovereign Monarchy. The Lord Hatton, the Bishop of Sarum, Sir Orlando
Bridgman, and Dr. Steward perused the whole Treatise, and the King approving of
the Contents, commanded the Lord Digby further to consider the Book, in whose
hands it did for a long time rest; neither was it made public till about ten
years after the War was ended.

In the beginning of the year 1645. he left Oxon, and went into Hampshire,
settling himself and Family at Winchester; Alresford with all the rest of his
Preferments being taken from him, and having nothing to subsist upon besides
his own Temporal Estate. And yet even now the exuberancy of an honest zeal
(that I may use his own words though upon another occasion) carried him rather
to the maintenance of his Brethrens and the Churches Cause, than to the
preservation of his own peace and particular contentments. And therefore
considering unto what a deplorable condition the poor Loyal Clergy were
reduced, how they were hungry and thirsty, and their souls ready to faint in
them; as also how the Parliament were about to establish those Presbyterian
Ministers for term of life in those Livings, out of which himself and many
others were ejected, he drew up some Considerations, and presented them to some
Members of the House of Commons, to see whether he could move them to any
Christian Charity and Compassion. And they are so clear and convincing, that
they would have prevailed upon any, but those that were made up all of Guts,
but no Bowels. They are these that follow.

1. The Clergy which were sequastrated in the time of the Long Parliament, were
charged for the most part with no other Crime, than their adhaesion to the late
King in the long course of his Troubles; which many of them did in gratitude
for Preferments received; others in relation to their services and personal
Duties; and all as I conceive out of conscience of that Loyalty and Allegiance,
in which by their several Oaths and Subscriptions they were bound to him.

2. Sequestration is in Law no other than a suspension a Beneficio, depriving a
man only of the profits, not of the rights of his Incumbency; nor leaving him
in an incapacity in returning to those profits again, upon the taking off of
the Sequestration, or Suspension, which in the intendment of the Law is
reckoned only for a temporary, no perpetual punishment.

3. The persons put into those Benefices have been ever since looked upon but
as Curates, not as Proprietaries of those Livings; and in the wisdom of the
Parliament were considered but as Tenants at will, or quamdiu been se gesserint
at the best: the power of presenting to those Livings upon the death or
deprivation of the right Incumbent, being left wholly to the Patron, as by Law
it ought; which kept those Ministers (for the most part Presbyterian) in a
continual obnoxiousness to the Commands and Will of that Parliament, to which
they were very useful on all occasions.

4. The Bill now brought into the House for settling those new Ministers for
term of life, has many things which seem worthy of consideration, as carrying
in it many disadvantages to parties interessed therein, and something
prejudicial to the public peace: For,

1. It deprives the right Patron of his lawful power of nominating to those
Livings, descended to him from his Ancestors, or purchased by his money; and
consequently settled on him in as strong a way, as the established Laws of the
Land could confirm the same.

2. It destroys many a learned, peaceable and Religious man without hope of
remedy; but serves withal for a great justification of their Innocence, when
for want of Crime to proceed upon, and legality in their conviction, the power
of the legislative Sword is fain to be made use of to effect the business.

3. It subverts those ends for which those men were first put into their
Livings; who being settled in the same for term of life by Act of Parliament,
and following the impetuosity of their own spirits, will be apt when time and
opportunity serves, to let fly all their fury at the present Government, as
they did formerly at the other in the late Kings Reign. And though it be
conceived by some, that the Ordinance for ejecting scandalous Ministers will be
curb sufficient to hold them in, yet I find no such thing as turbulent and
factious Preachings to be specified amongst the scandals which are therein
enumerated.

5. Whereas it is intended that the Minister thus deprived shall have a Fifth
part of the Profits of the Living, if he be not otherwise provided of some
temporal means sufficient to maintain himself and Family, I conceive with all
submission to better Judgments, that the said limitation will be occasion of
much trouble to the men deprived, if it does not quite overthrow the benefit
intended to them; that being a sufficient means for one man which is not for
another, with reference to their Degrees, Families and ways of Living: whereas
to these new-comers-in the profits of the Living will be always certainly
sufficient with an Overplus, if we measure by that Standard wherewith they
make others; it being no unusual thing in some of that Party to tell the
sequestered Clergy, when they sued for their Fifths, That it was sufficient for
them to be suffered to live. And then assuredly -- Populo satis est Fluviusque
Ceresque. It will be accounted a high degree of sufficiency (if not of
superfluity rather) that they have wherewithal to buy themselves a morsel of
Bread and a cup of cold Water.

And accordingly as this Reverend Person foretold, so it came to pass. For when
the Presbyterian Intruders were settled in the Benefices of the Sequestered
Clergy for term of life, although the Commissioners for Rejecting of Scandalous
Ministers had power to grant a Fifth part, together with the Arrears thereof to
the Ejected Clergy, yet the Bill was clogged with two such circumstances, as
made it unuseful to some and but a little beneficial to the rest. For first it
was ordered that no man should receive any benefit by the Bill, who had either
30 l. per ann. in Real, or 500 l. in Personal Estate: By means whereof many who
had formerly 500 l. yearly to maintain their Families, were tied up to so poor
a pittance, as would hardly keep their Children from begging in the open
Streets. And 2dly. There was such a power given to the Commissioners, that not
exceeding the Fifth part, they might give to the poor Sequestered Clergy as much
and as little as they pleased, under that proportion. And the Exam. Hist. p.
111.
Doctor instances in one of his certain knowledge, who for an Arrear of 12 years
out of a Benefice Rented formerly for 250 l, per ann. obtained but 3 l. 6 s. 8
d. (the first Intruder being then alive and possessed of the Benefice) and no
more than 20 Marks per ann. for his future subsistence; which is but a
Nineteenth part instead of a Fifth.

Not long after which Oppressions, the Intruders themselves were in as imminent
danger to be divested of all their maintenance, as the Loyal Clergy, who had
suffered the utmost extremity of Cruelty and Injustice. For Tithes being
represented as a Public Grievance in the Rump-Parliament, the Gentry were in a
fair way to be deprived of their Impropriations, and the Presbyterians
themselves of their Patrimony. And although our Reverend Doctor paid Tithes
himself, and therefore had no Obligations to appear in the defense of them for
private Ends or Interests, yet for the upholding of the common Christianity and
some kind of standing Ministry in the Nation, he endeavored in a modest and
rational way the undeceiving of the people in that particular. For whereas it
was objected

1. That the maintenance allowed the Clergy was too great for their Calling; He
showed that never any Clergy in the Church of God has been, or is maintained
with less charge to the Subject, than the Established Clergy of the Church of
England.

2. Whereas it was objected that their Maintenance was made up out of the Tenth
part of each man's estate; He demonstrated, That there is no man in the Realm of
England, who pays any thing of his own toward the Maintenance of his
Parish-Minister, but his Easter-Offerings.

3. Whereas it is suggested, That the changing of this way by the payment of
Tithes into Stipends, wou^d be more grateful to the Country, and more ease to
the Clergy; He proved, That the changing of Tithes into Stipends would bring
greater trouble to the Clergy, than is yet considered, and far less profit to
the Country, than was then pretended. So zealous was this excellent person, not
only for his Friends and Fellow Sufferers, viz. the poor oppressed and ejected
Clergy; but for his very enemies the Intruders, that had Preached the King out
of his Life, and himself and Brethren out of all their Livelihoods and
Preferments. And at that time too his zeal appeared, when he was by a small
temporal Estate incapacitated to receive the least benefit by any Act of Mercy
that could accrue to him by his labors in that particular: Nay had the project
of removing Hirelings out of the Church (as it was then phrased) taken effect,
Doctor Heylyn's Estate would have received considerable improvements and
advantages. For which he was fain to compound with the Committee Men in
Goldsmiths-Hall in the year 1645. But he has left no memorial of what he paid
to those insatiable Leeches and Oppressors. However he sped well, as the case
stood with him. For being (as was before observed) voted a Delinquent, the
Parliament marked him out for an Oblation, resolving, that whenever they could
get Heylyn into their snares, who had been an instrument of so much mischief to
them, his Blood should appease their Fury, and expiate his own Guilts. But
being at the Siege at Oxon, he shared with the Royallists in the common benefit
of those Articles, that were made at the surrender of that City; and by that
means saved his Life, as well as his Estate.

Anno Dom. 1648. he settled himself and Family at Minster-Lovel in Oxfordshire.
And although he had lost his Library (which for choiceness of Authors was
inferior to few Clergy-mens in England) and therefore might well be deemed
unfit to write Books for others, when he was robbed of his own; yet he would
not permit his own private Oeconomicks to swallow up his precious minutes, but
endeavored to benefit his Country, and to divert his mind from the sad
complexion of the times, by enlarging his Geography into a Cosmography; which
as it now remains perfected by him, may be truly averred to be a Repository of
as much useful and delightful Learning, as any published either in that
present, or in preceding Ages. It is true many material Errors were justly
charged upon it, when it was a Geography, but his own Apology is more powerful
than any can be made in his behalf; Preface to the Cosmography.
for being writ in an Age, on which the pride of Youth and Self-opinion might
have some predominancies, I thought it freer from mistakes than since I have
found it: and those mistakes by running through eight Editions (six of them
without my perusal or supervising) so increased and multiplied, that I could no
longer call it mine, or look upon it with any tolerable degree of patience.

If it be said, that as it is now completed by him, he has as well run into new
Errors, as corrected the old ones; it may be so too. For those humane Abilities
are yet to be named, that were in all things governed by an infallible Spirit.
And no man that is not so guided, can plead the privilege of not being liable
to mistakes. But his own words are the most satisfactory answer to this
objection. I must have been a greater Traveller than either the Greek Ulysses,
or the English Mandeville, all Purchase his Pilgrims, Certam. Epist. 369.
many of our late Jesuits and Tom Coriot into the bargain, if in describing of
the whole world, with all the Kingdoms, Provinces, Seas and Isles thereof, I
had not relied more on the Credit of others, than any knowledge of my own. But
if any Gentleman, Merchant, or other Traveller shall please to let me
understand in what those Authors, which I trusted, have misinformed me, let it
be done in jest or earnest, in love or anger, in a fair manner or a foul, with
respect or dis-respect unto me, in what way soever, I shall most thankfully
receive the Instructions from him, and give him the honor of the Reformation,
when that Book shall come out in another Edition. I will neither kick against
those who rub upon such sores as I have about me, nor fling dirt on them who
shall take the pains to bestow a brushing on my Coat. I was trained up, when I
was a Child, to kiss the Rod, and I can do it, I thank God, now I am a man. Cur
nescire pudens pravae quam discere mallem? Rather to be ashamed of mistaking in
any thing I have written, than to learn of any body what I was to write, was
taken by me both for a Rule and a Resolution in the first putting out of my
Geography, and I shall be at the very same pass to the very last.

In the year 1653. he removed to Lacies-Court in Abingdon. For being robbed of
his choicest Companions, his Books; he resolved to fix himself as near as
possibly he could to Oxford; loss of time, together with the charge and trouble
of a Journey, rendering his Visits less frequent to the Bedleian Library, than
would well comport with his condition. For although he was a Living Library, As
Euscapius said of Longinus.
a Locomotive Study, a Scribe fully instructed in the Kingdom of God, a
Householder that could bring out of his Treasury things both new and old, yet
for all that he resolved to continue a laborious Searcher after Wisdom, and
gave his Flesh no rest, that he might entertain his mind with the noblest
Contemplations: neither would he fix his thoughts upon notional and useless
Speculations, but whenever he could by any kind of labor either of Body or
Brain be really serviceable to the just Interests of his Prince or Church, he
refused no pains or expenses, but would undergo (to others) the most
unsupportable burdens, to restifie his zealous affection unto both. One
instance of which is evident in what he contributed to Saint Nicholas Church in
Abingdon, the utter demolishing of which was resolved on by the Sacrilegious
Schismatics of those times.

The then Usurping Powers had by the severest Edicts solemnly interdicted the
Regular Clergy, the discharge of their public Ministry in the sacred Offices
of Religion: Nay they were forbid the teaching and instructing of Youth in all
private houses, though they wanted the necessaries of Humane Life for
themselves and Families. In which sad prospect of Affairs, our Divine built a
private Oratory, where he had frequency of Synaxes; the Liturgy of the Church
being daily read by him, and the Holy Eucharist administered as often as
opportunity gave leave; many devout and well-affected persons, after the manner
of the Primitive Christians when they lived under Heathen persecutions,
resorting to his little Chapel, that there they might wrestle with the
Almighty for his blessing upon themselves, and upon a divided infatuated
people. But in a few years, the rage of the Higher Powers abating, the Liturgy
of the Church began in some places to be publicly read; and Mr. Huish (then
Minister in Abingdon) had a numerous Auditory of Loyal persons, who frequented
public Prayers at St. Nicholas; which became so greatly offensive to the
Factious party, that they labored all they could to have the Church razed to
its very Foundations: But notwithstanding the Authority which then ruled, God
rendered the endeavors of Dr. Heylyn and some other Royallists successful in
the pre^ervation of his own house. And because Mr. Huish either out of a
principle of prudence or fear had for some time whilst those contests
continued. desisted from performing the sacred Offices of Religion, therefore
our Doctor to animate him unto the performance of his Duty, sent him the
following Letter after his return from London, where he had been soliciting in
the common Cause of the Church, which was to have been laid even with the
ground.

SIR,
We are much beholden to you for your cheerful condescending unto our desires,
so for as to the Lords-days Service; which though it be Opus Diei in Die suo,
yet we cannot think our selves to be fully masters of our requests, till you
have yielded to bestow your pains on the other days also. We hope in reasonable
time to alter the condition of Mr. Blackwel's pious Gift, that without
hazzarding the loss of his Donation, which would be an irrecoverable blow unto
this poor Parish, you may sue out your Qu^etus est from that daily Attendance,
unless you find some further motives and inducements to persuade you to it: yet
so to alter it, that there shall be no greater wrong done to his Intentions,
than to most part of he Founders of each University, by changing Prayers for
the Souls first by them intended, into a Commemoration of their Bounties as was
practiced. All dispositions of this kind must vary with those changes which
befall the Church, or else be alienated and estranged to other purposes. I know
it must be some discouragement to you to read to Walls, or to pray in public
with so thin a company, as hardly will amount to a Congregation: But withal I
desire you to consider, that magis and minus, all Logicians say, do not change
the Species of things; that Quantities of themselves are of little efficacy (if
at all of any) and that he who promised to be in the midst of two or three when
they meet together in his name, has clearly showed, that even the smallest
Congregations shall not want his presence. And why then should we think much to
bestow our pains where he vouchsafes his presence? or think our labor ill
bestowed, if some few only do partake of the present benefit? And yet no doubt
the benefit extends to more than the parties present: For you know well that
the Priest or Minister is not only to pray with, but for the people; that he is
not only to offer up the peoples Prayers to Almighty God, but to offer up his
own Prayers for them; the benefit whereof may charitably be presumed to extend
to, as well as it was intended for, the absent also. And if a whole Nation may
be represented in a Parliament of 400 persons, and they derive the Blessings of
Peace and Comfort upon all the Land, why may we not conceive that God will look
on three or four of this little Parish, as the Representative of the whole, and
for their sakes extend his Grace and Blessings unto all the rest; that he who
would have saved that sinful City of Sodom, had he found but ten righteous
persons in it, may not vouchsafe to bless a less sinful people upon the Prayers
of a like or less number of Pious and Religious persons. When the High Priest
went into the Sanctum Sanctorum to make Atonement for the Sins of the People,
went he not thither by himself? none of the people being suffered to enter into
that place. Do not we read, that when Zacharias offered up Incense, which
figured the Prayers of the Saints within the Temple, the people waited all that
while in the outward Courts? Or find we any where that the Priest, who offered
up the daily Sacrifice (and this comes nearest to our Case) did ever intermit
that Office by reason of the slackness or indevotion of the people in repairing
to it? But you will say There is a Lion in the way, there is danger in it.
Assuredly I hope none at all; or if any, none that you would care for. The
Sword of the Committee had as sharp an edg, and was managed with as strong a
malice, as any Ordinance of later Date can empower men with. Having so
fortunately escaped the danger of that. why should you think of any thing but
despising this? as Tully did unto Mark Antonie, Catilinae Gladios contempsi,
non timebo tuos. Why may you not conclude with David in the like sense and
apprehensions of Gods preservation, that he who saved him from the Bear and the
Lion, would also save him from the Sword of that railing Philistine. And you
may see that the Divine Providence is still awake over that poor Remnant of the
Regular and Orthodox Clergy, which have not yet bowed their knees to the Golden
Calves of late erected, by putting so unexpectedly a hook into the nostrils of
those Leviathans which threatened with an open mouth to devour them all. I will
not say as Clemens of Alexandria did in a case much like that, it is (...), to
indulge too much to apprehensions of this nature in matters which relate to
Gods public Service. All I shall add is briefly this, that having presented
you with these Considerations, I shall with greediness expect the sounding of
the Bell to morrow morning; and in the mean time make my Prayers to Almighty
God so to direct you in this business, as may be most for his Glory, your own
particular Comfort, and the good of this people: with which expressions of my
Soul, I subscribe my self,

Your most affectionate Friend and Brother in Christ Jesus Peter Heylyn.


Upon the receipt and reading of this Letter, Mr. Huish betook himself to his
wonted duty, reading the Churches Prayers with that frequency, gravity and
devotion as became a man of his Reverence and Profession.

And the daily visits which were paid by our Doctor to the place of Gods
public Worship, the better enabled him as well to undergo the severity of
Study, as to contend with the hardships of Fortune. And amongst the products of
his Studies, the Theologia Veterum or Exposition of the Apostles Creed does
first merit our Commendations. Indeed many other Books were written by him,
when the King and Church were in their low and calamitous condition; some of
which were Historical relating to matters of Fact; some Political, relating to
the power of Princes and various Forms of Government; and lastly others
Theological; and those either Didactical, tending to the settling and informing
of men's understandings; or Practical, that conduced to the amending of their
manners; or Polemical, that vindicated the Truths of God and Unity of his
Church against the Errors, Schisms and Persecutions of its Enemies, whether
Papists, Socinians, or Disciplinarians. His Book upon the Creed is a mixture of
all these excellent Ingredients; insomuch that whoever would be acquainted with
the Sense of the Greek and Latin Fathers upon the Twelve Articles of our
Faith, as also with Positive, Polemical and Philological Theology, he will not
find either his labor lost, or his time mispended, if he peruse what our
learned Doctor has writ upon that Subject.

But neither Learning or Innocence are a sufficient safeguard against the
assaults of mischievous and malicious men; many of whom combined together to
render Dr. Heylyn as infamous in his Name, as they had before made him
improsperous in his Estate And to that purpose they used their utmost
endeavors to have one of his Books burned (called Respondet Petrus) by an
Order from Olivers Council Table. For Dr. N. Bernard Preacher of Gray's Inn
putting out a Book, entitled, The Judgment of the Lord Primate of Ireland,
etc. our Reverend Doctor being therein accused for violating his Subscription
and running cross to the public Doctrine of the Church or England; as also
being taxed with Sophistry, Shamelesness, and some other things which he could
not well endure either from the Dead, or the Living, he returned an Answer to
it, against which, Articles were presently formed and presented to the then
Council Table; and the common Rumor went, that the Book was publicly burnt: A
fame (as the Certam Epist. 100.
Doctor says) that had little truth in it, though more color for it, than many
other charges which had been laid upon him. He was in London, when he received
the first notice of it; and though he was persuaded by his friends to neglect
the matter, as that which would redound to his honor, and knew very well what
Sentence had been passed by Tacitus upon the Order of Senate, or Roman Consul
for burning the Books of Tacit. An. lib. 4.
Cremutius Cordus the Historian, Neque aliud externi Reges, aut qui eadem
saevitia usi sunt, nisi dedecus sibi atque illis gloriam peperere, i. e. they
gained nothing but ignominy to themselves and glory to all those whose Books
they burnt; yet our Doctor was rather in that particular of Sir John Falstaff's
mind, not liking such grinning honor; and therefore rather chose to prevent
the Obloquy, than boast in it. To which purpose he applied himself to the Lord
Mayor of London and a great Man in the Council of State, and receiving from
them a true information of what had passed, he left his Solicitude, being quite
freed from all fear and danger.

About this time it was that the King, Church and Churchmen were arraigned and
traduced by many voluminous Writers of the Age; and the Doctor being solicited
to answer them by Letters, Messages and several personal Addresses, by men of
all Orders and Dignities in the Church, and of all Degrees in the Universities,
was at last overcome by their Importunities; the irresistible Entreaties of so
many Friends having something in them of Commands. And the first Author, whose
Mistakes, Falsities and Defects he examined, was Mr. Thomas Fuller the
Church-Historian, who intermingling his History with some dangerous Positions,
which if reduced into practice, would overthrow the Power of the Church, and
lay a probable Foundation for Disturbances in the Civil-State; the Doctor made
some Animadversions on him by way of Antidote, that so, if possible, he might
be read without danger. Another was Mr. Sanderson's long History of the Life
and Reign of King Charles I. whose errors being of that nature as might
mis-guide the Reader in the way of Knowledge and Discourse, our Doctor rectified
him with some Advertisements, that so he might be read with the greater profit.
It would swell these Papers into too great a bulk, if I should give a
particular account of the Contests that this Reverend man had with Mr.
Harington, Mr. Hickman, and Mr. Baxter; the last of which was so very bold as
to disgorge himself upon the whole Clergy of England Epist. Ded. before Cert.
Epist.
in his Grotian Religion, which caused in our Doctor, (as he tells his Brethren
the old Regular Clergy) So great an horror and amazement, that he could not
tell whether or no he could give any credit to his Senses; the words sounding
loud in his ears and not sinking at first into his heart. Neither Did Mr.
Baxter arraign the whole Clergy in general, but more particularly directed his
Spleen against Dr. Heylyn; whose name he wished afterward he had spared. But
it was whilst he was living; he has made more bold with him since he was dead;
and that for no other reason (that I can learn) but for exposing the Follies,
Falsehoods, and uncharitableness of a daring and rash Writer, who never returned
one word of Answer (besides Railing and Reproaches) unto what our Doctor
Published against him.

And having made mention of these Authors, against whom our excellent Doctor
appeared in the Lists, it may not perhaps be deemed unacceptable to those
Readers who are either unable to buy, or unwilling to read the Books written
against them, to transcribe some particular passages which may be a farther
testification of the zeal of this great Scholar for the King and Church.

And the first (relating to the King) shall be about the Coronation; it being a
piece of new State-Doctrine, that the Coronation Exam. Histor. 201.
of the King should depend upon the consent of the Lords and Commons assembled
in Parliament. For in the Form and Manner of the Coronation of King Edward VI.
described in the Catalogue of Honor, set forth by Thomas Mills of Canterbury,
Anno Dom. 1610, we find it thus: The King being carried by certain Noble
Courtiers in another Chair unto the four sides of the Stage, was by the
Archbishop of Canterbury declared to the people standing round about, both by
Gods and man's Laws to be the Right and Lawful King of England, France and
Ireland, and proclaimed that day to be Crowned, Consecrated and Anointed: unto
whom he demanded, Whether they would Obey and Serve, or not? By whom it was
again with a loud cry answered, God save the King, and ever live his Majesty.
The same we have in substance both in fewer words in the Coronation of King
James; where it is said, The King was showed to the people, and that they were
required to make acknowledgment of their Allegiance to his Majesty by the
Archbishop, which they did with Acclamations. But assuredly (says Dr. Heylyn)
the difference is exceeding vast between Obeying and Consenting; between the
peoples acknowledging their Allegiance, and promising to Obey and Serve their
Lawful Sovereign, and giving their Consent to his Coronation, as if it could
not be performed without it. This makes the King to be either made or unmade by
his people, according to the Maxim of Buchanan, Populo jus est, imperium cui
velit deferat: than which passage there is nothing in all his Books more
pestilent or seditious.

Neither is another Position any less derogatory to Regal Power, viz. That
Parliaments are to be Assistant to the King in the exercise of his Regal
Government. Unto which our excellent Doctor says, That Parliaments or
Common-Councils consisting of the Prelates, Cert. Epist. 243.
Peers and other great men of the Realm were frequently held in the time of the
Saxon Kings, and that the Commons were first called to those great Assemblies
at the Coronation of K. Henry I. to the end that his Succession to the Crown
being approved by the Nobility and People, he might have the better color to
exclude his Brother. And as the Parliament was not instituted by King Henry
III. so was it not instituted by him to become an Assistant to him in the
Government, unless it were from some of the Declarations of the Commons in the
Long Parliament, in which it is frequently affirmed, That the Fundamental
Government of this Realm is by King, Lords and Commons; which if so, then what
became of the government of this Kingdom under Henry III. when he had no such
Assistants joined with him? Or what became of the Foundation in the Intervals
of following Parliaments, when there was neither Lords nor Commons on which the
Government could be laid? And therefore it must be apparently necessary, either
that the Parliaments were not instituted by King Henry III. to be his
Assistants in the Government; or else that for the greatest space of time since
Henry III. the Kingdom has been under no Government at all for want of such
Assistants. And I would fain learn, who should be Judge touching the Fitness or
Unfitness of such Laws and Liberties, by which the People and Nobility are to
be gratified by their Kings: For if the Kings themselves must judge it, it is
not likely that they will part with any of their just Prerogatives, which might
make them less obeyed at home, or less feared abroad, but where invincible
necessity or violent importunity might force them to it. And then the Laws and
Liberties, which were so extorted were either violated or annulled whenever
the Granter was in power to weaken or make void the Grant; for Malus
diuturnitatis Custos est metus. But if the People must be Judges of such Laws
and Liberties as were fittest for them, there would be no end of their Demands,
unreasonable in their own nature and in number infinite. For when they meet
with a King of the Giving hand, they will press him so to give from one point
to another, till he give away Royalty it self; and if they be not satisfied in
all their Askings, they will be pleased with none of his former Grants.

But that which pared the Prerogative to the quick, was, that the Reformation
of Religion was the Province of the People, or that they might do their Duty in
the business when the King omitted his; concerning which our excellent Doctor
delivers his judgment in these clear and convincing words, [ Exam. Hist. 135.]
That Idolatry is to be destroyed by all them that have power to do it, is
easily granted. But then it must be understood of lawful Power, and not
permitted to the liberty of unlawful violence. Id possumus quod jure possumus,
was the Rule of old, and it has held good in all attempts for Reformation in
the elder times. For when the Fabric of the Jewish Church was out of order,
and the whole Worship of the Lord either defiled with Superstitions, or
intermingled with Idolatries, as it was too often; did not Gods Servants tarry
and wait for leisure, till those who were Supreme both in Place and Power, were
by him prompted and inflamed to a Reformation? How many years had that whole
People made an Idol of the Brazen-Serpent and burnt Incense to it, before it
was defaced by Hezekiah? How many more might it have stood longer undefac'd,
untouched by any of the common People, had not the King given order to demolish
it? How many years had the seduced Israelites adored before the Altar at
Bethel, before it was hewn down and cut in pieces by the good Josiah? And yet
it cannot be denied but that it was much in the power of the Jews to destroy
that Idol, and of the honest and Religious Israelites to break down that Altar,
as it either was or could be in the power of our English Zealots to beat down
Superstitious Pictures and Images, had they been so minded. Solomon in the Book
of Canticles compares the Church to an Army, Acies castrorum ordinata, as the
Vulgar has it; An Army terrible with Banners, as we read it: A powerful Body
without doubt, able which way soever it moves to wast and destroy the Country,
to burn and sack the Villages through which it passes. And questionless many of
the Soldiers knowing their own Power, would be apt to do it, if not restrained
by the Authority of their Commanders and the Laws Tacit. Hist. l. 1.
of War. Ita se ducum Authoritas, sic gor disciplinae habet, as we find in
Tacitus. And if those be not kept as they ought to be, Confusi equites
peditesque in exitium ruunt; the whole runs to a swift destruction. Thus it is
also in the Church with the Camp of God; If there be no subordination in it, if
every one might do what he list himself, and make such uses of that power and
opportunity as he thinks are put into his hands* what a confusion would ensue?
how speedy a calamity must needs fall upon it? Courage and zeal do never show
more zealously in inferior powers, than when they are subordinate unto good
Directions, from the right hand, i. e. from the Supreme Magistrate, not from
the interests and passions of their Fellow Subjects. It is the Princes Office
to Command, and theirs to execute; with which wise Caution the Emperor Otho
once represt the too great forwardness of his Soldiers, when he found them apt
enough to make use of that power in a matter not commanded by him. Vobis Tacit.
Hist. l. 1.
arma and animus, mihi Concilium and virtutis vestrae Regimen relinquite, as
his words are. He understood their Duty and his own Authority; allows them to
have power and will, but regulates and restrains them both unto his own
Command. So that whether we behold the Church in its own condition, proceeding
by the starrant and examples of Holy Scripture; or in resemblance to an Army
(as compared by Solomon) there will be nothing left to the power of the people
either in way of Reformamation or Execution, till they be vested and entrusted
with some lawful Power derived from him, whom God has placed in Authority over
them. And therefore though Idolatry be to be destroyed, and to be destroyed by
all which have Power to do it, yet must all those be furnished with a lawful
Power, or otherwise stand guilty of as high a Crime, as that which they so
zealously endeavor to condemn in others. And if it be urged, That the
Sovereign forgetting his Duty, the Subjects should remember theirs; it is a
lesson which was never taught in the Book of God. For beside the examples which
we have in demolishing the Brazen-Serpent and the Altar of Bethel, not acted by
the Power of the People, but by the Command of the Prince, I would fain know
where we shall find in the whole course and current of Holy Scriptures, that
the common people in and by their own Authority, removed the High Places, and
destroyed Images, or cut down the Groves, those excellent Instruments of
Superstition and Idolatry; or that they did attempt any such thing till
warranted and commissionated by the Supreme Powers? Where shall we find that
any of the seventy thousand persons, which had not bowed the knee to Baal, did
go about to destroy that Idol? or that Elijah or Elisha (two men as
extraordinary for their Calling, as for their Zeal and Courage) did excite them
to it? Where shall we find the Primitive Christians, when living under the
command of Heathenish Emperors, busied in destroying Idols, or defacing the
Temples of those gods, whom the Pagans worshipped, though grown in those times
unto those infinite multitudes, that they filled all places of the Empire, Et
vestra omnia implevimus, Cities, Castles, Buroughs, your places of Assembly,
Camps, Tribes, Palaces, yea the very Senate and common Forum, as Tertullian
pleads. No other Doctrine preached or heard of, till either the new Gospel of
Wickliff, or the new Lights shining from Geneva.

These, with many more if it were safe to insert them in these Papers, were the
Doctrines which this Reverend man taught when there was no King in our English
Israel. He did not only rescue the actions of his Sovereigns Life and Reign
from those CaCalumnies and Mistakes which were obtruded on him by malicious or
inobservant Writers; but he took care that what he writ should be beneficial to
Regal Government, and that those his Countrymen who had any share of guilt in
the unnatural Rebel^ion might be induced to a hearty Contrition and
Reformation. And this he did too in those days of Libertinism and Danger, when
he could expect nothing for his pains, but Death mingled with all the
ingredients of Cruelty and Torment. Suffice it to acquaint the Reader that Dr.
Bates imparted to his judicious perusal his Elenchus Motuum, (a secret of that
weight and importance that it ought only to be lodged in so faithful and loyal
a Breast) upon which he made many Considerations, that very much tended to the
honor of the King and Church, as well as of that loyal Physician and Historian.
And which is not unworthy of remark; in whatever he Writ or Preached either
before or afther the Murder of his Royal Master, he took care in asserting the
Prerogative and Rights of the Crown, not to entrench the least upon the
Liberties and Privileges of the People. For thus he himself acquaints us, [
Cert. Epist. 326.] If any were faulty in this kind, viz. in maintaining that
all the Goods of the Subject were at the Kings absolute disposal, let them
speak for themselves; neither my Tongue nor Pen shall ever be employed in their
behalf: Certain I am, that I am free enough from the Accusation; my nearest
kindred being persons of too fair a Fortune to be betrayed by one of their own
Blood to a loss of that property, which they have by Law in their Estates. And
no less certain am I, that no flattery or time-serving, no preaching up of the
Kings Prerogative, nor derogating from the property of the English Subject,
could be found in any of my Sermons before his Majesty, had they been sifted to
the very Bran. In confidence whereof, I offered the Committee of the Courts of
Justice (before whom I was called on the Complaint of Mr. Pryn) to put into
their hands all the Sermons which I had either Preached at Court of in
Westminster-Abby, to the end they might see how free and innocent I was from
broaching any such new Doctrines, as might not be good Parliament-Proof,
whenever they should come to be examined.

Nor was the courage of our Doctor for the Church, less active and vigorous,
than for the King. For whenever its Doctrine, of Discipline; its Ministry, or
Government; its Liturgy, or Ceremonies; its Offices, or Revenues were assaulted
by Tongue or Pen, its enemies were in a short space of time made acquainted
with their Malice or Mistakes. For he encountered the Errors and Heresies, the
Schisms and Sacrileges, the Disloyalties and Rebellions of the Age with no less
zeal than St. Paul did the gross Idolatries and Superstitions of the Athenians.

The Doctrines of the Church he defended against Papists and Calvinists. What
he did against the first will be a sufficient vindication of his sincerity in
the Protestant Religion; a thing not only doubted of, but called in question in
the Long Parliament; before whom he made a large Protestation touching his
soundness in Religion and his averseness from Popery. The Form of his
Protestation I never had communicated to me; but whatever it was, he was then
freed by it from all suspicion of that Crimination in the judgment of all sober
men. He had before set himself right in the opinion of the King and the whole
Court in the Sermons which he Preached upon the Parable of the Tares. For
making the principal points controverted between Us and the Papists the
constant Arguments of his Discourses upon that Subject, his Auditory were so
well satisfied about his integrity in Protestantism, that some of the most
judicious did not stick to say, That Dr. Heylyn had in his Tare-Sermons pulled
up Popery by the Root and subverted the Foundations of it: To which it was
replied by some bitter spirits (whether with more uncharitableness or imprudent
zeal, is hard to say) That the Archbishop might Print and Dr. Heylyn might
Preach what they pleased against Popery, but they should never believe them to
be any thing the less Papists for all that. A censure of a very strange nature,
and so little ^avouring of Christianity, that it is hard to parallel it by any
instance, except it be of the Age we now live in. And so industrious has the
Devil, the great Calumniator and Accuser of Holy men, been to propagate this
Reproach, that some persons, whose Tongues are their own and will admit of no
Lords over them, have visited the very Grave of this Reverend person and like
Vultures preyed upon his body. Amongst whom, the Author of that pestilent
Pamphlet, called An Appeal from the Country to the City, lets fly at him in
these words, Page 6.
Dr. Heylyn has made more Papists by his Books than Christians by his Sermons.
And Dr. Heylyn, though dead, does yet speak for himself to the eternal
confutation of the Calumny, as well as shame of the Calumniator. The present
Dean of St. Paul's has very generously justified the Doctor General Preface to
an Answer of several Treatises.
against T. G. who by all means would have brought him over to his Cause and
Party in the Controversy between them, about the Idolatry of the Roman Church,
quoting a passage out of his fourth Sermon upon the Tares, where he lays to the
charge of the Papists the most gross Idolatry, greater than which, was never
known among the Gentiles. And indeed the whole Volume of those Sermons is
studiously contrived against Popery; and put out on purpose in the last times
of Confusion, by our Doctor, to obstruct the spreading of that Canker of
Christianity. And when he had preached only the two first, some of his
judicious hearers did not stick to declare, That Dr. Heylyn had done more in
two Sermons for the Suppression of Popery, than ever Dr. Pr. had done in all
his life.

But that the Reader may be convinced about the Doctors sincerity in
Protestantism, let it be considered that never any Writer upon the Apostles
Creed did more industriously expose and strenuously confute the Errors of the
Roman Church, than he does in his Treatise upon that Subject; which was put out
also at that time, when he and the exauctorated Clergy (as he calls them) had
all the provocations of want and scorn to have forsaken a persecuted Church and
embraced Popery. He disproves their Preface to Theo. Vet. p. 13.
Traditions: And as for their Idolatry, Theol. Vet. p. 27, 28. Edit. 1.
he speaks in these words, That although they publicly profess but one Sovereign
God, yet the poor Christians in the Roman Church are taught every where to
place their confidence in more local Saints, than ever Heathen-Rome did muster
of its Topical gods. -- And how in a very little time Rome- Christian came to
have more Tutelary Saints and Patrons (and those too of each Sex) than ever
Heathen-Rome should gods, or goddesses. -- Neither is this any studied Calumny,
but so clear a Truth, that it was never yet gainsaid by their greatest
Advocates: so much has Rome relapsed into her ancient Gentilism, revived again
so many of her gods and goddesses, that both Jews and Infidels may have cause
to question, whether she does believe in one God alone, or that he only is the
Almighty Father, whom the Creed mentions. Neither does he stick in generals,
but particularly proves the Popish Idolatries in Ib. 72.
Worshipping Saints and Angels, and employing them as Mediators unto God; in Ib.
152.
adoring the Blessed Virgin, and bestowing those blasphemous Titles of Matter
misericordiae, Matter Gratiae, Regina Caeli, etc. in Ib. 187.
Worshipping the Cross, and the impudence of those Writers that defend it; in
Ib. 418, 419, 420.
the Invocation of Saints, showing how it first came to be introduced in the
Church, together with the unlawfulness and danger of that Doctrine and
practice, from Scripture, Reason and the Fathers; answering the Objections made
by Schoolmen and others for it; proving that that Doctrine, together with that
of Worshippiug of Images is a Fruit of Gentilism; and showing the vanity of
their distinctions; as also upon what ground the device of Purgatory is
obtruded on us, and how it is rejected as well by the whole Greek Church, as by
the ancient Fathers. He 130.
censures the whole herd of Schoolmen, telling how they have entangled the
simplicity of the Christian Faith within the labyrinth of curious and intricate
distinctions, insomuch that it became at last a matter of great wit and
judgment to know what was believed in the things of Christ. He 138.
exposes those impure Blasphemies that the Papists fix upon the Holy Spirit and
Blessed Virgin Mother, unmasking the obscenities of the lazy Monks and Friars,
who fancied themselves to have had unclean commixtures with her: relating the
Bull of Pope L^o 10. that gave Tekelius a Dominican Friar authority to absolve
any man whatsoever, etiamsi virginem matrem vitiaverit, although he had
defloured the Virgin Mother. 152.
Perstringing those that would free her from the contagion of all Venial and
Original Sin; and assert her Virginity so far, as to extend it to the integrity
of her Body as well as purity of her Mind; and 277.
condemning Maldonate for not only making Christ, but God the Father inferior
to her. He 195.
largely disproves the monstrous Paradox of Transubstantiation, which he shows
was hammered in the brains of capricious Schoolmen, 269, 270, 294.
and that the Sacrifice of the Mass is a dangerous deceit and blasphemous Fable
affabulated to Transubstantiation by the Popes of Rome; the Rise and absurd
consequences of which Doctrine he at large illustrates. He is content 292.
to be accounted a Heretic by the Papists, because he will admit of no more
Mediators of Intercession than Christ, who is the Mediator of Redemption. He
294.
confutes the strange Positions of the Trent-Council about the Mass, showing
how absurd it is that a poor Priest should have power to make his Maker; and
having made him with the Breath of his Mouth, he should fall down and Worship
what himself had made: That having worshipped him as God, he should presume to
lay hands upon him, and Offer him in Sacrifice as soon as Worshipped; that his
Oblation once made is efficacious both to Quick and Dead; to the Absent and the
Present; and that such as are present at it, may, if they find their stomachs
serve, devour their God. He 304.
attacks the Papists in the Fundamental of their Religion, viz. That Christ
must have the Pope for his Viceroy to supply his place and absence, and to
govern and direct his Church in Peace and Unity; and he 384.
again re-assumes the Argument and confutes all that Bellarmin and others
produce for it. But then the mischief is, he tells of those, who would 305.
impose upon the Church as many petite Popes as there are Parishes -- by means
whereof they make Christ's Body more monstrous, than the Monster Hydra, not, to
have seven Heads only, but seven hundred thousand -- He takes 332.
Estius to task for making Christ in his Exposition of Mark 13. 32. the Author
of Equivocation. He 359.
confutes Harding for asserting, that the proof of Christ's Deity depended not
upon the Holy Scriptures, but the Tradition of the Church, and the Authority of
some subsequent Councils confirmed by Popes; as if God could not be God, unless
the Pope allowed it. He vindicates 361, 362.
the Greek Church against the uncharitableness of the Roman, and 371, 372.
the Authority and Honor of the Scriptures against the Blasphemies that are
fixed upon them by the Papists; but then as luck would have it, he speaks of
some Reformers, who assert that Preaching viva voce is only able to convert
sinners, and that the Word sermoniz'd, not written, is alone the Food that
nourishes to eternal life; and he proves unanswerably how such men detract more
from its perfection and sufficiency than the Papists. He condemns those who
call Papists by the name of Catholics, professing that he never gave that name
to them either in Writing or common Speech, as thinking it a greater
condemnation to our selves than men are aware of -- And that if we once grant
them to be Catholics, we thereby do conclude our selves to be no Christians.
De not. Eccles. l. 4. c. 4.
Nay he proves out of Bellarmin, how they are delighted with the name of
Papists, and that they have no mind to be called Christians; the name in most
parts of Italy being grown so despicable, that Fool and Christian are become
Synonymous. Since then (says the Doctor) they have no mind to be called
Christians, no reason to be called Catholics, let us call them as they are, by
the name of Papists, considering their dependence on the Popes decisions for
all points of Faith. But then he tells of another Faction that make as ill an
use of the Title Holy, as the Papists do of the name Catholic; that are holy
in the sense of Corah and his Factious Accomplices, who made all the Congregation
holy and all holy alike. He gives also an excellent account of the Presbyterian
and Independent platforms, and 386, 387.
proves against both of them, that the Churches Government is not Democratical,
and against the Papists, that it is not Monarchical, but in the judgment of the
purest Antiquity Aristocratical. In a word, he 397, 398.
shows how both the Eastern and Western Churches opposed the Popes Supremacy,
forced Celibacy of Priests, Transubstantiation, Half-Communion, Purgatory,
Worshipping of Images, and Auricular Confession: Of which last Doctrine, he at
large 457, 458.
states the whole business about it from Bishop Morton, showing how it ought to
be free in regard of Conscience, and possible in regard of Performance. But
then withal he asserts the Efficacy and Power of the Sacerdotal Absolution,
proving it not only Declarative but Authoritative and Judicial; as also the
403, 404.
Right that every National Church has to decree Rites and Ceremonies for the
more orderly officiating in Gods Public Worship, and the procuring of a
greater degree of Reverence to the Holy Sacraments.

In the belief of these Doctrines, this great Scholar lived and died: And with
what confidence can any one rake in his Grave and asperse his Memory, not only
with things which he never opined, but with those which his soul ever abhorred?
But, if there can be any accession to the degrees of Bliss in the other world,
I doubt not but his Rewards are advanced and grow more massy with the
persecutions which his name suffers upon earth. Our Blessed Savior himself was
not out of the reach of malevolent tongues, when his Body was laid in the
Grave, Mat. 27. 63.
being then called a Deceiver by his Murderers. And thrice welcome are those
aspersions and mis-constructions that make us conformable to so glorious a
pattern. Spiteful and inconsiderate men do ever judge rashly of things and
persons, taking a great pleasure to assault the Innocence and undermine the
Reputations of those that are more upright and virtuous than themselves.

But against these things it is commonly said, and as commonly believed, that
some persons, and those too of the most illustrious Quality have been perverted
from the Protestant Faith to Popery, by reading some of Dr. Heylyn's Books, and
particularly his Ecclesia Restaurata, or History of the Reformation. And Dr.
Burnet in the first Volume of his History upon the same Subject, has done all
he can to confirm the world in the belief of that injurious imputation: For
after a short commendation of our Doctors style and method (it being usual with
some men slightly to praise those at first, whom they design to lash more
severely afterward) he presumes to tell his Reader, Dr. Burnet's Preface to the
History of the Reformation, Vol. I.
That either Doctor Heylyn was very ill informed, or very much led by his
Passions; and he being wrought on by most violent prejudices against some that
were concerned in that time, delivers many things in such a manner and so
strangely, that one would think that he had been secretly set on to it by those
of the Church of Rome, tho I doubt not he was a sincere Protestant, but
violently carried away by some particular conceits. In one thing he is not to
be excused, That he never vouched any Authority for what he writ, which is not
to be forgiven any who write of Transactions beyond their own time, and deliver
new things not known before. So that upon what ground he wrote a great deal of
his Book, we can only conjecture; and many in their ghesses are not apt to be
very favorable to him.

This Objection containing many particulars in it, will require as many
distinct Answers in the Vindication of the Doctors Honor and Writings, and more
especially of his History of the Reformation.

And first, if it be true, that any have embraced the Roman Faith by reading of
that Book, we may conclude them very incompetent Judges in matters of Religion,
who will be prevailed on to change it upon the perusal of one single History;
and especially in the Controversies between US and the Papists, which do not so
very much depend upon matters of Fact, or upon an Historical Narration of what
occurrences happened in England, in the Reigns of any of our preceding Princes;
but upon Doctrines of Faith, viz. what we are to believe or dis-believe in
order to our pleasing of God in this life, and our being eternally blessed with
him in the next. Although Iunius and others have by their reading of Holy Writ
found the efficacy of it upon their hearts, and from profligate Atheists have
become Gods faithful Servants; yet the blessed Doctrine of the Bible, has
through the depravation of man's Nature, had a quite contrary efficacy upon
other persons; being just like wholesome meat which administers health and vigor
unto Atheletick and sound Bodies, but infeebles nature and feeds the diseases
of those that are sickly and distempered. Let the History of the Reformation be
never so fatal to unwary and less intelligent Readers, yet it was writ with an
intent to justify the Reformation, Epist. Ded.
and that upon such just and solid Reasons as might sufficiently endear it to
all knowing men, as its Author tells his Majesty. Bonae res neminem
scandalizant nisi malam mentem, says one of the Ancients. Some men have such
inveterate Diseases, that no Physic can do them good; and some Stomachs are so
foul, that Antidotes are turned by them into poison. If any one was ever
unsettled in Protestantism by reading of Ecclesia Restaurata, it was only
accidental; his perversion being to be ascribed either to the ignorance or
weakness of his Judgment, or to the stubbornness of his Will, or some other
evil principle of his Mind. It cannot proceed from any intrinsic evil quality
in that or any other Book of Doctor Heylyns, which abound with unanswerable
Arguments to establish the Discipline and Doctrine of the Church of England
against its professed Enemies of Rome and Geneva. But our Doctors own words
will be a sufficient defense of him unto all equal and unprejudiced Judgments,
In the whole carriage of this work, I have assumed unto my self the freedom of
a just Historian; concealing nothing out of Fear, nor speaking any thing out of
Favor; delivering nothing for a Truth without good Authority; but so
delivering that Truth, as to witness for me, that I am neither biassed by Love
or Hatred, nor overswayed by partiality and corrupt affections, I know it is
impossible in a work of this nature to please all parties, tho I have made it
my endeavor to dissatisfie none, but those that hate to be reformed; or
otherwise are so tenaciously wedded to their own opinion, that neither Reason
nor Authority can divorce them from it. In short, his love to Truth, and
veneration to the Church of England were the only motives that made him
undertake to write that History: The one was the Mistress, which he ever served;
and the other was the Mother, whose Paps he had always sucked, And whoever
dis-regards, or deviates from either of those, may perhaps be offended with
some particular passages in Ecclesia Restaurata.

As for his never vouching Authority f^r what he writ, which is not to be
forgiven him; I hope he has met with a more merciful Judge in another world,
than it seems Dr. Burnet is in this. But who is to pardon Dr. B. for accusing
Dr. Heylyn of violent prejudices against persons, of writing things so
strangely, as if he had been a Factor for the Papists, and yet not specifying
one particular Instance, wherein he was thus partial and perfidious. He began
the writing of that History in September 1638, communicating his design to
Archbishop Laud, from who^ he received all imaginable encouragement. And what
benefit would any Reader receive to have quoted to him the pages of
Manuscripts, Acts of Parliament, Registers of Convocation, old Records and
Charters, orders of Council Table, or other of those rare pieces in the
Cottonian Library, which were made use of in that elaborate History. Had D^.
Heylyn borrowed his materials out of Vulgar or Printed Authors, he ought then
to have vouched particular Authorities for what he writ, but making use of
those which few Scholars either could or had perused, it had been the part of a
Pedant, not of an Historian, to have been exact and particular in his
Quotations. Not to mention either Greek or Latin Historians. Does not Dr. B.
esteem the Lord Bacon's History of Henry VII. to contain as complete and
judicious an account of the Affairs of that Princes Reign, as any thing of that
nature, that is extant in English Story? But the Margent of that Book is not
stust with many more Quotations, than the Doctors Ecclesia Restaurata. And yet
the Lord Bacon writ of Transactions beyond his own time, and lived as far
distant from the Reign of King Henry VII. as Dr. Heylyn did from King Henry
VIII. who laid the first Foundation of our Reformation. For my own part I
cannot with the most diligent search find out any passages in Ecclesia
Restaurata, which evert the great Rule that ought to be observed by all
Historians, viz. Ne quid false audeant, to commit nothing unto Writing which
they know to be false, or cannot justify to be true. History is the Record of
time, by which the Revolutions of Providence are transmitted from one Age unto
another. And if it can be proved that Dr. Heylyn has either suborned Witnesses,
falsified Records, or so wrested Evidence, that posterity cannot make a certain
judgment of those Transactions, of which he undertook to inform his Countrymen,
then it must be confessed that he was led by Passion more than Judgment, and by
violent prejudices more than the substantial evidences of Truth.

And yet if all this were made out, it is no more than what may be laid at the
door of that Author, Hist. D. Ham. p. 29, 30.
who not many years since writ the History of Duke Hamilton; where are reported
the most abominable Scandals, broached by the malicious Covenanteers against
the Hierarchy of the Scottish Church. And the Historian, without the least
contradiction or confutation, permits them to pass for infallible Truths, that
so Posterity as well as the present prejudiced Age might be leavened with an
implacable enmity and hatred against the whole Order of Bishops. And although the
Hamiltons were the old inveterate enemies of the Stuarts; and the Duke, of whom
that large History is compiled, was an enemy as treacherous to K. Charles I. as
any that ever appeared against him in open Arms, drawing the Scots in the
English Court to be his Dependents; alienating their Affections from the King
his Master. Tho wise men of both Nations thought that the first Tumult at
Edinborough was raised by his Instruments, and the Combustions that ensued were
secretly fomented by him: Tho when he was High Commissioner, he drew the King
from one Condescension to another in behalf of the Covenanteers, till he had
little else left to give but his Crown and Life: Tho he drew him first to
suspend and then to suppress the Liturgy and Canons made for the use of the
Scottish Church, and to abrogate the five Articles of Perth, procured with so
much difficulty by K. James, and confirmed by Parliament: Tho he authorized the
Covenant with some few alterations in it, and generally imposed it on that
Kingdom: Tho he yielded to the calling of the Assembly, and was assured by that
means, that the Bishops by the Majority of their Enemies Voices should be
Censured and Excommunicated; that Episcopacy should be abolished, and all the
Regular Clergy exposed to Ruin: Tho he got to himself so strong a Party in the
Kingdom, that the King stood but for a Party in the Calculation: Tho when he
had Command over a considerable part of the Royal Navy in the Frith at
Edinburough, he made good that saying of the Scots, That the Son of so good a
Mother (being a most rigid Covenanter) could do them no hurt, by loitering
about on purpose till he heatd that the Treaty of Pacification was begun at
Barwick, whither he came in Posthast, pretending to disturb that business, when
he knew it would be concluded before he came thither: Tho he was guilty of the
vilest Treachery to the Best of Princes, and the Best of Subjects, viz. Charles
I. and the Marquess of Montross, who returning out of France, and designing to
put himself into the Kings Service, made his way to Hamilton, who (knowing the
gallantry of the man, and fearing a Competitor in his Majesti^s Favor) told
Montross on the one hand, That the King slighted the Scottish Nation, that he
designed to reduce it unto a Province, and that he would no longer continue in
the Court were it not for some services that he was engaged to do for his
Country: And on the other hand told the King, That Montross was so popular and
powerful among the Scots, that he would embroil the Affairs, and endanger the
Interest of his Majesty in that Kingdom; which suggestions made the King take
little notice of him, and the Martyred Hero was confirmed in the belief of
what Hamilton had secretly whispered to him; which caused him to go to
Scotland, and there to list himself with the Malcontents of that Kingdom,
whose concerns he espoused till he saw his own Error, and Hamilton's Treachery:
Tho D. Hamilton was the man that prevailed with the King to pass that Act for
continuation of the Parliament during the pleasure of the Two Houses, and
boasted how he had got a perpetual Parliament for the English, and would do the
like for the Scots too, and contrary to the wishes of all good men, prevailed
with the King to Dissolve that Parliament which was immediately precedent,
playing with both hands at once; pulling with one hand back the Commons from
all Compliance with the King, and thrusting on the King with the other hand to
Dissolve the Parliament: In fine (for the repetition of these things is not
very delighting) Tho this D. Hamilton did in the opinion of very many wise men
aim at nothing less than the Crown of Scotland, and had so courted the Common
Soldiers, raised for the Service of the Swedes, and obliged their Commanders,
that David Ramsey openly began an health to King James the Seventh; yet all
these with many more particulars are either quite smothered, or so painted over
by Dr. Burnet, that the Volume he has writ upon Hamilton may rather be called
an Apology, or a Panegyric than a History. But Dr. Heylyn had the courage to
acquaint the world with these harsh Truths in the Life of the Archbishop, and
in the Observations that he has writ upon Mr. L'Estrange's History of King
Charles I. And there was no other way to be revenged on him, than to traduce
his Labors, and blast his Memory, as if he had been secretly set on to write
by those of the Church of Rome. A Calumny so improbable, that it is confuted in
the very Preface to Ecclesia Restaurata, Page 6.
where he tells how the Owners of the Abby-Lands had all the reason in the
world to maintain that Right, which by the known Laws of the Land had been
vested in them. -- And that the Exchanges, Grants and Sales of the Monasteries
and Religious Houses were passed and confirmed by the Kings Letters Patent
under the Great Seal of England in due form of Law, which gave unto the
Patentees as good a Title as the Law could make them; and that Pope Julius the
Second in Queen Mary's Reign confirmed all those Lands by his Decree to the
present Occupants, of which they stood possessed (justo titulo) by a lawful
Title. But the Doctors Observation is verified in himself, viz. That It Is the
Faction a man joins with, not the Life or Principles of the man himself that
makes him a good or a bad man; And I will add a learned or good Writer. He did
not write Books, or Preach Sermons, as anciently Poets did Comedies, of whom
Terence tells us, Poeta cum primum animum ad scribendum appulit,
Id sibi negotii credidit solum dari,
Populo ut placerent, quas fecissit fabulas.


Thus Englished by Dr. Heylyn.

Thus Poets when their mind they first apply,
In looser Verse to frame a Comedy.
Think there is nothing more for them to do
Than please the people whom they speak unto.
But this Reverend man was of no crouching temper to popular Factions, or
Opinions, And whoever they are that oppose those, will be charged with Railing
and Reviling, as well as with Falsities and Mistakes, tho they use the most
unaffected propriety of words to represent the conceptions of their minds, in
giving an account of things in their proper and due circumstances. Dr. Heylyn
had too much in him of a Gentleman and a Scholar to use any unseemly
expressions in his Writings, to render either Persons, Opinions, or Actions
odious. If he found them so, he ought so to represent them, or else he would
not have acquitted himself like an Historian, i. e. faithful to the just
interests of Truth. Had he but employed his Pen to have written one half of
those things against the King and Church of England, which he writ for them, he
would have been accounted by very many persons (I will not say by Dr. B.) the
greatest Scholar, the greatest Protestant, the most faithful Historian, or in
their own phrase, the most precious man that ever yet breathed in this Nation.
But he had the good luck to be a Scholar, and better luck to employ his
Learning like an honest man and a good Christian, in the defense of a Righteous
and pious King; of an Apostolical and true Church; of a Venerable and Learned
Clergy: And this drew upon him all the odium and malice that two opposite
Factions, Papist and Sectary could heap upon him.

Had he writ only against the first, his name had received no more disturbance
from men upon earth, than his Soul does amongst its blessed associates in
Heaven. But diving into unbeaten paths, in his Theological Studies, he gives an
account of the first entrance of the Calvinian Tenets into this Kingdom, viz.
Exam. Hist. 162.
How the controversies about Grace, Predestination, etc. had had been long
agitated in the Schools between the Dominicans on the one side and the
Franciscans on the other: the Dominicans grounding their opinion on the
Authority of S. Austin, Prosper, and some others of the following Writers: The
Franciscans on the general current of the ancient Fathers, who lived ante mota
certamina Pelagiana, before the rising of the Pelagian Heresies. Which Disputes
being after taken up in the Lutheran Churches, the moderate Lutherans (as they
call them) followed the Doctrine of Melancthon, conformable to the Franciscans
in those particulars. The others whom they call Stiff or Rigid Lutherans, of
whom Flaccius Illyricus was chief, go in the same way with the Dominicans. The
Authority of which last opinion, after it had been entertained and published in
the works of Calvin, Observat. on the History of the Reign of K. Charles, 72.
for his sake found admittance in the Schools and Pulpits of most of the
Reformed Churches. And being controverted pro and con by some of the Confessors
in Prison in Qu. Mary's days, after her death many of our exiled Divines
returning from Geneva, Basil, and such other places, where Calvin's Dictates
were received as celestial Oracles, brought with them his opinions in the
points of Predestination, Grace and Perseverance: which being dispersed and
scattered over all the Church by Calvin's authority and the diligence of the
Presbyterian party (then busy in advancing their Holy Discipline) they came to
be received for the only true and orthodox Doctrine, and were so publicly
maintained in the Schools of Cambridge, till Dr. Peter Baroe, Professor for the
Lady Margaret in that University, revived the Melancthonian way in his public
Lectures, and by his great Learning and Arguments had drawn many others to the
same persuasions.

From which words it appears what little show of reason there is to call those
Divines Arminians, who are of a different judgment from Mr. Calvin in the
points aforesaid. For first, The Arminians are rather a Branch of the Sect of
Calvin; to whose Discipline in all particulars they conform themselves, and to
this Doctrines in most, differing from him only in Predestination and the
Points subordinate; but managing those differences with a far better temper
than their Opposites, as may be seen at large in Mr. Hales's Letters. And
secondly, Arminius (as our Doctor Cert. Epist. 22.
Tells us) was too much a puisne, of too late standing in the world, to be
accounted the first Broacher of those Doctrinal Points, which have such warrant
from the Scriptures, and were so generally held by the ancient Fathers both
Greek and Latin, till St. Austins time; defended since that time by the
Jesuits and Franciscans in the Church of Rome, by all the Melancthonian
Divines among the Lutherans; by Castalio in Geneva it self; by Bishop Latimer
and Bishop Hooper in the time of K. Edward VI; by some of our Confessors in
Prison in the days of Qu. Mary: by Bishop Harsnet in the Pulpit; by Dr. Peter
Baroe in the Schools in the Reign of Qu. Elizabeth; by Hardem Bergius the first
Reformer of the Church and City of Emden; and finally by Anastasius Velvanus,
A. D. 1554. and afterward by Henricus Antonii, Johannes Ibrandi, Clemens
Martini, Cornelius Meinardi, the Ministers generally of the Province of
Vtrecht; by Manaus the Divinity Professor of Leyden; by Gellius Succanus in the
Province of Friezeland, before the name of Jacob van Harmine was heard of in
the world.

And if it be objected that the whole stream of Protestant Divines, who were
famous either for Piety or Learning embraced the Calvinian Doctrines; to this
also the Doctor gives a satisfactory answer in many places of his learned
Writings. The Reader may please to consider, Cert. Epist. 173.
1. That this being granted to be a truth, we are rather to look upon it as an
infelicity which befell the Church, than as an argument that she concurred with
those Divines in all points of judgment. That which was most aimed at
immediately after the Reformation, and for a long time after, in preferring men
to the highest dignities of the Church, and chief places in the Universities,
was their zeal against Popery, and such a sufficiency of learning as might
enable him to defend those Points, on which our separation from the Church of
Rome was to be maintained, and the Queens Interest most preserved. The Popes
Supermacy, the Mass, with all the Points and Nicities which depended on it,
Justification by Faith, Marriage of Priests, Purgatory, the Power of the Civil
Magistrate, were the Points most agitated: And whoever appeared right in those,
and withal declared himself against the corruptions of that Church in point of
Manners, was seldom or never looked into for his other Opinions, until the
Church began to find the sad consequences of it in such a general tendency to
Innovation both in Doctrine and Discipline, as could not easily be redressed.
2. In answer to the f^re-mentioned objection, Ib. 153.
It is recorded in St. Marks Gospel, cap. 8. that the blind man whom our
Savior restored to sight at Bethsaida, at the first opening of his eyes saw
men as Trees walking, ver. 24. i. e. walking as Trees; quasi dicat homines quos
ambulantes video, non homines sed arbores mihi viderentur, as we read in
Maldonate. By which words, the blind man declared (says he) se qauidem videre
aliquid, cum nihil ante videret, imperfecte tamen videre, cum inter homines and
arbores distinguere non posset. More briefly Estius upon the place, Nondum ita
clare and perfect video, ut discernere possim inter homines and arbores. I
discern somewhat, said the poor man, but so imperfectly, that I am not able to
distinguish between Trees and Men. Such an imperfect sight as this the Lord
gave many times to those whom he recovered out of the Egyptian darkness, who
not being able to discern all Divine Truths at the first opening of the eyes of
their understandings, were not to be a Rule and Precedent to those that
followed and lived in clearer times. and under a brighter Beam of Illumination
than others did.

What grounds were laid down by this excellent person for Unity and Charity in
the Worship of God, and in the Doctrine and Government of the Church, may be
seen in these words to Mr. Baxter; Cert. Epist. 57.
Unity and Charity in the ancient simplicity of Doctrine, Worship, and
Government, no man likes better than my self; bring but the same affections
with you, and the wide Breach that is between us (in some of the Causes which
we manage on either side) will be suddenly closed: but then you must be sure to
stand to the word Ancient also, and not keep your self to simplicity only. If
Unity and Charity will content you in the ancient Doctrine, in the simplicity
thereof without subsepuent mixtures of the Church, I know no Doctrine in the
Church more pure and Ancient, than that which is publicly held forth by the
Church of England in the Book of Articles, the Homilies, and the Catechism
authorized by Law, of which I may safely affirm as St. Austin does in his Book
Ad Marcelinum, His qui contradicit, aut a Christi fide alienus est, aut est
Haereticus, i. e. He must either be an In^idel or an Heretic who assents not
to them, If Unity and Charity in the simplicity of Worship be the thing you aim
at, you must not give every man the liberty of worshipping in what Form he
pleases, which destroys all Unity; nor Cursing many times instead of Praying,
which destroys all Charity. The ancient and most simple way of Worship in the
church of God was by regular Forms prescribed for the public use of Gods
people in the Congregations, and not by unpremeditated undigested Prayers,
which every man makes unto himself, as his fancy shall lead him. And if set
Forms of Worship are to be retained, you will not easily meet with any, which
has more in it of the ancient simplicity of the Primitive Times, than the
English Liturgy. And if ancient simplicity of Government be the point you drive
at, what Government can you find more pure or Ancient than that of Bishops; of
which you have this Character in the Petition of the County of Rutland, where
it is said to be, That Government which the Apostles left the Church in; that
the Three Ages of Martyrs were governed by; that the thirteen Ages since have
always gloried in; (by their Succession of Bishops from the Apostles, proving
themselves Members of the Catholic and Apostolic Church) that our Laws have
established; that so many Kings and Parliaments have protected; into which we
were Baptized; as certainly Apostolical as the Lords day; as the distinction of
Books were written by such Evangelists and Apostles, as the Con^ecration of the
Eucharist by Presbyters, etc. An ample commendation of Episcopal Government,
but such as exceeds not the bounds of Truth or Modesty. Stand to these grounds
for keeping Unity and Charity in the ancient simplicity of Doctrine, Worship
and Government in the Church of God, and you shall see how cheerfully the Regal
and Pre^atical Party will join hands with you, and embrace you with most dear
affections. But you tell me, That if I will have men in peace as Brethren, our
Union must be Law, or Ceremonies, or indifferent Forms. This is a pretty
Speculation, but such as would not pass for practicable in any well-governed
Commonwealth, unless it be in the old Vtopia, the new Atlantis, or the last
discovered Oceana. For how can men possibly live in peace as Brethren, where
there is no Law to limit their desires, or direct their actions? Take away Law,
and every man will be a Law unto himself, and do whatsoever seems best in his
own eyes without control: then Lust will be a Law for one; Felony for
another; Perjury shall be held no Crime; nor shall any Treason or Rebellion
receive their punishments; for where there is no Law, there can be no
Transgression: and where there is no Transgression, there can be no punishment;
punishments being only due for the breach of Laws. Thus is it also in the
Worship of God; which by the Hedge of Ceremonies is preserved from lying open to
all profaneness; and by Set-Forms (be they as indifferent as they will) is
kept from breaking out into open confusion. St. Paul tells us, that God is the
God of Order, not of Confusion in the Churches. If therefore we desire to avoid
Confusion, let us keep some Order; and if we would keep Order, we must have
some Forms; it being impossible that men should live in peace as Brethren in
the house of God, where we do not find both. David has told us in the Psalms,
that Jerusalem is like a City which is at Unity with it self. And in Jerusalem
there were not only solemn Sacrifices, Set-Forms of Blessing, and some
significant Ceremonies prescribed by God; but Musical Instruments and Singers,
and Linen Vestures for those Singers, and certain Hymns and several Times and
Places for them ordained by David. Had every Ward in that City, and every
Street in that Ward, and every Family in that Street, and perhaps every Person
in that Family used his own way in Worshipping the Lord his God, Jerusalem could
not long have kept the name of a City, much less the honor of being that City
which was at Unity in it self -- When therefore the Apostle gives us this good
counsel, that we endeavor to keep the unity of the Spirit in the bond of
peace, he seems to intimate that there can be no Unity, where there is no
Peace; and that Peace cannot be preserved without some Bond. If you destroy all
Ceremonies and subvert all Forms, you must break the Bond; and if the Bond be
broken, you must break the Peace; and if you break the Peace, what becomes of
the Unity? So that it is but the dream of a dry Summer (as the saying is) to
think that without Law, or Forms, or Ceremonies, men may live peaceably
together as becomes Brethren, though they profess one Faith, acknowledge one
Lord, receive one Baptism, and be Sons of one Father which is in Heaven.

Having thus surveyed some particulars pertaining to the Doctrine and
Ceremonies of the Church, proeced we next to take a short view of some things
delivered by this right learned man concerning the Convocation; which in
ancient times was part of the Parliament, Exam. Hist 126.
there being a Clause in every Letter of Summons by which the Bishops were
required to attend in Parliament, that they should warn the Clergy of their
respective Dioceses, some in their Persons, and others by their Procurators to
attend there also* But this has be^n so long unpractis'^, that we find no
footsteps of it since the Parliaments in the time of King Richard the Second.
It is true indeed that in the 8th. year of Henry VI. there passed a Statute, by
which it was enacted, That all the Clergy which should be called thenceforth to
the Convocation by the Kings Writ, together with their Servants and Families,
should for ever after fully use and enjoy such liberty and immunity in coming,
tarrying and returning, as the Great men and Commonalty of the Realm of England
called or to be called to the Kings Parliament have used, or ought to have or
enjoy. Which though it makes the Convocation equal to the Parliament as to the
freedom of their Persons; yet cannot it from hence be reckoned or reputed for a
part thereof.

And as it is now no part of the Parliament, so neither has it any necessary
dependence upon that Honorable Council and Assembly, Observat. on the History
of the Reign of K. Charles, 220.
either in the Calling or Dissolving of it, or in the Confirmation or
Authorizing of the Acts thereof, but only in the King himself; and not upon the
Kings sitting in the Court of Parliament, but in his Palace or Court-Royal
where ever it be. And this appears both by the Statute made in the 26th. of
Henry VIII. and the constant practice ever since. Indeed since the 25th. year
of Henry VIII. no Convocation is to assemble, but as it is Convocated and
Convened by the Kings Writ? for in the Year 1532. the Clergy made their
Acknowledgment and Submission in their Convocation to that mighty and great
Monarch; which Submission passed into a Statute the very next year following.
But this does not hinder, but that their Acts and Constitutions ratified by
Royal Assent, are of force to bind the Subject to submit and conform to them.
For before the Statute of Proemunire, and the Act for Submission, Convocations
made Canons that were binding, Exam. Hist. 97.
although none other than Synodical Authority did confirm the same. And certainly
they must have the same power; when the Kings Authority signified in his Royal
Assent is added to them. They also gave away the money of the Clergy, by whom
they were chosen, even as the Commons in Parliament gave the money of the
Cities, Obs. 196.
Towns and Countries, for which they served. For in choosing the Clerks for
Convocation, there is an Instrument drawn up and sealed by the Clergy, in which
they bind themselves to the Archdeacons of their several Dioceses upon the
pain of forfeiting all their Lands and Goods, Se ratum, gratum and acceptum
habere, quicquid Dicti Procuratores sui dixerint, fecerint vel constituerint,
i. e. to allow, stand and perform whatsoever their said Clerks shall say, do,
or condescend unto on their behalf. Nor is this a speculative Authority only
and not reducible unto practice, but precedented in Queen Elizabeth's time. For
in the year 1585. the Convocation having given one Subsidy confirmed by
Parliament, and finding that they had not done sufficiently for the Queens
occasions, did after add a Benevolence or Aid of two shillings in the pound to
be levied upon all the Clergy; and to be levied by such Synodical Acts and
Constitutions, as they digested for that purpose, without having any recourse
to the Parliament for it.

But against these things it was objected in the Long Parliament of King
Charles I, That the Clergy had no power to make Canons without common consent
in Parliament, because in the Saxon times, Laws and Constitutions
Ecclesiastical had the Confirmation of Peers, and sometimes of the people, unto
which great Councils our Parliaments do succeed. Exam. Hist. 237.
Which argumeut (says our Reverend Doctor) if it be of force to prove, that the
Clergy can make no Canons without consent of the Peers and People in
Parliament, it must prove also that the Peers and People can make no Statutes
without consent of the Clergy in their Convocation. My reason is, because such
Councils in time of the Saxons were mixed Assemblies, consisting as well of
Laics as Ecclesiastics? and the matters there concluded on of a mixed nature
also; Laws being passed as commonly in them in order to the good Governance of
the Commonwealth, as Canons for the regulating such things as concerned
Religion. And these great Councils of the Saxons being divided into two parts
in the times ensuing, their Clergy did their work by themselves without any
Confirmation of the King or Parliament, till the Submission of the Clergy to
King Henry VIII. And if Parliaments did succeed in the place of those great
Councils, it was because that anciently the Procurators of the Clergy, not the
Bishops only had their place in Parliament, tho neither Peers nor People voted
in the Convocations. Which being so, it is not much to be admired that the
Commons repined about the disuse of the general making of Church-Laws, as they
did in the beginning of the Long Parliament, when they voted the proceedings of
the Clergy to be prejudicial and destructive to the Fundamental Liberties and
Privileges of the Subject. For besides that this repining at the proceedings
of any Superior Court does not make its Acts illegal, there is a new memorable
passage in the Parliament of the 51. of Edw. III. which will clear this matter,
which in brief is this: The Commons finding themselves agrieved as well with
certain Constitutions made by the Clergy in their Synods, as with some Laws or
Ordinances which were lately passed, more to the advantage of the Clergy than
the common People, put in a Bill to this effect, viz. That no Act or Ordinance
should from thenceforth be made or granted on the Petition of the said Clergy
without consent of the Commons: and that the said Commons should not be bound
in times to come by any Constitutions made by the Clergy of this Realm for
their own advantage, to which the Commons of this Realm had not given consent.
The reason of which is this, and it is worth the marking Car eux ne veulent
estre obligez anul de vos Estatuz ne ordinances faits sanz leur Assent, i. e.
because the Clergy did not think themselves bound (as indeed they were not in
those times) by any Statute, Act, or Ordinance made without their Assent in the
Court of Parliament. And besides these precedents already mentioned, there is
another memorable Convocation in the 4th. and 5th. years of Philip and Mary;
Introduct. unto Exam. Hist.
in which the Clergy taking notice of an Act of Parliament then newly passed,
by which the Subjects of the Temporalty, having Lands in the yearly value of
five pounds and upwards, were charged with finding Horse and Armor according to
the proportion of their yearly Revenues and Possessions, did by their sole
Authority in the Convocation, impose upon themselves and the rest of the Clergy
of this Land, the finding of a like number of Horses, Armor and other
necessaries for the War, according to their yearly Income, proportion for
proportion, and rate for rate, as by that Statute has been laid on the
Temporal Subjects. And this they did by their own sole Authority, as was before
said; ordering the same to be levied on all such as were refractory, by
Sequestration, Deprivation, Suspension, Excommunication, without relating to
any subsequent Confirmation by Act of Parliament, which they conceived they had
no need of.

Nor did the zeal of our learned Doctor here terminate; it was like Aarons
Ointment, that descended from his Beard to the lowest Skirts and Fringes of his
Garments. For first, as for the Bishops, he did not only write for them when
their Order flourished, but he defended their Function and Honor when their
power was expired. For that Episcopacy might never revive in this Kingdom, its
enemies used all possible endeavors to render it odious to all sober and
considering Christians. And to do that, 1. The Bishops were made the cause of
the Civil War; to which calumny our Doctor answers; Its true, the Covenanteers
called it the Bishops War, and gave out, Observe. on -- 151.
that it was raised only to maintain the Hierarchy; The truth is, Liturgy and
Episcopacy were made the occasions, but they were not the causes of the War;
Religion being but the Vizard to disguise the business, which Covetousness,
Sacriledg and Rapine had the greatest hand in. But the thing was thus. The King
being engaged in a War with Spain, and yet deserted by those men who engaged
him in it, was fain to have recourse to such other ways of Assistance as were
offered to him. But what those ways were will be too tedious to acquaint the
Reader with in this place: he may better inform himself in the Observations on
Master L'Estrange his History. 2. Another Engine raised to demolish Episcopacy,
was to persuade the People that Bishops were an imperious proud sort of men, or
as Mr. Baxter (who was resolved as well to make up the measure of his own
Incivilities as of the Bishops Afflictions) a Turgid persecuting sort of
Prelacy; as also that in respect of their Studies, they were no way fit for
Government, or to be Barons in Parliament. Unto which the Doctor answers with
an old story of a Nobleman in K. Henry VIII's time, who told Mr. Pace one of
the Kings Secretaries, in contempt of Learning, Exam. Hist. ^46.
That it was enough for Noblemens Sons to Wind their Horn, and carry their Hawk
fair, and leave Learning to the study of mean men. To whom Mr. Pace replied,
Then you and other Noblemen must be content that your Children may wind their
Horns and keep their Hawks, whilst the Children of mean men do manage matters
of State. And certainly there can be no reason, why men that have been versed
in Books, studied in Histories, and thereby made acquainted with the chiefest
Occurrences of most States and Kingdoms, should not be thought as fit to manage
the Affairs of State, as those who spend their time in Hawking or Hunting, if
not in worse Employments. For that a Superinduction of Holy Orders should prove
a Supersedeas to all civil prudence, is such a wild extravagant fancy, as no
man of Judgment can allow of. And as for the Clergies Pride and Covetousness,
he thus tells their Accuser: How sad their Condition is, Cert. Epist. 44.
and under what impossibilities of giving content unto the people. For if they
keep close, and privately, and live any thing below their Fortunes, the People
then cry out, O the base sordidness of the Clergy! But if according to their
means, or in any outward luster; then on the other side, Oh the pride of the
Clergy! But tell me (Mr. Baxter) if you can, in what the Turgidness or high
swelling pride of the Prelates did appear most visibly. Was it in the bravery
of their Apparel, or in the train of their Attendance, or in their Lordly Port,
or lofty looks, or in all, or in none? Admitting the most and worst you can of
these particulars, would you have men that shine in a higher Orb, move in a
lower Sphere, than that in which God has placed them? Or being ranked in Order
and Degree about you, would you not have them keep that distance which belongs
to their Places: Or because you affect a Parity in the Church, would you have
all men brought to the same Level with your self, without admitting Sub and
Supra in the Scale of Government? If they were your Fathers in God, why did not
you look upon them with such reverence as becomes Children? If your Superiors
in the Lord, why did not you yield them that subjection which was due unto
them? If fixed in Place and Power above you by the Laws of the Land only, and
no more than so, why did not you give obedience to those Laws under which you
lived, and by which you were to be directed? Take heed I beseech you Mr.
Baxter, that more Spiritual Pride be not found in that heart of yours, than
ever you found worldly and external Pride in any of my Lords the ^^^hops; and
that you do not trample on them with greater insolence ( Calco platonis Fastum,
sed majori Fastu, as you know who said) in these unfortunate days of their
Calamity, than ever they expressed toward any in the time of their Glory. Were
it my case, as it is yours, I would not for ten thousand worlds depart this
life, before I had obtained their pardon, and given satisfaction to the world
for these horrible Scandals. 3. As for those persons that were heartily
affected with Episcopacy, and dissatisfied with the extinction of an Order so
sacred and venerable, there was this way found out to quiet their di^contents,
viz. to persuade them that Bishops and Presbyters were of equivolent
importance, and comprehended under the same name in the Holy Scriptures. But
grant (says this their Champion) that they be so: Obser. 183.
who, that pretends to Logic, can dispute so lamely, as from a Community of
names to infer an Identity or Sameness in the thing so named? Kings are called
Gods in Holy Scripture; and God does frequently call himself by the name of
King: yet if a man should thence infer, that from this Community of names,
there arises an Identity or Sameness between God and the King, he might
worthily be condemned for so great a Blasphemer. St. Peter calls our Savior
Christ by the name of Bishop, and himself a Presbyter or Priest, 1 Pet 2. 25.
or an Elder, 1 Pet. 5. 1.
as we unhandsomly read it: yet were it a sorry piece of Logic to conclude
from hence, that there is no distinction between an Apostle and an Elder, the
Prince of the Apostles, and a simple Presbyter; or between Christ the Supreme
Pastor of his Church and every ordinary Bishop. Lastly, take it for granted
that Bishops have an Identity or Sameness in Name, Office, Ordination and
Qualification with Presbyters, it will not follow convertibly that Presbyters
have the like Identity or Sameness of Qualification, Ordination, Name and
Office, which the Bishop has. My reason is, because a Bishop being first
Regularly and Canonically to be made a Priest before he take the Order and
Degree of a Bishop, has in him all the Qualifications, the Ordination, Name
and Office which a Presbyter has; and something further superadded, as well in
point of Order and Jurisdiction, which every Presbyter has not: So that although
every Bishop be a Priest, or Presbyter, yet every Presbyter is not a Bishop. To
make this clear by an example in the Civil Government. When Sir Robert Cecil,
Knight, and principal Secretary of State was made first Earl of Salisbury, and
then Lord Treasurer, continuing Knight and Secretary as he was before; it might
be said that he had an Identity or Sameness in Name, Office, Order and
Qualification with Sir John Herbert the other Secretary; yet this could not be
said reciprocally of Sir John Herbert, because there was something superadded
to Sir Robert Cecil, viz. the Dignity of an Earl and the Office of Lord
Treasurer, which the other had not. So true is that of Lactantius, Adeo
argumenta ex absurdo petita ineptos habent exitus. It is ordinary for Arguments
built upon weak grounds to have worse Conclusions. And a better Instance cannot
be given of this, than in the Retortion that Mr. Seldom made to one in the
House of Commons, Ib. 188.
who disputed against the Divine Right of Episcopacy, His argument was this. 1.
That Bishops are Iure Divino is of Question. 2. That Archbishops are not Iure
Divino is out of Question. 3. That Ministers are Iure Divino, there is no
Question. Now if Bishops which are questioned whether Iure Divino shall Suspend
Ministers which are Iure Divino, I leave it to you Mr. Speaker. Which Mr.
Seldom (whether with greater Wit or Scorn is hard to say) thus retorted on him.
1. That the Convocation is Iure Divino, is a Question. 2. That Parliaments are
not Iure Divino, is out of Question. 3. That Religion is Iure Divino, is no
Question. Now, Mr. Speaker, that the Convocation which is questioned whether
Iure Divino, and Parliaments which out of Question are not Iure Divino, should
meddle with Religion, which questionless is Iure Divino, I leave to you Mr.
Speaker.

There are some other Points relating to Episcopacy, which Dr. Heylyn has long
time since cleared and determined. And if some of our pretending Statesmen had
considered and read what was written upon those Subjects, their time and pains
would have been more profitably spent to the honor and security of this Church
and Kingdom, than in raising doubts and scruples, which had long before been so
clearly stated and resolved. For, 1. As for Bishops sitting in Parliament to
Vote in Causes of Blood and Death, this the Doctor evinced not only in the
Tract, entitled, De Iure paritatis Episcoporum, P. 224.
but in his Observations upon Mr. L'Estrange's History, where he says, that
although the ancient Canons disable Bishops from Sentencing any man to Death, yet
they do not from being A^sistants in such cases; from taking Examinations,
hearing Depositions of Witnesses, or giving Counsel in such matters as they saw
occasion. The Bishops sitting as Peers in the English Parliament, were never
excluded from the Earl of Strafford's Trial, from any such Assistances, as by
their Gravity and Learning and other Abilities, they were enabled to give in
any dark and difficult business (tho of Blood and Death) which were brought
before them. 2. With the like solid reasoning, the Doctor has evinced the
Bishops to be one of the Three Estates. For, not to mention what he says upon
this Argument in his Stumbling Block of Disobedience: That they have their Vote
in Parliament as a Third Estate, not in capacity of Temporal Barons (although they
are so, as Mr. Seldom evinces, Yitles of Hon. p. 2. cap. 5.
and an Act of Parliament, Stat. 25. Edw. III.) will evidently appear from
these following Reasons, For, first the Clergy in all other Christian Kingdoms
of these North-West Parts make the Third Estate; that is to say, in the German
Empire, as appears by Thuanus the Historian, lib. 2. In France, as is affirmed
by Paulus Aemilius, lib. 9. In Spain, as testifies Bodinus de Republ. lib. 3.
For which also consult the general History of Spain, as in point of practice,
lib. 9, 10, 11, 14. In Hungary, as witnesses Bonfinius, Decl. 2. lib. 1. In
Poland, as is verified by Thuanus also, l. 56. In Denmark, as Pontanus tells us
in Historia rerum Danicarum, l. 7. The Swedes observing anciently the same Form
and Order of Government as was used by the Danes. The like we find in Cambden
for the Realm of Scotland, in which anciently the Lords Spiritual, viz.
Bishops, Abbots, and Priors made the Third Estate. And certainly it was very
strange, if the Bishops and other Prelates in the Realm of England, being a
great and powerful Body, should move in a lower Sphere in England, than they do
elsewhere. But 2dly. Not to stand only upon probable inferences, we find first
in History, touching the Reign and Acts of Henry V. That when his Funerals were
ended, the Three Estates of the Realm of England did assemble together, and
declared his Son King Henry VI. being an Infant of eight Months old to be their
Sovereign Lord, as his Heir and Successor. And if the Lords Spiritual did not
then make the Third Estate, I would fain know who did? Secondly, The Petition
tendered to Richard Duke of Gloucester, to accept the Crown, occurring in the
Parliament Rolls, runs in the name of the Three Estates of the Realm, that is
to say, the Lords Spiritual and Temporal, and the Commons thereof. Thirdly, In
the said Parliament of the said Rich. Crowned King, it is said expressly, That
at the request and by the consent of the Three Estates of this Realm, that is
to say, the Lords Spiritual and Temporal, and Commons of this Land Assembled in
this present Parliament, and by Authority of the same, it be Pronounced,
Decreed and Declared, That our Sovereign Lord the King was and is the very and
undoubted King of this Realm of England, etc. Fourthly, It is acknowledged in
the Statute of 1. Eliz. c. 3. where the Lords Spiritual and Temporal, and the
Commons in that Parliament Assembled, being said expressly and in terminis, to
represent the Three Estates of this Realm of England, did recognize the Queens
Majesty to be their true, lawful, and undoubted Sovereign Liege Lady and Queen.
Add unto these the Testimony of Sir Edward Cook, tho a private person, who in
his Book of the Jurisdiction of Courts (published by Order of the Long
Parliament) c. 1. does expressly say, That the Parliament consists of the Head
and the Body, that the Head is the King, that the Body is the Three Estates,
viz. the Lords Spiritual, Temporal, and the Commons. In which words we have not
only the Opinion and Testimony of that learned Lawyer, but the Authority of the
Long Parliament also, tho against it self.

I hope the perusal of these things will be no less acceptable to the sober
Reader, than the transcribing of them has been unto my self; which I have done
to the end as well of informing my Countrymen about the Rights of the Crown
and Privileges of the Church and Clergy, as to show that Dr. Heylyn had a zeal
according unto knowledge, and was not less zealous for knowledge-sake.

And the Doctor having thus stood up in the defense of Monarchy and Hierarchy,
both in their prosperous and adverse condition; when the black Cloud was
dispelled, and a fair Sunshine began to dawn upon these harrassed and oppressed
Islands, by the Return of his Sacred Majesty, this excellent man having in his
mind Tullies Resolution, Defendi Rempub. Adolescens, non deseram Senex, thought
it unbecoming him to desert the Church in any of its pressing needs: and
therefore when the door of Hope began to open, he busied his active and
searching mind in finding out several expedients for the restoring and securing
of its Power and Privileges in future Ages against the attempts of Factious and
Sacrilegious men. And the first thing that he engaged in, was to draw up
several Papers, and tender them to those Persons in Authrority, who in the days
of Anarchy and Oppression, had given the most signal Testimonies of their
Affection to the Church. In which Papers he first showed what Alterations,
Explanations, etc. were made in the Public Liturgy in the Reigns of King
Edward VI. Queen Elizabeth, and King James; that so those who were entrusted
with so sacred a Depositum, might be the better enabled to proceed in the
Alteration and enlargement of it; as they afterward did, and as it now stands
by Law Established in this Church. Secondly, Whereas in the first year of King
Edward VI. it was enacted that all Archbishops, Bishops, etc. should make
their Processes, Writings, and Instruments in the Kings name, and not under
their own Names -- (which Act was afterward extended unto Ordinations, as
appears by the Form of a Testimonial extant in Sanders's Seditious Book, De
Schismate Anglicano) and whereas the Act was repealed in the last year of Queen
Mary, and did stand so repealed all the Reign of Queen Elizabeth, but was by
the activity of some, and the incogitancy of others revived again in the first
year of King James, but lay dorment all the Reign of that Prince, and during
the first ten years of King Charles I. after which it was endeavored to be set
on foot by some disturbers of the Public Peace; upon which, the King having it
under the hand of his Judges, that the proceedings of the Archbishops,
Bishops, etc. were not contrary to the Laws of the Land, inserted their
Judgment about it in a Proclamation for indemnifying the Bishops, and the
satisfying of his loving Subjects in that Point; therefore Dr. Heylyn
considering that what the Judges did was extrajudicial, and that the Kings
Proclamation expired at his Death, solicited the concerns of the Church in this
Affair, viz. that the Act so pas^ed, as before is said, in the first of King
James, might be repealed, that so the Bishops might proceed as formerly in the
exercise of their Jurisdiction without fear or danger. Thirdly, Whereas in the
16. year of Charles. I. there passed an Act that no Archbishop, Bishop, etc.
should minister any Corporal Oath unto any Churchwarden, Sideman, or any other
person whatsoever, with many other things whereby the whole Episcopal
Jurisdiction was subverted (except Canonical Obedience only) and all
proceedings in Courts Ecclesiastical in Causes Matrimonial, Testamentory, etc.
were weakened, and all Episcopal Visitations were made void as to the ordinary
Punishments of Heresy, Schism, Nonconformity, Incest, Adultery and other
Crimes of Ecclesiastical Cognizance, therefore Dr. Heylyn stated the Case, and
in a Petition drawn up by him, prayed, that for the restoring of the Episcopal
Jurisdiction, the Clauses of that Act, and the penalties thereunto annexed,
might be wholly abrogated and annulled.

But the most remarkable Effort of his zeal for the Church, after the Kings
Restoration, was the Application made by him to the great Minister of State in
those days, that there might be a Convocation called with the Parliament. What
good effects were produced by his endeavors in that particular, let the Reader
judge, when he has perused the following Letter, with which the Reverend Doctor
saluted that powerful Statesman.

Right Honorable and my very good Lord,
I Cannot tell how welcome or unwelcome this Address may prove in regard of the
greatness of the Cause and the low condition of the Party, who negotiates in
it. But I am apt enough to persuade my self, that the honest zeal which moves
me to it, not only will excuse, but endear the boldness.

There is, my Lord, a general Speech, but a more general Fear withal amongst
some of the Clergy, that there will be no Convocation called with the following
Parliament; which if it should be so resolved on, cannot but raise sad thoughts
in the hearts of those, who wish the peace and happiness of our English Sion.
But being the Bishops are excluded from their Votes in Parliament, there is no
other way to keep up their Honor and Esteem in the eyes of the people, but the
retaining of their places in the Convocation. Nor have the lower Clergy any
other means to show their duty to the King, and keep that little freedom which
is left unto them, then by assembling in such Meetings, where they may exercise
the Power of a Convocation, in granting Subsidies to his Majesty, tho in
nothing else. And should that Power be taken from them, according to the
constant (but unprecedented) practice of the late Long Parliament, and that
they must be taxed and rated with the rest of the Subjects without their liking
and consent, I cannot see what will become of the first Article of Magna
Charta, so solemnly, so frequently confirmed in Parliament, or what can
possibly be left unto them of either of the Rights or Liberties belonging to an
English Subject.

I know it is conceived by some, that the distrust which his Majesty has in
some of the Clergy, and the Diffidence which the Clergy have of one another, is
looked on as the principal cause of the Innovation: For I must needs behold it
as an Innovation, that any Parliament should be called without a meeting of the
Clergy at the same time with it. The first year of King Edward VI. Qu. Mary,
and Qu. Elizabeth were times of greater diffidence and distraction, than this
present Conjuncture. And yet no Parliament was called in the beginning of their
several Reigns, without the company and attendance of the Convocation, tho the
intendments of the State aimed then at greater alterations in the face of the
Church, than are now pretended or desired. And to say the truth, there was no
^anger to be feared from a Convocation, tho the times were ticklish and
unsettled, and the Clergy was divided into Sides and Factions, as the case then
stood, and so stands with us at this present time. For since the Clergy in
their Co^vocations are in no Authothority to propound, treat, or conclude any
thing (more than the passing of a Bill of Subsides for his Majesty's use) until
they are empowered by the Kings Commission, the King may tie them up for what
time he pleases, and give them nothing but the opportunity of entertaining one
another with the news of the day. But if it be objected, that the Commission
now on foot for altering and explaining certain passages in the Public
Liturgy, that either pass instead of a Convocation, or else is thought to be
neither competable nor consistent with it; I hope far better in the one, and
must profess that I can see no reason in the other. For first, I hope that the
selecting of some few Bishops and other learned men of the lower Clergy to
debate on certain Points contained in the Common Prayer Book, is not intended
for a Representation of the Church of England, which is a Body more diffused,
and cannot legally stand bound by their Acts and Counsets. And if this
Conference be for no other purpose, but only to prepare matter for a
Convocation (as some say it is not) why may not such a Conference and
Convocation be held both at once? For neither the selecting of some learned men
out of both the Orders for the composing and reviewing of the two Liturgies
digested in the Reign of King Edward VI. proved any hindrance in the calling of
those Convocations, which were held both in the second and third, and in the
fifth and sixth of the said Kings Reign. Nor was it found that the holding of a
Convocation together with the first Parliament under Queen Elizabeth, proved
any hindrance to that Conference or Disputation which was designed between the
Bishops and some learned men of the opposite parties. All which considered, I
do most humbly beg your Lordship to put his Majesty in mind of sending out his
Ma^dates to the two Arch^ Bishops for summoning a Convocation (according to the
usual Form) in their several Provinces, that this poor Church may be held with
some degree of Veneration, both at home and abroad. And in the next place, I do
no less humbly beseech your Lordship to excuse this freedom, which nothing but
my zeal for Gods glory and my affection to this Church could have forced from
me. I know how ill this present office does become me, and how much fitter it
had been, for such as shine in a more eminent Sphere in the holy Hi^rarchy to
have tendered these Particulars to consideration. Which since they either have
not done, or that no visible effect has appeared thereof, I could not choose
but cast my poor Mite into the Treasury; which if it may conduce to the
Churches good, I shall have my wish; and howsoever shall be satisfied in point
of Conscience, that I have not failed of doing my duty to this Church,
according to the light of my understanding; and then what happens unto me shall
not be material. And thus again most humbly craving pardon for this
presumption, I kiss your Lordships hands, and subscribe my self

My Lord, Your Lordships most humble Servant to be commanded Peter Heylyn.


Having thus surveyed the most important Occurrences of Dr. Heylyn's Life, I
doubt not but every judicious and impartial Reader will be convinced at once of
his vast Abilities and Acquirements in the large Circle of Learning and
Sciences, of his immovable Integrity in the Protestant Religion, and of his
indefatigable Industry and Service to the just Interests both of the Crown and
Mitre. For tho I will not say as St. Paul does of his Son Timothy, that there
was no man like-minded, yet no one had more hearty and unbiassed affections, no
man did more naturally care for this Church and Kingdom than Dr. Heylyn; and at
that time too, when he expected nothing for his pains and industry, but all the
miseries and mischiefs, which armed Malice and succesful usurped Tyranny could
inflict upon him. Preach indeed he could not in those days of danger and
persecution. But he plentifully made up that unavoidable omission by his
Writings: through all which there runs such a native plainness and elegancy, as
can be paralleled in very few of the Writers of that Age he lived in. In all
his Books his Style is smooth and masculine, his Sense full and copious, his
Words plain and intelligible, his Notions numerous and perspicuous, his
Arguments pertinent, ponderous and convincing. Those Accomplishments which
rarely concentred in any Individual, were in Doctor Heylyn, in their eminency
and perfection, viz. a solid Judgment, an acute Wit, a rich teeming Fancy, and
a memory so prodigiously quick and tenacious, that it was the Storehouse of
most Arts and Sciences. And which is most wonderful, it was not impaired either
by Age or by Afflictions. For many of those learned Volumes that have his
learned Name annexed to them, were writ when his Sight failed him. And here I
cannot forget that deserved Character, which a right learned man, and now an
eminent Prelate of our Church bestowed on him, viz. That Dr. Heylyn never writ
any Book, let the Argument be never so mean and trivial, but it was worthy of a
Scholars reading. And another very celebrated Professor (now) in Oxon, paying
him the respects of a Visit at Abingdon, returned home with the profoundes^
Admiration of his incomparable Abilities, saying, That he never heard any
Doctor of the Chair deliver his Judgment more copiously and perspicuously upon
any Subject, than our Doctor did upon those various Theological Points, that
were proposed to him. Insomuch that what Livie affirmed of Cato, might without
any injury to Truth be affirmed of this Reverend person, Natum ad id diceres,
quodcunque ageret.

And it is just matter of wonder, how any Scholar that had so many Sicknesses
and Avocations from the Muses in his Childhood and Youth, and that was
encumbered with the burden of so many secular businesses in his middle Age,
should arrive to such vast knowledge and improvements. For he was a Critic (and
that no vulgar one) both in the Greek and Latin Languages: A polite Humanist,
being exactly acquainted with the best Poets, Orators and Historians: He was
also an excellent Poet; but a more able Judge of it in others, than a practiser
of it himself. Philosophy he studied no farther, than as it was subservient to
nobler Contemplations. But as for History, Chronology, and Geography, they were
as familiar to him, as the Transactions of one months business can be to any
private person. And that Divine is yet to be named, whose knowledge did exceed
Dr. Heylyn's in the Canon, Civil, Statute, or Common Laws: To the profession of
which last if he had betook himself, few men in the Nation would have exceeded
him either in Fame or Estate.

In all things that were either spoke or writ by him, he did loqui cum vulgo,
so speak as to be understood by the meanest Hearer, and so write as to be
comprehended by the most vulgar Reader. Observe. on the Hist. -- page 2.
It is true indeed (as he himself observes) that when there is necessity of
using either Terms of Law, or Logical Notions, or any other words of Art, an
Author is then to keep himself to such Terms and Words, as are transmitted to
us by the Learned in their several Faculties. But to affect new Notions, and
indeed new Nothings, when there is no necessity to invite us to it, is a Vein
of writing which the two great Masters of the Greek and Roman Eloquence had no
knowledge of. But many think, that they can never speak elegantly, nor write
significantly, except they do it in a language of their own devising, as if
they were ashamed of their Mother Tongue, and thought it not sufficiently
curious to express their fancies. By means whereof more French and Latin words
have gained ground upon us since the middle of Queen Elizabeth, than were
admitted by our Ancestors (whether we look upon them as the British or Saxon
Race) not only since the Norman, but the Roman Conquest. A folly handsomely
derided in an old blunt Epigram, where the spruce Gallant thus bespeaks his
Page, or Laquey Diminutive and my defective Slave,
Reach my Corpse Coverture immediately:
It Is my complacency that Vest to have,
TO insconce my person from Frigidity.
The Boy believed all Welsh his Master spoke,
Till railed in English, Rogue go fetch my Cloak.


And yet this simplicity and plainness of writing is the true cause, why so
many were heretofore and are still scandalized at the Doctors Books. But let
the Reader attend to him whilst he pleads for himself: Pref. to Theol. Vet.
The truth is, I never voluntarily engaged my self in any of those public
Quarrels, by which the Unity and Order of the Church of England has been so
miserably distracted in these later times. Nor have I loved to run before or
against Authority; but always took the just Counsels and Commands thereof for
my ground and warrant: which when I had received, I could not think that there
was any thing left on my part, but obsequii gloria, the honor of a cheerful and
free obedience. And in this part of my obedience, it was my lot most commonly
to be employed in the Puritan Controversies; in managing of which, although I used
all equanimity and temper which reasonably could be expected (the argument and
persons against whom I writ being well considered) yet I did thereby so
exasperate that prevailing party, that I became the greatest object of their
spleen and fury.

When the Jewish Libertines could not resist the wisdom, and spirit, and
excellence of Elocution with which St. Stephen defended himself and blessed
Savior, Acts 6. 10.
we find in the next Chapter, that his enemies deserted all rational arguings,
and betook themselves to acts of the most inhumane violence; first gnashing
upon him with their teeth, and then assaulting him with stones. Add the truth
is, Dr. Heylyn had few other answers returned to the many learned Volumes
written by him, besides vollies of audacious and virulent slanders to wound his
name, and to hinder easy and credulous persons from perusing of his Books. He
tells one, who called him the Primipilus, or chief of the Defenders of Prelacy,
that although he did sometimes put vinegar in his Ink to make it quick and
operative, Cert. Epist. 31.
as the case did require, yet there was nothing of scurrility or malice in it;
nothing that savoured of uncharitableness, o^ of such bitter reproaches, as he
was unjustly charged with. When he met with such a Firebrand as Mr. Burton, it
was not to be expected, that he should pour oil upon him to increase the flame,
and not bring water to quench it, whether foul or clean. And when he met with
other unsavory pieces, it was fit that he should rub them with a little salt to
keep them sweet. The good Samaritan, when he took care of the wounded
passenger, is said to have poured into his wounds both Oil and Wine, i. e. Oil
to cherish and refresh it, and Wine to cleanse it; Oleum quo foveatur, vinum
quo mordeatur. He had not been a skilfu^ Surgeon, if he had done otherwise.
And the Doctor being to contend with so many and malicious Adversaries, had
been a very unwary writer, had he made no distinction, but accosted them all
after one and the same manner. The grand Exemplar of Sweetness, Candor and
Ingenuity, used the severest invectives against the hypocritical Scribes and
Pharisees. Certainly one Plaster is not medicinal to all kind of sores; some
of which may be cured with Balm, when others more corrupt and putrified, do
require a Lancing. And thus did this Reverend man deal with the enemies of the
King and Church; insomuch that he received thanks from the Ministers of Surrey
and Bucks (in the name of themselves and that party) for his fair and
respectful language to them, both in his Preface to his History of the Sabbath
and conclusion of the same. To conclude, unless good words may receive
pollution by confuting bad principles, and describing bad things, nothing of
any rude or uncharitable language can be found in any of the Writings of Dr.
Heylyn,

But as all men have not abilities to write Books, so neither to pass sentence
on them, when written. And yet whatever hard censures the Doctors Books have
met with in the world, I am persuaded his most inveterate enemies who will have
but so much patience as to peruse impartially this Account given of his Life,
will believe that one who had acted, written and suffered so much in the
defense of the King and Church, might have met with some Rewards or Respects in
some measure suitable to his merits. But God Almighty and wise Providence had
otherwise ordered the Event of things; purposing (no doubt) that this excellent
person, who had for the greatest part of his pilgrimage encountered with the
spite and threatenings, oppositions and persecutions of those who had subverted
Monarchy in the State, and Order and Decency in the Church, (should
(notwithstanding the Kings Restoration) have administered to him another Trial
of his passive Fortitude; and that was to wrestle with the neglects and
ingratitude of his Friends. Indeed some Right Reverend Fathers in the Church
(amongst whom Bishop Cousins ought not to be passed over in silence) protested
not their wonder only, but their grief, that so great a Friend and Sufferer for
the Royal Family and Church, should like the wounded men in the Gospel, be
passed by both by Priest and Levite, and have no recompense for his past
Services, besides the pleasure of reflecting on them. But the Statesmen of
those days ranked the Doctor with the Milites emeriti, the old Cavaliers, of
whose Principles there could be no fear, and of whose Services there could be
no more need. But notwithstanding all the frowns of Fortune, yet he could say
his Nunc Dimittis with more sensible joy and cheerfulness, than he was able to
do, for many of the precedent years; having the satisfaction to live, (I cannot
say to see) till the King was restored to his Throne, and the Church to its
Immunities and Rights. Yea, let them take all, forasmuch as my Lord the King is
come again in peace unto his own House. The Doctor had nothing given him, but
what neither Law nor Justice could detain from him; and that was the former
Preferments that he had in the Church, from the profits and possession of which
he had been kept above seventeen years. And with those he contentedly
acquiesced; and not unlike some of the old famous Romans, after they had done
all the Services they could for their Country, returned home to their poor
Wives, and little Farms, yoking again their Oxen for the Plough, when they had
fettered their enemies in Chains. Above all, this excellent Scholar enjoyed the
inward peace and tranquillity of his own mind; in that he fought a good fight,
kept the Faith, finished his course, discharged his Duty and Trust, and had
been counted worthy to suffer the loss of all things (except his Conscience)
for the best of Princes, and the most righteous of Causes in the world. And I
pray God grant that an old observation which I have somewhere met withal, may
not be verified either as to the concerns of Dr. Heylyn, or any of the old
Royallists, viz. It is an ill sign of prosperity to any Kingdom, where such as
deserve well, find no other recompense, than the peace of their own Consciences.

But alas! all these unkindnesses and neglects were trivial to the irreparable
loss of his eyesight: of which he found a sensible and gradual decay for many
years; and therefore was the better enabled to endure it. But about the year
1654. tenebrescunt videntes per foramina; those that looked out of the windows
were darkened, and he was constrained to make use of other men's eyes (but not
in the sense as great persons do) to guide him in the Motions of his Body* tho
not in the Contemplations of his Mind. Like good old Jacob, Genesis 48. 10.
his eyes were dim and he could not see: but there was this difference between
them, that the Patriarchs eyes were grown dim by reason of Age, but Dr. Heylyns
were darkened with Study and Industry. As the whole frame of his Body was
uniform, comely and upright, his Stature of a middle size and proportion; so
his Eye naturally was strong, sparkling, and vivacious; and as likely to
continue useful and serviceable to its Owner, as any man's whatsoever. But by
constant and indefatigable Study (which for many years he took in the night,
being hurried up and down with a successive crowd of Business in the day)
either the Crystalline humor was dried up, or the optic Nerves became
perforated and obstructed; by which means the Visive Spirits were stopped, and
an imperfect kind of Cataract was fixed in his eyes, which neither by inward
Medicines nor outward Remedies could ever be brought to that maturity and
consistence, as to be fit for cutting. Detestabilis est caecitas, si n^mo
oculos perdiderit, nisi cui eruendi snnt. No punishment would be more dreadful
than blindness, if none lost their eyes, but those that had them pulled out by
tortures and burning basins. But this Stalius calls blindness so.
Sors Letho dirior omni, this heavy affliction was by God laid upon Dr. Heylyn
to exercise his Faith, to quicken Devotion, to try his Patience, Tul. Tus.
Quaest. lib. 5.
and to prepare him for his merciful Rewards. Animo multis modis variisque
delectari licet, etiamsi non adhibeatur Aspectus, Loquor autem de docto homine
and erudito, cui vivere est cogitare: Sapientis autem cogitatio non ferme ad
investigandum adhibet oculos advocatos: etenim si nox non adimit vitam beatam,
cur dies nocti similis adimat? A man may recreate himself various ways, although
his sight fail, if he be knowing and learned: For a wise man will entertain
himself with the noblest Contemplations without the help of his bodily organs;
the life of such an one consisting more in Meditation than Action. And if a
dark night cannot render our lives miserable, why should daylight be able to
effect it, which to a blind man is no other than night? And that incomparable
Author proceeds in presenting his Reader with many instances of persons that
were highly useful in their Generations after they were deprived of their
sight. And Dr. Heylyn, as well as Cneus Aufidius, having Animum acutum, was
able to give advice to his Friends, to solve Doubts, to clear and defend Truth,
to write Histories, and videre in literis: For when the windows were quite
darkened, the Candle of the Lord, Ibid.
his itellectual lamp, burnt more clear and bright within him. Democritus (as
the Orator goes on) luminibus amissis, Alba scil* and Atra discernere non
poterat: at vero bona, mala; equa, iniqua; honesta, turpia; utilia, inutilia;
magna, parva poterat* and sine varietate colorum licebat vivere beat: sine
notione rerum non licebat. -- Our Reverend Divine, when he had lost his eyes,
could not ('it is true) discern white from black; but which was a more
advantageous Speculation, he could discern good from evil; and just from
unjust, and things lovely, and honest and profitable, from those which were
impure, unrighteous and incommodions. And a man may be happy, tho he does not
discern variety of Colors, but he cannot be so, unless he his senses exercised
to discern between good and evil.

Another of the Roman Orators reckons up many advantages of blindness;
Quintilian. in Declam.
telling us, Caecus non irascitur, non odit, non concupiscit; and cum corpora
nostra vigorem de luminibus accipiunt, pereunt cum suis vitia causis, i. e. one
that is deprived of sight has no objects to kindle his Anger, to precipitate
his Revenge, to inflame his Lips; which must needs languish and decay, when
those bodily Members, through which they commonly gain admission into our
Souls, are impaired and become useless. And amongst other advantages which the
Doctor received from this heavy misfortune, he acquaints Mr. Harington of one:
Certam. Epist. 310.
For looking on him (as he writes) as a generous and ingenuous Adversary, I
should count it no crime to be ambitious of your society and friendship, had
not my great decay of sight (besides other infirmities growing on me) rendered
me more desirous of a private and retired life, than of such an agreeable
conversation. And so apprehensive was he of his approaching End, that he
elsewhere tells his Reader, The small remainder of my life will be better spent
in looking back upon those errors, which the infirmities of nature and other
humane frailties, have made me subject to, that so I may redeem the time,
because my former days were evil. And I can truly say, that of those short
Memoirs which he left behind him of the eleven first Lustrums of his Life (for
they extended no further) he ever and anon intersperses some Religious Sentence
or other, relating to those Vicissitudes, with which the Divine Providence was
pleased to exercise him, to express the devout affections that he had toward
his Maker and Redeemer; taking all occasions, according to the various
accidents and occurrences that happened unto him, to stir up his Soul, either
to magnify the Mercies, or acknowledge the Justice, or adore the Wisdom, or
trust in the Power, or rely upon the promises of God. When Sir W. S.
one of his Adversaries was surprised with the Advertisements, that were so
speedily made upon one of his Books, and twitted him with having numerous
Helpers; conceiving it impossible, that a Treatise so accurately writ should be
exposed to public light within so short a space of time; the Doctor replies,
Tho I cannot say that I have many H^lpers, yet I cannot but confess in all
humble Gratitude, that I have one great Helper, which is instar ^mnium, even
the Lord my God: Auxilium meum a Domino, my help comes even from the Lord
which made Heaven and Earth. And I can say with the like humble acknowledgments
of Gods mercies to me, as Jacob did, when he was asked about the quick dispatch
which he made in preparing savoury meat for his aged Father, Voluntas Dei fuit
ut tam cito occurreret mihi quod volebam, Genesis 27. 20. It is Gods goodness and
his only, that I am able to do what I do.

That name is yet to be mentioned, that was ever loaded with more reproach and
infamy than Dr. Heylyn's. And he ever kept silence, unless it was when he was
accused of gross errors against any Fundamentals in Religion: For that he
looked upon to be a self-conviction; having that advice of St. Hierom
frequently in his Writings, but oftener in his thoughts, In suspicione
haereseos se nolle quenquem fore patientem. But as for private whispers or bold
calumnies, which reached only to the private concerns of his Name and Repute,
they did not in the least move him; having long learned with him in the old
Historian (as he once told one of his friends) civili animo laceratam
existimationem far, to bear with an undisturbed mind the greatest calumnies
which either the tongues or pens of malicious men could lay upon him. But when
ever the concerns of Church or State in general, or his Friends in particular
required his helping hand, then like the dumb Son of Craesus, he found a Tongue
(and a Pen too) tho no extremity of his own (unless in the Instance now
mentioned) could remove him from his espoused silence.

And as he had learned to contemn calumnies himself; so he endeavored to fix
the same resolution in the poor ejected Clergy; Cert. Epistola. Epist. Ded.
thus writing to them, You, my Brethren, who have been so long trained up in
the School of patience; the suffering of Reproaches, whether from theTongue or
Pen, from the Press or Pulpit, cannot be taken out as a new Lesson, never
learnt before. I know I speak to men, who are not to be put in mind of that
which you have learned in Aesop's Fables: In one of the Morals, you are taught
to imitate those generous Horses, Qui latrantes caniculos cum contemptu
praetereunt, which use to pass by barking Curs with neglect and scorn: Or to be
told of that which you once read in the Annals of Tacitus, Tacit. Anal. l. 13.
viz. Convitia spreta exolescunt, Those contumelies die soonest, that are least
regarded: or to be remembered of that memorable saying of St. Cyprian, who had
suffered as much in this kind, as the most amongst us; but having suffered no
more from the tongues of his enemies, than Christ our Savior did before from
the hands of Judas, he thus encouraged himself and others by this golden
sentence, Nec nobis turpe esse pati, quae passus est Christus; nec illis
gloriam facere, quae fecerit Judas. Which passages, tho very full of use and
comfort, how infinitely short are they of that celestial consolation, which our
Savior gives us in his Gospel, pronouncing a Blessing upon all those who are
persecuted and reviled, and against whom all manner of evil is falsely spoken
for his name sake; assuring them, that it should be cause of gladness and
rejoicing to them in this present life, and of great reward in Heaven for the
life to come. Let us therefore behave our selves with such Sobriety and
Moderation, such Piety and Christian Candor, that the ignorance of foolish men
may be put to silence, and that all those who speak against us as evildoers,
may be convicted of their faults and malicious speaking, before God and man. --
Let us entertain Fortune bythe day, and patiently submit our selves to the
appointments of that heavenly Providence, which powerfully disposes all things
to the good of the Universe. So doing we shall show our selves the Followers of
that Lamb of God, who opened not his mouth before the Shearers; the Scholars of
that gracious Master, who when he was reviled, reviled not again, nor used any
unbecoming speeches in the midst of his sufferings.

Nor were these the only instances of Christian Goodness, that were conspicuous
in this Reverend person. His Charity was more than verbal or persuasive. For
not to enlarge upon those particular Testimonies of his Liberality to private
Christians in relieving their Wants, as well as rescuing them from their Errors
and evil Principles (of which there might be given considerable Instances)
those public demonstrations of his Bounty and Generosity in contributing to
the necessities of his Prince, not only to his power, but beyond his power,
ought not to be passed over in silence. For first in the year 1639. when King
Charles I. began his Journey against the Scots, the English Clergy by means of
Archbishop Laud (but first thought on and proposed by Dr. Heylyn) were aiding
and assisting to his Majesty in their speedy and liberal Contributions; and the
Doctor for his Parsonage of Alresford gave 50 l. for South-Warnb. 20 Marks; and
at that time he was in the First Fruits for it. He was the very first of of the
Clergy that subscribed in Hampshire, and his example proved so powerful, that
in that very County, the sum of what was given by the Clergy amounted to no
less than 1348 l. 2 s. 4 d. In the year 1642. when the War was actually begun,
he attending upon his Royal Master at Reading, made a Present to him of Money
and Plate, to the value of 100 l. Neither was his liberal hand defective in
some other Instances of Bounty; for An. Dom. 2634. he gave 20 l. toward the
repairing of S. Paul's Church. And after the return of King Charles II. tho by
the neglect of his Friends he was rendered an object of scorn and triumph to his
Enemies, yet he gave in the Royal Benevolence 50 l. for his Parsonage of
Alresford, besides his share of 1000 l. as he was Prebendary of Westminster.

And that which enabled him to do these and many other such Charitable acts,
was an honest Providence or Thrift; that being (as one calls it) the Fuel of
Magnificence. And certainly our Churches, with other Monuments of Honor, that
are in this and other Nations erected to the Worship of God and the benefit of
mankind, were no more built by the riotous prodigal Spend-thrift, than by the
penurious Mammonist.

Temperance is the common Attendant of Frugality: in the exercise of which
Virtue, the Doctor was a perfect Christian Philososopher. For in what ever he
eat or drank, he confined himself to simple nourishments, designing only to
satisfy natures necessities; but never irritating his Appetite with any
artificial Delicacies either of Meat or Drink. And of all the calumnies with
which his Reputation was sullied and aspersed, none of his virulent Enemies had
the confidence ever to charge him either with incontinency or insobriety. For
he never gratified or diverted himself in any wanton behavior or brutish
desires. And the only reason that induced him so soon to sorsake the Seat of
the Muses and enter into the state of Marriage, was to avoid all unchaste and
impure inclinations, and to be possessed of an habitual chastity of mind, as
well as of body. To preserve which, he had not only a continual watchfulness
over his Appetite, being never seen raised by Drink beyond his usual
cheerfulness; but like the holy Apostle he was in weariness and painfulness, 2
Cor. 11. 27.
in watchings often, in hunger and thirst, in fastings often. His Study was
seldom without his company, except his Meals, or necessary business, or the
Rules of Civility obliged him to take his leave of it. Little or no exercise
was allowed by him for his bodily health, except walking in his House or
Garden; and then he was digesting and fixing those Notions and Observations in
his mind, which he had before read, or caused to be read to him. His Fastings
or Abstinencies were not only very frequent, but so long and tedious, Psalm. 32.
4.
that his bodily moisture was turned into the drought of Summer; and his
digestive faculty became so debilitated and depraved, that he was very often
subject unto Fevers. And perhaps the severity and frequency of his Fastings
might be the cause of his little and short Angers, which were quickly raised
and as speedily stilled and calmed in him; and were also rendered very tolerable
unto those on whom they lighted, not only by the shortness fo their
continuance, but by the wonderful goodness of his Nature, which expressed it
self (as in many other things, so) in an habitual pleasantness and cheerfulness
of conversation, and a tender compassion to all persons that groaned under the
weight of any Trouble or Affliction.

The Son of Syrach resembles Ecclus. c. 34. 2, 7.
him, that regards dreams, to one that catches at a shadow, and follows
after the wind, And he gives a reason, For dreams have deceived many, and those
have failed that have put their trust in them. But notwithstanding his decrying
of Dreams as vain and foolish; yet in the very same Chapter he intimates, Verse
6.
that if they be sent from the most High in our Visitation, we may then set our
hearts upon them. And such a Dream as this had our Reverend Doctor of his
approaching End. For on Saturday night before his fatal Sickness, he had this
Dream, viz. That being in an extraordinary pleasant Place, and admiring the
beauty and glory of it, he saw King Charles I. his Martyred Master, and heard
him speaking to him in these words, viz. Peter, I will have you buried under
your Seat at Church, for you are rarely seen but there, or in your Study. This
Dream he related to his Wife the very next morning, telling her it was
extraordinary and significant, and desired her that his Burial might be exactly
according to it. On the Monday he purchased an House in the Almonry, and the
same day had the Writings Sealed and the Money paid; and at night told his dear
Companion, that he had bought that House on purpose near the Abbey, that she
might be near the Church, and serve God after his Copy and Example. And
renewing the charge to her, he went to Bed in as good bodily health, as he had
done before for many years; but after his first sleep, he found himself taken
with a violent Fever, occasioned (as was conceived by his Physician) by eating
of a little Tansey at Supper. It seized him, May 1. 1662. and deprived him of
his understanding for seven days: the eighth day he died; but for some hours
before had the use of his Faculties restored to him, telling one of the Vergers
of the Church, who came to him; I know it is Church-time with you, and this is
As^ension-day, I am ascending to the Church triumphant, I go to my God and
Savior, into Ioys Celestial, and to Hallelujahs Eternal. He died in his great
Climacterical upon Ascension-day 1662. when our Blessed Savior entered into his
Glory, and as a Harbinger went to prepare his place for all his faithful
Followers and Disciples.

The Synagogus annexed to Mr. Herbert's Poems.

Mount, mount my Soul, and climb, or rather fly,
With all thy force on high.
Thy Savior rose not only, but ascended,
And he must be attended,
Both in his Conquest and his Triumph too
His Glories strongly woo
His Graces to them, and will not appear
In their full luster, until both be there.
Where he now sits not for himself alone,
But that upon his Throne,
All his Redeemed may Attendants be,
Robbed and Crowned as he.
Kings without Courtiers are lone men, they say;
And do thou think to stay
Behind one earth, whilst thy King Reigns in Heaven?
Yet not be of thy happiness bereaven.
Nothing that thou can think worth having's here:
Nothing is wanting there,
That thou can wish to make thee truly blessed,
And above all the rest,
Thy Life is hid with God in Jesus Christ,
Higher than what is highest.
O grovel then no longer here on earth,
Where misery every moment drowns thy mirth.
But tower, my Soul, and soar above the Skies,
Where thy true Treasure lies.
Tho with corruption and mortality,
Thou clogged and pinioned be;
Yet thy fleet thoughts and sprightly wishes may
Speedily glide away.
To what thou can not reach, at least aspire,
Ascend, if not indeed, yet in desire.
As for the Offspring of his Loins, God gave him the blessing of the Religious
man in Psalm 128. his Wife being like a fruitful Vine, and his Children (being
in all eleven) as Olive-plants encompassed his Table: nay he saw his Childrens
Children, and (which to him was more than all) he saw peace upon Israel; i. e.
the Church and State restored, quieted and established after many concussions
and confusions, and a total Abolition of their Government.

But the issue of his Brain was far more numerous, than that of his Body; as
will appear by the following Catalogue of Books written by him, viz.

Spurius, a Tragedy MSS. Written An. Dom. 1616.

Theomachia, a Comedy, MSS. 1619.

Geography, twice Printed at Oxon: in Quarto, 1621. 1624. and four times in
London; but afterward in 1652. enlarged into a Folio, under the Title of
Cosmography.

An Essay called Augustus, 1631. inserted since into his Cosmography.

The History of St. George, London, 1631. Reprinted 1633.

The History of the Sabbath, 1635. Reprinted 1636.

An Answer to the Bishop of Lincolns Letter to the Vicar of Grantham, 1636.
Afterward twice Reprinted.

An Answer to Mr. Burtons two Seditious Sermons, 1637.

A short Treatise concerning a Form of Prayer to be used according to what is
enjoined in the 55. Canon, MSS. Written at the request of the Bishop of
Winchester.

Antidotum Lincolniense, or an Answer to the Bishop of Lincoln's Book,
entitled, Holy-Table, Name and Thing, 1637. Reprinted 1638.

An uniform Book of Articles, fitted for Bishops and Archdeacons in their
Visitations, 1640.

De Iure partialis Episcoporum, or containing the Peerage of the Bishops.
Printed in the last Collection of his Works, 1681.

A Reply to Dr. Hackwel, concerning the Sacrifice of the Eucharist MSS. 1641.

A Help to English History, containing a Succession of all the Kings, Dukes,
Marquesses, Earls, Bishops, etc. of England and Wales, Written An. Dom. 1641.
under the name of Robert Hall, but now enlarged under the name of Dr. Heylyn.

The History of Episcopacy, London, 1641. And now Reprinted, 1681.

The History of Liturgies, Written 1642. and now Reprinted, 1681.

A Relation of the Lord Hopton's Victory at Bodmin.

A View of the Proceedings in the West for a Pacification.

A Letter to a Gentleman in Leicestershire about the Treaty.

A Relation of the Proceedings of Sir John Gell.

A Relation of the Queens return from Holland, and the Siege of Newark.

The +, or Black Cross, showing that the Londoners were the cause of the
Rebellion.

The Rebels Catechism. All these seven Printed at Oxon, 1644.

An Answer to the Papists Groundless Clamor, who nickname the Religion of the
Church of England by the name of a Parliamentary Religion, 1644. and now
Reprinted, 1681.

A Relation of the Death and Sufferings of William Laud, Archbishop of
Canterbury, 1644.

The Stumbling Block of Disobedience removed. Written 1644. Printed 1658. and
Reprinted 1681.

An Exposition of the Creed. Folio. London, 1654.

A Survey of France, with an account of the Isles of Guernsey and Iersey.
London, 1656. Quarto.

Examen Historicum, or a Discovery and Examination of the Mistakes, Fa^sities
and Defects in some modern Histories: in two Books. London, 1659. Octavo.

Certamen Epistolare, or the Letter-Combat managed with Mr. Baxter, Dr.
Bernard, Mr. Hickman, and I. H. Esquire London, 1658 Octavo.

Historia Quinque-Articularies. Quarto. London, 1660. Reprinted, 1681.

Respondet Petrus, or, An Answer of Peter Heylyn, D. D. to Dr. Bernards Book,
entitled, The Judgment of the late Primate, etc. London, 1658. Quarto.

Observations on Mr. Ham. L'Strange's History, on the Life of King Charles I.
London, 1658. Octavo.

Extraneus Vapulans, or a Defense of those Observations. London, 1658. Octavo.

A Short History of King Charles I. from his Cradle to his Grave, 1658.

Thirteen Sermons; some of which are an Exposition of the Parable of the Tares,
London, 1659. Reprinted 1661.

The History of the Reformation. London, 1661. Fol.

Cyprianus Anglicus; or the History of the Life and Death of Archbishop Laud.
Folio. London, 1668.

Aerius Redivivus, or the History of the Presbyterians, from the year 1636, to
the year 1647. Oxon. 1670. Fol.

His Monument has, since the erection of it, had violence offered it by some
rude and irreligious hand; there being ever in the world those ill men, who
regard the Names of the Learned, neither whilst they are living, nor when they
are dead. It is erected on the North-side of the Abbey in Westminster, over
against the Sub-Deans Seat; and the Right Reverend Dr. Earl, then Dean of
Westminster, and afterward Bishop of Salisbury, was pleased to honor the memory
of his dear Friend with this following Inscription.

Depositum mor^ale
Petri Heylyn S. Th. D.
Hujus Ecclesiae Prebendarii and Subdecani,
Viri plane memorabilis,
Egregiis dotibus instructissimi,
Ingenio acri and foecundo,
Iudicio subacto,
Memoria ad prodigium tenaci;
Cui adjunxit incredibilem in Studiis patientiam;
Quae, cessantibus oculis, non cessarunt.
Scripsit varia and plurima,
Quae jam manibus teruntur;
Et argumentis non vulgaribus
Stylo non vulgari suffecit.
Constans ubique Ecclesiae,
Et Majestatis Regiae Assertor;
Nec florentis magis utriusque
Quam afflictae:
Idemque perduellium and Schismaticae Factionis
Impugnator acerrimus.
Contemptor Invidiae,
Et animo infracto.
Plura ejusmodi meditanti,
Mors indixit Silentium;
Vt sileatur
Efficere non potest.
Obiit Anno Aetat. 63.
Posuit hoc illi moestissima Conjux.
FINIS.

