THE HISTORY OF THE REVOLUTIONS IN SWEDEN, OCCASIONED BY The Change of
Religion, and Alteration of the Government in that Kingdom.

Written Originally in FRENCH, By the Abbot VERTAT: Printed the last Year at
PARIS, And now done into ENGLISH, By J. MITCHEL, M. D. With a Map of Sweden,
Denmark and Norway.

LONDON, Printed for A. Swall and T. Child, at the Unicorn in St. Paul's
Churchyard. 1696.

TO HIS GRACE The DUKE of SHREWSBURY, One of HIS MAJESTY'S Principal
Secretaries OF STATE.
May it please your Grace,
AS we have the unwonted, and perhaps the peculiar Happiness, to live under a
Sovereign, whose Interest is inseparably united to that of his Subjects, we
have also the Pleasure to see the Management of Affairs committed to the Care
of a Minister, who has extinguished the unhappy Distinction betwixt a Courtier
and a Patriot; and has an equal Regard to the Honor of the Crown, and to the
true Interest of his Country. You are at once the Favorite of the Prince, and
of the People: You have always preserved an unshaken Fidelity to the one, and a
generous Affection to the other; and are equally beloved by the Former, and
adored by the Latter. You Inherit the unsullied Glory of your Ancestors; and
the Illustrious Name of TALBOT is now as Terrible to Lewis XIV. as it was
heretofore Fatal to Charles the Seventh, The Eyes of all the World are fixed
upon you; they look upon you as a Public Good; and, next to your Great Master,
you are the Object of their Hope and Expectations. You are the Chief Encourager
and Promoter of Public Designs, and are consequently the fittest Patron for a
Work that gives us so lively an Idea of the vast Disproportion betwixt the
Subjects of a Hero, and the Slaves of a Tyrant. And it is this Consideration
alone, which makes me hope, That the Honesty of the Intention will prevail with
you to excuse the Errors and Presumption of

Your Grace's Most humbly Devoted Servant, John Mitchel.

The TRANSLATOR's PREFACE.
SInce there are few (if any) Readers, who are not desirous to be either
diverted or instructed, the Translator presumes that he may spare himself the
Trouble of Recommending a Book which is so admirably well fitted to both these
Designs, and will infallibly satisfy those who expect either Pleasure or
Advantage by perusing it.

It Is generally supposed to be written by the Abbot VERTAT; whose former
Performances in this kind were received abroad with the unanimous Approbati^n
of the best Judges, and have justly entitled him to the Character of an
Excellent Historian. But tho such as are acquainted with his other Works will
be always ready to do Justice to his Merit and Reputation, those who reflect
upon his Nation, Religion and Profession, and consider how frequently and
grossly the Public has been abused with Romances, under the specious Title of
Histories, will be apt to suspect the Credit of his Relations, and fancy
themselves in danger of being imposed upon by the impudent Forgeries of a
Maimburg or Varillas.

It must be confessed, that such Prejudices as these are so far from being
Groundless Suspicions, that they are the natural Consequences of a prudent
Caution. But since it would be equally unjust and inhumane to condemn a Man for
the Fault of another, our Author may reasonably desire his Readers to suspend
their Judgment till they have examined his Book, which is the best Apology that
can be made for him: For they will soon find a more than sufficient Number of
convincing Proofs of his Innocence and Integrity, and be obliged to acknowledge
that his Exactness and Impartiality are as conspicuous as the Clearness and
Solidity of his Judgment. He penetrates into the deepest Mysteries of State,
and discovers the hidden Springs that put all the Wheels in motion. He omits
nothing that may serve to illustrate or embellish his Subject; and never
inserts any thing that is either impertinent, or beneath the regard of a
Historian. His Characters are just and lively, his Digressions few and useful,
and he is every where consistent with himself. He represents Tyranny and
Oppression in their native and ugly Form; and exposes the Avarice and
Usurpations of the Church and Court of Rome, with as much Freedom as he
censures Luther and his Followers. Such Plain-dealing and Ingenuity may be
looked upon as Prodigies, in a Book that is printed at Paris, dedicated to the
Chancellor of France, and written by a French Abbot. And such rare and
excellent Qualities may, in some measure, atone for the Harshness and Severity
of his Reflections upon the First Reformers; and will certainly oblige all
moderate Persons to pardon an Error that must be reckoned among the Prejudices
of Education, and perhaps was only intended as a Blind to cover him from the
Res^ntment of the Court and Clergy, who might probably be offended at some bold
Strokes in his Work, and conclude that the Blow was really aimed at Them.

The Story describ^d in this Book is so uncommon, and attended with such
improbable, and even almost incredible Circumstances; the Characters of the
Principal Actors are so extraordinary, especially of the two contending
Princes, who seem equally to exceed the usual Bounds of Humanity, tho on very
different Accounts, the one being as far below as the other is above the common
Level of Mankind: The Turns are so unexpected, and disclose such surprising
Scenes, that the Reader can hardly forbear suspecting that he owes the whole
Entertainment to the Fancy of the Author, and has only been diverted with the
Fictitious Adventures of a Fabulous Hero. But the Truth of the Swedish
Revolution will never be questioned by those who consider that the History of
the present Age, and even our own Experience, may furnish us with Examples of
no less wonderful Events; as it appears evidently by the following Instances.

Since no Man can be supposed to be capable of forgetting the late memorable
Transactions in this Kingdom, 'twou'd be a ridiculous piece of Nicety to
dispute the Truth of even the oddest and most improbable Circumstances of K.
Christiern's Flight and Abdication.

The Story of the Massacre of Stockholm will not be condemned as a Fable; nor
the unmanly Barbarity of that Prince, in murdering a whole Parliament, be
reckoned too black a Crime to be fastened upon a Crowned Head, at a time when
we have reason to believe that there are some Princes in Europe who scruple not
to consent to, and even encourage the Assassination of a Sovereign.

No Man who is acquainted with the Amors of a Monarch who makes at present a
very great Figure in the World, will be surpised at the Character of
Sigebrite, and the Extravagant Passion of her Unfortunate Lover.

To conclude the Parallel, the undaunted Courage, steady Resolution, Admirable
Conduct, Generous Magnanimity, and all the other Peaceful and Military Virtues,
which are so eminently Remarkable in all the Actions of that Great Prince, who
may be justly styled the Deliverer of the Swedish Nation, the Establisher of
the Reformed Religion, and the Restorer or rather the Founder of the Monarchy
of that Kingdom, will perhaps be looked upon as a Combination of Prodigies, and
fill the mind of the Reader with an agreeable Amazement; but cannot appear
Incredible to those who have the Happiness to live under the Dominion of a
Hero, whose matchless Bravery, and inimitable Virtues darken the Fainter Glory
of Gustavus's Reign.

It Is hoped the Candid Reader will excuse the Faults of the Translation, in
consideration of the extreme Haste that occasion'd'em: especially since 'twas
thought fit to let pass some Inaccuracies of Style, rather than to delay the
Publication of a Work that may be of considerable use in the present Juncture.
The end of the First, and the middle of the Second Part, both the Index's and
the French Author's Preface were done by other Hands, but revised by the
Translator of the rest, who takes this occasion to acknowledge that the Reader
might have met with a more agreeable Entertainment, if an Mr. Terne
Ingenious Gentleman who designed to have undertaken the Work, and had actually
begun the Translation, had had leisure to carry it on.

THE AUTHOR'S PREFACE.
AMong the most Entertaining Subjects that History may afford us, I know none
that deserve more Attention, than such Changes as States are subject to, with
respect to Religion and Government. Every Man finds himself concerned on the
Account of what is most capable of moving his Affections, his Conscience, and
his Ambition: Each Character is animated with lively Passions; All is in
motion. The People designing to reassume that which they think to be their
Primitive Right, and most ancient Privileges, will choose their own Master, and
determine their Religion: They side with those, in whose Favor Prejudice and
Passion sway 'em; while the Grandees themselves are forced to fawn upon the
Mob, that they may by their Assistance advance their own Interests, and private
Designs.

When the Historian is a good Painter, he presents a most curious Draught to
the Reader's View: And if he be also a good Judge, he makes that useful and
profitable, that before was pleasant; by showing, on one hand, the
Inconveniences that attend those surprising Revolutions; and on the other, by
giving us a faithful Description of their Character who appear on the Scene,
and doing those famous Men all the Justice they deserve.

Here are represented a Nobility factious within it self, almost independent
from their Sovereign, above all, jealous of the Authority which the Bishop's
assumd, and envious of their excessive Revenues. The Prelates usurping their
Prince's Rights; and often profaning the Sanctity of their Character, by
Sedition and Violence. A whole Kingdom divided between these two Parties; and
the Danes turning their Neighbors Troubles to their own Profit and Advantage,
declaring for one of 'em, and at length falling upon both. A Massacre of the
Senate and Nobility: And, in a Word, the Swedish Monarchy shaken in its very
Foundation, destitute of its King, Senate, Generals and Armies; and ready to
become an unhappy Province of Denmark. When a Prince comes on the Stage, famous
for his many Exploits, and the Head of that Branch which now sits on the
Throne; whose Courage and Conduct expels the Danes out of his Country, and
whose Policy does by degrees gain him all that Authority which the Clergy and
Nobility had usurped on his Predecessors.

Here those Riches, which, in the former Ages of the Church, were the Marks of
the Prince's Bounty, and the Reward of the Clergy's Holiness and Virtue, are
seen to become the Occasion of those Disorders; which was the Cause and
Pretense of their being utterly deprived of these Advantages.

Here an Elective Crown is made Successive and Hereditary, by the Valor of a
Prince, who, from an unhappy Exile, becomes King; and so Absolute, as to change
the Form of the Government, as his Inclination and Interest directed him.

I own, I was offended at the little Exactness and Sincerity many Authors wrote
with, in relation to the Affairs with Sweden: Some have disguised the Truth of
Things; and others have not been curious enough in informing us of the most
remarkable Passages, and the Motives of those Enterprises. But the more these
Authors seemed to contradict one another, the more Care I took to reconcile
'em; and to distinguish what was true from what was false, I perused with
greater Application all the Historians who treat of this Subject, whether
Ericus Upsaliensis. Chorsgraphia Scandinaviae Adami Bremensis. Tumbae veterum
apud Sueones Gothosque Regum. Exegesis de quinque primariis Suecorum
Gothorumque antiquis emporiis. Retorsio adversus Petram Parvum. Jacobus
Ziglerus testis oculates Coedis Holmiensis. Hu^feld. Annals Episcoporum
Slevincensium. Theatrum nobititatis Suecanae, Messenii. Joannes Gothus Magnus.
Olaus Magnus. Pontanus Saxo Grammaticus. Loc^enius. Scheffcrus. Chytraeus.
Bazius. Buraeus. Pafenderf. Vita Ar^^hiepisc. Upsalentium. Grantzius.
Vastorius. Meurs^^. Scandia illustrata Messenii. Antiquitates Suecogo^hisae
Loctenii. Monsieur de Thou. F^orimona as Remond. Varillas. Maimbourg.
Swedes, Danes, German or French, Catholics or Protestants: I read 'em free
from all other Interest or Passion, than that of knowing the Truth, and writing
it with Exactness: And I have reason to hope I shall not be accused of being
biased by any Party; a Fault too mean to be committed by a sincere and
impartial Historian.

I have not praised the Heads of the Roman Party in all they did, because all
their Actions were not laudable: They always had the Advantage of defending a
Party which had the Truth on its side; but they themselves very often were
contented with an outward Zeal, without an inward Faith; and were less eager in
the Defense of their Religion, than in that of the Wealth it procured 'em.

Neither have I wholly blamed nor despi'sd the Heads of the Protestant Faction,
because they were not wholly to be blamed, or despised: I have distinguished
Error from Malice; and respected the great Parts, and excellent Qualifications
which God, as the Author of Nature, had endowed such Persons with, as he had
not led by his Grace into the Knowledge of his true Religion.

Some Books lately Printed for A. Swall and T. Child, at the Unicorn in St.
Paul's Churchyard.
THesaurus Geographicus: A new Body of Geography: Or, a Complete Description of
all the known Countries of the Earth; illustrated with Historical Remarks, and
Accurate Maps, Engraven on Copper. Together with Descriptions of all
considerable Cities and Towns; and Draughts of the Fortifications in Flanders,
viz. Dunkirke, Newport, Ostend, Oudenard, Maestricht, Liege, Namur, Luxemburg,
Mons, Charleroy, Aeth, etc. Together with other principal ones in Europe. To
all which is premised an Introduction, containing the General Doctrines of
Geography, the Systems of the Universe, the Doctrine of the Spheres, etc. In
Folio.

Romae Antiquae Notitia: Or, The Antiquities of Rome: in two Parts. I. A short
History of the Rise, Progress, and Decay of the Commonwealth. II. A Description
of the City: An Account of the Religion, Civil Government, and Art of War; with
the Remarkable Customs and Ceremonies, public and private. With Copper Cuts of
the principal Buildings, etc. To which are prefixed two Essays concerning the
Roman Learning, and the Roman Education. By Basil Kennet, of C. C. C. Oxon.
Dedicated to the Duke of Gloucester. Octavo.

The Evangelical History: Or, The Life of our Blessed Savior Jesus Christ;
Comprehensively and plainly related: With Practical Inferences and Discourses
thereupon. Adorned with Copper Cuts. Octavo.

The Evangelical History: Part the Second. Being the Lives and Acts of the Holy
Apostles, comprehensively and plainly related, according to the Holy
Scriptures, and the Writings of the Primitive Fathers of most approved
Authority. Illustrated with the Effigies of the Apostles, and a Map of their
Travels, fairly Engraven on Copper. Octavo.

A new History of Ecclesiastical Writers: Containing an Account of the Lives,
and an Abridgment of the Works of the Primitive Fathers, and other
Ecclesiastical Writers, from the Time of our Savior, to the End of the Ninth
Century. Written in French, by L. E. du Pin: Englished. In Seven small Volumes,
in Folio.

The Seventh Volume of Monsieur du Pins Ecclesiastical History: Containing the
History of all Transactions in the Church, during the Ninth Century. Englished,
in Folio, may be had alone.

CAMDEN'S BRITANNIA: Newly Translated into English: With large Additions and
Improvements, and Maps of every County, newly Engraven according to the latest
and best Surveys. Published by Edmund Gibson, of Queen's College in Oxford.
Folio.

Now in the PRESS.
THE Antiquities of Greece: Or, An Account of the Religion, Civil Government,
Magistrates, Laws, Customs, Military Discipline, Arms, Public Buildings,
Exercises, Sports, etc. of the Ancient Grecians. With a Description of the City
of Athens, etc. Octavo.

The History of the Revolutions in Portugal. Done out of French.

The Memoirs of the Imprisoned Marshall de Boufflers.

Important Me^n^^^.

A Continuation of the Voyage to the World of Descartes.

All (...) from the French, will be speedily (...).

A TABLE Of the Principal Matters.
Contained in the First Part.
A.
ADministrators of Sweden, what the Dignity was 29 Albert, second Son of the
Duke of Meckelburg King of Sweden, his Reign 9 his Subjects deposed him 10, 13
he is defeated by Margaret and taken Prisoner 14 Joannes Angelus Arcemboldi,
Legate of Pope Leo. X. in the Northern Kingdoms 49 his good and bad qualities
50 his Covetousness in heaping up Treasure ib. he distributes Indulgences ib.
he holds a Conference with Christiern King of Denmark ibid. he promises to
maintain his Interest against the Administrator of Sweden 52 he departs for the
Court of Sweden ibid. his Negotiation in Sweden with the Administrator ibid.
and seq. by his discourse he gives occasion to the Administrator to suspect
that he was brought over to take part with his Enemies. 53 The Administrator
permits him to distribute his Indulgencies in Sweden 54 he gathers together
vast sums of Money in Sweden and the Administrator lets him export them out of
the Kingdom 55 He discovers to the Administrator the designs of the King of
Denmark his correspondence with the Clergy of Sweden, and the Treachery of the
two Governors of the Castles of Stockholm and Nicoping 56 he returns to
Denmark, and seems concerned at the ill Success of his Negotiation; ibie. the
Pope enjoins him to take another journey to Sweden, and to threaten the
Administrator with Excommunication in his name; 66 he used all possible means
to engage that Prince to give Satisfaction to the Pope, ibid. the Administrator
offers him the Archbishopric of Upsal, 68 he blames the Archbishops conduct,
contrary to the Orders he had received from the Pope, to maintain his
Authority, ibid. he imploys his Friends to persuade his Holiness to confirm the
deposition of that Prelate, ibid. he returns from Sweden to Denmark 70 Arwide a
Nobleman of great note in West- Gothland, he declares for Gustavus against the
Danes, and by his order lays Siege to the Castle of Wadestene Augustine the
Court of Rome usually employed Augustine Mo^ks i^ Savony to publish the
Indulgences, they were supplanted by the Jacobins, the mischiefs that ersu'd
B.
ERic Banner a Danish Lord asks leave to keep his Kinsman Gustavus upon his
parole, 76 he obtains his request upon condition that he should cause Gustavus
to be conducted to the Castle of Calo, whereof he was Governor, and that he
should pay six thousand Crowns of Gold for his Ransom, if he suffered him to
make his escape, 76, 77 the kind entertainment which Banner showed to Gustavus.
77 Banner being informed of the Flight of Gustavus his Prisoner, pursues and
overtakes him, 89 he taxes him with ingratitude, ibid. he is convinced at last
of the equity of his Reasons 90 Bishops of Sweden, their Authority and Riches
See Clergy Olaus Bond, Lord of Nericia rises up in Arms against the Danes and
besieges Orebro the Capital City of Nericia The Bull of Leo X. which suspends
the Kingdom of Sweden from divine Service, and excommunicates the Administrator
with the whole Senate 69 The Burghers and other Inhabitants of the Maritime
Towns of Sweden, 6 why their Deputies had little Authority in the Diets ib.
C.
CAlmar, the union of Calmar, 16 the statutes and conditions of it. ibid. It
was the Foundation and Original of the Wars that continued above an Age between
Sweden and Denmark; 16 Christiern makes himself Master of Calmar, 95 he gives
the Government of it to Severinus of Norby a Danish Lord ibid. Canutson; Grand
Marshal of Sweden, acknowledged King of Sweden and Norway by the Estates, 23 he
goes about to infringe the Authority and Four of the Bishops; 24 they compel
him to leave the Kingdom, 26 he is set on the Throne again after seven years of
Exile, 27 he is detained and taken Prisoner, 28 he was constrained to renounce
the title of King, ibid. and was sent away to a Castle in Finland, ibid. he
gets possession of the Throne a third time 29 Charles V. his aspiring to an
universal Monarchy; It is reported that he gave his Sister in Marriage to
Christiern, only on condition, that he should acknowledge him for his Successor
to the three Northern Kingdoms, in case he should die without issue Christiern
the first Count of Oldenburg Progenitor of the Royal Family that now Reigns in
Denmark. 22 Canutson hinders him from being owned as a Sovereign Prince by the
Estates of Sweden. 23 For what reason; ibid. after the deposing of Canutson he
was proclaimed King of Sweden and Norway, 26 he was expelled seven years after
27 Christiern II. King of Denmark, his good and bad qualities, 37 he aspires to
the Throne of Sweden, ibid. what he did in order to get possession of it, ibid.
and sequ. he is offended at the Mission of the Legate Arcemboldi and why, 50 he
endeavors to make use of him to prosecute his designs against Sweden with
greater success, 51 and sequ. he communicates his designs to him, 52 he tells
him that he was assured of the Castles of Stockholm and Nicoping, ibid. he
gives private orders to his Admiral to affront upon some pretense the first
Swedish Vessels that he should meet. 57 Pope Leo X. publishes a Bull of
Excommunication against the Kingdom of Sweden and intrusts Christiern King rf
Denmark with the execution of it, 69 that Prince having received the Bull from
the Pope, enters Sweden at the head of his Army, and immediately destroyed the
Country with Fire and Sword 70 to give a color of Justice and a show of
Religion to these Cruelties, he caused the Popes Bull to be posted up in all
places where he committed these outrages, ibid. he besieges Stockholm, ibid.
Christiern is obstinately resolved to continue the Siege contrary to the advice
of his Generals, 71 he raises the Siege for fear of being hemmed in between
the Town and the Swedish Army, ib. his Rear Guard is beat and routed, ibid. the
whole Baggage of his Army is taken, ibid. and three hundred of his Men are made
Prisoners; ibid. the wind proved so contrary that he staid three Months without
being able to set Sail out of the Road of Stockholm, ibid. the miserable
condition which his Fle^t was reduced to for want of Water and Provision, ibid.
Christiern sends to propose a Truce for some days to the Administrator, ibid.
it was accepted and for what reason, 73 he forms a design to make himself
Master of the Administrators Person by treachery, ibid. after what manner,
ibid. Christiern being disappointed of his design against the Administrator, he
endeavors that it may succeed better with respect to Gustavus and six other
Lords in the Swedish Army, 74 he proposes an interview in the City of
Stockholm, ib. and offers to appear there in Person, provided Gustavus were
given as a Hostage with six other noble men to be chosen at his pleasure, ibid.
Gustavus and the other Lords being come to salute the King Christiern caused
them to be arrested and disarmed contrary to the public Faith and the Law of
Nations, 75 he strives to bring over Gustavus to his party, but to no purpose,
76 he privately commands him to be dispatched ibid. upon the remonstrance of a
Danish Off^er, he contents himself with a confining him to the Castle of
Copenhagen ibid. Christiern t^kes a resolution to make so great efforts the
next Campaign, as to be able entirely to oppress the Administrator, 78 he gives
orders to his Officers to seize on the Treasure of the Legare Arcemboldi, and
for what reason ibid. he caused the Legate himself to be arrested with all his
effects, 78, 79 he makes new Levies, 79 he raises extra^rdinary Taxes in his
Kingdom without the knowledge or advice of the States, ibid. he obtains four
thousand Foot of Francis I. King of France, 80 he makes Otho Crumpein General
of his Forces, not daring to leave Copenhagen, ibid. this General gives him
notice of the success of his Arms, 87 Christiern appears much concerned at the
news, and why ibid. he fears, lest Otho should make himself Master in his name
of the King Kingdom of Sweden, ibid. or least he should suffer himself to be
prevailed upon by the enemies to take their part, ib. he writes Letters full of
gratitude to Otho, ib. he sends him word to keep him in awe that he intended to
march in Person to Sweden in the Spring at the head of a numerous Army, ib. he
sends several Vessels laden with Salt which was scarce and very dear in Sweden,
and appoints it to be distributed gratis to the principal inhabitants of every
Village, ib. Christiern being informed of the flight of Gustavus, dispatcheth
orders to General Otho to cause him to be apprehended, 90 he enters Sweden in
the Spring, 95 he is received and entertained by the Archbishop and the other
Prelates with extraordinary marks of joy, ib. he solemnly ratifieth the Treaty
of Upsal, ib. he summons the Administrators Relict, who had shut up her self in
Stockholm, and the Governor of Calmar to surrender these two places, ib. he
buys the last of these places, ibid. he gives the Government of it to Severinus
de Norby, ib. he carries on the siege of Stockholm with all imaginable vigor,
96 he caused the A^ministrator's widow to be summoned a second time, 97 she is
forced to capitulate, 98 he is received into the City at the head of four
thousand men, whom he leaves in Garrison, ibid. he calls a Meeting of the
Estates of Sweden on the fourth of November, and appoints on the same day the
Ceremony of his Coronation, 98 he leaves the command of his Forces to Severinus
de Norby, 99 he intrusts the Archbishop of Upsal with the Government of the
State, ibid. he sends General Otho to Denmark, whom he suspected by reason of
his victories, he returns to Denmark upon the advice he had received that his
presence was necessary at Copenhagen, ibid. the Senate and principal Lords of
the Kingdom murmur against the augmentation of Christiern's authority, ibid. he
takes a Resolution for the security of his conquest, to destroy the whole
Senate of Sweden, and the principal Noblemen of the Realm, 102 he resolves for
this purpose to make use of the pretenses of excommunication, and to revive the
affair of the Archbishop of Upsal, 103 he disbands the French Forces which he
had in his Service, ibid. the bad usage he show 'em, he makes preparations to
repass into Sweden, in order to be present at the Assembly of the States, which
he had called together ^o assist at the ceremony of his Coronation, ibid. he
causes himself to be attended with two Ecclesiastical Senators, 104 for what
reason, ibid. he imbarks for Sweden accompanied with the Queen his Wife, ibid.
the Ambassador of the Emperor Charles V. brings him the Order of the Golden
Fleece, and congratulates him upon the happy success of all his enterprises,
105 he defers the receiving of the Golden Fleece to the day of his Coronation,
ibid. he takes measures in secret with the Archbishop of Upsal to put to death
their common enemies, 106 he is acknowledged in the Assembly as the Lawful
Sovereign Prince of Sweden, ibid. he invites the Senators and Swedish Nobility
to a magnificent Feast to express joy for his accession to the Crown. ibid he
affects a very courteous familiar deportment, ibid. Trollius Archbishop of
Upsal demands justice of of him against the Senators that had deposed him. 107
Christiern seemingly declines to take any cognizance of the matter, and referrs
it to Theodore Archbishop of Lunden and the Bishop of Oldensee, ibid. he causes
the Administrator's Widow, and all the other Lords who had been invited to the
Feast which he made in the Castle of Stockholm, to be arrested, 108 he sends
executioners to them to warn 'em to prepare for death. 109 On the eight day of
Nov. 1520. he puts to death by the hand of the common Hangman a great number
of Senators as well Ecclesiastical as Secular; the Counsels and Magistrates of
Stockholm, and ninety four Lords, who had been imprisoned in the Castle. 109.
110 The Cruelty and Inhumanity of Christiern, ib. he abandons Stockholm to the
Fury of his Soldiers. 111 A certain Gentleman for bewailing the misfortunes of
his Country, is by Christiern's order bound to a Stake, his privy parts cut
off, his belly ripped up, and his heart pulled out, ibid. he commands the Body of
the Administrator to be dig'd out of the ground, ibid. he gives Orders to drown
that Prince's widow, ibid. his Covetousness obliges him to change his
resolution, and he condemns her to perpetual imprisonment, 113 he alters the
Form of the Government, 114 he oppresses the People with Taxes, ibid. he
threatens the Peasants to cut off one of their Feet, and one of their Hands,
114 he constitutes Theodore Archbishop of Lunden Viceroy in his absence, ibid.
he nominates Thedore and the Bishop of Oldensee to the rich Bishoprics of
Stregne and Scara, ibid. he sets a price upon the head of Gustavus, ibid. he is
styled the Northern Nero, many Lords are Massacred by his Order in their
Castles, ibid. he is surprised with the news of the commotions in Sweden, 133
he dares not go in Person to Sweden, nor send his Forces out of Denmark, ibid.
he equally dreads both the Nobility and Clergy, ibid. for what reason, ibid. he
usurps part of the goods of the Archbishop of Lunden; 136 the application of a
Prophecy of St. Bridget to Christiern, 137 he writes to the Viceroy of Sweden
to order his Army to march to reduce the Mutineers to their Obedience, ibid. he
threatens Gustavus to put his Mother and Sister to death with Torments, if he
should appear at the head of the Rebels, 109 he causes these two Princesses to
be sowed up in a Sack and cast into the Sea, 154 he commands the Danish
Officers, residing in those places which remained in his possession in Sweden,
to destroy all the Swedes that were in his Troops ibid. Christina, the Relict
of Prince Steno Administrator of Sweden, retires into the Citadel of Stockholm
after the death of her Husband. 83 Christiern causes her to be Summoned to
Surrender this Place to him, 95 her resolute Answer, 96 she is obliged to come
before Theodore Archbishop of Lunden, to give an Account of her Husband's
Conduct, 107 she appears with a modest and undaunted Countenance, ibid. she is
Arrested, 108 Christiern gives Orders to drown her, 112 Admiral Norby saves her
Life. ibid. After what manner Christiern causes this Princess to be conveyed
into Denmark, and condemns her to perpetual Imprisonment 4 Christopher of
Bavaria King of Denmark, Sweden and Norway, 22 his Reign and Death. The Clergy
of Sweden, ibid. they alone had larger possessions than the King, and even than
all the other Estates of the Realm together. ibid. The Bishops were for the
most part Temporal Lords of their Episcopal Cities; ibid. every one of them in
their respective Diocesses had made themselves Masters of the goods of all
Ecclesiastical persons that dyed intestate. ibid. They enjoyed the Right of
Fines or Mulcts and Confiscations which anciently belonged to the Prince
Demeans, ibid. they had acquired by pious Foundations and Legacies, many
Mannours belonging to the Crown, 5 The Clergy were allowed to Augment their
estates by donations, but never to diminish them by sales and alienations,
ibid. what the Bishops were wont to exact of the King before they would
acknowledge him for their Sovereign, ibid. th^^ caused their Castles to be
fortified, and kept Garrisons in them, ibid. they took up Arms against their
Neighbors, and sometimes even against their King, 5, 6 the new Authority which
Queen Margaret granted to them. 19 Canutson K. of Sweden made an attempt to
bring down their exorbitant Power, 24 the Bishops treated him at (...)
Heretic, ibid. they sent for Christiern King of Denmark, and caused him to be
proclaimed King of Sweden, 25 and (...). Canutson is reestablished on the
Throne, but the quality and title of a King are only left to him, the Bishops
retaining the sole Authority 29
D.
DAlecarlia a Province of Sweden, 116 a description of it and its Inhabitants,
117 the Dalecarlians rise up in Arms against Christiern, and acknowledge
Gustavus as their Head. 127 etc. ^hattle between the Dalecarlians and Danes
near Westeras, 140 the Dalecarlians enter pell-moll with them into the Town,
141. they make themselves drunk with Brandy and other strong ^^quors which
remained in the Houses of diverse Merchants that tracted; those Commodities,
ibid. the Captain of the Castle marches out at the Head of his Garrison and
kills a great number of Delecarlians whom he found for the most part drunk,
unarmed, and without any defense. ibid. Gustavus puts a stop to the disorder,
142 the Dalecarlians make themselves Masters of the City of Upsal, 143 they
desire leave of Gustavus to go and get in their Harvest, which is granted 'em
146 Denmark the union of Denmark, Sweden and Norway under one Sovereign Prince
effected by the policy of Margaret Queen of these three Kingdoms 16
E.
ERic after Margaret obtains the three Northern, Crowns by right of Succession,
19 he is driven out of his Dominion by whom and for what reason. 20 and sequ.
Eric a Swedish Gentleman
F.
FRedage a Gentleman proscribed by Christiern French. Christiern obtains French
Troops to the number of four thousand Men, 80 the valor and bravery of the
French, 80 they contribute much to the reducing of Sweden, under the obedience
of Christiern, ibid. the unkind usage they received from that Prince, 103 he
refuses to furnish 'em with Provisions to pay 'em their arrears, or to provide
Vessels to carry them back to their own Country ibid.
G.
GOthland-west overrun by the Troops of Otho General of the Army of Christiern
II. King of Denmark 8^ Gustavus his Age, Extraction, Employment and excellent
Endowments, 50 he makes a proposal to furnish the Peasants with Fire-Armes,
because they usually made use only of Bows and Arrows, 60 he defeats, the
Danes, 62 Christiern forms a design to sieze on his Person, 74 he proposes an
interview with the Administrator in the City of Stockholm, and for the security
of his Person, demands Gustavus as a Hostage, ibid Gustavus appears on the
shore, and the Danish Admiral desires him to enter into his Shallop to goand
salute the King, 75 he is conducted to Christiern, who causes him to be
Arrested and Disarmed; ibid. Christiern not being able to gain him to his
party, gives private Orders to take away his Life, 76 afterward he is prevailed
with by the Remonstrances of an Officer to keep him Prisoner in the Castle of
Copenhagen, ibid. Eric Banner a Danish Lord his near kinsman desires him of the
King upon his parole, and obtains his request, 76 upon what conditions, 77
Gustavus having received information of the Calamities of his native Country,
and of the death of the Administrator, is ext^^n^ly troubled, 8 (...) though
mitigated by the kind^ so of Banner, (...) to him, ibid he resolves to procure
his Liberty by any means whatsoever, ibid. he disguises himself in the habit of
a Peasant, ibid. he heirs himself to a Merchant of lower Saxony to drive his
Oxen, 89 Banner being informed of his escape pursues and overtakes him at
Lubeck, ibid. Gustavus gives him satisfaction, 90 he desires succors of the
Government of Lubeck, ibid. the Regency is afraid to declare against the King
of Denmark who had a powerful Fleet, 91 Nicolas Gems principal Consul of Lubeck
assures Gustavus at his depaarture from Stockoolm, that if he could form a
party capable of keeping the Field, the Government of that City would declare
in his favor, ibid. Gusta-vus Lands near Calmar, and enters into the Town, he
ibid. discovers himself to the Governor, and to the principal Officers of the
Garrison, consisting for the most part of Germans. 92 Those Foreigners seeing
him destitute^ of Troops end Attendants, threaten either to kill him or to
deliver him up to Christiern, if he would not retire, ibid. the Danes send out
several parties to apprehend him, ibid. he assumes the habit of a Peasant, and
passes in a Cart laden with Straw, through all the quarters of the Army, ibid,
His Kindred and Friends are unwilling to hold any correspondence with him; the
Peasants refuse to follow him. ibid. Being abandoned of all, he takes a
Resolution to attempt, even at the hazard of his Life, to get alone into
Stockholm, 94 the Danes endeavor to surprise him, and in their search came but
an hour too late to seize him, ibid. he resolves to lie hid in the Convent of
the Carthasians of Griphysholm which was scunded by his Ancestors. ibid. These
Monk refuse to admit him, ibid. he retires to the House of a Peasant of the
Province of Sudermania, an ancient Domestic Servant of his Family, and
absconds there for some months ibid. He is certifi'd by the same Domestic of
the death of his Father and all the Senators, as also of the Massacre of
Stockholm. 116 Christiern sets a price upon the head of Gustavus, 114 Gustavus
retires to the Mountains of Dalecarlia in the habit of a Peasant, accompanied
with a Country sollow who served him for a Guide, 117 his Guide robs him of all
his money, which he had provided for, his subsistence, 118 he loses his way in
the Mountains, ibid, to get a Livelihood, he is forced to hire himself as a
Labourer to work in the Copper-mines, ibid. he is discovered by the Lord of the
Mainour, who entertains him in his House, ibid. etc. this Lordboasts to him of
the strongth and number of his Vassals, 119 Gustavus upon this report resolves
to raise a general Insurrection in that Province, 120 he declares his mind to
the Lord, who excuses himself upon the account of certain politic
considerations, 121 and advises him to deserr his enterprise for some time.
ibid. After manydays wandering up and down in the Woods, he arrives at the sent
of another Gentleman vain'd Peterson. 122 Th^^ Gentleman receives him with all
possible demonstrations of affection and kindness, and nevertheless goes about
to betray him, 123 Peterson's Wife gives notice to Gustavus of her Husband's
Treachery, ibid. she lets him out of her House in the night, and causes him to
be safely conducted by a faithful Servant to a Curate of her acquaintance, 124
he is entertained very kindly by the Curate, ib. who advises him not to have
any recourse to, nor any longer to trust the Nobility of Dalecarlia, 125 he
represents to him that it would be most expedint to address himself direstly to
the Peasants, ibid. the means which they agree upon, to dispose the People to
revolt. ibid. Gustavus appears at Mora, 126 he makes a speech in an Assembly.
127 It Is resolved to submit no longer to the Danish yoke, 128 they take up
Arms, and entreat Gustavus to command 'em. ib. An observation which finally
engaged these Country people to follow Gustavus, with an entire confidence, 129
he forms a Body of four hundred Men, and leads them directly against the
Governuor of the Province. ibid. The Castle is stormed by Scaladeo, and the
whole Garrison put to the Sword, except the Governor who is taken Prisoner.
130 The fame and good succes of this Expedition caused almost the whole
Province to declare in his favor, 131 many Swedish Gentlemen out-lawed by
Christiern, betake themselves to his Army, ibid. he procures a general
defection in Helsingland, Medelpadia, Angermania, Gestricia and Bothnia, ibid.
he increases his Army in his march by the Concourse of Peasants that flocked to
him from all parts, ibid. he abolishes the Impositions and Taxes which
Christiern had laid upon them, ibid. he sends Emissartes throughout the whole
Kingdom of Sweden to dispose the^ Nobility and common People to take up Arms as
soon as he should enter into their Provinces, he gains by secret Negotiations
the greatest part of the Swedish Officers, who served on board Admiral Norby's
Fleet, or in the Viceroys Troops, 132 the Viceroy musters up in a little time
an Army of above fifteen thousand Men, 137 he appears on the banks of the River
Brunebec at the head of his Horse, with a Resolution to force his passage over
it, ibid. Gustavus causes a Bridge to be laid over the same River, and
transports all his Troops, 138 the Stratagem he used to make himself Master of
Westeras, 139 he routs the Danes. 196, etc. he takes the City of Westeras. 141
An unlucky circumstance which had like to have ruined his Army, ibid. by what
means he prevented it, 141. 142 Gustavus gives Order to draw lines of
Circumvallation round the Castle of Westeras, 142 he takes the field, A great
number of Lords and Gentlemen at the head of their Vassals join his Troops. 143
Seventy Swedish Officers at once desert from the Viceroys party, and pass over
into his Army. ib. Arwide, Laurentius Petri and Ol^vs Bond Lords of great note
come to aspire him that the Nobility and People of their Province waited only
for his (...) appear in Arms, ib. he takes the City of Upsal by storm, 144 he
carefully preserves the Archbishop's Palace and Goods, ibid. he sends an
account to the Government of Lubeck of the success of his Arms, and demands
supplys of them ibid. his Agent concludes a Treaty at Lubeck with Stephen de
Sassi a German Colonel, by which that Officer was obliged to land in Sweden in
three months at the head of twelve hundred Men. 145 The Dalecarlians desire
leave to be dismissed in order to take care of their Harvest, 146 he writes a
very respectful Letter to the Archbishop of Upsal to endeavor to bring him off
from the Danish party, 147 he causes it to be delivered to him by two Canons of
Upsal, who imagined that they had a great interest with the Archbishop. ib. The
Prelate rejects the Letter, and demands Troops of the Viceroy to seize upon
Gustavus's Person in Upsal, 148 he was very near surprising him. ibid. Gustavus
retires from Upsal with precipitation, 149 his infantry being terrified left
the main body of his Army, ibid. his Gentleman being hurried on with an unruly
Horse fell upon him, and threw him backward in the water, ibid. he sustains as
it were alone the whole shock of the Danish Forces, ibid. he forms a design to
surprise the Archbishop, ibid. he receives the German Troops commanded by
Colonel Sassi, 150 he defeats the Archbishop's Army, and reenters into Upsal
with his victorious Troops, ibid. he marches directly to Stockholm, 152 he
obliges the Viceroy and the Archbishop to leave the City, he is informed by a
Courtier of the reducing of the Castles of Wadestene, Hora and Sceninc in
Ostro-Gothland, 154 the Towns of Lincoping, Norcoping and Sudercoping, at the
first approach of his Forces take up Arms and expel the Danes. ibid. Gustavus
receives the sad news of the death of his Mother and Sister, who were cast into
the Sea wrapped up in a Sack, by the command of Christiern, ib. he give orders
cut in pieces all the Danes that could be taken, ibid. he marches to
Ostro-Gothland, putting Garrisons and Governors into the Towns that adhered to
his party, ibid. he advances to besiege the Bishop of Lincoping in his Castle.
156 That Prelate opens his Gates and goes out to meet him with his principal
Clergy, ib. he calls a Meeting of the Estates of the Realm at Wadestene, few
Deputies of the Provinces are present, and for what reason. ibid. The Assembly
earnestly entreats him to take upon himself the Administration of the
Government, 157 they are also desirous to confer on him the quality of King,
ibid. he positively refuses this Title, and contents himself with that of
Administrator, ib. he is ackowledg'd by the Estates and in the Army, as General
Governor, and Sovereign Administrator (...) Sweden 158
H.
HAquin, King of Norway 9
I.
INdulgences, the Augustine Monks were usually employed to publish the
Indulgences in Saxony, 134 The Jacobins under Pope Leo X. take this Commission
from them, ibid. They amplify the Virtue and Efficacy of Indulgences, ib. They
spend in Feasts and Riotous Excesses the Money so gathered, ibid. Luther
preaches at first against the Scandalous way of Publishing Indulgences. ibid.
Afterward being exasperated with the Threats and Injuries he received from the
Jacobins, he inquires into the Origin and Foundation of Indulgences: 135 He
maintains the Indulgences were neither grounded on Advice nor Precept, and that
they were equally unprofitable both in this and the other World ibid. Jonas of
Nerderby a Swedish Gentleman outlawed by Christiern, retires to Gustavus's Army
131
K
KIngs of Sweden, their limited Power and Authority, and seq. Many have
attempted at several times to make themselves Masters of the Government, 8 but
in vain, 9, etc. see see Sweden
L
LAurentius Petria, Lord of Sudermani declares in favor of Gustavus, 143 he
besieged the Town of Nicoping ibid. Leo X. Trolle Archbishop of Upsal receives
the Pallium from the hands of Pope Leo X. 38 The Administrator of Sweden writes
to the same Pope complaining of the Archbishops Misdemeanors, 47 Leo X.
answers him in obliging and favorable Terms, ibid. However he only blames that
Prelate in appearance, ibid. for what reason, ibid. He orders his Legate
endeavor to procure an accommodation betwixt the Archbishop and the
Administrator, 53 The Archbishop being constrained to renounce his Dignity in a
full Senate, makes a complaint to the Pope of the Violence that was offered to
him, 66 Leo X. threatens to Excommunicate the Administrator, of he does not
forthwith re-establish the Archbishop, ibid. The Administrator Steno complains
to the Legate of the Pope's partiality, ibid Pope Leo X. upon the
Administrators vs^sal to restere Trolle Archbishop of Upsal (...) former
di^uity, suspends the whole Kingdom of Sweden from Divine Service, and
Excommunicates the Prince and Senate, 69 He commits the execution of this Bull
to the King of Denmark, the professed Enemy of the Swedes ibid. Lincoping, The
Bishops of Lincoping and Stregnez privy to the Secrets of the Archbishop of
Upsal, 83 They boldly declare for Christiern II. King of Denmark, ibid. They
hindered the Nobility from taking up arms to defend their Country, ibid. They
magnify the power of the Danes, 84 They oppose the Election of a new
Administrator, ibid These two Prelates bring over to their Party three Senators
and some Lords, ibid. They engage these Noblemen to demand a Truce of Otho in
the name of the whole Nation, ibid. The Bishop of Lincoping is condemned to
death by the order of Christiern, 110 However he causes him to be set at
Liberty, and for what rea-son, 110. 111 This Prelate durst not declare for
Gustavus against Christiern, but shuts himself up in his Castle, 155 The Bishop
of Lincoping being informed of his displeasure and approach, goes forth to meet
him with some of the chief of his Clergy, in order to appease his Anger and to
make a Submission 156 Lords of Sweden their Authority and Power 6 see Sweden 6
Luther (Martin) an Augustine Monk Doctor and Professor in the University of
Wirtemburg, 134 He Preaches against the abuse the Jacobins made of their power
in publishing of Indulgences, ibid. He published his Opinions concerning the
Remission of Sins, Repentance and Purgatory, He calls in question the Popes
Authority, 136 Luther is condemned at Rome as a Heretic, 135 He engages the
Secular Princes in his defense against the Court of Rome ibid. Laurentius and
Olaus Petri propagate his Doctrine in Sweden, 151 Olaus Petri publicly Preaches
it in the Cathedral Church at Stregnes ibid. He prevails upon the Professors
and Scholars of the University to profess the same Dostrin, 152 The Bishops of
Sweden neglect to take notice of the rise and progress of Lutheranism ibid.
M.
MAgnus Smeck his Reign, Wife and Children, 9 He attempts to render himself an
absolute Monarch in Sweden, and entirely to abolish the Senate, ibid. He is
driven out of Sweden by his Subjects ibid. Margaret, The Estates of Norway
confer upon her the Regency of the Kingdom, and the Guardianship of the Young
Prince Olaus her Son, After the death of Prince Olaus, she is elected by the
Estates for their Sovereign Princess, ibid. Her Father Waldemar King of Denmark
dying without Issue she sends Deputies to the Estates of that Kingdom to
solicit her Election in their Assembly, She is proclaimed Queen of Denmark,
ibid. The Swedes offer their Crown to the Queen Margaret, ibid. and 13 She
accepts it, and for what reason, 13 The Treaty which she made with the Swedes,
ibid. She is acknowledged as the Sovereign Princess of Sweden, ibid. The
Character of this Princess, 12 Having no Children, and not being willing to
Marry, she appoints her a Successor at the request of the Swedes, 14. 15 She
proposes the Union of the 3 Kingdoms under the same Monarch to the Deputies of
the 3 Nations Assembled at Calmar, 15 she obtained her desire, 16 by what means
she made herself absolute in the 3 Kingdoms, 17 Eric succeeds her in the 3
Kingdoms but did neither inherit her power nor her Personal Abilities 19
N.
SEverinus de Norbi a Danish Lord, his base compliance with all the Humor and
Inclinations of Christiern, 96 Christiern gives him the Government of Calmar,
95 He entrusts him during his Absence with the command of his Forces in Sweden,
99 Norbi saves the life of the Administrator's Widow, 112 He contrives how to
make himself independent, 113 He aspires to the Marriage of that Princess,
ibid. He admits man- Swedish Gentlemen on board his Vessels. 115
O.
OLaus Petri, see Luther Olaus, a Gentleman who fled for Refuge in Dalecarlia
131 Otho Crumpein nominated by Christiern II. to be General of his Army, 80 he
was one of the greatest Captains of the Northern Countries, ibid. Otho enters
into West Gothland, ibid. He ravageth this Province with a design to draw the
Swedes to a Battle, ibid. Otho at the sight of the Swedish Army retires with
apparent precipitation to the Lake Weter, ibid. The Swedes pursue him, 81 an
obstinate Fight between the two Armies, ibid. The Victory inclines to Otho's
side, ibid. He orders his Victorious Troops to march against the Swedish
Infantry that were possessed of the Pass of Tyvede, 82 The Swedes repulse
Otho's Infantry, He renews the Attack with the French Infantry, which force the
Swedes and gain their Retrenchments, ibid. He passed through the Forest of
Tyvede, and penetrates into the Heart of the Kingdom, 83 Christiern having
obtained in an Assembly of three Senators, some Lords and the Bishops of the
Kingdom, held at Upsal, the Title of the King of Sweden, Otho advances with his
Army to the most Remote Provinces, to cause his Masters Authority to be there
acknowledged, 86 He dispersed the Militia that were gathered together in diverse
Places, ibid. He destroys with Fire and Sword the Castles of those Lords who
refu^'d to submit, ibid. He investe Stockholm, 87 He writes to the King of
Denmark to give him an account of the success of his Arms, ibid. Christiern
sends him back to Denmark 99
P.
POpe Leo X. See Leo X. Peterson a Dalecarlian Gentleman entertains Gustavus
with all imaginable marks of respect and deference, 122 He commends his design,
and promises to oblige his Vassals to appeaar in Arms, ibid. He gives him
assurances of an inviolable fidelity, and names the Lords and Principal
Countrymen whom he pretended to engage in his Party, 123 Under these specious
pretenses of Zeal and Affection for Gustavus's Cause ^da Person, he conceals
his Intention of betraying him, ibid. He discovers the Retreat of Gustavus to a
Danish Officer, who causes Peterson's House to be surroundid with Soldiers,
ibid Gustavus escapes the danger by the means of Peterson's Wife, who had
disclosed to him the treacherous Design of her Husband ibid. Laurentius and
Olaus Petri spread abroad the Doctrine of Luther with very great success, 151
Olaus Petri Preaches Lutheranism in the Church of Stregnes of which he was
Canon and Protonotary, ibid. He makes conferences, publishes Theses and
disputes every day in the University of that City, ibid. He gains the greatest
part of the Professors and Scholars of the University 152 Peter's Pence, what
they are, 47 by whom imposed ibid.
S.
STephen de Sassi makes an agreement with Gustavus's Agent to land in Sweden at
the head of twelve hundred Men 145 The Senate and Senators of Sweden, 3 The
Senate in his first institution was established only to serve as a Council to
the King, 4 It Is Authority is extended so far as to take cognizance of the
Prince's Conduct, ibid. The Sovereign Power and Majesty of the State was lodged
in that Body ibid. Sigebritte, who she was, 99 ibid. She was entirely beloved
by Christiern II. She alone was Mistress of the destiny of the Court, and of
the whole Kingdom of Denmark, 100 She both disposed of, and took away all
manner of Offices and Dignities in the State, as she pleased without any regard
to the Laws of that Country, ibid. Christiern always approved her Conduct, though
never so irregular, ibid. she persuades him to destroy the Noblemen, and
Senators of Sweden, 101 She advises him to entrust the Officers of the Garrison
of Stockholm with this bloody Execution 102 Steno-Sturius Administrator of
Sweden 29 Steno the Son of Suanto-Sturius is acknowledged Administrator by the
States of Sweden, 34 To whom he was beholden for this Dignity, ibid. The
Agreement between him and Trollee his Competitor, 35 An irreparable Fault
committed by him, 36 The behavior of Trolle toward him. 41. 42 Steno
penetrates into Trolle's designs and conceals his Anger, 45 He gives him a
Visit at Upsal, ibid. and was there magnificently entertained, 46 He writes to
the Pope complaining of the Seditious Practices of that Prelate, 47 The Pope
blames the Archbishops proceedings in appearan, and seems privately to approve
them, ibid. Steno convenes the Estates, Tellia with an intent to have his
Authority confirmed, 48 The Legate Arcemboldi arrives in Sweden and exhorts the
Administrators to Peace, 52 The consequence of this Negotiation, 53 Steno
suspects by the Legate's discourse that he was engaged in the Interest of his
Enemies, and that he wasprivy to all their Designs. ib. The Administrator
resolves to bring him over to his own Party, by any means whatsoever, ibid. He
attacks him on his weak Side, permitting him to publish his Indulgences in the
Kingdom, 54 The Legate is won by his Liberality, ibid. He discloseth to Steno
the designs of the King of Denmark, his intrigues with the Clergy of Sweden,
and the Treachery of the two Governors of the Castles of Stockholm and
Nicoping, 56 Steno Assembleth the Senate, and acquaints 'em with a Conspiracy
that was formed against the Tranquillity of the State, 57 He cunningly draws the
Governor of Nicoping out of his Post, under color of a Muster, ibid. He
conveys new Troops into the Town, and appoints a new Governor, ibid. He gives
orders to apprehend the two Governors of Stockholm and Nicoping, who confess
their Crime, ibid. Steno (...) advised to sceare the Person of Trolle, and to
Besiege his Castle, 58 He Summons the Nobility and Militia of the Kingdom, 59
He Besieges the Archbishop. 60 The Arrival of the Danes obliges him to divide
his Forces, 62 He defeats the Danes, ibid. He coustrains Trolle to abandon his
Castle, and to appear before the Senate, who cause a formal Process to be drawn
up against him. 64, 65 The Pape commands Steno by his Legate to Re-establish
Trolle in his Metrepolitan See, under pain of Excommunication, 66 He acquaints
the Senate with the Popes Demands and Menaces, 67 The Temperal Lords despise
them, idid. The Administrator endeavors to engage the Legate in his Interests,
by offering him the Rich Archbishopric of Upsal, 68 Pope Leo X. upon Steno's
refusal to restore Trolle to his former Dignity, suspends the Kingdom of Sweden
from Divine Service, and Excommunicates this Prince with the whole Senate, 66
Steno marches directly against the King of Denmark, who had invested
Stockholm, deseats his Rear-guard; carries away whole Baggage and takes many
Prisoners; 71 The King of Denmark proposes a Truce for some days, 72 Steno
consents to the Truce and sends Provisions to the King and to his whole Flect,
73 Christiern by a Stratagem determines to make himself Master of Stenio's
Person, ibid. Christiern having Arrested Gustavus contrary to the Law of
Nations, Steno Arms all he can meet with, resolving either to rescue him or to
perish in the Attempt, 75 He marches at the head of his Army being followed by
ten thousand Peasants of West Gothland, to oppose Otho General of the Danish
Troops, 80, 81 He Attacks Otho with an undaunted Courage, is most desperately
engaged amidst the Enemies, and even keeps the Victory doubtful,
notwithstanding the inequality of his Forces, 81 Steno is wounded with a
Cannon-ball, which carried away one of his Legs, ibid. He looses both the
Battle and his Life, ibid. The Virtues and Faults of that Prince, ibid. His
Widow retires to the Citadel of Stockholm with her two young Children 83 Steque
Castle, it is Situation, 49 It Is dismantled by the Order of the Senate of Sweden
65 Stockholm Besieged by the Danes, 70 Christiern is forced to raise the Siege,
81 He demands of the Administrator of Sweden an interview in the City of
Stockholm, in order to terminate all their Differences, 74 Stockholm and Calmar
after the death of the Administrator remain only in the possession of his
Widow, 87 Otho investeth Stockholm, ibid. Christiern summons the
Administrator's Widow to Surrender it; 95 He carries on the Siege with Vigor,
96 He enters by Capitulation into the City at the head of four Thousand Men, He
abandons it to the Fury of his Soldiers 111 Suanto-Sturius Administrator of
Sweden, 30 his admirable Endowments 31, 32 Sweden, The Kingdom of Sweden was
still elective in the middle of the XIV. Century, 1 The nearest Relations of
the deceas^d King usually succeeded, but always by Virtue of Election, idid.
of the Power of the King of Sweden, ibid. How it was limited, ibid. The
Revenue, of the Crown wherein it is consisted 2 Of the Senate, of it is
Authority of the Lords of whom it was composed, 3 and sequ. The Archbishop of
Upsal Primate of Sweden was a Senator by his Office, ibid. The other Senators
were at the King's Nomination ibid. Of the Clergy of Sweden, their Revenues and
Power, 4 and sequ. Of the Lords and Gentlemen of Sweden, 6 hey made use of
their Vassals as Domestic Servants without Wages to cultivate their Lands,
ibid. The Titles of Baron, Count and Marrquiss were not known among the
Nobility in Sweden, ibid. The Gentleman maintained their Interests, and
revenged Iujuries offered to them by Force of Arms, ibid. Of the Burghers of
the Towns, and the little Authority their Deputies had in the Diets, Of the
Peasants, ibid their Manners and Religion, ibid. they have a particular
privilege to send Deputies out of their Body to the States General ibid,
Diverse attempts that the Kings of Sweden have made to recover their Authority,
8 and sequ. The Wars that laid waste Sweden du-ring seven Years, 13 ibid. The
cause of these Wars, The Union of Sweden, Denmark and Norway under one Monarch,
16 The several Wars which that Union occasioned between Sweden and Denmark,
ibid. and sequ. After the deposing of Christiern, Sweden fall into a kind of
lamentable Anarchy, 19 Sweden depopulated by Civil Wars, ibid. Steno-Sturius
Administrator of Sweden, ibid What that Dignity was, 30 The Foundation of the
Swedish Monarchy, and the Original of the Grandeur of the Family which at
prefent pessesseth the Throne, 31 Otho the Danish General ravageth Sweden, 80
and sequ. The Swedish Lords and Gentlemen are forced to submit to the Danish
Yoke, 86 Of all the Cities of Sweden only Calmar and Stockholm refused to open
their Grates to the Danes, 87 Christiern takes a Resolution to destroy the
greatest Noblemen of Sweden, and to abolish the Senate, 100 etc. He executes
his Barbarous Design on the 8th. day of November. 1520. 199 The desolation of
Sweden 111 114
T
THeodore, Archbishop of Lunden, what he was, 104 to whom he was beholding for
his advancement to this Dignity, ibid. He is advane'd upon Segebrite's
Recommendation from the Function of the Princes Barber, to the Dignity of an
Archbishop, ibid. Christiern referred to him and to the Bishop of Odensee his
Suffragan the complaint of Trolle Archbishop of Upsal against those that had
fore'd him to renounce his dignity, 107 These two Prelates cause the
Administrator's Widow to ^ppear before them to give an account of the
proceedings of Prince Steno he Husband, ibid. Christiern nominates Theodore
Archbishop of Lunden to be Viceroy in his absence, 114 This Archbishop
asspa^cheth a Courier to Christiern to give him notice of the Revolt of the
Northern Provinces, 133 He recalls all the Troops that were dispersed through the
Kingdom, ibid. The Auxiliary Forces refuse to obey, ibid. Christiern Writes to
him to march with his Army to reduce the Rebels to their Obedience, Theodore
advances at the head of his Forces as far as the River Brunebec with a design
to give Battle to Gustavus in the passage of this River, 137, 138 He abandons
that Post where he might have engaged with considerable Advantage, 158 He
retires to the Castle of Westeras, not believing himself to be safe there,
ibid. he shuts himself up in the Castle of Stockholm, ibid. He lea^ves
Stockholm and (...) Denmirk 15^ Trolle, nominated by the Archbishop of Upsal
and the Bishop to the dignity of Administrator of Sweden 33 The Secular
Senators Deputies of the Provinces, etc. exclude him, 34 The Tumults occasioned
by the heat of the contending Parties, ibid. His agreement with the young
Prince Steno, 35 Young Trolle his Son is ordained at Rome Archbishop of Upsal,
38 A Character of that Prelate, 41 His carriage toward the Administrator of
Sweden, ibid. The Projects which he contrived with Christiern II. King of
Denmark to depose the Administrator, Young Trolle indiscretion and want of
Policy, 41 He entertains the Administrator with extraordinary Magnificence, 46
Upon what account, ibid. He reproacheth him for aspiring to a Dignity that was
by no means due to him, ibid. He Corrupts the Governors of the Castles of
Stockholm and Nicoping, 48 He exherts Christiern King of Denmark to break the
Truce which he had made with Sweden, and to march to the Frontiers, ibid. He is
cited to take an Oath of fidelity to the Estates Assembled at Tellia, 49, 58 He
shuts himself up in the Castle of Steque, 49 He holds an Assembly of the
Bishops of the Kingdom and the rest of his Party, ibid. He complains of the
slowness of the King of Denmark in entering the Kingdom, 58 He requires the
Senate to call a new Meeting of the Estates, ibid. The Estates resolve to seize
upon his Person, and to bring him to his Trial, ibid. and sequ. Orders are
given to arrest his Father, Kindred, and other suspicious Persons. ibid. This
Prelate ventures to appear before the Estates, ibid. The Administrator advances
to besiege him in his Castle. 60, (...) The Bishops of Stregnez and Lincoping
his Friends exhort him to make at least a seeming Peace with the Administrator,
61 He rejects their advice, ibid. His consternation upon the defeat of the
Danes, The principal Officers of his Garrison oblige him to Capitulate, 63 He
demands to treat in Person with the Administrator, ibid. He Surrenders himself
to this Prince, who sends him to the Senate, 64 He is brought to his Trial, 65
He is condemned to resign his Dignity, and to spend the remainder of his Life
in a Monastery, ib. He dispatches one of his Creatures to Rome, to protest
against the Violence done to him, and to implore the Protection of the H. See,
66 Upon the news of the Administrator's death he leaves the place of his
Retreat, 83 He resumes the marks of his Dignity, which he had solemnly
abdicated in the Senate, ibid. He calls a Meeting of the Estates at Upsal, 84,
85 He gives the Title of King of Sweden, to Christiern, in the name of this
Assembly, as if he had been really acknowledged by the Estates of the Realm,
85, 86 He prohibits the Clergy to grant Christian Burial to those who dyed in
Arms against Christiern King of Denmark, 86 He takes measures with Christiern
to destroy the Swedish Noblemen whom they suspected, 106 He performs the
Ceremony of the Coronation of Christiern, ibid. He appears before the King in a
full Assembly, and demands Justice against the deceased Administrator, and
against the Senators and Lords who had forced him to resign his dignity, 107
Gustavus Writes to him in respectful Terms to draw him off from the Danish
Party, 147 He rejects his Letter, and sends to the Viceroy the two Canons of
Upsal, who had brought it to him, requiring that they should be put to death,
ibid. He demands Troops of the Viceroy, to seize upon Gustavus's Person in
Upsal, 148 He was very near surprising him in this City, ibid. He overtakes him
at the Ford of Lateby, and puts him in danger again of being killed or taken
Prisoner, 149 He leaves the Kingdom, and retires to Denmark 153 Truce
Christiern breaks the Truce between Sweden and Denmark, 57 He proposes to the
Administrator a Truce for some days 72
U
UPsal, The Archbishop of Upsal Primate of Sweden, and a Senator by his office,
See, Trolle Trolle Archbishop of this City, calls a Meeting of the Estates of
the Kingdom of Sweden, 84 The Persons who assisted, and what was ordained in
that Assembly, 85 and sequ. Gustavus takes the City by Storm, 144 The
Archbishop regains it from Gustavus, 149 Gustavus retakes it 151
W
WAdestene, Gustavus calls a Meeting of the Estates in this place, 156 Upon
what account, and what determined in the Assembly ibid. and sequ. Waldemer,
King of Denmark, 11 His Daughter Margaret See Margaret Westeras, the City and
Castle of that name, 138 The Viceroy of Sweden retires thither, ibid. a
Stratagem used by Gustavus to make himself Master of the City 139 Weter, a
Lake, whether Otho General of ohe Danish Army retired with the Forces under his
Command 80
map of Scandinavia SCANDINAVIA or the Kingdoms of DENMARK, SUEDEN, NORWAY and
LAPLAND.


THE HISTORY OF THE Revolutions IN SWEDEN.
SWEDEN was anciently an Elective Kingdom, Fourteenth Age; for though the
Children and nearest Relations of the Deceased Monarch were usually advanced to
the Throne, the Order of Birthright was sometimes neglected, and the Succession
was always determined by Choice. And by virtue of this Right of Election, the
Swedes oftentimes claimed a Power to Depose their Sovereigns, when they
incroach'd upon the Liberty and Privileges of the Nation.

The Royal Authority was confined within very narrow Limits; for the King could
neither make War nor Peace, and much less raise Money or Soldiers without the
Consent of the Senate, or of the Estates when they were assembl^d: 'Twas not
lawful for him to erect new Forts, or to put the Government of the old Castles
into the Hands of Strangers. Prerogative, was hated and suspected by the
People, who were as jealous of the Power of their Sovereigns, as of that of
their Neighbors and Enemies.

The Patrimonial Revenue of the Crown, consisted only in certain small
Territories near Upsal, and in a very easy Tribute which was exacted from the
Peasants by way of a Poll-Tax. In the Reign of King Magnus Ladaslasz, the
Copper Mines, the Propriety of the three great Lakes Meler, Vener, and Veter,
and the Right of Fishing upon the Coast of the Baltic Sea, were by the Senate
reunited to the Crown; and by the same Authority it was ordained, That they who
had purchased untilled Lands held in Fee, or a Right to Pasturage in the
Forests, should afterward pay those Duties to the Crown, from which they had
freed themselves during the Civil Wars. Since by the Laws of the Kingdom, there
were few Offenses punishable with Death, the Fines and Forfeitures that were
exacted on such Occasions, were of old a considerable Branch of the King's
Revenue; but the Bishops and Clergy had seized on the Profits which accru'd
that way, and perhaps colored their Injustice under a Pretext that these Fines
belonged to the Church, as a kind of Expiation or Atonement for the Crimes of
the Malefactors.

The Fees or Manors, and the Governments of Castles, which at first were only
granted for Life, or for a Term of Years, were insensibly changed to Hereditary
Possessions: For the Noblemen who enjoyed 'em, neglected the Payment of the
usual Daties for those Posts which they held by no other Title but their own
Power, and the Weakness of the Crown. And the Bishops, and others of the
Clergy, who were possessed of such Places, made use of the plausible Pretext of
Religion, to claim an Exemption from the Duties they were obliged to pay for
those Estates which they pretended were devolved to the Church, and become part
of its Patrimony. Thus the Clergy and Nobility had, by several Usurpations,
engrossed so great a part of the Prince's Revenue, that the Remainder at that
time was scarce sufficient to maintain 500 Horse. The King was almost only
considered as the Captain General of the State during the War, and as the
President of the Senate in time of Peace: It Is true, the former of these
Junctures was always most favorable to the Prerogative, especially when the
War was carried on with Success against the Enemies of the Nation; but the
Conclusion of a Peace put a stop to his growing Authority, and left him only a
Power to call a Meeting of the Estates, to propose Matter for their
Deliberation, and to execute their Decrees.

The Public Authority was almost entirely lodged in the Senate, Twelve Lords,
who for the most part were Governors of Provinces, or Principal Officers of
State. These Lords attended the King at Stockholm, the Capital City of the
Kingdom, when any Important Affairs were to be transacted. The Archbishop of
Upsal, Primate of Sweden, Lincepinc, Seregnez, Vesteras, Seara, Abeo, and Vexio.
was a Senator by his Office; and the six Bishops of the Kingdom bore a great
Sway in the Meeting of the Estates, though they had no right to sit in the
Senate, unless they were nominated by the King, or chosen by the Estates during
an Interregnum. to introduce his Friends and Creatures into the Senate. But he
was frequently disappointed in his Choice, and for the most part lost a Friend
when he made him a Senator: For the nearer a Favorite was advanced to his
Master's Power and Authority, he was the farther removed from his Interest. And
besides the Love of Liberty and Affection to their Country, were in those days
the predominant Passions of the Swedes; nor could any Engagement or Obligation
weaken the Biass of so powerful an Inclination.

The Senate which at first was only instituted as a Council to advise the King,
had by degrees assumed an Authority over his Actions. The eldest Senator
pretended a Right to admonish and check the Prince, when he transgressed the
Limits of his Prerogative. The People looked upon the Senators as the
Protectors of the Liberty and Privileges of the Nation. The Sovereign Power and
Majesty of the State was properly lodged in that Body. There Justice was
administered Independently and without Appeal, and both War and Peace depended
on their Deliberations. It Is true they acted jointly with the King, but he was
oftentimes obliged to content himself with the Honor of executing their
Resolutions.

The Clergy were postest of greater Riches than the King and all the other
Estates of the Kingdom. The Archbishop of Upsal and his six Suffragans,
maintained their Dignity with all the Splendour that a vast Treasure could
enable 'em to display. They were for the most part the Temporal Lords of their
Episcopal Sees: And besides the Possessions that were annexed to their
Bishoprics, which consisted in several considerable Signiories or Lordships,
they had made themselves Heirs to all the Ecclesiastics that died Intestate in
their respective Diocesses, which by degrees had extremely augmented their
Revenues. They enjoyed the Prosits of Fines and Forfeitures which formerly
belonged to the Crown, and by several Foundations and Pious Legacies, had made
themselves Masters of a considerable number of the King's Manors and Fees. The
Patrimony of the Church was daily augmented by Donations, but could never be
diminished by Sale or Alienation, for such Practices were forbidden by express
Laws; which were as prejudicial to the Laity, as advantageous to the Clergy,
and served only to establish the Grandeur of the latter, upon the Ruins of the
former.

The Bishops made so good Use of the Influence they had over the People at
Elections, and of the Need a Pretender had of their Votes and Interest, that
they obtained on such Occasions several Privileges, which did very considerably
diminish both the Revenue and Authority of the Prince. They exacted what
Conditions they pleased of the King, before they would own him to be their
Sovereign: And before they would perform the Ceremony of his Coronation, they
obliged him to Swear, That he would inviolably preserve 'em in the Possession
(...) their Rights and Privileges; That he would never attempt to put a
Garrison into any of their Castles or Forts; That the Lands and Manors which
they enjoyed, by what Means soever they had come to the Possession of 'em,
should not be reunited to the Crown; and at the same time they made him Sign a
Paper, declaring that he consented to his own Deposition, if ever he should
violate his Oath by incroaching upon their Privileges.

These Prelates grew so proud of their Riches, and of the number of their
Vassals, that they began by degrees, to act like so many little Sovereigns.
They fortified their Castles, and kept Garrisons in 'em: They never appeared
without a numerous Attendance of Gentlemen and Soldiers, and were still at the
Head of all Factions and Intrigues. They frequently took up Arms against their
Neighbors, for Differences relating to their Vassals, or about the Limits of
their Estates; and even sometimes scrupled not to march at the Head of an Army
against their Sovereign, especially when they suspected him of a Design to
recover the Duties and Lands that belonged to the Crown.

The Lords and Gentlemen fortified their Castles, and made 'em the Seats of
their petty Empires. They treated their Vassals like menial Servants, though they
allowed 'em no Wages; they made 'em Till their Lands, and oftentimes put 'em in
Arms to make Incursions into the Territories of their Neighbors. The Swedish
Nobility was not then distinguished by the Titles of Baron, Count, or Marquess,
or by Hereditary Names of Families: They were only known by the respective Arms
of their Houses, and by their Fathers Name, Gustavus Ericson, i. e. Gustavus
the Son of Eric.
which they bore jointly with their own; and were noted only for their Valor,
and for the numerous Train of Vassals that followed 'em to the War. They
defended their Rights, and revenged the Injuries they received, by Force of
Arms, and neither sought nor expected Redress from the public Justice, because
there was no Power in the Government to put the Laws in Execution. Force was
the Standard of Law and Justice, and the Supreme Decider of all sorts of
Controversies.

The Burghers of Stockholm, and the Inhabitants of other Maritime Towns, who
subsisted merely by Trading, were more submissive to the King, and better
affected to the Government. The Merchants especially were so disheartened by
that Lawless Liberty, which exposed 'em to the Insolency of every Potent
Oppressor, that they would have willingly consented to invest the Prince with a
sufficient Authority to restore the Public Quiet, and establish the Trade of
the Nation in a flourishing Condition: But there were so few Cities in the
Kingdom, that their Deputies had no great Interest, and were not much regarded
in the Diets.

The Peasants, on the contrary, who in this Kingdom have the peculiar Privilege
to send Deputies of their own Body to the Estates, out of a blind Obedience to
their Lords, were obstinate Assertors of the Liberties and Privileges of their
Provinces. Those who lived in fertile Countries applied themselves to
Husbandry; but in Helfingland, Cuestricland, Angermeland, and other Northern
Provinces, they spent their time in Hunting Fallow. Deer, which furnished 'em
with Meat for their Subsistence, and Skins for the Prince's Tribute. They were
mere Savages, for the most part bred in Woods, jealous of their Customs, and
having little to lose, were ready upon the least Occasion to rise up in Arms
and revolt against the Government. Idolatry was still openly professed in some
of their Villages, and Christianity prevailed in others; but their Religion was
so disfigured by a Mixture of their Ancient Superstitions, that they scarce
retained more of it than the bare Name of Christians.

The Peasants were the most numerous and potent Body of the State: Some of 'em
held immediately of the Crown, and sent Deputies to the Diets; and the rest
were Vassals to the Clergy and Nobility. Though the Tribute they paid to the King
was very easy and inconsiderable, he was oftentimes obliged to levy it by
Force, and to send some regulated Troops to the Forests and Mountains, for the
Security of those who were appointed to collect his Duties. They seldom or
never contributed their Assistance to the Preservation of the State, but in the
Quality of Soldiers; and even in that Case they thought themselves obliged only
to defend the Frontiers of their respective Provinces, and always claimed the
Privilege of choosing their own Leaders.

In all other Respects they lived almost without any Dependence upon the Court,
and even without any Union or Concord among themselves; being equally incapable
of Society and Submission, and affecting rather an untractable Wildness than a
generous Liber^y.

If we reflect upon the Independency of the Subjects, the limited Authority of
the Sovereign, and the different Interests of the several Orders that composed
the State, 'twill not appear Strange, that the Kingdom was almost perpetually
harassed with Insurrections and Civil Wars. Most of the Kings aspired at a more
absolute Authority, and some of 'em by the Assistance of their Friends and
Creatures, endeavored to make themselves Masters of the Government, and to
shake off their Dependence on the Senate: But the People were so far from being
unconcerned Spectators of an open Violation of the Liberties and Privileges of
the Nation, that the very Shadow and least Appearance of Arbitrary Power
occasioned an universal Revolt, and reunited all the States against the King.

The Bishops were afraid of Reprizals under too powerful a Prince, who might
seize upon his alienated Revenues, and perhaps confine the Clergy within the
Limits of their Profession: The Noblemen took up Arms to defend the Privileges
that made 'em in a manner Independent; and the Peasants, without comprehending
their true Interest, fought with the utmost Vigor and Obstinacy for the
Preservation of certain Customs that were useless to the Public, but agreeable
to their Savage Temper. The whole Kingdom was a perpetual Scene of Seditions,
Desolations, and Revolts: The Fate of the King seemed to be in the Hands of his
Subjects, and to depend on their Capricious Humor; and several Princes were
driven out of the Kingdom, for attempting to make themselves Absolute.

The Jealousy that reigned among the principal Families of the Kingdom, made
'em willing to retain the Title and Dignity of a King: But at the same Time
they resolved to bestow that Honor only upon a Foreign Prince, that having no
private Estate in the Kingdom, and being wholly destitute of Relations and
Creatures, they might oblige him to content himself with as much Authority as
they thought fit to allow him.

About the year 1363. Magnus Smock, Sweden: he had two Sons, Eric and Haquin,
by his Wife Blanch, Daughter to the Count of Namur. The Elder of these Princes
being dead, the People of Norway bestowed the Crown of that Kingdom upon the
Younger, who by his Father's Advice had married Margaret Daughter to Valdemar
IV. King of Denmark. Magnus having secured Norway, and being supported by his
Danish Aliance, would not let slip so favorable an Opportunity to make himself
absolute in Sweden, by abolishing the Senate of that Kingdom: And perhaps that
Project was concerted by all the Three Kings, and designed to be put in
Execution in their respective Kingdoms, to rid themselves of that dreaded
Assembly which checked their growing Authority and controlled all their
ambitious Designs. But as soon as the Swedes discovered the Intentions and
Correspondence of these three Princes, they took up Arms immediately, and
Sweden became the Theater of a cruel and bloody War. Valdemar, during his Life,
was very diligent in assisting his Ally; and Haquin sent a considerable Body of
Men to reinforce his Father's Army: But the Swedes alone, who were always
strong enough when they fought for the Defense of their Liberty, Magnus out of
the Kingdom, esteeming themselves sufficiently rewarded for all the Blood they
had spent in the Cause, by the Liberty they had to choose a new Sovereign. They
proceeded immediately to an Election, and the Choice fell upon Prince Albert,
second Son to the Duke of Meckelburgh, and Nephew to the late King Magnus,
excluding King Haquin, and Henry, Albert's Elder Brother, whom they hated and
suspected, as persons who had always promoted the Interest of the Prince whom
they had lately dethroned.

Thus Albert owed his Advancement to the impatient Humor of the Swedes, which
could not bear the Yoke of too absolute a power. Before his Accession to the
Crown, that he might promote his own Interest he seemed to embrace that of the
People; but as soon as he found himself fixed upon the Throne, he began to
follow the Maxims of his Predecessors, and studied the most promising Methods
by which he might make himself the absolute Master of his Subjects.

The Senate was the object both of his Jealousy, and Aversion; but the Fate of
King Magnus deterred him from attempting to abolish that powerful Body, much
less could he hope either to gain or over-aw those rich and potent Lords that
looked upon themselves rather as his Tutors than Counselors. And therefore to
balance their Authority, he sent for some Princes of his Family, and several
German Lords and Captains, whom he entrusted with the Command of the Troops and
principal Forts of the Kingdom. He introduced some of these Strangers, into the
Senate, against the fundamental Laws of the State; and under various pretexts
brought into Sweden a considerable Number of Foreign Troops, who began to
render him terrible to his own Subjects. Then he proceeded to impose exorbitant
Taxes upon the People for the payment of his Army: But this politic Contrivance
to establish his Authority being pushed on too far, served only to hasten his
Destruction; for the Swedes grew jealous of their Privileges, and resolved to
shake off that rigorous Yoke which they were not accustomed to bear.

Margaret the Daughter of Valdemar King of Denmark, and Widow of Haquin King of
Norwey, was at the same time possessed of the Crowns of both these Kingdoms.
For after the Death of the King her Husband, who did not long Survive the
Defeat and ABDICATION of his Father King Magnus, the States of Norwey entrusted
her with the Regency of the Kingdom, and the Guardianship of her Son Olaus. And
during her Administration of the Government she made so good Use of her Time,
and managed her designs with so much Dexterity and Success, that when the young
Prince dyed, the Norwegians found they were not at liberty to proceed to a new
Choice.

She was Mistress of the Army, Margaret was elected by the Estates, and
exchanged the Quality of a Regent for that of a Sovereign Queen, having already
born the same Title as the Wife of King Haquin.

King Valdemar her Father dying the same Year, without leaving any Prince of
his Blood whom the Danes might choose for his Successor, she sent Deputies to
the States General of the Kingdom to Solicit her Election to that Crown. Henry
of Mackelburgh, the Elder brother of Albert King of Sweden, and Husband of her
Elder Sister the Princess Ingelburge, employed his interest to obtain the same
Dignity; and flattering himself with the advantage he had of being a Son-in-Law
to the deceased, King thought he might easily contend with a Female Competitor:
But the Queen's Agents drew such convincing Arguments from the Merit, and
perhaps also from the Money of their Mistress, that she was unanimously elected
by the whole Assembly, Denmark in the Meeting of the Estates. As soon as she
received the News of her Advancement, she left Norwey, and went immediately to
Copenhagen, where she fixed the Seat of her Empire.

This Princess, who by some is called the Semiramis of the North, besides the
usual Ambition of her Sex, was Mistress of a Dexterity in the Management of
Affairs, and of a Capacity to form a long Series of coherent Projects, that are
rarely observed in a Woman. Her Inclinations to Love were suitable to her
Character and Dignity, that is, she was not really in love with any thing but
Glory, or sensible of any Passion but her Ambition to extend the limits of her
Empire, and advance her Authority.

She rejoiced in secret at the Dissatisfaction of the Swedes, and endeavored
to gain some of the Leading Men of that Nation. She bestowed Pensions and an
honorable Entertainment on those that were ill treated by King Albert; and
openly blamed his injustice in violating the Liberty and Privileges of his
Subjects. That Prince was daily laying new Impositions upon his People, without
the consent either of the Estates or Senate, and had already Squeezed
considerable Sums out of the Clergy by way of Loans: But nothing rendered him
more odious both to the Bishops and Nobility, than his Reuniting to the Crown
the third part of those Fees or Estates to which the Clergy and Gentry claimed
a right by virtue of so long a Possession.

This was the fatal signal of an universal Revolt; the Swedes conspired
unanimously against him, resolving to drive him out of the Kingdom, and to
offer the Crown to Queen Margaret. They imagined that she had already so much
business in Denmark that she would content her self with almost the bare Title
of Queen of Sweden: And though she should endeavor to stretch the Prerogative
too far, they concluded that the Danes and Norwegians would unite all their
Forces to keep their common Sovereign in a dependence on the Estates and Senate
of each Kingdom.

In pursuance of this Design, they secretly deputed some of the most
considerable Lords of the Kingdom to offer her the Crown, and she received the
Proposal with joy, as the most probable means to secure the Peace of Denmark.
For the violent Animosity that reigned betwixt the Subjects of both Nations,
was of as ancient a date as the Foundation of the two Kingdoms; and that
Antipathy, which is usually observed betwixt Neighboring States, had all along
been a perpetual source of War, which had oftentimes proved fatal to Denmark.
And besides this prudent Princess concluded, that her new Advancement might one
day furnish her with an opportunity to unite Sweden to Denmark. These
considerations made her resolve to give a favorable answer to the Proposals of
the Male contents: She agreed with their Deputies that the Nobility should rise
up in Arms, that they should acquaint King Albert with his Deposition, that the
Army and Estates should publicly acknowledge her to be their Sovereign, and
that after her Election she should be obliged to send a considerable Body of
Troops to support and defend 'em.

The Treaty being signed, Swedes immediately took up arms against the King, and
sent a Herald to intimate and declare that they renounced the Allegiance they
had sworn to him. At the same time they proclaimed Margaret de Valdemar, Queen
of Sweden, and as soon as they had received the Reinforcement which they
expected from that Princess, the united Armies marched toward West-Gothland,
where King Albert was drawing his Forces together to oppose 'em. That Prince
had taken all possible care to put himself in a posture of defense: he had
raised a considerable Body of Troops, obtained the Assistance of several German
Princes who were either his Relations or Allies, and engaged the Isle of
Gothland for the payment of twenty Thousand Rose-Nobles of the Coin of England,
which he borrowed of the Knights of the Teutonick Order to maintain the Charge
of the War. But all these preparations could not divert his impending Fate: The
two Armies met near Falcopinc, and Albert was not only defeated, but had the
Misfortune to fall into the Hands of his Enemies, with his Son Prince Eric, and
the principal Lords of his Party.

The Princes of the House of Meckelburgh, and Gerard Count of Holstein
endeavored to revive the drooping Hopes of this unfortunate Prince. They
levied new Troops, and obtained considerable Succors from the Hans-Towns who
were jealous of the Queen's Power, and dreaded the successful progress of her
Arms. Thus Sweden was made a prey to several different and Jarring Nations, who
seemed only to agree in a Design to ruin that Kingdom; and amid'st so many
Disasters, the poor Inhabitants could not distinguish their Friends from their
Enemies. The War lasted almost seven Years with extraordinary Fury, and a vast
expense of Blood: And the Peace that succeeded was rather an effect of the
Weariness of the two contending Parties, Albert was at last constrained to
exchange his Crown for his Liberty, and retired to his Native Country; after
which Queen Margaret's Title to the Crowns of the Three Kingdoms of the North
was universally owned and acknowledged.

The Swedes seeing themselves subject to a Princess that had no Children, and
fearing that after her Death King Albert or the Prince his Son might renew
their pretensions to the Crown, entreated her to secure the happiness of the
Kingdom by an advantageous Match. This Proposal, however intended, was not at
all welcome to the Queen: She was too fond of the Sovereign Power to share it
with a Husband: Yet that she might not seem to slight the Petition of her new
Subjects, she consented to appoint her Successor. But at the same Time she
resolved to choose a Prince whose tender Age might secure the quiet of her
Government, and keep him from attempting to mount the Throne during her Life.
In pursuance of this Resolution she sent for Prince Henry of Pomerania the Son
of Wartislas VII, and of Mary of Meckelburgh, the Daughter of Henry of
Meckelburgh and of Ingelburge the Queen's Elder Sister. She ordered him to be
called Eric, a Name which Twelve Kings of Sweden had already born, resolving to
educate him at her Court, and to make him the Heir of the Three Northern Crowns.

The Form of Government in these Kingdoms was almost the same: All three were
Elective, and every Nation had its Senate, without whose advice, or the consent
of the Estates, the Prince could not undertake any important Affair. In order
to the Accomplishment of her great Design, the Queen spent some time in gaining
Creatures, and securing the interest of some of the Leading Men of each Nation.
And as soon as she found her Project ripe for Execution, she called a Meeting or
Convention of the Estates of her Three Kingdoms to be held at Calmar in Sweden,
whither Forty Deputies of each Nation repaired to establish a Fundamental Law,
for the uniting of the Three Kingdoms under one Monarch.

The Queen presented the young Duke of Pomerania to the Convention, and
entreated 'em to confirm her Choice. She endeavored with a great deal of
Eloquence to make 'em sensible of the advantages they might expect by obeying
the same Sovereign; and put 'em in mind of the happy consequences of her
Election, which had established the public Tranquillity, and composed all those
fatal Animosities that are wont to disturb the quiet of Neighboring States.
She represented to 'em the inviting prospect they had of making themselves
Masters of all the Trade of the Baltic Sea, and that the Hanse-Towns could
never afterward enrich themselves by their Divisions: adding that the only way
to perpetuate these advantages, and to make the Union solid and durable, was to
unite the Three Kingdoms into one Monarchy, by a solemn and Fundamental Law.

The Presence of so great a Princess, Pomerania was unanimously approved, and
the Three Kingdoms of the North were united under that Prince and his
Successors, by a Fundamental Law, which was received by the Three Nations, and
confirmed by the most solemn Oaths.

This Celebrated Union of Calmar instead of establishing a lasting Concord
betwixt the Northern Kingdoms, was the fatal occasion of those bloody Wars that
kept Sweden and Denmark in a perpetual Flame for above a hundred Years. It
consisted of Three Main Articles, which seemed to have been framed on purpose
to secure the liberty and Independence of each Nation. By the First 'twas
ordained that these three Kingdoms which by the constitution of their
Government were Elective should afterward be Subject to one King, who should
be elected by turns in each Kingdom; and that the Royal Dignity should not be
appropriated to any one Nation to the prejudice or Exclusion of the rest,
unless the deceast Prince should leave Children or Relations, whom the
Convention of the three Estates should judge worthy to succeed him. The Second
obliged the Sovereign to share his Presence betwixt the three Realms, and to
spend the Revenue of each Crown in the respective Kingdom, without exporting
the Money he received, or applying it to any other use than the particular
advantage and benefit of the Kingdom where 'twas levied. And by the Third and
most important Article 'twas provided that each Kingdom should retain its
Senate, Laws, Customs, and Privileges; that the Governors, Magistrates,
Generals, Bishops, Soldiers and Garrisons should be Natives of the Kingdom
where they were employed; and that the King should never dispose of any of
these Posts to Foreigners, or to the Subjects of his other Kingdoms who should
be reputed Foreigners and Aliens to the Government of the Country where they
were not born.

The Swedes were extremely pleased to think that the Royal Prerogative was so
effectually restrained by this Treaty, that the Sovereign could never
afterward invade the liberties of the Subject. But they were soon convinced of
their Error, and both saw and felt the fatal Consequences of their mistaken
Policy. The Queen was too Powerful and Ambitious to content her self with so
limited an Authority. She was scarce settled upon the Throne of Sweden; when
she began to extend her Power, and endeavored with an extraordinary
Application to make her self the Absolute Mistress of the Kingdom. She seized
on all the Principal Forts, which she cunningly got out of the Hands of the
Gentry by proposing some tempting Exchange that might enrich their Families,
but lessen their Power and augment their Dependence on the Court. She bestowed
most of the Vacant Governments on Danish Lords, against the Proviso expressly
mentioned in the Treaty of Calmar, and by degrees removed the Swedish Nobility
from all the considerable Places of Honor and Trust in the Kingdom. Abraham
Broderson a young Swedish Lord, who had a very graceful Mien and was admirably
well shaped had the peculiar honor of her Favor: She gave him the Government
of Haland and made him her only Confident. But her extraordinary kindness to a
Man whose Handsomeness was his only Merit, instead of obliging the rest of his
Countrymen, furnished the disaffected party with a new pretext to censure her
Behavior, and murmur against the Government. At last they adventured to
express their dissatisfaction to the Queen her self: They went in a Body to
attend her, and laid before her the Titles by which they held their
Privileges, and a Copy of the Treaty of Calmar, the Violation of which gaul'd
'em extremely. But that cunning and imperious Princess was too well acquainted
with her own Power to dread the Effects of their Impotent Rage: and instead of
returning a Satisfactory Answer to their Address, she told 'em in a slighting
and disdainful Manner, That she would advise 'em to keep their Charters and
Titles as carefully as she intended to keep the Forts of the Kingdom. She
governed ever afterward with an absolute Power, and endeavored to secure and
confirm her Authority by keeping the Nobility at a distance from the management
of State Affairs, and empoverishing the Common People, that they might not be
able to carry on a design against the Government.

But since these Politic cautions were not sufficient to restrain a Nation that
had been accustomed to a Boundless Liberty, and was always ready to revol^ upon
the least Provocation; She made it her business to gain Creatures and to form a
Party in the Kingdom that might be able to maintain her Authority and baffle
all the Attempts of her Enemies. For the more effectual Prosecution of that
design she cast her Eyes upon the Clergy, who were very potent both by reason
of their vast Riches and the great Number of their Vassals: Nor could she have
taken a better way to curb the fury of a grumbling and Superstitious People who
thought themselves obliged to be governed by the Maxims of their Spiritual
Guides. There was not a Church in Sweden that did not receive some conspicuous
Marks of her Bounty: She augmented the Power and confirmed all the Privileges
of the Bishops, and afterward admitted 'em to a share in the Government, that
their own Interest and the Preservation of their Grandeur might oblige 'em to
maintain the Authority of the Crown.

The Bishops gained by such high and distinguishing Favors, devoted themselves
to the Interest of the Court; and the inferior Clergy followed their Example,
both by reason of their dependence upon their Superiors, and because the Favor
of the Court, and the Queen's Recommendation to the Chapters were the most
effectual means to obtain a Bishopric. The Lords and Gentlemen, who were
already jealous of the Riches and Power of the Clergy, could not without Grief
and Indignation behold this new Addition to their Authority; but they were
forced to content themselves with repining in secret during the life of the
Queen. For that wise and powerful Princess entertained Private Spies among the
Disafected Party; and by that means was acquainted with all their Resolutions,
and enabled to break all the Measures they could take to shake off the Yoke she
had imposed upon 'em.

After her Death, King Eric succeeded in the Three Kingdoms, but did neither
inherit her Power nor her Prudence. He retired to Denmark, and sent Governors
to Sweden who treated the People of that Kingdom rather as disarmed Enemies,
than as free Subjects. The Nation was over-loaded with Taxes, and filled with
Soldiers, who domineered over the wretched Inhabitants, and not only robbed and
plundered 'em without Control, but added scorn and Insolency to their unmanly
Barbarity. The Officers connived at these Disorders, and rather encouraged than
checked the Offenders. From whence we may reasonably conclude that either they
received a share of the Booty, or had secret Orders to tolerate these Abuses.
The Complaints of the Oppressed did not reach the Ears of the Prince, or were
rejected with Disdain: Nor could they hope to see an End, or so much as an
Alleviation of their misery without an entire Alteration of their Government.
And therefore they resolved in so desperate a case to have recourse to the most
violent remedies and to free themselves from a Power that seemed unjust at its
first Establishment, and was now become Tyrannical and insupportable.

Engelbreoth, Dalecarlia, was the first that adventured to appear in Arms
against the Public Oppressors of his Country. H^ roused the Courage of the
Neighboring Peasants and engaged 'em in the same design. They were a rude and
simple People, Lovers of their Prince and Country, but jealous of their
Privileges, and Enemies to Slavery and Oppression. He marched at the head of
his Tumultuary Forces, and cut to pieces some Danish Troops that endeavored to
oppose his Progress. His Army was quickly reinforced by a multitude of Peasants
whom the News of his success drew from the Neighboring Provinces: and no^ long
after he was joined by the Noblemen of Westmania and Nericia. He made himself
master of Upland; and his Presence and Fame engaged several other Provinces in
the Revolt. He abrogated the Taxes that were imposed by King Eric, and razed
all the New Forts which that Prince or his Predecessors had built to keep the
People in subjection to their Authority. The Senators who still acknowledged
King Eric assembled at Wadestein to consult about the most proper Methods to
put a stop to these Disturbances. But Engelbrecth hearing of their Design was
resolved either to persuade or fright 'em into a Sense of their Duty. He
marched with all possible haste to the place appointed for their meeting, at
the Head of a Thousand Peasants, and entering completely armed into the
Assembly, represented to 'em the Injustice and Cruelty of the Danish
Government, and swore he would stab the first Man that should venture to oppose
the Preservation of his Country. The pathetic violence of his Discourse and
the boldness of his Words and Actions, struck such a Terror into the Minds of
the Senators, that they publicly renounced the Allegiance and Fealty they had
sworn to King Eric.

Charles Canutson Great Marechal of Sweden and Governor of Finland complied
with the Resolutions of the Senate. He was descended from the Illustrious
Family of Bond, Canut. Eric XI.
which reckons several Kings of Sweden among its Ancestors. He saw with Joy
that his Country was like to be speedily freed from the Danish Yoke, but he
was vexed to think that an ordinary Gentleman, such as Engelbrecth, should
carry away all the Glory of so noble an Attempt, and was even afraid least the
Peasants in the Heat of their Affection to their Deliverer, should dispose of a
Kingdom in his favor which they had almost entirely conquered under his
Conduct. He went to that Gentleman's Army and sided with his Party on purpose
that he might make himself the Head and Master of 'em: nor was he disappointed
of his Hope, for he quickly obtained the Authority which was due to his Birth
and Dignity.

He took advantage of the misunderstanding that was betwixt King Eric and the
Danes. This Monarch seeing himself Master of Three Great Kingdoms fancied
himself above the Laws and Privileges of those Nations. He treated the Danes
and Norwegians little better than the Swedes, and assumed an arbitrary Power
over a People who were willing to be his Subjects but could not endure to be
used like Slaves.

The Tyrannical Disposition of this Prince made him so odious to his Subjects,
that all the three Kingdoms conspired against him; and the Revolt was so
general; that there were none left to support him. The Danes drove him out of
the Kingdom, and conferred the Crown upon his Nephew, Christopher of Bavaria,
who immediately sent to the Estates of Norwey and Sweden, requiring 'em to
confirm his Election in pursuance of the Treaty of Calmar. The Norwegians
acknowledged him as their Sovereign; but the Great Marechal of Sweden and the
chief Noblemen of that Kingdom, endeavored to oppose his Advancement. They
represented to the Estates that the Election of that Prince ought to be
rejected, because the Danes had chosen him without the knowledge and Consent of
their Allies: But the Bishops and Clergy made so strong an Interest for him,
that his Election was confirmed by the Plurality of Voices.

Sweden received no benefit by the Change of her Master. He followed the Maxims
of his Predecessors; Denmark was his Favorite Kingdom, and he left no means
unattempted to bring Sweden under the Dominion of that Crown; But Death
prevented the Execution of his designs. He was succeeded by Christiern I. Count
of Oldenburg, from whom the present King of Denmark is descended. The Danes
advanced him to the Throne without asking or expecting the Approbation of the
Swedes and Norwegians. Yet in imitation of his Predecessor he pretended that by
virtue of his Election in Denmark he had a just Title to the Crowns of Sweden
and Norwey ^ but his Pretensions to the former were thwarted by the Great
Marshall Canutson, who opposed his pretended right with Great Courage and
Resolution.

That Lord had observed ever since Engelbrecth's Revolt, that the Swedes were
weary of being under the Dominion of a Foreign Power: And from that very time
he began secretly to aspire to the Crown, and to draw a Scheme of his future
Advancement. His Office made him Master of the Forces and Militia of the
Kingdom; he governed a large province, and was the richest Lord in Sweden. The
Estates being assembled at Stockholm, the Great Marshall came thither at the
Head of so numerous a Company of Finlandish Lords and Gentlemen, that 'twas
generally concluded he would be Master of the Election. He represented to the
Assembly that the Treaty of Calmar was extremely prejudicial to the whole
Kingdom; that Queen Margaret and the Kings her Successors had always made use
of that pernicious Law as a Means and pretext to bring Sweden under Subjection
to the Crown of Denmark; that the Danes treated 'em rather like Slaves than
Allies, assuming a Power to impose a Sovereign upon 'em, without calling 'em to
his Election; and that they could only blame themselves for so unworthy a
Treatment, if they did not abrogate and disannul a Treaty that was so
dishonorable to the Nation.

This Discourse raised the languid Courage of the Swedes, and awakened their
ancient Aversion against the Danish Government. It put 'em in Mind of the
Tyranny of King Eric; and every Man began to accuse himself of Weakness and
stupidity for submitting to the Prince of Bavaria. The Election of the Count of
Oldenburgh was rejected with a great deal of Vehemence; Great Marshall as a
Recompense for the Zeal he had always professed for the Interest of his
Country. At the same time he managed the Estates of Norway so dexterously, and
had so great an Influence over 'em, that he was chosen Sovereign of that
Kingdom, whither he went, and was Crowned at Drunthlin, and entrusted the
Government of the State to two of the Principal Lords of the Country.

The Swedish Bishops had been devoted to the Crown of Denmark, ever since Queen
Margaret preferred them before the Nobility in the Government of the Kingdom.
They only gave their Consent to the Election of the Great Marshall, because
they could not oppose it; and were vexed to behold the Increase of his power
and Authority. He was not ignorant of their Spy and Aversion against him, and
that they were only dissatisfied because he did not allow 'em a share in the
Government. If he had considered their temporal Authority, he would have soon
perceived that it was his true Interest to gain 'em: But he thought himself so
well settled upon the Throne, that 'twas beyond the power of his most potent
Adversaries to disturb the Quiet of his Reign. He resolved to humble those
lofty Prelates, and concluded that the most effectual Way to make 'em harmless
and submissive to the Government, was to deprive 'em of part of those vast
Riches, which served only to make 'em terrible to their Sovereign. He obtained
an Order of the Senate to make an Exact Inquiry into all the Rights of the
Crown, Foundations, under pretext that the Superstition of the People would
give the Clergy an Opportunity by Degrees to make themselves Masters of all the
Lands in the Kingdom.

The Bishops and other Ecclesiastics were extremely incensed at this
Declaration. They affirmed publicly that the King was a Heretic, and
endeavored to persuade the people that this Invasion of their temporal Estates
was only made use of as a Cloak to cover more pernicious Designs, and that the
Blow was aimed at Religion it self. To prevent the pretended Consequences of a
Regulation that touched 'em in the most sensible part, they resolved to take up
Arms against the King, and engaged their Relations, Vassals, and Creatures in
the Conspiracy. To favor their designed Revolt, John de Salstat Archbishop of
Upsal, of the Illustrious Family of Bielke, dispatched a Gentleman with secret
Instructions to Christiern I. King of Denmark, to invite him to Sweden, in
order to the Re-establishment of the Treaty of Calmar. And least that Prince
should be discouraged by the seeming difficulty of the Attempt, he assured him
that all the Bishops of the Kingdom would second his Pretentions, and that they
were ready to receive him as their Sovereign into all their Cities and Forts.

Christiern was then in Norwey, whither he went upon a like Invitation from a
Party that revolted against King Canuton: But notwithstanding the War in which
he was engaged in that Kingdom, he sent a powerful Army to support the Intended
Rebellion of the Swedish Clergy. As Soon as Archbishop Salstat received advice
of the Danes appearing on the Frontiers, he called a General Assembly of the
Clergy, to be held at Upsal, where he excommunicated the King in a solemn Mass
which he said on that occasion. After the Office was ended he laid his
Ecclesiastical Ornaments and Habits upon the Altar, swearing that he would
never put 'em on again till he had driven that Prince out of the Kingdom. Then
he took a Cuirass and Sword, and went out of the Church in that warlike
Equipage at the head of his Vassals to fight against his Sovereign. The rest of
the Bishops followed his Example, and took up Arms for the preservation of
their Privileges. They joined openly with the Danes, and longed to see their
Country under the Dominion of Foreign Princes who during their necessary
absence, left the Clergy in possession of all the marks of Sovereignty, and
even of a large share of the Royal Authority. They scrupled not to fight
against the King at the Head of the Danes, and the whole Kingdom was distracted
with a dreadful Complication of Civil and Foreign Wars.

Yet that Prince might have easily dispersed the Clouds that seemed to threaten
him with inevitable Ruin, and might have triumphed over the joint Forces of his
Foreign and Domestic Enemies, if he could have contented himself with the Regal
Dignity and the Revenues that were annexed to the Crown. But he began too soon
to domineer over his new Subjects, and not only imposed unusual Taxes upon the
People, but invaded the Privileges of the Nobility, without reflecting on the
fatal consequences of disobliging those to whom he owed his Crown and
Authority. By these violent proceedings he lost several of his best Friends,
and the most considerable Lords of the Kingdom. The Archbishop, taking
advantage of this Misunderstanding, routed the King's Army which was already
weakened by the Desertion of the Nobility, and pursued him to Stockholm whither
he retired after the Loss of the Battle. That unfortunate Prince perceiving
that the Nobility had forsaken him, and that he had neither Forces nor
provisions to undergo a Siege, was so afraid of falling into the Hands of his
Enemies that he left the Kingdom, and retired to Dantsick with a Design to
raise Forces in Prussia and Germany, and to appear once again in Sweden at the
Head of an Army.

In the mean Time the Archbishop was received into Stockholm, Christiern I. to
be proclaimed King of Sweden. That Prince was still in Norway, but as soon as he
had settled his Affairs there, he marched immediately to Sweden, and was
received as Sovereign of the Kingdom. The Archbishop flattered himself with
the Expectation of Governing the Kingdom, and imagined that Christiern would in
imitation of his Predecessors content himself with the Title of King; but that
Prince declared openly that he was resolved to keep the power in his own Hands,
and did not think fit to gratify the Ambition of his Benefactor. The haughty
Prelate finding himself so unexpectedly slighted, and (as he thought)
ungratefully treated, expressed his Dissatisfaction in Terms that were not much
different from a positive Menace. But Christiern knowing him to be a Person of
a turbulent and daring Temper was so far from complying with his Humor, or
endeavoring to appease his Passion, that he ordered him to be apprehended, and
sent him under a strong Guard to Denmark. Catil Bishop of Lincopinc, the
Archbishop's Nephew, took up Arms immediately to revenge the Affront that was
put upon his Uncle, and having in a little time raised a considerable Body of
Soldiers, had the good fortune to obtain several Victories over that Prince's
Army. Christiern perceiving that his Army was not strong enough to keep the
Field, in opposition to that Prelate, dispersed his Forces into the Places that
were in his Possession, and returned to Denmark to Levy a sufficient Number of
Men to recruit and augment his Army.

Bishop Catil remained Master of the Government during the War, which lasted
almost seven Years. He offered several times to receive the King of Denmark
into the Kingdom, if he would set the Archbishop at liberty: But that Monarch
was too proud to submit to a forced compliance, and scorned to own the
Reduction of Sweden to any but himself. Canutson's Friends perceiving that the
Breach grew-still wider, took advantage of so favorable a Juncture, and
prevailed with Catil to consent to the King's Restoration. As Soon as that
Prince received the welcome News he returned to Sweden, and re-mounted the
Throne after he had lived seven Years in Exile; but he saw himself quickly
reduced to his former Condition. Denmark's Eyes, and convinced him of the Error
he had committed in disobliging the Clergy: He endeavored to regain their Favor
by setting the Archbishop at liberty, and that Prelate assured him that he
would raise a new Insurrection against King Canutson. Christiern was engaged in
a War with the Count of Holstein who had invaded Jutland, so that he could not
at present spare any Soldiers: but he furnished the Archbishop with a
considerable sum to ^^^y Forces in Sweden, and ordered a Company of his Guards
to wait upon him, that he might enter the Kingdom with an honorable attendance.

The Archbishop was met and received on the Frontiers by Bishop Catin and all
his Followers. He blamed 'em for contributing to King Canutson's Restoration;
and 'twas resolved by all that were present to Dethrone him a second time. The
War broke forth again with more fury than ever: and not long after there was a
bloody Battle fought on the Lake Meler which was then frozen, where the King
was so entirely defeated that he had not Men enough lest to secure his Retreat,
so that he was forced to put himself into the Hands of his Enemies. The
Archbishop made him renounce the Title of King and afterward confined him to
a Castle in Finland, which he allowed him for his Subsistence.

This Prelat was not so fond of King Christiern as before, nor to forward to
acknowledge him as King of Sweden. His Imprisonment had given him a clearer
view of the Policy and Temper of that Prince; and he had found by experience
that it is sometimes dangerous for a Subject to put too great obligations on his
Sovereign. He resolved to enjoy the Fruit of his Victory, and to share the
Supreme Authority with the principal Lords of his Party. Sweden had the
Misfortune to be made the Scene of a confused and fatal Anarchy, and to groan
under the Tyrannical Dominion of as many Sovereigns as there were Lords that
could raise any Forces, or were Masters of a Castle or Fort. Every private
Quarrel was the occasion of a War, and the contending Parties made use of the
Names of King Canutson or King Christiern, to cover their rising up in Arms
with a Pretense of Authority, though at the bottom they did not own the Right or
Interest of either of these Princes. Canutson with extraordinary Eagerness and
Importunity, preferring an easy Subjection to a wild and troublesome Freedom.

Thus after so many Revolutions that Prince had the good Fortune to mount the
Throne a third Time. He was solemnly invested with the Title and Quality of a
King, and was put in possession of the Capital City; but the Bishops and Lords
retained their Authority over the Provinces. He did not long survive this happy
turn of his Fortune, and was so sensible at his Death of the Difficulties with
which the Sovereign of an elective State must resolve to encounter, Steno Sture
whom he appointed to succeed him, to content himself with the Quality of
Administrator of Sweden, for fear of provoking the Jealousy of the Lords by
assuming a more elevated Title. The Estates, after his Death, approved the
choice he had made, and the advice he had given his Successor. The Bishops and
the Nobility fearing that if he were invested with the Royal Dignity, he would
re-demand the Tributes, Revenues, and Forts which they had seized, confirmed
the Title of Administrator, and in that Quality entrusted him with the Command
of the Army, and the Government of the State.

The Dignity of Administrator was properly a Commission during the Inter-Regnum
or Vacancy of the Throne, which might be revoked and made void by the Estates.
He was by his Office the General of the Kingdom, and had a more immediate
Authority over the Soldiers and Officers, who took an Oath of Fidelity to him.
The Archbishop of Upsal, as Chief Senator, which was a Dignity annexed to his
Office, had the Precedence in public Solemnities and on Days of Ceremony; but
in Time of War the Sovereign Power was lodged in the Person of the
Administrator, and he enjoyed all the Authority of a King, though he durst not
assume the Title. The Swedes were so afraid of absolute Power, that they
dreaded the very Name of a King, and imagined that they enjoyed a greater
Liberty under an Administrator, though his Authority was not Inferior to that of
a King, and might be advanced as high as he had the Courage and Dexterity to
raise it.

Christiern the First endeavored sometimes by Treaties and sometimes by Force
to abolish that Dignity, and re-establish the Union of Calmar. The Bishops were
still devoted to his Interest, and declared in his Favor as often as they
could discover their Inclinations without Danger. During the space of Four and
Forty Years, that Monarch and King John the Second his Son, governed Sweden by
Turns with the Administrator Steno, and Suanto Sture: For it happened not
unfrequently that the King of Denmark and the Administrator were at the same
Time Masters of several Provinces according as the Faction of the Bishops, or
the Party of the Nobility prevailed. In the mean time neither of 'em could make
themselves Absolute in a Kingdom where the Sovereigns were oftentimes obliged
to part with some Branch of their Prerogative, to purchase the Obedience of
their Subjects.

Such was the State of Sweden, when it began to be made the Theater of the most
memorable Revolutions that ever happened in the North, which may be justly
reckoned the Foundations of the Swedish Monarchy, Charles XI. King of Sweden,
of the Palatine Branch of Deuxponts is the Grandson of Catherine de Vasa, the
Daughter of Charles of Sudermania, and Wife of Casimir Count Palatine of the
Rhine.
and of the Grandeur of that Family which at present possesses the Throne.

After the Death of Swanto Sture the last Administrator of Sweden, the Factions
and Parties, which by his Power and Policy he had broken and dispersed, began to
break forth with fresh Violence. He owed his Advancement to his own Merit, and
to the need the Kingdom had of his Protection: For he was chosen Administrator
at a time when that Dignity seemed to be instituted on purpose to oppose the
Attempts of the Danes. His Victories over the Muscovites raised his Glory and
Reputation, and made his Memory Illustrious.

His Power was almost equal to the Authority of the most Absolute Monarchs. He
was Fortunate in War, and respected in Peace. he obliged John II. Denmark, by
the Terror of his Arms, to make a Truce with Sweden; and established Peace and
Plenty among his People. The Nobility and Peasants looked upon him as the
Protector of the Public Liberty; and his Merit procured him the Friendship of
some of the Bishops, whom he had persuaded to disingage themselves from the
Danish Faction.

He never undertook any important Affair, without imparting his Designs to
James Ulfonis Archbishop of Upsal, and Heming Gadde Bishop of Lincopine: For
though those Prelates were Enemies to his Dignity, they could not forbear loving
and esteeming his Person. He showed an extraordinary Respect to the Senate, and
affected so little Superiority over the Noble men, that he seemed only to excel
'em in Merit, though he was willing that People should know that this was rather
an Effect of his Moderation, than of Weakness and Meanness of Spirit. He kept
always a considerable Body of Standing Forces, that his Enemies might never
find an Opportunity to Surprise him, before he was prepared to receive 'em. His
Court and Household were composed of the Officers of his Army; he maintained 'em
with his own Revenues in time of Peace, and made 'em his Ministers and
Favorites. These prudent Maxims which he observed in the Management of all his
Affairs, made him the Terror of the Danes, and their Faction, who durst never
engage in any Attempt against Sweden, during his Government.

After his Death, the Senate called a Meeting, or Convention of the Estates at
Arboga, to proceed to the Choice of a Successor. The Bishops, led by the
Consideration of their private Interest, endeavored to support the Claim of
the Kings of Denmark, under whose Reign they had always the largest Share in
the Government, and lest no Means unattempted to revive the Union of Calmar.
They represented to the Estates, that Plenty and a flourishing Trade, were the
happy Effects of the Observance of that Treaty in Norway; that this was the
only Way to change the present Truce with Denmark to a solid Peace, which could
not but be extremely Advantageous to Sweden; and that on the contrary, the
Election of an Administrator would make the Kingdom the Seat of a bloody and
pernicious War, so long as there were any Kings in Denmark able to maintain the
Justice of their Pretensions to the Crown of Sweden.

But these Arguments were not much regarded by the rest of the Assembly, who
were convinced that these designing Prelates would, for their own Interest,
bring the Nation under a Yoke that was Grievous and Insupportable to all the
other Estates of the Kingdom. The greatest part of the Deputies declared aloud,
That they would have an Administrator, and the Bishops were forced to comply
with the prevailing Opinion. The Archbishop of Upsal was the first that gave
his Vote, and declared in Favor of the Senator Eric Trolle, who was a prudent
and deserving Person; and besides recommended by his Age, Birth, Riches, and
Alliance to the late Administrator. The Archbishop, to prevent any Opposition
that might be made against that Senator's Advancement, assured the Friends and
Relations of the late Administrator, that 'twas only the Respect he had for the
Memory of that Great Man, which made him name Trolle for his Successor; adding,
That by this means Swanto's Son, who by reason of his Youth, could not be
supposed to be yet Master of so much Skill and Experience as was required for
the Discharge of so great a Trust, would have an Excellent Opportunity to fit
himself for the Management of Affairs, and to learn the Art of War under the
Inspection of his Kinsman, who by reason of his old Age, could not keep him
long from the Possession of his Father's Dignity.

But this was only a specious Pretense to cover his hidden Designs. He had
resumed the old Maxims of the Clergy after the Death of Swanto, or rather began
now to discover those Inclinations which he durst not own under the Reign of
that wise and powerful Prince. Eric Trolle was his intimate Friend, and he was
not ignorant of his secret Affection and Dependence on the King of Denmark, by
reason of a considerable Estate which he had in that Kingdom. It Is true, that
Lord was a very Wise and Judicious Person, but he had neither Courage nor
Resolution, and both his Age and Inclination made him Incapable of engaging in
a War with Denmark.

Besides the Archbishop concluded, That the Fear of losing his Estate in
Denmark, and the sure Prospect of a considerable Recompense, would have so
great an Influence over him, that he would be easily persuaded to accept of
this Dignity by way of Trust, and afterward make use of the Power it gave him,
to make the King of Denmark Master of the Kingdom.

But all these Politic Contrivances were frustrated, by the unconquerable
Aversion with which the Swedes were possessed against all that were suspected
to favor the Danish Interest. The Lay-Senators, the Nobility, the Deputies of
the Provinces, and Consuls of Steckholm, agreed unanimously to exclude Eric
Trolle, and at the same time declared for the young Prince Steno. The Bishops
and their Faction persisted obstinately in the Choice of Trolle; and the Heat
of the Two contending Parties began to occasion a terrible Disorder in the
Assembly. But the Noblemen and Deputies maintained the Interest of Prince
Steno with so much Zeal and Vigor, that the Bishops finding they could not
safely oppose his Advancement any longer, submitted to the plurality of Voices,
and even seemed to approve what they could not prevent. July 21.


Not long after the Disaffected Party began to raise new Dis^^^^bances, and to
dispute the Validity of the Election, pretending that it was carried on by
indirect Methods, and that the Electors were either biased or over-awed It Is
hard to divine what might have been the Event of a Contest about so consi^^^^
le a Prize as the Supreme Power: But it is probable the Animosity of the two
Contending Factions might at last have occasioned a Civil War, especially in an
Elective Kingdom, where People are generally so unwilling to acknowledge a Man
for their Sovereign, whom they used to cousider as their Equal; if the
Difference had not been composed by the Mediation of the Common Friends of both
Parties.

By the Articles of this Agreement, the young Administrator was obliged to
consent, that the Archbishop should resign his Benefice and Dignity to Eric
Trolle's Son. 'Twas hoped that the Son's Advancement would soften the Father's
Anger, and make him bear his Disappointment with less Impatience: And this was
reckoned the surest Expedient to establish a good Understanding betwixt the two
Families, and to preserve the Peace of the Nation.

But notwithstanding all these pretended Advantages, the Promotion of young
Trolle was opposed by the greatest part of the Nobility and Gentry, who looked
upon this Agreement as a Condescension beneath their Courage, and injurious to
the Reputation of their Party. They assured the Administrator, that they were
able to maintain his Right with their Swords in the Field, against the Bishops
and the Danish Faction: And some of^em who penetrated deeper into the Intrigues
of State, and were better acquainted with the Art of Government, told him in
private, That the Fate of his Predecessors should deter him from conferring the
principal Dignity of the Church upon a Person that was already possessed of the
highest Advantages both of Birth and Fortune: That since the fatal Tr^aty of
Calmar, the Archbishops had b^^n the Authors and Fomenters of all the Intestine
Wars that had harafs'd the Kingdom, under the Reign and Administration of his
Predecessors: That young Trolle was reputed a turbulent and daring Person: That
those who considered the Zeal with which the Clergy and Danish Faction
solicited his Preferment, could not but suspect his Fidelity to the present
Government: And that 'twas absolutely inconsistent with the most obvious Rules
of Prudence, to advance a Man that was in a manner obliged both by Interest and
Natural Affection, to hate the Person who was the only Obstacle of the Grandeur
of his Family.

These were the principal Arguments with which these Grave Politicians
endeavored to convince the Administrator of the Dangerous Consequences of the
proposed Agreement: But in this, as well as in most other cases, it appeared
that the Force of Reason is not able to curb the unbridld Heat of Youth. The
young Prince wanted Experience, and was unwilling to be governed by that of
others: He was dazzled with the Splendour of his new Dignity, and could not think
himself secured in the Possession of his beloved Grandeur, so long as his Title
was controverted by so powerful a Rival. His mind was so taken up with the
Pleasures of a present Enjoyment, that he was not at leisure to think of future
Dangers; and perhaps he was so deluded by the seeming Generosity of the Action,
that he was incapable of foreseeing the Hazard to which it exposed him. But
whatever were the Inducements that betrayed him into this Error, it is certain
that the Archbishop resigned with his Consent, and that Trolle was elected by
the Chapter upon his Recommendation. Leo X. in his Favor, and remitted a
considerable Sum of Money to the new Prelate, who was then at Rome, that he
might be able to appear in an Equipage suitable to his Dignity, and to the
Honor and Reputation of the Kingdom.

The old Archbishop sent a secret Message to his Successor, by one of his
Confidents, with private Orders to pass by the Court of Denmark, with which the
Swedish Clergy kept an uninterrupted Correspondence. The Election of the
Administrator, and the Advancement of Trolle to the Archbishopric of Upsal,
were News of too great Importance to the King of Denmark, not to be imparted to
him with all possible haste. King John had not long before left the Crown to
his Son Christiern II. whose Temper was a sufficient Indication of his future
Misfortunes. He was naturally Sour, Fierce, and untractable; his Courage
proceeded rather from Transports of Fury, than from a magnanimous Desire of
Glory; and he seemed only to make War, that he might feed his Eyes with the
Bloody Horrors of Death. His Birth and the Choice of the Danes, had put him in
Possession of two Crowns; but he could not think himself Happy in a Kingdom,
where the Sovereign Power was restrained by the Laws, and by the Authority of
the Senate. On the contrary, he looked upon Sweden as a Country, where by the
Success of his Arms, and Right of Conquest, he might one day have the Pleasure
to Rule with a boundless and unbridl'd Power.

He waited with an extreme Impatience, Trolle, who was descended of a Family,
and engaged in a Party, that were always ready to promote the Interests of
Denmark, helped him to bear the mortifying News of the Election of a new
Administrator: And he imagined, that by the Assistance of the Swedish Clergy,
he might obtain an easy Victory over a Prince whose Authority was not yet
firmly established. He wrote with his own hand to that young Prelate, to
congratulate his late Advancement, and sent him a considerable Sum of Money as
a Token of his Friendship.

Trolle was consecrated at Rome, and received the Pallium from Pope Leo X. In
his return to Sweden, he passed by Lubeck, which at that time was the principal
and most potent City of all the Hanse-Towns, and had engrossed the whole Trade
of the Northern Kingdoms. There he sound a Gentleman whom King Christiern had
sent to engage him in his Party. The Danish Minister, who was acquainted with
his Master's most secret Designs, after he had delivered his Credentials, told
the Archbishop in the King's Name, that His Majesty could not forbear taking
this occasion to repeat the Assurances of his Friendship, and that he hoped to
see the Union of Calmar revived by his Assistance, and by the Interest and
Power to which the Dignity of his Office gave him so just a Title.

Trolle was not ignorant of the Interest and Inclination of his Family; and
both his Father and the old Archbishop had taken care to engage him in their
Faction. He told the Gentleman that he was fully persuaded of the Justice of
his Master's Pretensions to the Crown of Sweden; and prayed him to assure that
Prince, in his Name, that he was very sensible of the Obligations which the
Consideration both of his Office and Family laid upon him, to promote the
Danish Interest; and that as soon as he had taken Possession of his
Archbishopric, he would endeavor to give His Majesty the most convincing
Marks of his Zeal and Affection to his Service.

He had afterward several private Conferences with King Christiern's Agent,
during his abode at Lubeck. The Dane finding him to be of a haughty and
imperious Temper, and extremely proud of his new Dignity, and of the Grandeur
of his Family, resolved to attack him on the weak side, and to make him an
Enemy to the Administrator, as well as a Friend to the King of Denmark. He
insinuated with a great deal of Art, that he was obliged, in Justice to
himself, and to the Honor of his Family, to resent the Affront that was put
upon his Father; and added, That he could never believe that a Person of his
Merit would tamely bear the Arrogance of an Insolent Youth.

He represented to him afterward, That the Election of an Administrator was a
late Invention of the Nobility to elude the Treaty of Calmar. That by this
means the Kings of Denmark were deprived of their undoubted Right to the Crown
of Swedon; and the Prelates of that Kingdom excluded from the Share which those
Princes allowed 'em in the Government. Then finding that his Discourse had made
a considerable Impression on the Archbishop's Mind, he added, as it were to
comfort him after such Melancholy Reflections, That in all probability the young
Administrator would not continue long in the Possession of his Dignity; That
the King his Master was resolved to insist upon the Execution of the Treaty of
Calmar; That his Claim would be asserted by Coarl^, and Ferdinand of Austria,
whose Sister he had lately married, by the Dukes of Saxony his Uncles, and the
Marquess of Brandenburg his Brother-in-law; That he was at Peace with all the
Hanse-Towns; That the City of Lubeck, which formerly pretended to preserve an
Equality betwixt the Northern Crowns, was not now in a Condition to assist
Sweden; That the Republic was so weakened by the late War, in which it was
engaged for the space of ten Years against the King of Denmark, that the
Regency were wholly taken up with contriving Expedients to re-establish their
Trade, and would think themselves obliged to Christiern, if he would consent to
confirm and maintain the Peace which they had obtained; That his Master was
endeavoring to make a League with France and England; and that as soon as the
Truce betwixt Denmark and Sweden expired, he would enter the last of these
Kingdoms at the Head of his Army, to maintain his Right, and establish his
Authority. He added, That he had Orders to assure him in his Master's Name,
That his Majesty would entrust him with the Government during his Absence, and
advance him to the same Post which the Archbishops of Upsal enjoyed under the
Reign of his Predecessors.

The haughty Prelate listened attentively to a Proposal that flattered his
Ambition. He looked upon the Kindness he had lately received from the
Administrator, as a mere forced Condescension; and instead of loving and
honoring him, as his Benefactor, he began to hate and suspect him as a secret
and implacable Enemy of his Family, and one who was obliged by Interest to
humble and oppose him. He fancied that he might aspire to the Authority which
that Prince enjoyed, and even that he might obtain it, by devoting himself
entirely to the King of Denmark's Service.

Having considered all the advantageous Consequences of such a Revolution, he
repeated his Protestations to the Envoy, that he would imitate the most Zealous
of his Predecessors in their inviolable Fidelity to the Crown of Denmark. But
since he was not well acquainted with the present State of a Kingdom from which
he had been so long absent, 'twas resolved and agreed upon betwixt 'em, that he
should spend some time in reviving and increasing the Danish Faction; and that
the King should from time to time send private Agents to take an account of the
Strength and Condition of their Party, and to concert the surest and most
convenient Measures to put their Designs in Execution.

The Danish Envoy having finished his Negotiation returned to his Master; and
the Archbishop embarked for Sweden with a full resolution to Plot the ruin of
the Administrator.

Though that Prelate was educated at Rome, he had made but a slender progress in
the Arts of Subtilty and Dissimulation, that are so industriously taught at
that Court. He was naturally of a stiff and violent Temper, more learned than
Politic, proud of the Riches and Power of his Family and absolutely governed by
his Humor. He was extremely imperious and haughty, and even incapable of
Complaisance: he hated his Superiors, could not endure his Equals, and
slighted his Inferiors, among whom he reckoned all those who were not so rich
as himself. He was so far from regulating his Behavior to the Administrator
according to the Maxims of Policy, that he did not so much as observe the
common Rules of decency. He industriously avoided that Prince, who in an
obliging manner came out of his Palace to meet him; and as soon as he came
ashore, he went by Land to Upsal without sending any compliment to the
Administrator, as if he had forgot both his Dignity and Kindness.

He spent the first days after his Arrival in receiving the Compliments of his
Suffragans, and the Homage of his Clergy. His Relations and Friends, and the
chief Persons of the Danish Faction went to visit him, some to congratulate his
advancement, and others to discover his humor, and observe his Behavior to the
Administrator. In the mean time there was nothing to be seen at Upsal but
Feasting and Rejoicing, which lasted above a Month; for that young Prelate
affected so extraordinary a Magnificence, and his Friends and the Creatures of
his Family were so numerous, that he was attended with a Court which in some
measure obscured that of his the Sovereign.

But they were not so wholly intent upon their pleasure, as to forget Politics
and Affairs of State. 'Twas during these Feasts and in the heat of an
Entertainment that the violent and impetuous Prelate began to discover his
Dissatisfaction. He complained to his Friends of the Injury which he pretended
was done to his Father in the late Election; and even could not forbear saying
publicly that Steno would have had but few Voices if the Election had been
free. Afterward he discoursed in private with the Bishops to discover their
Inclinations to the Government, and to know what confidence he might place in
their Assistance, if he should be engaged in any Design against the
Administrator. He insinuated, as it were by way of common discourse; that 'twas
to be feared the end of the Truce with Denmark would be the beginning of a
bloody War; that he was persuaded Christiern would leave no Means unattempted
to re-establish the Union of the Kingdoms upon the Foot of the Treaty of
Calmar, notwithstanding the Election of an Administrator; that he pitied the
miserable condition of his Country, which, in all probability, would be
Sacrificed to the ambition of these two Princes; that he knew not what side the
Clergy ought to take, in case of an open Rupture; that 'twas true the Office of
the Administrator seemed to be instituted for the defense of the Nation and the
Preservation of it is liberty; but that the Pretensions of the Kings of Denmark
were founded on a just Claim; and besides that those Princes seemed only to
contend for the Title of Kings of Sweden, that they might entrust the Clergy
with the whole care and Authority of the Government.

He added that Time and their Advice would instruct him what measures he ought
to observe with the King of Denmark: But as for Prince Steno, he declared that
he was so fully convinced of the violent and indirect Methods that were used in
his Election, that he did not think the Clergy obliged to defend and support
the Dignity of the Administrator against the Danes, so long as that Prince was
possessed of it.

The Archbishop's Discourse was received with an universal Applause by his
Suffragans. They unanimously declared for the King of Denmark, and even some of
the most violent of 'em were of Opinion, that they ought immediately to invite
him to break the Truce, and surprise Prince Steno, whom they reckoned an
Usurper; and that at the same Time each Prelate should oblige the Towns and
Castles in their respective Jurisdictions to own the Justice of the Danish
pretensions. Others thought it necessary to put all Things in a Readiness to
favor your the Invasion, and without losing Time to engage all their Friends
and Vassals in the Design: and in the general all the Bishops endeavored to
outvie each other in expressing their Complaisance to their Primate and an
entire Resignation to his Conduct, which they were the more willing to promise,
because the intended Invasion was yet but an uncertain project, and both the
War and the Dangers that attend it seemed to be at a Distance.

Afterward the Archbishop made it his Business to enquire into the Number and
Strength of his Vassals. He sent a Body of Soldiers to take possession of the
Fort of Steque, which belonged to the Archbishopric, and furnished it with
Stores and Ammunition, as if the War had been already declared. He obliged his
Friends and Relations to give him new Assurances of their Assistance, and by
his Magnificence and Liberality engaged a considerable Number of 'em to remain
with him.

The misunderstanding betwixt that Prelate and the Administrator, and the
preparations that were made by his Creatures and the rest of the Danish
Faction, gave Occasion to People to believe that the Kingdom would quickly be
made the Scene of a Civil War. Upsal became the general Rendevous of all the
Malcontents, and of those straggling Adventurers, who are always ready to
offer their Service upon the first Appearance of a Faction, and are afterward
as apt to desert or betray their party, as they are variously acted by Fear or
Interest. They were extremely well received by the Archbishop, who heard with
pleasure their Complaints against the Government, and seemed to be touched with
a Sense of their Grievances. He endeavored to express his Dissatisfaction by
his Discourse and all his Actions, that the disatisfacted Party might be
encouraged to make their Addresses to him: but he carefully avoided every Thing
that might give the People Occasion to suspect his Correspondence with the
Danes, who, he knew, were generally hated by the whole Swedish Nation, except
the Clergy. And therefore he took care to regulate his Behavior in such a
Manner, that his Hatred and aversion against the Administrator might be thought
to proceed from a private Quarrel betwixt the two Families, in which the Estate
was not at all concerned.

The Administrator was equally surpised and incensed at the News of these
Transactions. He perceived that the Archbishop was preparing for a Rupture,
and was so enraged at that Prelate's Ingratitude, that being naturally of an
impatient and fiery Temper, he would have immediately marched against him at
the Head of his Army, if his Council had not moderated his Fury. They told him
that Princes must not proceed in such Cases like private Persons; that his
Anger and Resentment would only serve to strengthen the Archbishop's Party,
and augment the Number of the Malcontents; that he had to do with a People
who were extremely Jealous of their Liberty, and always ready to oppose the
Attempts of their Sovereigns: and therefore they advised him to conceal his
Indignation, and to endeavor to gain that Prelate by gentle and obliging
Methods.

Steno submitted to their Opinion, and under pretext of taking a Journey to
some Lands that belonged to him, he passed through Upsal, which lay directly in
his Way, and is but ten Swedish Leagues from Stockholm. He alighted at the
Archbishop's Palace, and went to visit him with all the Demonstrations of Joy
and an obliging Confidence that could be expressed by a Prince who had Reason
to believe that his Dignity and Kindness would procure him a hearty Welcome.
After he had congratulated his happy Return to the Kingdom, he told him that he
was extremely glad that he had had an occasion to conttibute to his
Advancement, and began to complain in a very kind and obliging Manner that he
had not yet appeared at the Court. And in the general he omitted no Expressions
of Kindness and Civility that might appease the Anger of that stubborn-Prelate,
and bring him back to a Sense of his Duty.

The Arch Bishop who was both vexed and surpised at that Prince's Arrival
answered his Caresses with a Constraint and Disturbance that appeared visibly
in all his Actions. However he entertained him with extraordinary Magnificence;
but that was merely an Effect of his vanity, and designed rather to display his
Power and Riches, than to express his Joy and Gratitude for the Honor the
Administrator had done him. Nor could he forbear in the Heat of their Discourse
to reproach that Prince indirectly for using violent Methods, to obtain a
Dignity which was only due to the Merits of his Father.

The Administrator who was loath to quarrel with a Man whom he purposely came
to oblige, began to justify his Election; but that haughty Prelate won'd not so
much as condescend to hear his Reasons, and told him with a great deal of heat
that the Time would come when a free Convention of the Estates would do Justice
to his Father, and to all those who were dissatisfied with the Government.

The Prince was equally surpised at the Archbishop's Threatenings, and
incensed at his Pride and Insolency. He retired with a Resolution to employ all
his Power and Interest to humble him; and least the Court of Rome, which
usually takes hold of such Occasions to extend its Authority, under pretext of
protecting the Clergy, should interpose in this Affair, the Administrator wrote
to the Pope to complain of the Insolence and ill Behavior of that Prelate.

Not long after the Pope returned an Answer full of kind and obliging
Expressions. He blamed Trolle for his Turbulency and ingratitude, and added
that he had sent Orders to his Legate who was then at the Court of Denmark, to
go immediately to Sweden and in his Name to admonish the Archbishop of his
Duty.

But notwithstanding those specious pretenses, the Instructions he gave to his
Legate were intended rather for a Complement than a real Satisfaction: For though
he seemed to blame the Archbishop, he could not but rejoice in his Heart that
both he and the other Prelates of the Kingdom, whom the Court of Rome is wont
always to look upon as her Subjects and Creatures, should extend their Power,
and assume a Share in the Government of the State. And besides the Popes had
always bore a secret Aversion to the Kings, and Sovereigns of Sweden, since
those Princes had discontinu'd the payment of the Tribute usually called St.
Peter's Pence. Ann. 940. Bazius Hist. Eccles. Suec. and Gotica.
'Twas imposed by King Olaus as a Tax upon all his Subjects, when the Christian
Religion was first introduced into the Kingdom. But most of his Successors
refused to submit to an Imposition, which was equally injurious both to the
Prince and to the Subjects.

Several Popes had in Vain demanded that Tribute; Honorius III. John XXII.
Innocent VI. Gregory XI.
and even some of 'em had darted their usual Thunders of Excommunication, but
without making the least impression upon those Princes: So that the Court of
Rome was at last obliged to give over its successless Attempts upon a People,
whose Eyes were opened rather by Policy than Learning, and who by an early and
unanimous Resolution had shaken off the Fear of Ecclefiastical Censures. The
Administrator was admonished by his Council, who were acquainted with the
Inclinations and Politics of the Court of Rome, not to rely upon the Pope's
Assistance in so dangerous a Juncture: Nor did he place so much Confidence in
the Apostolical Letters, but at the same Time he took more effectual Measures
for the Defense and preservation of his Authority.

He summoned a Meeting of the Estates at Tellia, under pretext that the Truce
with Denmark was ready to expire; but in effect to procure a new Confirmation
of this Title and Authority, and at the same time to discover the Strength of
the Archbishop's Party.

That Prelate, on the other hand, made it his Business to gain more Friends to
the King of Denmark, and to raise new Enemies to the Administrator. He exacted
fresh Assurances of Fidelity from those of his Party, and even engaged the
Governors of the Castles of Stockholm and Nicopinc in the Danish Faction.
Afterward he sent a trusty Messenger to King Christiern, to give him an
Account of the present Posture of Affairs, and of the Condition of his Party;
and to entreat him to advance immediately at the Head of his Army, without
staying for the end of the Truce, which he might easily find several plausible
Pretexts to violate. And besides he ordered his Agent to assure him, That the
Government of the Castles of Stockholm and Nicopinc would declare in his
Favor, and receive his Forces into the Places under their Command.

Christiern, replied to these Solicitations, that it would not be sufficient to
break the Truce, unless the Estates of Denmark would contribute to the War
against Sweden; that he was endeavoring to engage the principal persons of the
Kingdom in that Design; that he believed he had already gained the Legate that
was going to Sweden; that if the Negotiation of that Prelate should not be
attended with success, he would take care to start some difference betwixt the
Two Nations, and push it on so far that the Estates of Denmark should be
obliged to take up Arms in the defense of the Nation.

In the mean time the Estates of Sweden Assembled at Tellia, where the
Administrator had appointed 'em to meet; and he had the pleasure to see that
most of the Deputies were the same persons who had contributed most effectually
to his Advancement. This encouraged him to summon the Archbishop to repair
thither, in order to his qualifying himself for his Office, by taking the usual
Oath of Fidelity to the Estates. But that Prelate not daring to appear in an
Assembly, where his Enemy had so strong a party, shut himself up in the Fort of
Steque, which was a Castle seated on the top of a Hill, and equally fortified
by Art and Nature. The Archbishop of Upsal had taken all imaginable care to
render it Impregnable, according to the Rules that were observed in those days;
and besides, it was sufficiently secured by the privileges of the Clergy which
made it an inviolable Sanctuary. The Archbishop called a meeting of the
Bishops and others of his Faction, and the Assembly was held in that Castle, as
if the Convention at Tellia had neither been free nor lawfully called. Thus
both parties were making preparations for an open Rupture, Joan. Magnus vit.
Arc^iep. Vpsal.
when John Angelo Arcemboldi, Pope Leo the Tenth's Legate in the Northern
Kingdoms arrived in Sweden, and offered his Mediation to negotiate an Agreement
betwixt the Archbishop and the Administrator.

The Legate was of a smooth and pliant Temper, extremely Polite and
Complaisant, and seemed to make the getting of Money his principal Business,
and the main Object of his Desires He pretended, among his other Commissions,
to be entrusted with a full power to grant Licenses for the eating of Flesh on
Fish-days, to those who would be at the charge of purchasing a dispensation. At
the same time he distributed indulgences to all those who would contribute a
certain sum for the Building of St. Peter's Church at Rome. These new Projects
for draining the People of their Money were set on foot about that time, and
carried a little too far by the Ministers of the Court of Rome under the
Pontificate of Leo X. though perhaps without his knowledge.

Arcemboldi, scraped together those profitable Incomes, with all the greediness
of a Soldier that is sent to levy Contributions. He had fleeced a part of
Denmark under the protection of his Bulls, and not satisfied with the
considerable sums he had raised in that Kingdom, he put his Money out to
Interest, or employed it in Merchandising, when he was preparing for his
departure to Sweden.

King Christiern, was extremely dissatisfied with the Commission and Behavior
of that Legate, who under a Religious pretext drew all the Money out of his
Dominions; but he durst not express his displeasure. He could not hope to
succeed in his design against Sweden, without the assistance of the Clergy, and
he was fraid least they would become his Enemies, if he should quarrel with the
Court of Rome. Thus he was forced to purchase the favor of that Prelate at the
rate of exposing his Kingdom as a prey to his Avarice. He over-loaded him with
Caresses and Obligations during his Abode in Denmark, and at his departure he
received his last visit with the highest Demonstrations of kindness and
Civility.

He prayed him to employ the interest and Authority to which his Character
entitled him for the Establishment of a firm and lasting Peace betwixt the Two
Kingdoms. He assured him that he was ready to consent to any reasonable
expedients for the carrying on of so good a design, provided the Swedes would
engage to put the Treaty of Calmar in execution. He added that neither the
Civil Wars, nor the most successful Rebellions could be supposed to make void
the Obligation of so solemn a Treaty; that the Clergy and all the honest party
in the Kingdom looked upon the Union that was agreed upon in that famous
Assembly as the truest way to establish a solid and durable Peace betwixt the
Two Nations; and that this was the only fault which the Administrator could
object against the Archbishop. He prayed the Legate to protect that Prelate
from the unjust Rage of a rash and insolent youth; and concluded that he hoped
he would put some difference betwixt a Captain of Rebels, and a Sovereign,
whose Family had been always devoted to the interest of the holy See.

The Legate was not ignorant that the Court of Rome was extremely well pleased
with the Danes, and very much dissatisfied with the Swedes; and besides he knew
that King Christiern was allied to the House of Austria, for which the Pope had
an extraordinary respect: but the most prevailing Motive that engaged him in
that Prince's service was the consideration of the Money he left in the
Kingdom, and of that which he hoped to get at his return, in some Provinces
where he had not yet published his Indulgences. He assured the King that he
would prosecute his designs with all imaginable Vigor and Zeal, and even
insinuated to him that he had secret orders to favor his pretensions and
protect his Creatures, adding, that under the seeming Character of a Mediator,
would he promote his Interest, and serve him with as much Fidelity and
Affection as he could expect to find in his own Ministers.

The King of Denmark relying upon these Protestations discovered his most
secret designs, and talked to him with more freedom than a Prince ought to use
with a Foreign Minister. He told him, that he was sure of the Castles of
Stockholm and Nicopinc, that all the Bishops were ready to receive him into the
places that were under their Command, and that the Archbishop of Upsal who
managed the whole design would come over to his Army as soon as he should appear
on the Frontiers of the Kingdom. He entreated the Legate to confer with that
Prelate, if it were possible to keep any Correspondence with him without giving
people occasion to suspect the design of their Conferences. He desired him also
to concert with the Archbishop the surest and most convenient Methods to put
their project in execution.

The Legate left Denmark with these Instructions, and as soon as he arrived at
the Court of Sweden, he publicly exhorted the Administrator and the Senate in
the Pope's Name to conclude a firm and lasting Peace with Denmark. Some days
after he demanded a private Audience of the Administrator, in which he
entreated that Prince to grant the honor of his Friendship to the Archbishop,
and not to disturb that Prelate in the possession of a dignity which the Pope
conferred upon him merely at his Recommendation. Steno replied in few Words,
and with a great deal of Courage and Resolution, that he would always receive
his Holiness's desires with Submission and Respect, and have an honorable
regard for the Person of his Legate; but withal he told him, that he ought in
the first place to offer his Advice and Admonitions to the Archbishop, who he
assured him might enjoy his Dignity without the least disturbance or
molestation, if he would return to a sense of his duty.

The Legate who only waited for an occasion to enter upon the Subject of his
Negotiation, told the Prince that he had received orders from the Pope to offer
and consult about the best expedients for bringing the difference betwixt him
and the Archbishop to an amicable agreement, and for establishing a firm and
durable peace between Sweden and Denmark; and that he perceived that the latter
could hardly be accomplished without the former. He prayed him to accept the
mediation of the holy See, he exhorted him to prefer a solid Peace before the
uncertain chance of War, which perhaps would not be equally agreeable to all
the Estates of the Kingdom, and would make him odious even to the Nobility and
Commons, if it should happen to be prolonged beyond their Expectation, or if
they should be disappointed of their hope of success.

This discourse and the care the Legate took to confound the Archbishop's
Affair with the King of Denmark's pretensions, made the Administrator suspect
the intentions of that Prelate, who he concluded was gained by his Enemies, and
acquainted with all their Designs. He knew how much it was his interest to
discover the bottom of their project; but 'twas not an easy Task for a young
Swedish Prince to pump a secret out of an Italian Prelate, who had been trained
up in the art of dissimulation in the Court of Rome. And therefore instead of
endeavoring to unriddle the mystery by overreaching that crafty Minister in
an art of which he was an absolute Master, he resolved to attack him on the
weak side; and in pursuance of that design, he entreated him, by the advice of
the Senate, to distribute his indulgences in the Kingdom, assuring him that
during that time he would take such measures as might be conducive to the
public good, and agreeable to the inclinations of the holy Father.

This contrivance had all the success that could be desired: The Legate was
extremely glad of so favorable an opportunity of continuing his gainful trade
with so fair a prospect of Advantage, which was the only design of his Legation
to the Northern Countries. He was afraid that if the Two Nations should come to
an open Rupture, 'twould be impossible for him to pursue his Commission in
Sweden, and that the tumultuous confusion of War would deprive him of the
profits of his Mission, for which 'twas thought he had advanced a considerable
Sum to the Apostolical Chamber. And therefore as soon as he had obtained the
consent of the Administrator and Senate, he published his Bulls through the whole
Kingdom, and his Officers took care to disperse 'em through all the Provinces.
Those under-Collectors, or Licensed Beggars whom he carried about with him,
were certain persons who had farmed the right of publishing his Bulls, and were
obliged to purchase their Leases for a considerable sum of Money. 'Twas always
his Custom to agree with the highest bidder, without regarding the
qualifications of those mercenary Preachers, provided they could give him
sufficient security for the payment of his Money.

The Administrator, either out of Policy or Devotion, seemed very desirous of
obtaining these indulgences. He was very liberal on that occasion; and in
imitation of his example the Senators and all the Nobility laid out
considerable sums of Money on these Commodities. The common people who are
usually the best customers at such Markets, emptied their pockets to secure
their Souls: every one was willing to contribute to the pious design, and even
the wildest Debauches seemed to grow fond of the modish Devotion, which the
Administrator had brought into fashion, and were easily persuaded to submit to
a penance that tended only to mortify their purses.

Arcemboldi amassed a prodigious Treasure in Sweden, Vit. Archiep. Vpsal. Joan.
Magni.
and the Administrator suffered him to export the Money in Specie, without
paying any Customs or Duties. This was a very considerable favor; for all the
Princes of Germany exacted a third part of the profits of the indulgences that
were published in their Dominions. And as a further mark of his kindness he
sent several magnificent presents to the Legate, and among the rest a
considerable quantity of rich Furs, and a very large Table of massy Silver.

The Administrator imagining that he had absolutely gained the Legate by so
many obliging Demonstrations of his Favor, and by the richness of his
presents, some time after took an occasion to discourse with him in private.
After he had complained of the Archbishop's ingratitude, he told the Legate
that he had received a full information of that Prelate's pernicious designs,
and that he was resolved either to bring him to a sense of his duty, or to make
him leave the Kingdom. Arcemboldi was so charmed with that Prince's liberality
that he acknowledged the Justice of his resolution, and even could not forbear
discovering the King of Denmark's secret. He thought his Conscience obliged him
to bestow his favors, where he received the most bountiful returns, and
perhaps was afraid that the Administrator was already acquainted with the
instructions he had received from the King of Denmark, and would stop the Money
he had raised in the Kingdom, if he should still continue to conceal so
dangerous a secret. Resolving then to make the best advantage of a discovery
which perhaps he could not prevent, he gave the Prince a full account of the
King of Denmark's designs, of the correspondence he entertained with the
Swedish Clergy, and of the infidelity of the Governors of the Castles of
Stockholm and Nicopinc.

Yet for his own security he made the Administrator promise to carry on his
design with so much prudence and caution, that the Archbishop might not have
the least occasion to suspect that he had betrayed King Christiern's Secret. At
his Return to Denmark, he seemed to be extremely afflicted with the ill success
of his Negotiation. He told the King that the Administrator was so exasperated
against the Archbishop, that there was no hope of a speedy Reconciliation;
that in his opinion that Prelate was an obstacle to the Re-establishment of the
Treaty of Calmar; that he kept himself constantly shut up in the Castle of
Steque, from whence he seemed to threaten the Administrator with a Civil War;
that he did not think it convenient to go thither, least Steno should have
suspected his design; that the Administrator was possessed with an
extraordinary Aversion against the person of that Prelate; and that he had
Reason to believe that though 'twere possible to prevail with the Prince to
resign his dignity, he would never be persuaded to consent to that proposal,
while he thought it might prove advantageous to his Enemy.

The King of Denmark perceiving the ill success of the Legate's Negotiation,
concluded that he could never make himself Master of Sweden but at the head of
a powerful Army. He considered also that the Truce was not yet expired, and
that he could not begin the War without the consent and approbation of the
Estates of Denmark: and therefore he gave private orders to his Admiral to
affront the first Swedish Ships he should meet with, not doubting but that the
Administrator would endeavor to revenge such an indignity, by way of Reprizal
or Retaliation, either by Land or Sea, which would oblige the Estates and
Senate of Denmark to declare War against Sweden.

In the mean time the Administrator took all possible care to frustrate the
designs of his Enemies; and resolved to make the best improvement of the
Legate's discovery without betraying his secret. He informed the Senate that
several persons in the Kingdom were engaged in a Conspiracy against the State,
and that the Governors of Stockholm and Nicopinc had betrayed their Trust, and
were ready to receive the Enemies into the places which they commanded. The
Senate was alarmed at the News of so black a design, and prayed him to secure
the Traitors. He pretended to take a review of the Garrison of Nicopinc, and as
soon as the Governor and Soldiers came out of the Fort he ordered a new
Garrison to take possession of the place, under the Command of a Governor who
was absolutely devoted to his Interest. At the same time he gave orders to
arrest the Governor of the Castle of Stockholm, Septemia.
who attended at Court according to his usual Custom. Westeras, the Capital
City of Westmannia, where those two Governors were accused of contriving and
abetting a Treasonable design against their Country, and Commissioners were
appointed to draw their Indictment. The fear of punishment and the hope of a
pardon made so strong an impression upon 'em, that they confessed their design
to deliver up these places to the King of Denmark, and accused the Archbishop
as the Author and Fomenter of the Conspiracy.

The Administrator having this advantage over him, resolved to proceed against
him with the utmost Rigor; and in order to his Conviction ordered him to be
summoned to give an account of his Behavior to the Estates. Some of the
Senators who were sensible of the dangerous tendency of these divisions, and
dreaded the fatal consequences of an open Rupture, endeavored underhand to
persuade the Archbishop to submit to the Administrator, and even offered him a
safe Conduct signed by the principal Members of the Estates, hoping to divert
the threatening storm, and to gain the stubborn Prelate by easy and gentle
methods.

The Archbishop was enraged to find that his designs were blasted by too early
a discovery: he complained to his Friends of the King of Denmark's remissness
and neglect, and immediately sent one of his Creatures to that Prince to
acquaint him with the danger to which his party in Sweden was exposed, and to
hasten his March to that Kingdom. In the mean time to amuse the Senate, he
desired that a new Convention of the Estates might be summoned, under pretext
that the greatest part of the deputies that composed the Assembly at Westeras
were either the Creatures or Relations of his declared Enemy.

The Estates were so incensed at the Pride and Obstinacy of that religious
Prelate, that they resolved to secure his person and bring him to a Trial. They
entreated the Administrator to invest the place where he resided; and at the
same time orders were given out to apprehend his Father, and such of his
Friends and Relations as were suspected to be privy to his designs against the
Government, or might be supposed to be able and willing to take up Arms in his
Defense. And since they foresaw that these Proceedings would infallibly
occasion a Rupture with the King of Denmark, the Administrator was desired to
raise the Militia, and to put the Kingdom in such a posture, that it might not
be in danger to be surpised by its Enemies.

The Breach betwixt the Archbishop and the Estates, gave the Prince an
occasion to revenge a private quarrel, under the plausible pretext of punishing
a public Enemy, and that he might not lose so favorable an opportunity, he
gave Orders immediately for a general Rendezvous of all the Nobility and
Militia of the Kingdom. His Friends and Relations repaired to his Assistance at
the head of their Forces, every one striving to signalize his Fidelity to his
Country, and Affection to the Prince, in a War that was undertaken to maintain
his Election, and defend the Liberty of the Nation.

Among all the Noblemen who assisted the Administrator on this occasion, there
was none who expressed a more vigorous Zeal for his Interest then Gustavus
Ericson, the great Standard Bearer of the Crown: A young Lord about Six and
Twenty Years of Age, descended from the ancient Kings of Sweden, and
particularly from King Canutson, who was his great Uncle. He was the Son of
Eric Vasa, Governor of Finland, and Cousin Germain to the Administrator, with
whom he was educated. He had naturally a high and daring Spirit, his Soul was
postess'd with an eager desire of Glory, and infinitely more sensible of the
Manly Delights of Ambition, than of the softer Charms of Pleasure. The
Administrator divided his Favor and Confidence betwixt him and his Father; but
the old Age of that Senator, and a certain Timorousness that appeared in all
his Actions, made such an impression upon the Prince, that tho he did not
esteem him less for these Disadvantages, he took more pleasure in Gustavus, who
with an equal solidity of Judgment, was Master of more Courage and Strength of
Mind, and never proposed any Designs or Expedients, but what were suitable to
the Bravery, and agreeable to the Inclinations of his young Master.

'Twas by his Advice that the Prince resolved to give Fire Arms to the
Peasants, who till then, had only, or for the most part, made use of Bows and
Arrows. The Administrator ordered a considerable number of Muskets to be
brought to Lubeck, and put on Board a Ship, which (...) Sail immediately for
Stockholm, but was taken by the Danish Admiral, as she came out of the Mouth of
the Trave, which passes by Lubeck. This Act of Hostility served for a
Declaration and Signal of a Bloody War, which began betwixt the two Nations,
notwithstanding the opposition made by the Estates of Denmark, who were
desirous to continue the Truce.

The Administrator was not so discouraged by this Loss, as to give over the
design he had formed against the Archbishop. He put himself at the head of the
Militia or Infantry, which was the most numerous Body in his Army, and gave the
Command of the Horse to Gastavus. The Bishops of Stregnez and Lincopinc marched
before, under pretext of interposing their Interest and Mediation, to bring
their Primate to a Sense of his Duty; but their real Design was to give him
notice of the Strength and Condition of the Administrator's Forces. For though
the Prelates were engaged both by Interest and Inclination in the Danish
Faction, as well as the Archbishop, they were more Politic and Cunning, and
took care to conceal their real Sentiments, the discovery of which could
neither be advantageous to their Party, nor safe for themselves, at a time when
the whole Nation was in Arms for the Administrator. At their arrival at Steque,
they entreated the Administrator to excuse 'em for not declaring against that
Prince, according to their agreement at Upsal, assuring him that they only
waited till the King of Denmark should enter the Kingdom to support 'em. They
advised him to reflect upon the Power and Strength of the Administrator, who in
few days would appear before the W^^^s of his Castle, at the head of a numerous
Army; and concluded with telling him, that 'twould be an Action worthy his
Prudence to divert the impending Storm, and amuse the young Prince with a
seeming Submission, from which he might easily disengage himself, as soon as
they should meet with a more favorable juncture to put their desirous in
Execution.

The Arch-Fishop rejected the Advice of his positick Subingans with Anger and
Disdain, and chid 'em for their Weakness, which he branded with the names of
Treason and Cowardice. He told 'em he had to ^^ived Advice by an Envoy from
Denmark, that Christiern was preparing to invade Sweden with all his Forces;
that his Fleet was fitted out, and ready to make a Descent; that the
Administrator was (...) in a Condition to oppose so potent an Enemy, that be
hoped in a little time to see the King of Denmark seated on the Swedish Throne,
and that they had reason to fear that he would be revenged on his false
Friends, as well as on his declared Enemies. The Bishops finding that their
Remonstrances served only to exasperate their fierce and stubborn Primate,
retired to give place the Administrators Army, which at the same time appeared
before the Castle.

The Prince hoped to carry the Place, before the Danes could be able to make a
Diversion, but he had scarce opened the Trenches, when he was informed that the
Enemy had made a descent near Stockholm, and were destroying the Country with
Fire and Sword. Upon this advice he divided his Army, and leaving the Infantry
to guard the lines, he marched with the Cavalry toward the Enemy, accompanied
with Gustavus, and followed by all the Swedish youth, who longed for an
occasion to signalize their Courage under the Command and in the presence of
their Prince. August.


The Administrator met the Danes near the Castle of Wedel; Gustavus was the
first who charged 'em at the head of a Squadron. The Action was very bloody,
and the Victory was for some time disputed on both sides with all the obstinacy
which is usually observed in those first Encounters, on the event of which the
honor of the Nation and the success of the Campaign seems to depend. But at
last the Danish Troops were defeated, and the greatest part of 'em cut to
pieces: those who had the good fortune to escape made a disorderly Retreat to
their Ships, and retired to Denmark.

The Prince ascribed all the glory of this important Action to Gustavus, who
after he had attacked the Enemies with a great deal of Vigor, ran into
themidst of 'em with his Sword in his hand, and pursued 'em to their Vessels,
without giving 'em time to Rally. 'Twas upon this occasion that the Prince
began to consider him as an useful person, whom before he had only loved as an
agreeable Companion. He admired the surprising genius of that young Lord, his
eager inclination to War, his Courage, Valor, and above all the extraordinary
presence of Mind he had shown in the first Essay of his Arms. He was the best
Judge of such Qualities as these, and naturally inclined to prefer 'em before
other endowments: and consequently they made a stronger and more lasting
impression upon his Mind.

After so considerable a success, the Prince led back his Victorious Troops to
the Siege of Steque. The Archbishop was extremely alarmed at the News of the
entire defeat and flight of the Danes, who abandoned him to the mercy of his
Enemies; for he imagined that the King of Denmark would have taken more
effectual measures to support and relieve him. The Bishops, and the rest of his
party were so over-awed by the Prince's power that they durst not declare
against him and even those who were most suspected were either secured, or
driven out of the places that were under their Command. In the mean time the
besiegers carried on their Works to the foot of the Wall: but tho the
Archbishop was not able to make a longer resistance, the natural Pride and
fierceness of his Temper, and his implacable aversion against the Administrator
would not suffer him to condescend to a Treaty. He defended the Castle for some
days with all the fury and obstinacy of a desperate Man who resolves to bury
himself under the ruins of the Walls that enclose him: but the Officers of the
Garrison were of another opinion, and fearing to be treated as Rebels if the
place should be stormed and they found in Arms against their Prince and
Country, forced their haughty Governor to Capitulate.

He desired to treat with the Administrator in person, and offered to come to
his Tent provided Gustavus should be delivered as a Hostage. Steno consented to
that proposal, and Gustavus entered the Castle at the same time that the
Archbishop came out of it in order to attend the Administrator. But he was so
scared with a sense of his guilt, that he durst neither rely upon the exchange
nor the Faith of a Treaty, which is reckoned an inviolable security according
to the Law of Nations. And therefore knowing how dear Gustavus was to the
Prince, that he might at least have the pleasure to taste the cruel delights of
Revenge, he left orders with the Officers of the Garrison, to cause that Lord
to be hanged on the Battlements of the Castle, if they should receive advice
that the Administrator treated him as a Prisoner.

When he came before the Prince he desired leave to Capitulate, with as much
confidence as if he had been defending the place, for the service of his
Country, against the public Enemies of the Nation. But the Administrator,
desiring that the obstinacy of that Prelate might be reputed a Crime against
the State, and a downright Rebellion, refused to enter into a Treaty, and in
the name and behalf of the Estates of Sweden, required, that a Garrison might
be put into the Castle. He told the Archbishop that 'twas the Senate's
business to give Judgment concerning his behavior; and to regulate the
conditions of the Treaty; adding that he would not appear in the Senate till
they had decided that affair; and that he would neither be his Friend nor his
Judge, since he refused to acknowledge his Authority.

The Archbishop, who was still as haughty and insolent as ever, imagined that
the Administrator, notwithstanding his seeming Resolution, referred the
decision of their difference to the Senate, on purpose that some of the Members
of that illustrious Body might offer their mediation in order to a friendly
agreement. Upon this Consideration he surrendered the Castle to the Prince, and
having obtained a safe Conduct or protection, took Journey to Stockholm
accompanied with a numerous Train of his Followers, and attended with as
magnificent an Equipage, as if he had triumphed over all his Enemies. He
sanfy'd that his interest with the King of Denmark would strike such a Terror
into his Judges, that they would think themselves abundantly satisfied by his
pretending to be innocent; concluding that they would look upon his Revolt, as
a private quarrel betwixt him and the Administrator, occasioned by the
jealousy of the Government, and would expect no other Satisfaction, than a
bare acknowledgment of that Prince's Authority.

But he was quickly made sensible of his Error, and of the vanity of his Airy
Hopes; for as soon as he arrived at Stockholm, they began to proceed against
him with Vigor. The Senate finding that they might safely rely upon the
assistance of the Administrator, who was still at the head of his Army, gave
judgment against that Prelate; and the Bishops of Lincoping, Stregnez, and
Scara, who were Members of that Body, were obliged to submit to the plurality
of Voices, and to subscribe his Condemnation, for fear of being suspected and
prosecuted as Favorers and Abettors of his Rebellion. He was declared an Enemy
to his Country, and 'twas ordained by the Senate that he should immediately
resign his Title to the Archbishopric, that he should retire to a Monastery
to do Penance for all the Disturbances his Ambition had raised in the Kingdom;
that the Fort of Steque which had encouraged the Danes to invade Sweden; and
under the former Archbishops had been always made a Sanctuary and
Retiring-place for Rebels and disaffected Persons, should be demolished, that
public Thanks should be given to the Administrator, for his Diligence in
stifling the Rebellion; and that the whole Kingdom should unanimously concur to
maintain the authority of that Prince, and the Decree of the Senate, in case
the Pope through misinformation or prejudice, should endeavor to restore the
Archbishop.

This Decree was entered in the public Registers, signed by all the Senators,
Spiritual and Temporal; and in execution of these Orders, the Fort of Steque
was demolished, and the Archbishop forced to renounce his Dignity. He
delivered his Resignation in full Senate, to be transmitted to the Pope; but at
the same time, he sent one of his Creatures to Rome, to complain of these
violent Proceedings, and to beg the Protection of the Holy See.

The King of Denmark engaged all his Friends at the Court of Rome, to employ
their Interest to support and defend that Prelate, whose Abdication had blasted
all his Designs, and ruined his Party in Sweden. He was rather irritated than
discouraged at the defeat of his Forces, and made new Levies to invade Sweden,
during the next Campaign; for the Estates of Denmark thought themselves obliged
to revenge the loss they sustained at Wedel. He sent to Muscovy to solicit
the Czar to declare against the Administrator, and endeavored to prevail with
the Pope, to join his Ecclesiastical Thunders to the Forces with which he
designed to attack that Prince.

His importunity and the Archbishop's Complaints, made so great an impression
upon the Pope, that he ordered his Legate Arcemboldi, who was still in Denmark,
to return immediately to Sweden, and require the Administrator to put the
Archbishop in possession of his Office and Dignity upon pain of
Excommunication. The Legate, at his arrival in Sweden, employed all his
Interest and Rhetoric to persuade that Prince to give the Pope Satisfaction.
He represented to him in private, with an ingenuity and freedom that were not
suitable to his Character, but seemed to be the effects of their former
Friendship, and a requital of the Administrators Kindness, that the Anger and
Dissatisfaction of the Court of R^^^, were terrible to the greatest Monarchs;
that he ought to dread and avoid the fatal Consequences of an Excommunication;
that in such a Case, the People as well as the Clergy would forsake him; that
even his Friends and most devoted Creatures, would hardly venture to incur the
Censure and Indignation of the Church; that since both his Honor and Revenge
were satisfied by the Archbishops Resignation, he had a fair opportunity to
lay an Obligation upon the Holy See, and that the Pope would by that means, be
engaged to be surety for that Prelate's good Behavior.

The Administrator communicated the Pope's Message to the Senate, and
acquainted 'em both with his Desires and Menaces. The Bishops of Lincoping,
Stregnez, and Scara, who had been^forc'd to sign the Archbishop's Sentence,
seconded the Legate's Proposal with a great deal of Vigor, but were
unanimously opposed by the Lay-Senators, who were the most powerful and
numerous part of the Assembly. They told the Administrator, that he ought not
to be scared at the Thunders of the Vatican, since their Strength and Efficacy
depended merely upon the Weakness and Credulity of those against whom they were
pointed, that the Contrivances and Machinations of the Court of Rome were
always covered with a religious Disguise; that Scorn and Contempt was the best
security against such Menaces; that the Pope was incensed against 'em for
denying his Tribute, and that the King of Denmark, in Conjunction with Leo X.
solicited the Restoration of a Rebel, to his former Power and Dignity, that he
might afterward by his Assistance, make himself master of the Kingdom.

Steno by their Advice, answered the Legate, that he could not imagine what
motives sho^'d induce the Pope to undertake the defense of a Traitor, who was
seized in actual Rebellion against his ^ountry, and deserved to be punished
with Death, for holding Intelligence with the Enemies of the Nation; that his
Character and Dignity could not be supposed to protect him from the just
indignation of his injured Sovereign; that his Judges thought they had
pronounced a very favorable Sentence against him, by condemning him only to
perpetual Imprisonment; that his Brethren of the Clergy had signed his
Condemnation, and that his Judgment could not be reversed without exposing the
Kingdom to new and fatal Disorders.

The Experience he had formerly had of the Legate's temper, made him resolve to
strengthen these Reasons with a more prevailing and demonstrative Argument; and
therefore after he had softened him with several considerable Presents, he
offered him the Archbishopric of Upsal, and engaged to obtain a Decree of the
Estates in his favor, impowering him to hold that Benefice, during his Life,
without being obliged to reside in the Kingdom.

The Legate was so dazzled with the tem^ting prospect of filling his Cossers
with the Revenues of so fat a Benefice, that he forgot his Commission, and
thought he might plead a sufficient excuse for neglecting to execute the Orders
he had received from the Pope. He embraced the alluring proposal with joy, and
in Testimony of his Gratitude to his Benefactor, he approved all that he had
done, and publicly blamed the Archbishop. He wrote to Rome against that
Prelate, and assured the Pope, that he had justly drawn upon himself the
Indignation of the Administrator and Estates of Sweden, by rebelling against
his Country. At the same time he solicited all his Friends to employ their
Interest with the Holy Father, to procure a Confirmation of the Sentence
pronounced against that Prelate, and leave to appear a Candidate at the
a^proaching Election. But the Pope rejected his Requeit, and absolutely refused
to grant the Permi^^sion that was required to qualify him for that Dignity;
either out of regard to the house of Austria and the King of Denmark, who
declared in favor of the Archbishop, or as a mark of his just resentment for
the Offense he had given by his scandalous way of distributing Indulgences in
the North.

Upon the Administrator's refusal to restore the Archbishop, the Pope
discharged his Thunders against the whole Kingdom, and particularly against the
Administrator and Senate, whom he Excommunicated. Besides he ordained 'em to
rebuild the Fort of Steque at their own charge, Theodore Archbishop of Lunden
in Denmark, and the Bishop of Odensee in Fuenen, who at King Christiern's
solicitation were entrusted with the care of publishing i^: and that Prince was
desired to put it in execution and to treat the disobedient Swedes as
Excommunicated persons and obstinate Schismatics.

The suddenness of so terrible a blow surpised all Europe, and the Swedes were
extremely offended at the last article of the Bull which committed the
execution of it to the King of Denmark. They said that it did not become the
common Father of Christendom to side with either of the contending parties,
much less to make ^se of his power which was altogether spiritual, to protect a
Rebel and a Traitor, and to authorize a Prince, who endeavored to make himself
master of their liberties and Fortunes. The Senate issued out a strict order
prohibiting all persons to give obedience to the Bull under severe penalties:
and the Administrator took all possible care to put himself in a condition to
oppose the Danish Army, without which he was not much afraid of all the
Thunders of the Vatican.

The Legate perceiving that 'twou'd be scandalous to reside longer at the Court
of a Prince wh^m his Master had Excommunicated; was forced to leave Sweden and
to relinquish his expectation of the Archbishopric of Upsal. At his return to
Denmark he found King Christiern drawing his forces together in order to his
expedition against Sweden. As Soon as that Prince received the Pope's Bull, he
entered into that Kingdom at the head of his Army, May.
and immediately began to destroy the Country with Fire and Sword, to stun the
Swedes with terrible apprehensions of his vengeance. But at the same time to
give some color of Justice and Religion to those Barbarities which he
committed purely out of Revenge, he caused the Bull to be solemnly affixed in
all the places where he left the marks of his Fury, as if he had only come with
a design to execute the Pope's orders.

Some time after he sat down with all his Forces before Stockholm, hoping that
the Terror of his Arms, the Consternation of the Citizens, and especially the
fear of Excommunication would occasion some Tumult that might be improved to
his advantage: But the Governor and Magistrates of the City took such
effectual measures to keep the people in order, that there was not the least
appearance of any disturbance. The Inhabitants were possessed with so strong an
aversion against the Danes that they resolved to desend the Town to the last
extremity; and the Burghers mingled with the Soldiers of the Garrison made
frequent and funous Sallies. The Besiegers found every where an incredible
resistance: every Foot of Ground which they gained cost 'em the Lives of a
great number of their Men; and they were oftentimes beaten out of those pos^s
in the day, which they had surpised during the obscurity of the Night. The
Garrison made a continual Fire which did a great deal of Execution; and besides
the Danes infler'd extremely for want of necessary Provisions.

The King was advised by his Officers to retire, before the Swedes came up, who
were upon their march to relieve the Town: but he was so incensed against the
Burghers for their vigorous resistance, that he resolved obstinately to
continue the Siege. In the mean time the Administrator was putting himself in a
condition to march against the Enemy with all the Forces of the Kingdom. The
whole Nation took the Alarm, and ran to arms with an incredible Ardor: every
Man thought himself concerned in the defense of the common cause, and all the
Provinces of the Kingdom seemed to be animated with a spirit of Revenge and
Fury. Thus instead of an Army of regulated Troops the Administrator saw himself
at the head of a vast Body of Tumultuary Forces who without waiting for Orders
took up Arms for the preservation of their liberty. The whole Country was
overspread with swarms of Peasants who came flocking to the general Rendezvous,
some descending from the Mountains, and others running out of the Woods. Most
of these savage Warriors were clothed with the Skins of Wild Beasts, and armed
after a very odd and even ridiculous manner: but they were inspired with a
certain undaunted ^ury, that supplied the place of bravery and made 'em resolve
to spend the last drop of their Blood in the defense of their Country.

The Administrator having assembled all his Forces, marched straight toward
the King of Denmark, July.
who searing to be enclosed betwixt the Swedish Army and the City, raised the
Siege, and retired to his Ships. But the Swedes taking advantage of the motion
his Troops were obliged to make in order to their Retreat, charged 'em so
vigorously, that the Rear of the Danish Army was almost entirely defeated. They
fied to the shore with so much precipitation and disorder, that the greatest
part of 'em were cut to pieces; and many of those who escaped the Fury of the
pursuers were drowned in attempting to swim to their Vessels. The Swedes made
themselves masters of all the Baggage, and took above Three hundred Prisoners,
who for the most part were Officers and Persons of note that halted to sustain
the shock of the Enemy while the Soldiers were imbarking, and with the loss of
their liberty, preserved the King himself and the greatest part of his Army.

But this was not the only Misfortune which attended that disastrous
Expedition; for the Danes were detained above three Months in the Road of
Stockholm by contrary Winds, and at last were so straightened for want of
provisions that they were sorc'd to make frequent Descents to supply their
necessities. But they were always repulsed by the Swedish Cavalry, under the
command of the brave Gustavus, who was perpetually in motion, and obliged 'em
to retire with precipitation to their Ships. His Courage and Vigilance produced
so good an effect, that the Danish Fleet was reduced to the utmost extremity:
they had neither Water nor Victuals, and there was a great mortality among the
Soldiers. The King himself was in danger of perishing, either for want of
provisions, or by the contagious distempers that began to break forth in his
Army.

To deliver himself out of so miserable a condition, he sent a messenger to the
Administrator with orders to propose a Truce for some days under pretext of
treating about the Ransom of the Soldiers. After the Envoy had delivered his
message, he insinuated dexterously that it would not be impossible to change the
Truce to an eternal peace betwixt the two Nations. The Administrator was not
^gnorant of the extremity to which Christiern was reduced, and knew that he
might easily complete his Victory by starving his Enemy: but either out of
generosity, or in hopes of procuring a solid peace, which would have secured
him in the possessionof his dignity, he consented immediately to the Truce, and
sent several Boats laden with provisions for the use of the King, and all his
Navy.

Christiern perceiving that the Administrator was extremely desirous of a
Peace, imagined that this might furnish him with an Opportunity to make himself
Master of his Person. He pretended to be overcome by that Princes Generosity,
and acknowledged himself extremely obliged to him for the seasonable Relief he
had sent him. Some time after, he proposed an interview on Board the Fleet,
whither he invited the Administrator, in order to treat about a Peace; and for
the security of his Person, he sent several of the most considerable Persons in
his Army to the Court at Stockholm.

The Prince, who was naturally of a very free and candid temper, was easily
persuaded to give him that satisfaction, but the Senate opposed his Resolution,
either because they suspected that there was some treacherous Design hidden
under so plausible a pretext, or were resolved to maintain the Honor of the
State in the Person of the Administrator. In compliance with their desire,
Steno sent back the Hostages with fresh supplies of Provisions, and a Message
to the King of Denmark, by which he acquainted him that he would have willingly
consented to the interview on Board the Fleet, but that the Senate thought it
more convenient, that the Treaty should be managed by Commissioners from both
sides in some place on the Frontiers, that should be mutually agreed upon.

Christiern perceiving that the Administrator had escaped the Snare that was
laid for him, resolved upon another project to facilitate the Execution of his
Designs. He dreaded the valor of Gustavus, and the authority of his Family in
the Kingdom; and besides, he had a particular spite against him, for his
Affection and Fidelity to the Administrator. He projected a Contrivance, to
make himself Master of his Person, and of five or six other Lords in the
Swedish Army, imagining, that by threatening to put these Officers to death, he
might oblige the Administrator to consent to the Re-establishment of the Treaty
of Calmar, or at least, hoping to create a difference betwixt the Prince, and
the most considerable Families in the Kingdom, if he should refuse upon any
Terms, to save the Lives of Gustavus and his Companions.

In pursuance of this design, he proposed an interview in the City of
Stockholm, offering to repair thither with some of his Council, provided
Gustavus and six other Lords whom he should name, should be delivered as
Hostages for the security of his Person. And to make both the Prince and Senate
sensible that 'twas their Interest to comply with this expedient; he
represented to the Administrator, that they might come to a more speedy
agreement by conferring together, than by employing Plenipotentiaries, who
usually consume a great deal of time in debating about the Preliminaries of a
Treaty.

Thus the Senate was obliged to consent to a Proposal, Lawrence Sigonis, Olaus
Ryning, Bennet Nicolai. George Siggones, Hening Gadde.
which they could not reject with any shadow of Reason. As soon as Gustavus and
the other Hostages appeared on the Shore, the Danish Admiral, followed by a
considerable number of Officers advanced to salute 'em; and at the same time
they were surrounded by several Soldiers, disguised like Mariners, who had come
ashore during the Truce, under pretext of buying Strong Water, and other
Provisions.

Then the Admiral desired 'em to go in his Boat to salute the King, who was
coming to see the Administrator. Gustavus would have willingly declined the
Complement, and waited till the King was landed, but he saw so many Danes about
him, that he chose rather to comply with a seeming Cheerfulness, than to make
an useless Resistance.

Thus he and his Companions went on Board, and were immediately carried before
the King, who commanded 'em to be arrested and disarmed, contrary to his own
Promise, and to the Law of Nations. Afterward he sent word to the
Administrator, that he would order 'em to be Beheaded as bells and
Excommunicated Persons, if he would not immediately consent to restore the
Archbishop, and Reestablish the Treaty of Calmar. Steno was so incensed at so
base a piece of Treachery, that he manned immediately all the Boats and Ships
in the Harbor. David Chytraus, lio. 7. p. 200. Loccen. l. 5. p. 196. Edit.
Vpsasalieu. Joann. Magnus, l. 23. p. 780. Olaus Magnus, lib. 16. p. 289. Edit.
Lugdun.
The Noblemen who were then in the City, and especially the Friends and
Relations of the Prisoners, leaped into the first Boats they could meet with.
The Prince himself went on Board a Frigate, which he found ready fitted, and set
Sail with his little Fleet, resolving with these Boats to attack the Danish Men
of War, and either to release the Hostages, or perish in the Attempt: But he
could not find his Enemies, who had taken the advantage of a favorable Gale
that began to blow some hours before, and set Sail for Denmark.

King Christiern left no means unattempted to corrupt the Fidelity of Gustavus
and his Companions: but they resisted with equal steddiness and courage all his
Promises and Threats, and could neither be scared nor flattered into a
Compliance with his desires. Their Resolution and Constancy had almost cost 'em
their Lives; for the King finding that he could not gain 'em, and dreading the
Courage and Indignation of Gustavus, if he should be obliged to release him,
gave secret orders to put 'em to Death. But the Danish Officer whom he
entrusted with that Commission, abhorring so barbarous an Action, and fearing
perhaps the law of Retaliation; if by the chance of War, he should fall into
the Hands of the Swedes, took the Liberty to tell his Master, that the Death of
these Lords would be prejudicial to his Interest, whereas by detaining 'em
Prisoners, he might keep their Relations in awe. These Considerations made so
great an Impression upon the King, that he contented himself with imprisoning
'em in the Castle of Copenhagen, where they were so cruelly treated by his
Order, that some of 'em ended their Days in that miserable Condition.

Eric Banner, a Danish Lord, pitying the hard fate of Gustavus, who was his
Kinsman, begged him of the King, upon his parole of Honor, and that he might
the more easily obtain a Suit of that Nature, from that jealous and diffident
Prince; he assured him, that the only reason that made him wish to have that
young Lord in his House, was, that he might have an opportunity to gain so
considerable a Friend to his Majesty. That Consideration prevailed with
Christiern, to grant his Request; but on Condition that he should carry his
Prisoner to the Castle of Calo in Jutland, of which he was Governor, and
should pay 6000 Crowns of Gold for his Ransom, if he should suffer him to
escape, or could not produce him upon Demand.

The Generous Banner thought no Conditions too hard to save the Life of his
Kinsman, which he believed, was not secure in the Castle of Copenhagen. He
carried him to Calo, October.
and endeavored by a kind and civil Entertainment, to make him forget the
Misery he had suffered at Copenhagen. The good Mien, Majestic Air, and
graceful behavior of that Prince, produced their usual effect upon the Mind of
his friendly Jailer, who after some time, allowed him the liberty of walking
abroad, and suffered him to take the diversion of Hunting. New Recreations were
proposed to him every day, and it seemed to be the main Business of the Family,
to please him: But all the Pleasures he enjoyed in so obliging a Society, could
neither make him forget that he was a Prisoner, nor give him the least
satisfaction while his Confinement deprived him of a share in the Hazard and
Glory of the War. His eager desire to serve the Administrator in the Defense of
his Country; and at the same time to execute his just Vengeance on the
perfidious Author of his Captivity, made him so uneasy, that the most studied
Delights served only to increase his Melancholy.

On the other Hand, King Christiern's Thoughts were so deeply six'd on the
Conquest of Sweden, and his Mind was so agitated with the tumultuous Motions of
a disappointed Ambition, that his Spite against the Administrator was
exasperated by the ill success of the Siege of Steckholm. He could not forgive
that Prince, for obliging him to make so disorderly and ignominious a Retreat,
and cutting off part of his Army. He was both vexed and ashamed, that he had
publicly violated his Faith, and the Law of Nations, to no purpose, by
detaining Gustavus and the rest of the Hostages; but nothing afflicted him more
sensibly than the daily decrease of his Party in Sweden. His Mind became a
dismal Scene of Spite, Rage, and Shame, and in the heat of his Fury, he
resolved to make a last effort the next Campaign, to repair all his Losses by
the ruin of his Enemy, hoping that the success of his Arms would in some
measure justify him for proceeding against the Swedes as rebellious Subjects
and excommunicated Wretches, without allowing 'em the Treatment which is
usually granted to common Enemies.

He stood equally in need of Men and Money to carry on his Designs; and to
supply the last of these Deficiencies, he gave Orders to his Officers to seize
the Legate Archemboldi's Treasures, under pretext that he had laid out the
Money he had raised by the Sale of Indulgences, on contraband Goods. But his
Guilt really consisted in a Million of Florins, which he was going to carry out
of the Northern Kingdoms, and in holding Intelligence with the Administrator.
The King had heard of the ill Offices he did to the Archbishop, and was not
ignorant that he had obliged all his Friends to make use of their Interest with
the Pope, to obtain the Archbishopric of Upsal. And from thence he concluded,
that the Dignity to which he aspired with the Administrator's consent, was the
reward of his betraying the Secret, with which he had entrusted him to that
Prince, and that his Infidelity had ruined the Danish Faction in Sweden. The
Prospect of so profitable a Revenge, was in his Opinion a sufficient Ground to
excuse an open violation of the Law of Nations. He caused the Legate to be
secured with all his Effects, and that he might not be obliged to restore the
Treasure he had seized, or submit to an Examination of the Privileges, to which
the Function and Character of that Prelate entitled him; he gave secret Orders
to suffer him to steal out of the Kingdom, after he had been kept for some time
in perpetual Fear of Death, that he might take hold of the first Opportunity to
make his Escape. By this usage of the Legate, it appeared that the seeming Zeal
of that Prince, in executing the Orders of the Holy See, was only a Politic
Contrivance to carry on his Ambitious Designs, which he endeavored always to
cover with a pretext of Religion.

He employed the Legate's Money in making new Levies, and imposed heavy and
unusual Taxes upon his Subjects, without the Advice or Consent of the Estates.
The Clergy and Nobility opposed these Innovations, and positively refused to
contribute toward the raising of the Supplies, under pretext, that neither the
Taxes, nor the Declaration of the War, were authorized or approved, either by
the Senate or Estates. But their real design was to put a stop to his Ambition,
and curb the Impetuosity of his Temper, for they were extremely jealous of his
Designs, and perhaps were not less afraid than the Swedes, of the Success of
his Arms.

In the mean time, he squeezed considerable sums out of the common People, who
are usually the first who feel the burden of Taxes, and are seldom or never
assisted by the Nobility and other Estates, who content themselves with
securing themselves. He levied foreign Troops with the Money he had raised by
these Impositions; he invited all the Soldiers of Fortune, and straggling
Adventurers that would enter into his Service, and even preferred 'em before
the Danes in the Distribution of Offices and Places, that his Arms might be
lodged in the hands of those who depended entirely upon him. At the same time
he prevailed with Francis I. King of France, to assist him with 4000 Foot,
under the Command of Gaston de Breze, the Prince of Foucarmont, and the Baron
of Gondrin. Thus in a little time, he had the Pleasure to see himself at the
head of a numerous Army, which made him equally terrible to his Subjects and
Enemies. He conferred the Title and Authority of General on Otho Crumpein, who
was esteemed one of the greatest Captains in the North, and entrusted him with
the management of his Designs, and the command of his Forces, not daring to
leave Copenhagen at a time, when there were so many visible Signs of a general
Dissatisfaction among the Senators, and the principal Lords of the Kingdom.

Otho led his Army to Westgethland, Febr.
In the mean time the Administrator marched at the head of his Army, followed
by Ten Thousand Peasants of that Province, who came voluntarily to his
Assistance. He encamped at the entry of the Forest of Tyvede, having ordered a
great number of Trees to be cut down, to fortify his Camp and Trenches. Otho
pretended to be somewhat daunted at the sight of the Swedish Forces, and
retreated with a seeming Precipitation to the Lake Veler, which was at that
time covered with Ice, upon which he encamped with his whole Army. Steno was so
transported at the sight of a Flying Enemy, that he was not master of so much
presence of Mind, as to restrain the impetuous Ardor of his Courage. He left
his Infantry and the Peasants in the Wood, where they lay entrenched, and
marched with his Cavalry after the Danes, whom he attacked near Bogesund. His
Valor and Example inspired all the Soldiers in his Army, with a Resolution to
conquer or die. He charged at the Head of a Squadron composed of the principal
Noblemen of the Kingdom; he drove back all that durst venture to stand the
Shock of his Attack, and broke through their thickest Ranks with so brave a Fury,
that he was just ready to taste the pleasure of so glorious a Victory, when one
of his Legs was shot off by a Cannon-builet. The Swedes were so disheartened at
the sight of their General's Misfortune, that they began to shrink and give
ground. The Danish General was too well acquainted with the Art of War, to
neglect so fair an opportunity of snatching the Victory out of the Hands of a
staggering and dismayed Enemy: And therefore as soon as he perceived their
Disorder, he ordered his Cannon to be charged with Cartouches, and pointed at
the Swedish Cavalry; and at the same time he brought up his Infantry, who made
a continual Fire. The Swedish Cavalry having lost the Spirit that animated 'em,
mantain'd a running Fight for some time; but at last fearing to be surrounded,
they fled with the utmost Precipitation and Confusion. During the general
Disorder, the Administrator was carried off upon a Sledge by his Servants, and
died of his Wound near Stregnez, as they were bringing him to Stockholm. He was
extremely valiant; but his undaunted Courage was not accompanied with an equal
Dexterity in the Management of Affairs; In a word, he was a better Soldier than
a Statesman, and fitter to command a Party, than to govern a Kingdom.

Otho, who knew as well how to improve as how to obtain a Victory, gave Orders
to his Troops to march immediately against the Swedish Infantry, and the
Peasants who guarded the Pass of Tyvede. He imagined that he could easily force
their Trenches, and commanded the Danish Foot to attack 'em; but the Swedes
made so brave a Resistance, that their Enemies were obliged to retire with a
considerable Loss.

The General, enraged at the Cowardice of his Men, ordered the French Infantry
to renew the Attack, and at the same time went round the Trenches, to see
whether he could discover an easier Passage, or a Place that was not so
strongly guarded. In the mean time the Prince of Foucarmont advanced at the
Head of the French, and was the first Man who mounted the Rampart with his
Sword in his hand; but immediately after he received so dangerous a Wound with
an Arrow that he fell into the Ditch. The French, as if the Fall of their
Commander had been designed for a Signal, attacked the Swedes with so obstinate
a Fury, that they made themselves Masters of the Trenches, notwithstanding an
incredible Resistance; and while they kept the Enemy in play, Otho opened a
Passage in another Place. Though the Swedes were extremely weakened and fatigued
by the Length of the Engagement, and surrounded on all Sides, they continued to
make a very brave Desence: the Peasants animated with Despair and Rage r^n into
the thickest Battalions, neither expecling nor desiring to live, and even
willing to die pr^vided they could revenge their Death by that (...) an Enemy.
They were all cut to pieces, except some who made their Escape in the Night,
and fled to the Woods, from whence they returned by Degrees to their respective
Habitations.

The Danish General, perceiving that there were no Forces left to oppose him,
passed through the Forest of Tyvede, and penetrated into the Heart of the
Kingdom. There were no regulated Troops, nor Militia on Foot, to make Head
against the Enemy; the People generally fled to the remotest Provinces; the
greatest Part of the Senators shut themselves up in their Castles; the
Administrator's Widow retired to the Citadel of Stockholm, with the two young
Princes her Children; and the Peasants dreading the Fate of their Countrymen,
took shelter in the Woods. There was no possibility of putting a Stop to the
Carrier of the Public Mistortunes, and retrieving the Honor of the Kingdom,
but by procee^ing to the Election of a new Administrator, who might have
encouraged and commanded the Nobility to make another, and more vigorous
Effort, rasly'd the Militia and scattered Troops, and opposed Christiern's
Pretensions to the Crown of Sweden.

The Clergy employed all their Interest to prevent an Election, which they
foresaw would be extremely prejudicial to the Interest of that Prince. As soon
as the Archbishop received Advice of the Administrator's Death, he left the
Monartery whither he had retired, and resuming the Authority which he had
solemnly resigned in the Senate, he marched straight to Vpsal, and made that
City declare for the King of Denmark. The Bishops of Lincoping and Stregnez,
were always secret Abettors of the Danish Faction, but had declined siding
openly with either Party, while the Event of the War seemed to be uncertain,
took this occasion to discover their real Inclinations. They publicly owned
the Justice and Reasonableness of the King of Denmark's Claim, and visited all
the Places in their respective Dioceses, to hinder the Nobility from taking up
Arms, flattering some with Hope of Reward, and terrifying others with the Fear
of Punishment. They endeavored to persuade all sorts of Persons, that Sweden
was not in a Condition to resist the Danes; that the late Administrator by
disobeying the Head of the Church had provoked the Indignation of Heaven, and
received the Just Reward of his Contumacy; that a new Election would only serve
to increase the Guilt of the Nation, and expose it to utter Ruin, whereas 'twas
in their Power to restore Plenty and Tranquillity by submitting to the Orders
of the holy See, and concluding a solid Peace with Denmark.

By such subtle Insinuations they gained three Senators and several Lords,
First Trelle, Eric Abrahami, Benedict Ca^^ut.
whose Lands were most exposed to the Fury of the Enemy. And under pretext of
securing the Quiet and Safety of their Country, they persuaded these Lords to
send Deputies to General Crumpein, to desire a Truce in the Name of the whole
Nation, and to assure him, that in the mean time they would take such
Resolutions, as might be equally profitable to both Kingdoms, and agreeable to
the King his Master.

The cunning General would not absolutely deny their Request, but he took care
they should not have time to reflect upon their Condition, and upon their true
Interest. He granted only a Truce for Eleven Days, and during that Time he
required that a Meeting of the Estates should be held at Vpsal, where he would
appear to acquaint 'em with his Master's pretensions. The Archbishop who by his
Office was the first Senator, called the Meeting, and the Clergy used all their
Interest and Rhetoric to persuade the Nobility and Commons either to come in
Person, or send Deputies to the Assembly; but the greatest Part of 'em refused
positively to meet in a Place that had declared for the Enemy. So that the
whole Assembly consisted only of the Bishops; the three Senators whom they had
gained, and some Lords of West Gothland, who were scared into a Compliance by
the Troops and Menaces of the Danish General. However the Archbishop opened the
Convention, which being entirely composed of his Friends and Creatures, was
absolutely governed by him. In the mean time Otho repaired to Vpsal accompanied
with the principal Officers of his Army, and required the Estates to abolish
the Dignity and Office of an Administrator, and to re-establish the Union of
Calmar, in Favor of the King his Master. There was no need of using Arguments
to persuade an Assembly that consisted of such Persons as were already engaged
in the Danish Faction, either by Fear or Inclination. They prevented the
General's Demands, abolished the Dignity of an Administrator, and condemned the
Memory of those Princes who had born that Title, as Rebels against their lawful
Sovereigns. And they were even so zealous to outdo each other, in hastening
the entire Ruin of their Country, that Otho was obliged to moderate their
Ardor, least it should be suspected that the Treaty, which he concluded with
the Estates was only signed by Traitors, or at least by Persons whose Consent
was extorted by violent Methods.

He promised in the Name of the King his Master, May.
that the Laws and Privileges of the Kingdom should be preserved and
maintained; that all the Articles of the Treaty of Calmar should be punctually
observed; that the Prisoners, and particularly Gustavus Ericson, should be
delivered without Ransom; and that no Person should be molested for engaging in
any Party during the War, since the Death of the Administrator Suanto, Then the
Archbishop conferred the Title of King of Sweden upon Christiern in the name of
the whole Assembly, as if his Sovereignty had been acknowledged by all the
Estates of the Kingdom. He sent also Circular Letters into all the Provinces,
intimating the Conditions of the Treaty he had concluded, and requiring all the
People to submit to the Resolution of the Estates, upon Pain of being
Prosecuted with the utmost Rigor for their Disobedience.

Afterward Otho marched with his Army into the remote Provinces of the
Kingdom, to make the People acknowledge the Authority of his Master. He routed
several Bodies of the Peasants, who could not bear the sight of their Enemies,
without putting themselves in a Posture of Defense. Their Natural Courage was
animated by all the Motions of Fury and Revenge; but they were equally
destitute of Leaders and Fortune. After the Danish General had dispersed the
Rabble, who fought with more Impetuosity than Order, he detached several
Party's; who burnt the Villages, pursued the Peasants to the Woods, and
destroyed a prodigious Number of 'em.

The Archbishop, to terrify the rest with the Fear of a Punishment, which the
Superstitious Peasants dreaded more than Death it self, prohibited the Clergy
to grant Christian Burial to those who died in Rebellion against the Prince,
that was Authorized by the Holy See. The Danish General destroyed the Lands and
Castles of those Lords who refused to acknowledge his Master; and at the same
time entertained those who declared in his Favor, with all the Demonstrations
of Kindness and Civility. The Lords and Gentlemen, weakened by their mutual
Divisions, were at last constrained to yield their Necks to the Danish Yoke,
and the whole Kingdom was forced to submit to it is new Master. The People ran
to meet the Conqueror, and endeavored to make their Peace on the easiest
Terms. The greatest part of the City sent Deputy's to promise Obedience; only
Stockholm and Calmar persisted in their Fidelity to the Administrator's Widow.
Otho invested the first of these Cities and cantoned his Troops about it in
such a manner, that 'twas impossible to relieve the Town by Land. Then he wrote
to the King his Master, to acquaint him with the Success of the Campaign, and
the Treaty that was concluded at Vpsal.

The News of the Reduction of Sweden were November.
extremely agreeable to the Court of Denmark: but while every one strove to
express his Joy for so glorious and important a Success, the King who was most
concerned in it, could not forbear discovering the Trouble and Uneasiness of
his Mind. That Jealous and Apprehensive Prince was afraid, that Otho would make
use of his Name, and of an Army that was wholly composed of Foreigners, to make
himself Master of the Kingdom: And even his Fears suggested to him, that the
Swedes, who were naturally possessed with an implacable Aversion against the
Danes would endeavor to bribe that General's Fidelity by offering to
acknowledge him as Administrator. However he dissembled his Suspicions, and sent
him Letters full of Expressions of Gratitude for the important Services he had
received from him; but at the same Time to keep him in awe, he acquainted him
that he was resolved to march to Sweden next Spring at the Head of a numerous
Army, and that he would command the Siege of Stockholm in Person Some time
after he sent several Ships laden with Salt, which was very scarce and dear in
Sweden, and ordered the General to cause it to be distributed Gratis among the
principal Persons of every Village, that the Peasants might esteem themselves
happy, in being subject to so kind a Master.

Gustavus was soon after alarmed with the dismal News of the Ruin of his
Country. He was extremely afflicted at the Administrator's Death, and concluded
that the King of Denmark would take advantage of the general Consternation to
make himself Master of the whole Kingdom. His Restraint became insupportable to
him, though he was still entertained by Banner with all the obliging Tenderness
he could expect or desire from a kind Relation. The Tranquillity of his
Thoughts was perpetually disturbed with the most violent Transports of Revenge
for the Death of Steno, and of a most passionate Love to his Country; and
perhaps he had already began to form some ambitious Designs, which increased
the Agitation of his Mind. He was too well acquainted with the King of
Denmark's Character to entertain the least Hope of procuring his Liberty from
that Prince before the End of the War, though to gain the Nobility that was made
an express Article of the Treaty of Vpsal; and the natural Generosity of his
Temper, would not suffer him to make any proposal to Banner that might seem
inconsistent with his Duty to his Sovereign. And therefore he resolved to make
his Escape privately, concluding that 'twou'd be no injury to his Kinsman, if
the Ransom appointed by the King were paid.

In order to the Execution of that Design, December.
he went out of the Castle one Morning, under pretext of hunting in the Woods,
according to his usual Custom. As Soon as he came to a convenient Place. he
disguised himself in a Peasant's Habit, and in that Equipage traveled on Foot
through Byways, and in two Days arrived at Flensburg. Since no Man was suffered
to go out of that City without a Passport, Gustavus durst not appear at the
Gate, or go before the Governor, for fear of being discovered; but as if
Fortune had designed to favor his Escape, this happened to be the time of the
Year, when the Merchants of lower Saxony come to Jutland to buy Oxen, with
which they drive a considerable Trade. Gustavus offered his Service to one of
these German Merchants, who hired him to drive his Oxen; by the help of which
Disguise he escaped out of the Danish Territories, and arrived safe at Lubeck.

As Soon as Banner heard of his Prisoner's Flight, he pursued him with
extraordinary Haste and Diligence, and overtook him at Lubeck. In the first
Transports of his Anger he began to treat him as a Person, who by a base Action
had exposed his Friend and Benefactor to the Indignation of his Sovereign, and
the Forfeiture of a considerable Sum of Money. Gustavus, knowing that these
Reproaches were not altogether groundless, was so far from being offended at
'em, that he endeavored in the mildest and most obliging Terms to pacify his
Kinsman, and to convince him of the Innocence, and even Necessity of that
Action which he blamed. He begged him to consider cooly and impartially the
Injustice of his Restraint, and the Injury that was done him against the public
Faith, and the Law of Nations. He told him, that he himself was a Witness with
what Patience and Submission he had born his Imprisonment, so long as he could
entertain the least Hope that the King of Denmark might at last be persuaded to
do him Justice: and that no reasonable Person could blame him for endeavoring
to procure his Liberty, since even the Treaty of Vpsal could not oblige his
implacable Enemy to release him. He added, that he would never forget the
obliging Treatment he had received at his House; and that he would take care to
send him the Sum which the King required for his Ransom.

Banner was so fully convinced by his Reasons, and satisfied with his Promise,
that he went home and gave out that he could not find his Prisoner. The King
fearing that his old Enemy would endeavor to form a Party against him in
Sweden, sent Orders to General Otho to make a diligent Search for him. But
notwithstanding all the Dangers that threatened him, he persisted in his
Resolution to return to Sweden, and to incite his Countrymen, to make a
vigorous Effort to recover their Liberty. In pursuance of that Design he
discovered himself to Nicholas Gems, the first Consul of Lubeck, and
endeavored by several Reasons to persuade that Magistrate to favor him with
his Advice and Assistance. He entreated him to consider that 'twas the Interest
of the Regency, to put a seasonable Stop to the boundless Ambition of King
Christiern; that the Conquest of Sweden would make that Prince Master of all
the Trade of the Baltic Sea, and consequently ruin the Merchants of the Hanse
Towns; and that the Inhabitants of Lubeck could never reckon themselves secure,
while the three Northern Crowns were united in the Person of one Sovereign.
Afterward he put him in mind of the Hatred which the Danes had on all
occasions expressed against that City; and of the many and important Services
which the Republic had received from Sweden. He added, that he was confident
the Regency had not yet forgotten, that they owed their Liberty to Eric Blesus,
King of Sweden, who delivered 'em from the Tyrannical Usurpation of Waldemar
II. Denmark; and that their Merchants were obliged to the Trade and Protection
of Sweden, for all the Riches they enjoyed. And concluded, that he hoped, that
both Interest and Gratitude would prevail with the Re-publick to assist their

The Consul was very sensible of the Reasonableness of Gustavus's Desire, and
promised to propose it at the first Meeting of the Council: But the Regency,
who were all Merchants, did not think fit to declare for a Party that had no
standing Forces to support 'em, and were not in a Condition to put themselves
in a Posture of Defense. These Burghers were only concerned for the present
Security of their Trade, and they were so afraid of incurring the Displeasure
of the King of Denmark, who was Master of a potent Fleet, that they refused to
grant Gustavus a Passage to Stockholm, where he was desirous to make his first
Appearance. But it seems the Consul saw further, or was better acquainted with
the Interests of the City, than the rest of the Council; or perhaps had private
Orders to show more favor to that illustrious Adventurer, than the Regency were
willing to own: For he told him in secret, that he would provide a Vessel that
should carry him to Sweden; and at his Departure assured him, that if he could
form a Party strong enough to take the Field, the Regency would infallibly
declare for him.

Gustavus would have landed at Stockholm, but the Master of the Ship, either in
Obedience to private Orders, or because he was bound to another Place; set him
ashore near Calmar, which seemed still to adhere to the Party and Interest of
the Princess Christina, the Administrator's Widow; or rather was kept by the
Governor, till the Danes should offer some advantageous Proposal to make amends
for the Loss of his Government.

Gustavus discovered himself to the Governor, and to the principal Officers of
the Garrison, who were for the most part Germans, and had served under him in
Prince Steno's Army; imagining that they would have so much regard to his
Birth, and former Authority, as to entrust him with the Command of the Town. He
exhorted 'em to signalize their Courage in so noble a Cause, and to preserve
that Fidelity to the Princess, which they had promised to her deceast Husband:
He told 'em that he had run through all Dangers, that he might have a share in
the Glory of a vigorous and honorable Defense; and assured 'em that they might
confidently expect a speedy and seasonable Relief. But those mercenary
Foreigners, seeing that he had neither Troops nor so much as Servants to attend
him, looked upon him as a lost Man, and were so far from submitting to his
Authority, or engaging in his Party, that when he attempted to gain some
Soldiers of the Garrison, they threatened so positively to kill him, or to
deliver him up to King Christiern, that he was forced to prevent the Execution
of their Menaces by a speedy Flight, and was even obliged to have recourse to
his former Disguise, upon advice that the Danes who were advertised of his
Arrival, had sent out several Parties to apprehend him. And fearing least so
vigilant an Enemy might easily discover a young Lord in the Habit of a Peasant,
he hid himself in a Wagon laden with Straw, and in that Equipage passed through
all the Quarters of the Danish Army, to a Castle that belonged to his Father in
the Province of Sudermania.

From thence he wrote to his Friends, to acquaint 'em with his Escape and
Return, desiring 'em to repair immediately to the Place where he lay with all
their Vassals and Followers. For he hoped that by their Assistance he might be
able to force some Quarter of the Danish Army, and afterward to march to the
Relief of Stockholm. But they were so far from engaging in so hazardous a
Design, that even his Relations refused to entertain any Correspondence with
him. That passionate Love, or rather fondness of Liberty, which was always
reckoned the peculiar Character of the Nation, seemed to be quite extinct, and
the haughty and untractable Swedes became the tame Slaves of their most hated
Enemies. Every Man endeavored to avoid the least shadow of Suspicion, and
contented himself with securing his private Interest, without regarding the
Safety and Honor of his Country.

Gustavus disdaining the Cowardice of his Friends, resolved to have recourse to
the Peasants, concluding that 'twou'd be an easy Task to inflame the natural
Fierceness of the Rabble, who could neither be engaged by Fear nor Hope in the
Danish Faction. He went about the neighboring Villages in the Night,
endeavoring to gain the principal Persons, and at last ventured to appear in
Public on Festival-days, to incite the Mobile to take up Arms against their
Oppressors. But he soon perceived that their wonted Fury was but too
effectually cooled by the late disastrous War, in which most of 'em had seen
the Death of some of their Relations: And instead of offering him their
Assistance, they told him in a blunt and clownish Manner, that they wanted
neither Herrings nor Salt under the Dominion of the King of Denmark, but could
not avoid certain Destruction, if they should make the least Attempt against so
potent a Prince.

Gustavus was equally vexed, and surprised at so unexpected a Disappointment.
He knew not what to do, for whither to retire: He could not be safe in Sweden,
but at the Head of an Army; the Danes were still in quest of him, and he could
neither continue long in one place, nor make frequent Removes without exposing
himself to manifest and even almost unavoidable Dangers. At last he resolved,
though with the hazard of his Life, to get into Stockholm, hoping that his
Presence would inspire the Burghers, and Garrison, with new Resolution and
Courage, and that by making a brave Defense, he might prevail with the Hanse
Towns, to send him a seasonable Relief. He left the Castle of Refnas, without
acquainting any Person with his Design, and traveled for some Days through By
ways, spending the Night in solitary Cottages, to avoid meeting with his
vigilant Pursuers. But notwithstanding all his Caution, he was once in so great
Danger of being surpised, that the Enemy came but an Hour too late. So that
finding it impossible to proceed on his Journey, without falling into the Hands
of the Danes, he returned by another Road, and in so pressing an Extremity,
resolved to take Sanctuary for some time in a Convent of Carthusians at
Griphysolm, which was founded by his Ancestors. But the Monks preferring their
present Interest to the Memory of past Favors, refused to admit him, under
pretext that they were afraid of exposing their House and Order, to the Fury
and Indignation of the Danes. And therefore perceiving that 'twou'd be in vain
to expect a safe Retreat, where there was so little Appearance of Generosity or
Gratitude, he returned to the Province of Sudermania, and retired to the House
of a Peasant, that had been an old Servant in his Family, where he lay hid for
some time, and sent his Host with Letters to several Lords, endeavoring to
reanimate their drooping Courage, and inspire 'em with a noble Resolution to
recover their Liberty and Honor. Danish General, and by the report he had
industreously spread abroad, that King Christiern was ready to enter the
Kingdom at the head of a powerful Army, that they durst not discover the least
inclination to a Revolt. In the mean time, Gustavus comforted himself with the
hope of some Revolution after that Prince's arrival, concluding that the
severity of his Government would rouse the aversion of the Swedes against their
ancient Enemies. King Christiern, longed extremely to enjoy the Fruit of his
Victories, and to awe his new Subjects with the sight of their Conqueror. He
entered Sweden in the spring, as he had intimated in his Letter to the General,
and was received by the Archbishop and the rest of the Prelates with all the
joy that usually appears in the Air and Behavior, of the Fortunate. The
Archbishop especially thought himself obliged to signalize his zeal on this
occasion, and to express a more than ordinary Satisfaction for the success of a
Revolution by which he hoped to be the principal gainer: For he concluded that
as soon as the King had completed the Conquest of Sweden, he would entrust him
with the sole management of his Authority.

Christiern at his arrival solemnly ratified the treaty of Vpsal, and as if
that Ceremony had given him an uncontroverted title to the Crown, he dispatched
Expresses immediately to the Administrator's Widow at Stockholm, and to the
Governor of Calmar, requiring 'em to surrender these two places. The Governor
capitulated without expecting a siege; and Christiern without employing any
other Artillery than what he drew (...) purse, made himself Master of that
important place, which was the most considerable Port in the Kingdom next to
Stockholm. He conferred the Government of it upon Severin de Norbi, Governor of
the Isle of Gothland, and Admiral of Denmark, who insinuated himself into that
Prince's Favor, by expressing upon all occasions an entire resignation to his
desires and inclinations, at a time when the Senators of Denmark, and the
principal Lords of the Kingdom claimed a Right to offer their advice to the
Prince and even to contradict his Opinion when they thought it inconsistent
with the good of the Nation.

But the Administrator's Widow expressed a more Heroical Resolution than that
treacherous Governor. She sent Christiern word that she would never submit to
the Destroyer of her Family and Country, nor comply with the Resolutions of an
Assembly that was composed of Traitors and Rebels, and governed by the Enemies
of the Nation. The Courage of that Princess and the boldness of her Answer was
a sufficient Intimation to Christiern, that the Conquest of Stockholm would
cost him dearer and require more substantial Batteries than that of Calmar. And
therefore since he perceived that in all probability the Garrison would make an
obstinate Defense, he advanced with his Army to invest the Place, and ordered
Admiral Norbi to block up the Port with his Fleet.

He carried on the Siege with all the earnestness and vigor that can be
supposed to animate an Ambitious Prince, who is just upon the point of
completing the Conquest of a Kingdom. He was day and night on Horseback; he
encouraged his Soldiers both by his own Example, and by considerable Rewards;
he went daily to the Trenches, and visited the most advanced Works; he shared
all the danger and fatigue of the Siege with the meanest of his Soldiers; and,
which was still a more difficult and laborious Task he curbed the impetuous
violence of his humor, dissembled his secret and implacable aversion against
the Swedish Nation, and even caressed the Nobility to keep 'em from taking up
Arms for the Defense of their Princess, and the Preservation of their Country.

In the mean time, the Administrator's Widow made a brave resistance: The
Soldiers of ^he Garrison animated by her Presence, and the Inhabitants
encouraged by the Success of their late Defense, repulsed the Artacks of their
Enemies with incredible Valor. But the they wanted neither Courage nor
Resolution, they began to suffer extremely for want of Provisions and
Ammunition; and the City was so straightened by the Besiegers both by Sea and
Land, that they could not hope to be relieved, though their Countryme or Allies
should have taken the Field in their Defense. The King of Denmark was informed
of their Gondition by some Deserters, and received the welcome News with
extraordinary Transports of Joy. He knew that the Conquest of Sweden depended
on the Reduction of the Capital City, and was still afraid least Gustavus,
whose Residence he could not discover, should raise an Insurrection in some
part of the Kingdom, or persuade the Hanse-Towns, to make a Diversion in
Denmark.

He sent a new Summons to the Administrator's Widow, to open the Gates at
Stockholm; and to persuade her to a speedy Submission, he ordered his Messenger
to represent to her, that her Obstinacy could not prevent the Loss of the Town;
that he was Master of the whole Kingdom; that his Army was lodged at the Foot
of the Wall, and only expected the Signal for a general Assault; that he was
sorry she seemed resolved to expose her self to the Disorders that are usually
committed when a Place is taken by Storm; and that since the Convention of the
Estates a^ Vp^al had by a solemn Treaty declared him Sovereign of the Kingdom,
her Resistance could not be esteemed less criminal than an open Rebellion,
especially since she headed a Faction that was excommunicated by the Pope. At
the same time he offered to agree with her upon the following Conditions; that
her Estate should be preserved entire; that she should still enjoy the same
Dignity and Honors which she possessed during the Life of her Husband; that
the Prisoners on both sides should be released without paying any Ransom; and
that the City of Stockholm, should continue in the Possession of all its
Privileges.

'Twas not without an extreme Reluctance, that the Princess condescended to
hear so unwelcome a Message. It Is certainly the most sensible Mortification
that can befall a Sovereign, when he is obliged to divest himself of his beloved
Power, especially when his Disaster is attended with this cruel Circumstance,
that he must resign his Authority to his Enemy. However the Ambassador's Widow
was so sensible of the hopeless Posture of her Affairs, that she was at last
persuaded by her Council to treat with the King of Denmark. The Articles of the
Capitulation were drawn by the Consuls and Magistrates of Stockholm, who took
care to make 'em as advantageous to the Princess, as they durst propose in the
present Juncture. Nor did the King make the least Scruple to grant all the
Terms which they desired, well knowing that as soon as he should be Master of
the City, 'twou'd be in his Power to give what Sense he pleased to the Articles
of the Treaty. Thus he signed the Capitulation, and was received into
Stockholm, September.
at the Head of 4000 Men, whom he left to keep Garrison in the Place.

He called a Meeting of the Estates to be held on the Fourth of November; and
appointed the same Day for the Solemnity of his Coronation Afterward he sent
Detachments from his Army to the principal Places of the Kingdom, to keep the
Provinces in awe. He sent back the General whom he suspected by reason of the
Glory of his Victories, and his Interest among the Soldiers, and having
entrusted Norbi, with the Command of the Army, and the Archbishop of V^sal with
the Management of the State, he marched with all possible Diligence to Denmark,
at the Head of his French and German Auxiliaries, having received repeated
Advices that his Presence was absolutely necessary in that Kingdom to crush a
brooding Revolt.

He stood in need of all his Power, and of the Fame of his Conquests and Arms,
to keep his Subjects from breaking out into open Rebellion. The People
encouraged by his Absence, and by the Necessity of his present Circumstances,
which obliged him to remove his Forces; obstinately refused to pay the new
Taxes, which he had laid upon 'em. They were generally dissatisfied, and
complained against the Government; they blamed him openly for invading Sweden,
and gave out that his Army was beaten, though that Report was only grounded on
their Wishes that it might prove true. The Senate, and principal Lords of the
Kingdom were so far from opposing and suppressing so visible a Tendency to a
Revolt, that they fomented the Discontent of the People. They hated Christiern
for excluding 'em from their wonted share in the Government; and were incensed
even to Madness, because he seemed only to assume an Arbitrary Power, that he
might lodge it entirely in the Hands of an old Dutch woman called Sigebrite,
who had neither Birth nor Beauty to engage his Affection, and yet, merely by
her Wit and Cunning, had made him one of the most desperate Lovers in the
World. She governed him with an absolute and uncontrolled Empire; her Pleasure
was the Supreme Law, on which the Fate of the Court, and of the whole Kingdom
depended. 'Twas as impossible to undermine, as 'twas dangerous to oppose her
Interest: She gave, and took away all Places, Offices, and Dignities as she
pleased, without reg^rding the Laws of the Country; and not unfrequently
undertook the Management and Promoting of unjust Designs, on purpose to show
the Arbitrariness of her Power. Yet notwithstanding her Age, and other Defects,
the deluded King approved all that she did, and seemed ambatious to be reckoned
the principal Minister of her Heasure.

The quick Return of that Monarch from his victorious Expedition surpised his
murmuring Subjects, and broke all their Designs. They endeavored with all
possible Care to conceal their Discontent, and to express a seeming Joy for
their Prince's Success. He was received at his Arrival with all those Marks of
Affection and Respect, which are the perpetual Companions of the Fortunate. His
Ministers, according to the usual Maxims of Courtiers, who are always ready to
flatter, and comply with the Humor, and Inclinations of their Sovereign, told
him in a Cabinet-Council, that in pursuance of the indispensable Rules of
Policy, he ought to secure the principal Lords of Sweden; that he could not
hope to preserve his Conquests, without abolishing the Senate of that Kingdom,
which they represented as a Body of Factious Persons, who upon all occasions
assumed a Liberty to control and oppose the Royal Authority; that there was
not one Member of that Assembly, who would not joyfully embrace the first
Opportunity of a Revolt, to make himself Master of the Sovereign Power under
the Title of Administrator, which for several Years had been the Reward of the
Authors, and Fomenters of a successful Rebellion; that he ought to rid himself
of the Senators, who were formidable to the Crown, by reason of the vastness of
their Estates, and the Authority they had over the People; and that he ought
only to leave such Persons in the Kingdom, whose Ambition was curbed by the
meanness of their Condition, and who could not pretend to any higher Employment
than Tilling the Ground, and paying Tribute to their Sovereign.

In the mean time Sigebrite made it her business to confirm the Opinion, and
Advice of these flattering Courtiers, by representing to the King, that his
Victory would be imperfect, and the Consequences of it doubtful and uncertain,
while there were any Lords in the Kingdom, able or willing to dispute the
Lawfulness of his Title; that the Senators and the principal Noblemen were
implacable Enemies to his Authority; that he ought to secure his Conquests, and
complete his Victory by the Death of those who were in a Condition to oppose
him; that to prevent all future Disturbances, he ought not to spare even those
who were most zealous and active in promoting his Interest; that the seeming
Friendship of the Bishops was only an Effect of the Ancient Emulation and
Animosity betwixt them and the Nobility; and that those ambitious Prelates
would prove the most dangerous Rebels, if he should give 'em the least occasion
to suspect that he intended to curb their Authority, or exclude 'em from a
share in the Government.

The inhumane Politics of this She-Favorite were extremely agreeable to the
sierce and cruel Humor of a Prince, who looked upon the Liberty of his
Subjects as inconsistent with his Honor and Safety. He imagined that his
Authority was essentially annexed to the Dignity of his Character, without any
Dependence upon the Laws of the Kingdom, and that his Will was the only Rule
and Standard of his Government. These were the Principles and Maxims by which
he regulated his Actions; so that he was easily persuaded to Sacrifice the
Senate, and most considerable Noblemen of Sweden, to the Extravagancy of his
Ambition, and to secure his Conquests by the Death of so many illustrious
Victims. But he wanted a specious Pretext to justify, or at least to excuse so
barbarous an Attempt; for he durst not without a plausible Show of Reason
proceed to the Execution of so many Persons of Quality, who had voluntarily
submitted to him, and relied upon the Faith of a solemn Treaty.

Sigebrite advised him to commit the Execution of that inhumane Sentence to the
Officers of the Garrison of Stockholm, who, under the Pretext of a Quarrel
betwixt the Soldiers and Inhabitants of the City, might encourage the former to
execute their Revenge, by an Universal Massacre of all the Persons of Note in
the Town. But notwithstanding the natural Impetuosity of his Temper, he was
loath to venture upon an Attempt that was clogged with so many Difficulties,
and might probably be attended with dangerous and fatal Consequences: He
considered that the Burghers of that City were numerous, and inured to War by
the late Siege which they had sustained; that the Garrison might be
overpowered, and cut to pieces in the Heat of the Tumult; and that the Success
of their Resistance might serve as a Signal for a Revolt through the whole
Kingdom.

For these Reasons he chose rather to make use of the Pretext of
Excommunication, and of the pretended Injustice that was done to the
Archbishop, that the People might be deluded by a certain Appearance of
Uniformity, and coherency in all his Proceedings, and that he might seem to be
acted only by a steadfast Zeal for executing the Pope's Bull against the Enemies
of that Prelate. He spent some Time in Denmark, in contriving the most probable
Measures, and giving necessary Orders to prevent the Commotions that might
happen in his Absence; and before his Departure disbanded the French Troops
that were in his Service. This was probably an Effect of his Complaisance to
his Brother-in-Law, At Francfort, June 20, 1519.
Charles of Austria, who not long before had obtained the Imperial Dignity; for
the Soldiers were not only dismissed with all the Marks of Contempt and
Disrespect, but treated rather as Prisoners of War, than as Allies, and
Auxiliary Forces, to whose Valor he owed the best Part of his Conquests. They
could neither obtain the Payment of their Arrears, nor a Supply of necessary
Provisions; nor would he furnish 'em with Ships to transport 'em to their own
Country; so that they were forced to wander about the Country, like a Company
of straggling Vagabonds. Many of 'em were starved to Death, others were
Massacr'd by the Danes, some were constrained to list themselves in the Danish
Service, and their Officers were obliged to encounter with a Thousand
Difficulties in bringing home the Rest.

As Soon as the King had ordered his Affairs in Denmark, he prepared for his
Departure to Sweden, that he might be present at the Convention of the Estates,
which he had called in Order to performing of the Ceremony of his Coronation.
Sigebrite advised him to carry Two Danish Senators along with him, that the
Cruelty of his premeditated Attem^t might in some Measure be authorized by
their Presence, and that the Blame of so inhumane an Action might be laid on
these Ministers.

'Twas by her Advice that he made Choice of Theodore Archbishop of Lunden, and
Primate of Denmark, and the Bishop of Odensee, one of his Suffragans; the same
to whom he had formerly procured the Bull of Excommunication to be directed,
which Pope Leo the Tenth published against the Administrator. They were
entirely devoted to the Court, and were only respected as the Ministers of the
King's irregular Passions. He placed a great deal of Confidence in the
Archbishop of Lunden, who was a Person of mean Birth, and could neither be
reckoned a Scholar nor a Statesman; but to make amends for these Defects, he
was a most ingenious Contriver of new and refined Pleasures, and admirably well
acquainted with all the Secrets and Improvements of that mysterious Art. He
owed his Advancement, and the Favor of his Master to Sigchritc, who first
brought him to Court to serve her in the Quality of a Spy, and afterward
raised him from the mean Office of the King's Barber, to the Dignity of
Archbishop of Lunden. And as he had the good Fortune to be supported by so
powerful a Benefactress, he quickly became the Favorite and Confident of his
Master, by furnishing him with a constant Supply of fresh and diversified
Pleasures.

The King set Sail for Sweden, accompanied with the Queen his Wife, and
attended by all the Court. But Sigebrite declined the Voyage, either because
she was unwilling to expose her self to the Satirical Mirth of the Swedish
Lords, who were oftentimes wont to make the King's extravagant Passion to his
old Mistress, the Subject of their Wit and Diversion; or because that Prince
thought fit to leave her at Copenhagen, to observe the Motions of the Senate.

At his Arrival in Sweden, he received an Ambassador from the Emperor, who came
to invest him with the Order of the Golden Fleece, and to congratulate his
Victories, and the happy Success of all his Designs. The Concern which the
Emperor expressed for promoting the Interest of his Brother-in-Law, was too
warm and zealous to be reckoned merely an Effect of their Affinity, which
seldom or never produces so strong an Affection among Sovereigns. It Is thought
that aspiring Prince bestowed his Sister upon the King of Denmark, on Condition
that he should declare him to be his Successor in the three Kingdoms of the
North, in Case he should die without Issue. Those who are acquainted with the
Character of Charles V. will never suppose him guilty of neglecting to take the
most promising Measures, to secure so important Branch of the Universal
Monarchy. This was his beloved Project, the Object of all his Hope and Desires,
and the Aerie Mistress whom he courted, or rather adored with so eager and
lasting a Passion. And the same Fondness for that imaginary Scheme seems to
have been entailed upon his Family and Successors, till the Terror and Rapidity
of the Swedish Conquests, and the fortunate Valor of their Royal Leader, roused
the Emperor Ferdinand II. out of his Golden Dream, Gustavus Adolphus. 1631.
and instead of a vain Ambition to extend his Empire over of all Europe,
obliged him to content himself with defending the Hereditary Dominions of the
House of Austria.

Christiern put off the Ceremony of receiving the Order of the Golden Fleece
till the day of his Coronation, that the Solemnity might be more splendid and
magnificent: And in the mean time he took secret Measures with the Archbishop
of Vpsal, to execute their Revenge upon their common Enemies. The Result of
their Consultations was, that the Archbishop should appear in the Convention,
and present an Address to the King, demanding Justice against those who
deprived him of his Dignity and Estate. Matters being thus concerted, the King
opened the Meeting of the Estates, where he was solemnly acknowledged as the
lawful Sovereign of Sweden. The next Day the Archbishop persorm'd the Ceremony
of his Coronation; November 4.
and the King swore upon the Gospels, and the Relics of the Saints, that he
would inviolably preserve and maintain the Laws, Privileges, and Customs of the
Nation. The Senate, Clergy, Nobility, and the Deputies of the Provinces took
the usual Oath of Fidelity to him; and the Emperor's Ambassador appearing in
the Midst of the Assembly, presented him with the Order of the Golden Fleece,
and in his Master's Name wished him a prosperous and successful Reign.

Afterward, the new King invited all the Lords to a magnificent Feast, which
he had ordered to be prepared in the Castle, as a public Mark of his Joy upon
the Occasion of his Accession to the Crown. The Senate in a Body, and all the
principal Noblemen who were then at Stockholm, attended His Majesty in
Obedience to his Desire: The two first Days were spent in Entertainments, and
all manner of solemn and diverting Recreations; the King received his Guests
with all the Marks of an obliging Kindness and Familiarity, and the mutual
Aversion, which had been so long fomented betwixt the Two opposite Factions,
seemed to be entirely forgotten and extinguished. The Swedes endeavored to
lose the Memory of their Ancient Fears and Jealousies, and flattered themselves
with the Prospect of a lasting and undisturbed Happiness; but on the third Day
they were awakened out of their excessive Security in a most terrible and
surprising Manner.

The Archbishop of Vupsal, accompanied with his Relations and Creatures,
appeared before the King in a full Meeting of the Estates, and publicly
demanded Justice against the deceased Administrator, and all the Senators and
Lords of the Kingdom, who forced him to resign his Dignity, and demolished the
Fort of Steque, which belonged to the Patrimony of the Church. The King
de^lin'd meddling with an Affair, of which he pretended that the Pope's
Commissioners were the only proper Judges, and desired the Archbishop to
propose his Grievances to the Two Da^ish Prelates, to whom the Bull published
by Leo X. was directed, protesting that he would only make ^^se of his
Authority to execute their Sentence according to the Bull, and the Intentions
of the Holy Father.

Immediately the Two Danish. Prelates, who were the secret Ministers of the
Passions of that Monarch, required and demanded, that the Administrator's Widow
should be brought before 'em, to give an Account of her Husband's Actions; though
it was both inconsistent with Reason, and the usual Methods of proceeding in
such Cases, that a Woman should be made accountable for the Behavior of her
Husband, in the Management of Affairs of State, concerning which Persons of
that Sex are very rarely consulted. However the King, without considering the
Justice of their Demand, obliged the Princess to come to the Assembly. She
appeared before him with a modest Assurance, and at first refused to plead
before the Pope's Commissioners. She put the King in mind of the Treaties of
Vpsal and Stockholm, by which he soletnnly obliged himself to bury all that was
past in Obli^vion, conjuring him to let her Husband rest quietly in his Grave,
and to pity the Fate of a Princess who had nothing left but her Fears and
Sorrow. But that inexorable Prince, with a seeming Calmness, referred the
Hearing of he^ Defense to the Pope's Commissioners, under pretext that the
Archbishop's Complaint had no Relation to the Differences that were formerly
betwixt him and the Administrator.

The Princess perceiving that the King was inflexible, and that she must
resolve to defend the Actions of the Prince her Husband, answered at last with
a great deal of Courage, that the Administrator besieged the Archbishop, and
demolished his Castle by virtue of express Order from the Estates and Senate of
the Kingdom; that the Archbishop was arraigned and convicted of Treason
against his Country, according to the usual Forms of proceeding in such Cases
that were prescribed by the Laws of the Nation; and that his Sentence was still
extant in the Public Registers, signed by all the Senators both Secular and
Ecclesiastical.

Though the King was acquainted with all the Circumstances of that Affair, he
sent for the Registers, and ordered the Archbishop's Sentence to be read
publicly before the Assembly, with the Names of all those who subscribed it:
after which he went out, as if he had only withdrawn that the Commissioners
might not be under the least Appearance of a Constraint. But immediately after
the whole Assembly was alarmed with the sight of a Troop of his Guards, who
came by his Order to arrest the Administrator's Widow, the Senators, Bishops,
and all the Swedish Lords and Gentlemen that were in the Castle.

The Danish Bishops, by virtue of the Pope's Commission, began to proceed
against 'em as Here^cks, as if the Inquisition had been established in that
Country. But the King of Denmark being un^illing to loose time in examining and
convicting those whom he had already doomed to De^ruction, and fearing least
their Friends should ^ake an attempt to relieve 'em, resolved to dissence with
the Formality of a Trial, and sent Executioners to acquaint the Prisoners with
their ^pproaching Fate. November.


The Eighth of November was the day appointed for the Fatal Solemnity. In the
Morning a Proclamation was published by the Heralds with ^^und of Trumpet,
prohibiting all Persons, in the King's Name, to go out of the City, upon pain
of Death. The whole Garrison was in Arms, and there were Corpse de Guard at all
the Gates, and in all the public Places of the City. The Great Guns were
mounted in the Marketplace, ^ith their Mouth's turned toward the principal
Streets; the People were seized with Terror, and expected with a melancholic
impatience the event of these unusual Preparations. At last, about ^oon, the
Gates of the Castle were opened, and disclosed the mournful Scene: A Troop of
Alustrious Victims, who for the most part were ^ill adorned with the Badges of
their Dignity, marched out in a dismal Pomp, and were led by their Executioners
to the Slaughter.

As Soon as they came to the Place of Execu^on, a Danish Officer read the Pope's
Bull aloud, ^s if it had been the Sentence of their Condem^ation; adding that
they were Executed by the Orders of the Apostolical Commissioners, and ^^e
Advice of the Archbishop of Vpsal. The Bi^^ops and the rest of the Lor^^^s
begged earnestly ^^at some Confessors might (...) suffered to assist, 'em at
their Death: But the Inhumane Ki^refus'd to grant 'em the last Comfort they
were capable of enjoying, either to glut his implacable Rage with the barbarous
delight of exp^sing his Enemies to Punishments in another World or because he
was unwilling to treat 'em as C^tholicks after they had been Condemned as
H^reticks. Nor was the cruelty of his Policy le^ remarkable in the Resolution
he took to Sacrifice his Friends, that people might not susped that his
pretended Zeal was merely the Effect (...) Revenge. The Bishops of Stregnez and
Scara were known to be devoted to his Interest, but all the Faithful and
Important Services they had done him could not procure so much as a Mitigatio^
of their Sentence: Their being Members of the Senate was their Crime, and their
Signing the Archbishops Condemnation was the pretext o^ their Punishment.

Yet the Bishop of Lincoping escaped the fata^ Blow; John Brach Locc. l. 5. p.
203. Olaus Magnus, an Eyewitness. Ziglerus an Eyewitness of the Massacre of
Stockholm.
for as the Executioner was just going to cut off his Head, he told the Danish
Officer who was appointed by the King to see the Execution performed, that he
might find an undeniable Proof of his Innocence under the Signet of hi^ Coat of
Arms, which he had affixed to the Archbishop's Sentence, and begged him to send
some Person to examine the truth of his Assertion. The King being informed of
his Request lifted up the Wax with his own Hand, and found a little Note which
that cunning Prelate had slipped under i^ as if he had foreseen the Tragical
Consequence^ of that Affair. He protested, in the Note, that he was forced to
Sign the Archbishop's Sentence to avoid the Indignation of his Enemies wh^
threatened to treat him after the same manne^ This Politic Contrivance saved
his Life, for the King ordered him to be set at liberty, to sh^^ that he only
designed to punish the Archbishop's Enemies, and those of the Administrator's
Party, who he pretended, were involved in the Sentence of Excommunication which
the Pope pronounced against that Prince.

Then they proceeded to the Execution of the Lay-Senators, beginning with Eric
Vasa, Eric Abraham. Eric Joh^nson, Fric Canut, Eric Rining, Eric and Eschille
Nicolai, Joachim Brahe, Magnus Green, Eric Kusius, Olaus Beron, Gunnar Gallus,
Benedict Erici John Gudmund, Andrew Olai, and Andrew Erici. Consuls of
Stockholm.
Gustavus's Father. The Consuls and Magistrates of Stockholm, and Ninety four
Lords who were arrested in the Castle underwent the same Fate. Yet the King
instead of being satisfied with the Death of so many illustrious Persons, was
extremely vexed, that some Lords, whom he had particularly inserted in the
black Roll, had escaped his Fury. He imagined that they lay concealed in the
Town, and was so afraid least they should make their Escape, and so desirous to
discover Gustavus, who, he thought might be hid in some House in the City, that
to give a full Scope to his Vengeance, he resolved to confound the Innocent
with the Guilty, and to expose the Town to the Fury of his Soldiers. As Soon as
they had received those bloody Orders, they fell upon the People that were come
to be Witnesses of that dismal Spectacle, and promiscuously murdered all that
had the misfortime to be in their way. Afterward they broke into the Principal
Houses, under pretext of searching for Gustavus. and the rest of the proscribed
Lords: The Citizens were stabbed in the Arms of their howling Wives, their
Houses were plundered, and the Honor of their Wives and Daughters was exposed
to the brutish Lust of the Soldiers. None were spared, but those who were
protected either by Poverty or Vgliness: All the rest were made a Prey to the
Rage of the Soldiers, who by the Orders and after the Example of their Inhumane
Sovereign, strove to outdo each other in the wildest and most extravagunt
Barbarity.

A certain Gentleman of the Swedish Nation was so sensibly touched with the
moving sight of so many deplorable Objects, that he could not restrain the
Impetuosity of his Grief, nor behold such a Scene of Horror without bewailing
the Misery of his Country. The furious King was so enraged at those Marks of
Compassion which his guilty Conscience interpreted as secret Reproaches of his
Cruelty, that he commanded the Unfortunate Mourner to be fastened to a Gibbet.
His Privy Members were cut off, his Belly ripped up, and his Heart plucked out,
as if Pity and Compassion had been the foulest and most Enormous Crimes.
Afterward the King pretending that the Administrator, by incurring the
Sentence of Excommunication had rendered himself unworthy of Christian Burial,
ordered his Body to be taken up and exposed in the public Place among the
mangled Carcasses of his Ancient Friends. He issued out an Order that no Person
should presume to bury any of these Bodies upon pain of Death; and would have
suffered 'em to lie in the open Place, as a terrible Monument of ^is Vengence,
if the stench and Putrefaction had not obliged him to command 'em to be taken
away. But before they were removed, he could not forbear going on purpose to
take a view of the dismal Trophies of his Fury. At last he ordered 'em to be
carried out of the City and Burnt, that even Death it self might not exempt 'em
from a Second Punishment, which he pretended to inflict upon 'em as
Excommunicated Persons.

Afterward he ordained that the Administrator's Widow should be drowned, but
the Execution of that cruel Sentence was prevented by Admiral Norbi, who under
a seeming Complaisance and Resignation to all the Humors and Inclinations of
his Master concealed a secret Project of high and ambitious Designs. He (...)
swaded that so Tyrannical a Government (...) not be long maintained; he saw
himself Master of a pote^t-Fleet, Governor of the Isle of Gothland that lies
opposite to the Coast of Sweden, and of the City of Calmar which was the second
Port in the Kingdom. He placed so much confidence in his Power and in his
Interest at Court, that he did not think himself obliged to set any Limits to
his aspiring desires: He fancied (...) one day raise himself above the Quality
of a Subject, and lay aside the Title of a Favorite to assume that of a Prince.
He flattered his Ambition with the secret hope of marrying the Administrator's
Widow, concluding that her Interest and Authority would facilitate his
Accession to the Crown of Sweden, or at least to the dignity of Administrator.
And therefore to save that Princesse's Life he told the King his Master that
she would deliver up all her Husband's Treasures for her Ransom. The King who
was as Covetous as Cruel, consented to recall her doom upon that condition, and
imagining that she was extremely obliged to his Mercy for changing her
punishment to a perpetual Imprisonment. He sent her to Denmark, with Gustavus's
Mother and Sister, and the rest of the Swedish Ladies whose Husbands perished
in the Massacre of Stockholm. They were thrown into different Prisons, where
they were very ill treated without any regard to their Birth, Sex or Beauty and
kept 'em as Hostages for the Fidelity of the Children, and Rulations that they
left in Sweden

Christiern imagined that he had established his^ Authority by this Massacre of
all the principal Nobility, he thought himself too powerful, and too formidable
to the rest of the Swedes to be afraid of 'em, he changed the Form of the
Government at his Pleasure, and ordered matters as in a conquered Country, he
oppressed the People with new Taxes, he threatened the Peasants to cause one of
their Feet and Hands to be cut off, adding in a kind of Raillery, that a
Peasant who was born for the Plow, and not for the War, ought to content
himself with one Hand, and a wooden Leg.

He nominated Theodorus Archbishop of Lunden, Viceroy in his Absence, and
appointed the Archbishop of Vpsal, and the Bishop of Oldensee for his Ministers
and Counselors, advancing these two Danish Prelates, by his absolute Power, to
the Rich Bishoprics of Stregnez, and Scara, without any regard to the Rights
of these two Churches, which had a Privilege to choose their own Bishops. And
he had also Interest enough at Rome, to induce the Pope to allow of the
Intrusion of these two Danish Prelates, whose Hands were in a manner imbrued in
the Blood of their Brethren. Christiern at his Departure, gave Orders to spare
neither Pains nor Cost, to discover Gustavus's Retreat; he set a Price upon his
Head, and promised considerable Sums of Money to those that should bring him
Prisoner, dead or alive, after which he returned to Denmark, laden with the
Curses of the Swedes, by whom he was styled the Northern Nero.

His Troops in his Absence continued the Barbarities, they had exercised in the
Capital City, many Lord's were surpised, and Massacr'd in their Castles by his
Order, without laying any other Crime to their Charge, than that they were
eminent for Birth and Courage; neither was the ordinary Pretext of
Excommunication any longer made use of; it was Crime enough to be accused of
being too rich, or of having Interest in the Province. The Viceroy swallowed
up in Pleasure, spent his Time in heaping up Money, by the Confiscation of the
Goods and Estates of those that were daily out-lawed; The chief Officers of his
Army ravaged the Provinces, every ones Troop being independent and separate,
without any Order or Discipline; and among so many different Interests, and so
little Subjection, they thought of nothing else but pillaging and oppressing
the People.

The Nobility terrified with so many Massacres, and not well united among
themselves, destitute of a Head, Money and Forces, were obliged to avoid the
Danish Cruelty, to submit to the Archbishop: So that every one strove to court
this Prelate, and every one would be thought to have done it always. It seemed
as if all the Sweedish Gentry had perished in the Massacre of Stockholm, for no
Body would acknowledge that they had served in the Administrator's Army, the
greater Part of the Nobility were glad to be employed in the Vice Roy's Troops,
as a secure Asylum: And the Calamities of Sweden were so great, that even their
Happiness was envied that were allowed to be Soldiers, though to fight against
their own Country.

Admiral Norbi feigning to commiserate this deplorable State of Sweden,
received many Gentlemen on board his Ships, and into his Governments; and
affected to treat 'em with all manner of Civility, with Relation to his secret
Designs: Those that were not under his Protection, being uncertain of their
Fate, and always between Hope and Despair, were exposed to the Insolence and
Avarice of the Danes; and it was dangerous for those who were not of the
Archbishop's Party to be possessed of an Estate: And whosoever had been his
Enemies, were forced either to escape by Flight, or resolve to die: For this
haughty Prelate pardoned none, but destroyed all his Adversaries under pretense
of Sacrificing them to the public Safety, but above all, he Endeavored to to
make himself Master of Gustavus's Person whom he hated as a Kinsman and
Fovourite of the deceased Administrator; besides he knew very well that he
could not better make his Court to Christiern than by Imprisoning or Destroying
that Lord.

Gustavus during his retreat looked about him on all sides to see if he could
discover any thing that might favor his designs; he had privately sent to
Stockholm, that old Servant at whose house he lay concealed, to inform him of
the Occurences of the State. And at his return it was that he heard of the
Death of his Father and all the Senators, and the general Massacre that had
happened in that miserable City; this so lamentable a piece of news did
extremely afflict him, the Death of so many Lords, having taken off all his
Family and Friends, and almost deprived him of all means and hopes of saving
himself. He knew not what measures to take, nor whether to retire, for he was
encompassed with Danish Troops, and knew very well that besides the great
promises, to any that should discover him, all those were threatened with Death
that had concealed or should not immediately deliver him up. So that he durst
not stir from the place he was in, nor trust any of the Swedes, lest the great
rewards should make 'em betray him. He resolved in this exigence privately to
retreat to the Mountains of Dalecarlia, hoping he might easily lie hid in the
Woods with which that Country is covered, and imagined that it would not be
difficult to cause the Inhabitants to Revolt, being the last of the Kingdom
that submitted to the Danish Dominion. There was not one good Town in the whole
Province, and hardly any but small Villages Situated on the edges of the
Forests, or on the banks of Lakes and Rivers, some of these Villages depended
on the Gentlemen of the Country, but most belonged to the Crown and were
Governed by the Peasants themselves; the Elders in every Village supplied the
place of Judges and Captains, though these were neither more Powerful nor Richer
than their Neighbors; the Honor of Commander consisting only in the
privilege of Fighting at the head of the Troops; for the chief Power was in
the hands of the Multitude, who Assembled on holydays, and took upon them to
determine all manner of Affairs.

The Government durst not send either Troops or Garrisons into this Province,
nor did the Kings themselves ever enter it, till they had given pledges to the
Inhabitants for maintaining their Priveledges; they managed with caution this
Savage People who inhabited in inaccessiable Mountains, lest they should
discover that it was in their power no longer to obey, and were contented with
the Tribute of a few skins only from these Peasants, and for the rest, they
were suffered to Live according to their own particular Cust^ms which were very
different from those of the other Provinces.

Gustavus in the disguise of a Peasant, set forward on his way to these
Mountains, accompanied only with a Country Fellow, who served for his guide. He
crossed over the whole Country of Sudermania, then passed between Nericia and
Westmania, and after the fatigues of a long and dangerous Journey arrived safe
in that part of the Mountains of Dalecarlia which the Natives called Daalfield.

He had no sooner entered into the Country, but he was abandoned by his guide,
who robbed him of all the money that he had provided for his Subsistence: He
wandered up and down in those dreadful Mountains, and amidst those Savages,
destitute of Company, Friends and Money; not dareing to own his Name, or
discover himself, he was forced for a Living, and to be concealed, to hire
himself for a Labourer and to work in the Copper-Mines, from whence the People
of these parts have their chiefest Subsistence, he was always at work with the
other Miners to get his Livelihood, and lay buried as it were in those
Subterranean Workhouses.

Gustavus hoped that the Misery of his Condition might serve at least to
conceal him, and that they would never think of searching for the General of
the Swedish Horse in so sorry a Habitation, notwithstanding which be was
discovered and known in this Disguise. For a Woman in whose House he Lodged
accidentally perceived under his Laborers Habit, a Silk Robe Embroidered with
Gold; which news was soon carried to the whole Village, and came to the Ears of
the Lord of the Place, who either out of curiosity of seeing a Stranger whose
Gentile Mien was much talked of, or rather that this disguise made him believe
him to be one of the Proscribed, came to the Mines with intent to offer him his
House and to contribute to his Safety; but was extremely surpised when he
found it to be Gustavus, whom it was not very difficult for him to discover,
because he having spent his Youth with him in the University of Vpsal: And
though he was much concerned to see this Young Lord in so miserable a
Condition, yet he feigned not to know him, lest it might discover him to
others; but as soon as he returned to his House he sent for him by a private
Messenger, and having in a most obliging manner told him that he knew him, gave
him all possible Assurances of his Service and Friendship and entreated him to
accept of his House where he might lie hid more securely than in the Mines, and
in his transport of Compassion and Kindness promised him to cause his Friends
and Vassals to take up Arms in his Defense if the Danes should attempt to offer
Violence to him in his House. Gustavus accepted these Offers with a great deal
of Joy, and at first lived with him as if he had no other design than to avoid
the pursuit of his Enemy's, but at the same time employed himself in getting
Information of the strength of the Province, and in finding out the
Inclinations of the Inhabitants of the new Government.

His Landlord told him the Dalecarlians suffered the Danish Tyranny with great
Impatience, that they publicly murmured at certain Taxes that Christiern had
imposed on 'em, that which tho small in reality appeared excessive and
intolerable because they were new; and that the People detested the King of
Denmark's Cruelty: He added that he doubted not but the Peasants would Revolt
of themselves, if the Danes continued to infringe their Privileges; afterward
he boasted of the Strength of Dalecanlia with an Exaggeration that is usual in
those that would make their Country be valud: He told him that that Province
alone was able to raise twenty thousand Men, that all the Peasants were born
Soldiers, and by the help of their Mountains could stop and defeat all
Christiern's Forces; this discourse being several times repeated induced
Gustavus to Resolve to Attempt to make the Province Revolt, which he discovered
to his Landlord, and Conjured him to Affist in it, he represented to him that
the Kingdom was Involved in the greatest Calamity's; that neither the Faith of
Treaty's, nor the Submission and Obedience of the People could bound or
satisfy the bloody Inclinations of Christierne, that especially it seemed that
this barbarous King had Sworn the Death of all the Swedish Nobility, that the
Massacre of Stockholm was but a Prelude to the Cruelty and Outrages which his
Troops Exercised in the Provinces, that the News was daily brought of the
barbarous Murder of some Gentlemen or other, that it was more generous and a
surer way to prevent and surprise the Danes than Cowardly to wait till they
Invaded the Province and Massacred the People in their own Houses.

But this Gentleman terrified with the Danger of the Enterprise, upon
apprehension of the Formidable Power of the Danes, declined being concerned in
it, Where are (said he to Gustavus) the the Forces necessary for carrying on so
great a Design, and what Army have you to Oppose the Enemies Troops, which seem
hitherto to have had some regard to our Privileges, but will outragiously
overrun the whole Province upon the first Motion we shall make?

It seemed as if Fear made this Gentleman forget what he had just before told
him of the Strength of his Province and the Inclinations of it is Inhabitants;
for he sought new Reasons to overthrow the former, and to oblige Gustavus to
take other Measures; he enlarged with much heat upon the Politic
Considerations, not so much indeed out of Affection to his Person as to justify
that it was not for want of Courage and Zeal for his Country that he declined
engaging in his Designs. But perceiving that Gustavus constantly persever'd in
his Resolution to take up Arms and Publicly to declare against the Danes, he
advised him to defer, at least for some time the Execution of his Enterprise,
he told him that perhaps he might meet with a lucky Opportunity when the whole
Province might of it is self be disposed to Revolt, that the Peasants had little
regard to the Interest of the Gentry, whom they always looked upon as severe
Masters, that though they seemed to pity the Fate of the Lords and Senators who
perished in the Massacre of Stockholm, they had never hitherto discovered any
Inclination to Revenge their Death upon their Murderers; but that the least
Attempt of the Danes to violate the Privileges of the People would infallibly
occasion a general Revolt; and that he was persuaded the Danish Army would
march to Dalecarlia as soon as they had completed the ruin of the rest of the
Kingdom. That then the Peasants would be obliged to take up Arms in their own
Defense; that he was resolved to let others begin the Revolt, and would neither
envy the Glory nor Danger of so rash an undertaking. He conjured him to wait
patiently at his House till the People should appear in Arms; insinuating that
wherever the Revolt should begin, the leading men of the Party would always be
ready to yield him that submission which they owed to his birth and merit; And
concluded with advising him not to ruin so generous design by a preposterous
haste in the execution of it; least, instead of becoming the Avenger and
Deliverer of his Country, he should only furnish the Danes with a new pretext
to complete the Destruction of the Nation.

Gustavus was too judicious and resolute to be either deceived or convinced by
his Landlord's Arguments; but though he was sensible that his pretended Caution
and Policy was rather the effect of his Fear than Prudence, he could not be
offended at the Weakness of a man whom he looked upon as an object of
compassion. He was so far from suspecting that he was a secret Well-wisher to
the Danish Interest, or that he was capable of betraying his Guest, that he did
him the justice to believe the sincerity of his Affection to his Country: but
at the same time he perceived that the difficulty of the Attempt deterred him
from engaging in it. And therefore instead of reproaching him with Cowardice
and Pusillanimity, he contented himself with conjuring him to keep the secret
with which he had entrusted him; and resolved upon a speedy departure to free
his timorous Landlord of the Trouble and Uneasiness which he might suffer upon
his account. He set out alone, and in the night, to avoid suspicion, and after
several days Journey through the Woods arrived at the seat of another Gentleman,
called Peterson, whom he knew in the Army, and who, he hoped would receive and
embrace his Proposals with more Courage and Resolution.

Peterson received him with all the marks of an obliging Civility; and
entertained him with that respect and submission which is usally so agreeable
to great Persons when they are under a Cloud. He seemed to be more sensibly
afflicted with his misfortunes than Gustavus himself: he exclaimed against the
Tyranny of the Danes; and cheerfully embraced the first proposal which Gustavus
made to him, some days after his arrival, to form a Party, and engage all his
Vassals and Followers in the Design.

Gustavus was extremely glad that he had at last found a man who was not afraid
to draw his sword in the defense of his Country; and endeavored by all the
most winning Expressions of Kindness, and by the sure propect of a suitable
Recompense to confirm him in so generous a Resolution. Peterson answered him
with repeated assurances of an inviolable Fidelity: he named the Gentlemen and
the chief Persons among the Peasants whom he hoped to engage in the Attempt:
and some days after he went privately from his house, in order, as he
pretended, to put the design in Execution.

But under the specious pretext of a zealous Affection to Gustavus, the
treacherous Dalecarlian was contriving his Ruin. The hope of making his Court
to the new King, and the Expectation of a large reward, made him resolve to
sacrifice his Honor to his Ambition, and to violate the most sacred Laws of
Hospitality by betraying his Illustrious Guest. In pursuance of that base
Resolution he went straight to one of King Christiern's Officers, and informed
him that Gustavus lay concealed at his House. The Danish Officer marched
thither immediately at the head of a Party of Soldiers: he invested the House,
and took possession of the Principal Gate which Peterson delivered up to him.
He concluded that he had done his Master a very important and acceptable piece
of service, by securing his most terrible Enemy. But he had the mortification
to find that he had taken a great deal of pains to no purpose: For Gustavus had
made his Escape the Night before, and even owed his Preservation to the Wife of
the Traitor that designed to betray him. She was prompted by Pity, and perhaps
by a more tender Passion, to discover her Husband's Plot, and not only sent
Gustavus away in the Night, but order d a Servant in whom she placed a more
than ordinary Confidence to carry him to the House of a Curate, who was one of
her Friends. Thus by the Kindness and Discretion of that generous Lady, and by
the Secrecy of her faithful Servant, Gustavus escaped the Snare that was laid
for him, and avoided the Pursuit of his Enemies, who could neither discover the
Occasion of his Flight, nor the place whither he retired.

The Curate received him with all the Civility and Respect which he owed to his
Birth, and to the Recommendation of the Person that entrusted him with so
important a Secret. He was a sincere lover of his Country, and did not think
himself obliged to follow the Maxims of the Clergy, since he had no design to
raise his Fortune by aspiring to higher Preferment. He assured Gustaevus of an
inviolable Secrecy, and least the Place of his abode should be discovered by
the Infidelity, or Indiscretion of the Servant that brought him thither, he
carried him to his Church, and hid him in a Place that was wholly at his
Disposal, and of which he alone kept the Keys.

He visited him every Day, and by degrees began to feel a secret and resistless
Inclination to love and esteem him; which was the usual Effect of the Presence
and Conversation of that young Lord. Nor did the generous Curate content
himself with expressing his Affection to Gustavus's Person; he approved his
Resolution, and encouraged him to undertake the great Attempt, assuring him
that he would employ all his Interest in the Village, and engage all his
Acquaintances in other Places, to carry on the Design with the utmost Vigor and
Diligence. But at the same time he acknowledged that he could neither advise
him to desire the Assistance, nor rely upon the Fidelity of the Dalecarlian
Gentlemen.

He informed him that the Nobility and Gentry of that Province, contented
themselves with a secure Enjoyment of their Estates, and the independent
Authority they assumed in their inaccessible Mountains; that they neither
thought themselves concerned in the Motions and Revolutions of the Court, nor
regarded the public Interest of the Nation; that they were seldom willing, and
sometimes unable to make their Vassals take up Arms; and that they would hardly
be persuaded to engage in a War, since it either deprived 'em of their
principal Riches, which consisted in the Number of their Followers, or made the
Peasants less tractable after their Return, and more apt to revolt against
their Masters. And therefore he concluded, that 'twou'd be his best and safest
Method, to apply himself immediately to the Peasants, assuring him that he
might expect a more vigorous and effectual Assistance from 'em, if they should
take up Arms, and declare for him of their own accord, than if the Villages
were only engaged by the Authority of their respective Lords.

After they had consulted together about the most proper Expedients, to put
their Design in Execution, they agreed that 'twou'd be highly conducive to the
Success of the intended Enterprise, to prepossess the minds of the Peasants,
and prepare 'em for an Insurrection, by giving out that the Danes were just
ready to enter into the Province to levy new Taxes and Impositions. The Curate
undertook to spread the Report, and assured Gustavus that he would shortly make
it the Public News of the Country, by the joint Assistance of the rest of the
Curates in that District, who for the most part were either his Relations or
Correspondents. Afterward he advised him to go to Mora, a populous Diocese or
Parish, about Twelve Swedish Leagues in Compass; where every Year during the
Christmass-Holy-days there was an extraordinary Concourse of Peasants, from all
the neighboring Villages. He told him that he could neither expect nor desire a
more favorable Opportunity to propose his Design to the Peasants, who were
never bolder, nor more easily persuaded to revolt than in such Public
Assemblies, where they have a full View of their Numbers and Strength. And in
the mean time he promised to secure and engage the principal and leading
Persons that he might not be in any Danger, who' the Crowd should reject his
Proposals.

In pursuance of the Curate's advice, Gustavus went to Mora on the day
appointed, where he found the Peasants already acquainted with his design to
make 'em a visit, and expecting with impatience to see a Man of whose merit and
valor they had received so advantageous a Character, one that was equally
illustrious both for his Birth and Courage, and had acquired more Glory by
Christiern's hatred than by the Favor of Steno. He laid aside his usual Habit,
and took care that his Dress should be suitable to his Quality, to engage the
attention of the People, who are apt to be dazzl'd with the external marks of
Grandeur. Afterward he appeared in the Assembly with a certain Noble
Fierceness in his Air, which was somewhat allay d and softened by a mixture of
Tenderness and Grief for the Death of his Father and all the rest of the
Senate. And that Majestic sorrow, which the admiring Multitude observed in his
Countenance and actions, inpir'd 'em at the same time with a submissive respect
and a tender and affectionate Compassion.

After he had entertained 'em with a general but lively description of the
deplorable and almost hopeless condition of their native Country; he
represented to 'em, with a pathetic and moving Eloquence, that the Senators and
principal Lords of the Kingdom were Barbarously Massacred by Christern's Order;
that by the same Prince's Command the Magistrates of Stockholm were put to
Death and the greatest part of the Citizens Murdered in their Houses; that
afterward he dispersed his Army into the several Provinces, that they might
the sooner complete the Destruction of the Kingdom; that he was resolved to
secure his Authority by the Death of all those, whether Noble, or Ignoble, who
were either able or willing to undertake the Defense of their Country; that he
was particularly incensed against the Dalecarlians, whose Valor and Courage had
made him tremble so often during the Reign of the late Administrator; that
consequently they had all the reason in the World to expect the most inhumane
Treatment from a treacherous and cruel Prince, that would never forgive 'em so
long as he dreaded their Bravery; that under pretext of putting his Army into
Winter Quarters, he was actually sending his Troops to disarm 'em; that they
would quickly be exposed to the Fury of enraged Soldiers; that their Lives and
Liberty would be at the Disposal of their insolent and merciless Enemies; and
that the only way to prevent their impending Ruin, was to resolve upon a
vigorous and seasonable Resistance. That the Dalecarlians had always looked
upon Liberty, as a dearer and more valuable Blessing than Life; that the Eyes
of the whole Nation were sixth upon 'em in so critical a Juncture; that the
World expected to see a convincing Proof, that they inherited the Bravery of
their Heroical Ancestors, and the noble Resolution with which those Illustrious
Patrio^^ had always opposed the pretended Authority of Tyrannical Usurpers;
that he was ready to sacrifice his Life and Fortune in the Defense of their
Liberty; that his Friends and all true Swedes, would join in so glorious an
Attempt; that besides he had received positive Assurances of a considerable
Reinforcement of the ancient Allies o Sweden, but supposing that their Forces
were not equal in number to those of the Danes, Revenge and Self-preservation
would inspire 'em with a generous Fury, which would easily supply that Defect;
and that for his part, he would rather choose to die, with his Sword in his
hand, than to preserve his Life by a base Submission to a perfidious and cruel
Enemy.

The Dalecarlians answered this Discourse with Shouts and Exclamations,
threatening to exeaute their just Revenge upon Christiern, and the Danish
Nation: One would have thought that this had been the first time they heard of
the Massacre of Stockholm; the Discourse and Presence of Gustavus, had made so
deep an Impression of Grief and Resentment upon their Minds. They swore to
revenge the Death of their Countrymen, and immediately resolved to disown
Christiern's Authority, and to destroy all the Danes they should meet, without
Mercy. Not but that some of these Peasants were at first inclined to oppose
this Revolt, under the Pretext of communicating their Designs to the other
Villages; either because they were gained by the Danes, or upon a politic
Account were afraid of exasperating a potent and victorious Prince. But the
enraged Multitude rejected this cowardly Motion with indignation, so that the
most violent, and those that declared for the War, were hearkened to with a
general Applause. Thus they unanimously took up Arms, and entreated Gustavus to
command 'em, being charmed with his graceful Mien, and admiring the Largeness
of his Stature, and the strong Constitution of his Body.

But nothing confirmed 'em more in the Resolution they had taken to follow that
young Lord, with a full assurance, than an obs^rvation made by the ancient
Inhabitants of the Village, that the North Wind continued to blow incessantly
while he made his Speech to 'em. This Accident among those superstitious
People, was looked upon as an infallible Sign of prosperous Success, and
therefore without any further Deliberation, imagining that the matter could be
no longer deferred without opposing the Orders of Heaven, which had so
manifestly declared in favor of Gustavus; they immediately formed a Body of
four hundred Men, and out of that Number chose sixteen of the handsomest and
best shaped Men that were descended of the principal Families, whom they
presented to Gustavus, to attend upon his Person, as Life-guards, and to serve
as a Mark of Badge of the Authority, which they had so lately conferred upon
him.

Gustavus resolving to take advantage of their Heat and Eagerness, lead 'em
directly against the Governor of the Province; for 'twas his interest to
prevent that Officer, and to make him incapable of opposing the Revolt of the
other Villages: In pursuance of that Resolution, he divided his Troop into
several Bands, the better to conceal his March and Design, and under Covert of
the Night and the Woods, arrived at the Foot of the Castle, with the
Dalecarlians, who marched thither secretly by different Roads. The Darkness of
the Night, and the Surprise of so unexpected an Attack, favored his Attempt,
so that the Castle was taken by Scalade, some Danish Soldiers that composed the
Governor's Guard, and the most part of his Domestic Servants, who stood in
his Defense were immediately sacrificed to the Rage of the Dalecarlians; and
Gustavus had much ado to rescue the Governor, who by Imprisonment suffered for
his Imprudence in presuming to maintain a Post in a conquered Country, and
amidst so fierce a Nation, without a Garris^n sufficient for the security of
his Person and Dignity. Gustavus permitted his Soldiers to plunder the
Governor's Apartment, and several Danish Merchants were treated almost after
the same manner, who since Christiern's new Government came to trade in that
Province; so that their richest Stuffs became a Prey to the Dalecarlian
Peasants, who dressed themselves with 'em after their odd Fashion. They also
killed the Officers that were employed in levying the new Taxes, which
Christiern had imposed. Gustavus seemed to take no notice of their Proceedings,
and perhaps was not offended at these disorders, which served only to make the
breach between the Dalecarlians and Danes wider, and their mutual Hatred more
irreconcilable.

Though this Enterprise was not very considerable in it self, it tended to
confirm the Peasants in their good Opinion of Gustavus, and they gave him
Commendations so much the more willingly, because they took him for a Witness
of the Courage and Bravery they showed on this Occasion. The Report and Success
of this Expedition, within a few days caused almost the whole Province to
declare in his Favor, for the Peasants came flocking from their Villages to
join his Forces, some by reason of their eager and impatient desire to be
avenged on the Danes, while others were excited by the hope of getting Booty,
or by their natural Inclination to undertake bold and desperate Enterprises.

Many Swedish Gentlemen and among others Olai, Lawrence Erici, Fredage and
Jonas of Nederby, who were Outlawed by Christiern, and had fled for Refuge to
that Province, repaired to his Army as it were to a common Sanctuary. He
appointed 'em in the Quality of Officers, to command these Tumultuary Forces
who usually fought with greater Impetuosity than Order. Afterward he traversed
with extraordinary Diligence, Helsingland, Medelpadia, Angermania, Gestricia
and Bothnia, caused all these small Provinces to Revolt which are for the most
part destitute of considerable Towns, and secured 'em by the good Order he took
in fortifying the Passages of the Mountains, which are the Principal Forts of
those Countries.

His Army was daily increased in his march by the concourse of the Peasants,
who came over to him in Crowd's, and oftentimes in spite of their Respective
Lords: He abolished the Taxes which Christiern had laid upon the People, and
established Commissaries to receive the ordinary Contributions, whch he
appropriated for the subsistence of his Forces. Afterward he dispatched
private Emissaries through the whole Kingdom, to dispose the Nobility and Peasants
to appear in Arms as soon as he should enter into their Provinces. He also
gained by secret Negociations the greater part of the Swedish Officers that
served in Norby's Fleet or in the Viceroy's Army: He left no means unessay'd
that might serve to augment his Forces and diminish those of his Enemy, and did
not make Preparations to enter into the Heart of the Kingdom, till he thought
himself almost as sure of the Fidelity of all the Swedes that remained in the
Army of that Prelate, as of the Zeal of the Delecarlians.

The Viceroy made it his principal and almost only care to heap up Money which
he spent in gratifying his Voluptuousness; he aspired only to this Dignity in
hopes of finding means to Pillage those People whom his Master designed to
Weaken and Ruin, and he would never have undertaken the Administration of the
Government, if he had foreseen that he should have had to do with other Enemies
then disarmed People, that were not able to defend themselves: The Revolt of
the Dalecarlians was a very Surprising and Mortifying piece of News to him, the
Danish Forces that were left in the Kingdom were very much weakened for want of
Discipline and by Desertion; he suspected the Fidelity of the Swedes who had
declared for him or were employed in his Army; nor did he place much Confidence
in the Assistance of the Auxiliary and Foreign Troops, who for the most part in
Civil Wars are always ready to change their Masters, when they meet with more
advantageous Proposals. The Valor of Gustavus was formidable to him, he
dreaded the Courage and Resentment of that Young Lord; but he was yet more
afraid of Christiern's Indignation, as being a Prince whose Displeasure was
extremely terrible, and who usually punished the Unfortunate, with as much
severity as the Guiley.

He dispatched a Courier to that Prince to give him an Account of the Revolt of
the Northern Provinces, and at the same time recalled those Troops that were
dispersed in different parts of the Kingdom. The Danes obeyed their Orders, tho
not without a secret Reluctance to leave those Places, where they enriched
themselves at the People's cost, and committed all manner of Disorders with
Impunity. But the greater part of the Auxiliary Forces refused to take the
Field under pretext of the want of their Pay. They made themselves Masters of
the Towns and Castles, where they were in Garrison, and shut themselves up in
those Places, not so much to defend and keep 'em for the King of Denmark, as on
purpose to retain 'em as Pledges for the payment of their Arrears; and to
obtain more advantageous Terms from the Victorious Party.

It was with no small Trouble and Vexation that Christiern heard of the
Transactions in Sweden; he did not find himself in a condition to go into that
Kingdom, and could not spare the Forces he had in Denmark. The whole Realm was
full of Disaffected Persons, for that Prince who was grown more cruel fince the
Massacre at Stockholm observed no Measures with his Subjects; he indifferently
exercised his Authority on the Lives and Estates of the Danes, without any
respect to the Dignity of the Persons, or to the Laws and Privileges of the
Country; he had caused several Gentlemen to be put to death without any
Formality, and on very weak Surmises, and he had no less offended the Bishops
and the whole body of the Clergy by the Praises he publicly bestowed on Luther
who under color of blaming the Abuses that were committed in Germany in the
publication of Indulgences openly Condemned the Wealth which the Bishops
enjoyed and the Temporal Power they assumed.

The Court of Rome usually employed the Augustine Friars to publish Indulgences
in Saxony, by which they reaped no small profit, and which procured 'em a great
Authority in that Country. The Jacobins under the Pontificate of Leo the X. got
this Commission from 'em: These Monks to show their Zeal in this new
employment, and perhaps to inhance the income of their Mission, cried up in
their Sermons the virtues and efficacy of Indulgences, in which they used
certain Expressions that were not at all agreeable either to the design of the
Church, or to the intent of the Bull that Authorized 'em. Besides, these
Collectors led a Life not over Regular; it is said they kept their Offices in
Taverns, and often spent there in Feasting what was the product of the people's
Zeal, and what good men's Devotion made em spare even from their necessary
occasions.

Martin Luther, of the Order of St. Austin, Doctor and Professor in the
University of Witemberg, pretended to be moved with these disorders, but in
reality desirous to revenge his Brethren, began in his Sermons to fly out into
sharp invectives against the bad use these Collectors made of their Authority.
He was a great Scholar and an Eloquent Orator, hasty, daring and headstrong,
conceited with his own Learning and Sentiments, and over fond of that glory
which is acquired by broaching new Opinions; undaunted, and so obstinate as
never to retract what he had once affirmed. He contenttd himfelf at first with
preaching against the unedifying manner of bestowing these extraordinary
Favors; but exasperated by the Affronts and Threats of the Jacobins he looked
back as far as the first Original of Indulgences.

He proposed new Doctrines on the Subject of Justification, of Remission of
sins, of Penance and Purgatory, and at last spoke against the Popes Authority,
from whence his adversaries derived, the proofs by which they would establish
Indulgences.

He taught in his Wiritings and Preached in his Sermons, that we are justified
by Faith alone, that Penance consisted only in a sincere Contrition, and that
Confession was but an unprofitable Repetition of our Faults; that to obtain
Remission of sins, 'twas sufficient to believe with a Lively Faith, that they
were forgiven; that Indulgences were neither recommended nor ordained to us for
our practices, and that they were equally useless in this World, and in the
next; that Purgatory was but a Modern invention contrived by the Monks to cheat
People out of their money; that the Mass was no Sacrifice, that it was of no
benefit to the dead, that that, and all other Prayers of the Church were to be
Read in the vulgar tongue; and above all that the Holy Sacrament was to be
Administered to the Faithful in both kinds.

The Pope alarmed by this new Doctrine, which seemed to expose the nature and
extent of his Power to the censure and examination of every particular Person,
thought to stifle so dangerous a Doctrine by condemning Luther as a Heretic,
and even ordered Jerome Alexander his Nuntio to Solicit the Elector of Saxony to
deliver up the Seditious Monk, that he might punish him as an Enemy to Religion.

Luther to secure himself against the practices of that Court, and to engage
the Duke of Saxony and all Secular Magistrates to protect him, published some
new Writings as much in opposition to the Pope's Power as they were fovourable
to Sovereign Princes; he wrote against the Celibacy of the Priests and the
Monachal vows; he taught that the only vows that were obligatory, were those of
Baptism; he inveighed against Hierarchy, which he pretended was a Tyrannical
Government; he exclaimed against the corruption of the Court of Rome, and
against the excessive Riches of the Church; he advised in his Books and Sermons
all the Sovereign Princes to take possession of the Funds and Revenues of the
Bishoprics, Abbys and Monasteries, unless when there was a Sovereignty annexed
to the Bishoprics, and in that case, he would have the Bishop marry, and not
suffer such Persons, as under the specious pretense of Celibacy engaged their
Allegiance to a Foreign Power to remain in his Territories; he would have the
Monasteries converted into public Schools and Hospitals, and the great
Treatures those Houses enjoyed to be employed partly in maintaining the
Preachers, Overseers and other Officers who should take care of the Poor, and
partly by the Prince in supplying the Exigences of the State and the
Necessities of his People.

These last Opinions gained Luther more Followers, then the first Propositions
he had advanced, on the obscure and crabbed Doctrine of Justification, and of
the merit of good Works. Many German Princes under color of this Doctrine,
deprived the Church of several Lands and Estates which they thought lay
convenient for 'em: And the King of Denmark after their Example usurped part of
the Demeans of the Archbishop of Lunden, as if he had already declared openly
for the new Religion.

The Danish Clergy, to be revenged for the Affront they met with under his
Reign, and perhaps to dispose People to a Rebellion, gave out a Prophecy of S.
Bridget, to this effect, That a King of Denmark should be expelled out of his
Kingdom, because of his Barbarity. Every one took Pleasure in applying this to
Christiern; but he having heard of it, publicly made a Jest of it; telling his
Courtiers, That that Bigot, wrote every Morning the Dreams she had had over
Night, which she very piously took for Revelations, and affecting to make that
Saint the subject of his Mirth, either out of a Spirit of Libertinism, or,
which is more probable, to discredit by a seeming Contempt and Derision, a
Prediction which whether true or false, might make a dangerous Impression in
Peoples Minds.

However, since by reason of the general Discontent of all his Subjects, he
could neither leave Copenhagen nor dismiss his Army without exposing himself to
a Rebellion; he wrote to the Viceroy of Sweden, commanding him to march with
his Army, in order to bring the Rebels to reasonable Terms, and at the same
time he sent Word to Gustavus, That he would make his Mother and his Sisters to
suffer the most cruel Torments; if he understood that he appeared again at the
Head of the Rebels.

Gustavus, despising his Threats, continued still to advance with his
Dalecarlians, putting all the Danes he met with to the Sword, and even the
Swedes who adhered to them or to the Archbishop; and his Forces increased
daily, during his March, so that in a short Time he saw himself at the Head of
an Army of above Fifteen thousand Men, all animated with his Courage and
Resentment, and resolved either to conquer or die. He marched toward
Westmania, while the Viceroy, on the other Side, at the Head of his Army,
advanced to the River Brun^b^^, with a Design to oppose his Passage, and fight
him, if he should attempt to pass the River.

No sooner was he come to the Banks of the River but he saw Gustavus appear on
the other Side, at the Head of his Horse, and ready to force his Passage. He
was so daunted at the Sight of so resolute an Enemy, that he retired with much
Precipitation, and basely left a Post, where he might have fought with
Advantage, either because he was diffident of his own Capacity, in giving the
necessary Orders, and Commanding during the Heat and Tumult of the Action, or
because he durst not trust the Swedes, who were very numerous in his Army. He
retired at first into the Castle of Westeras, which was not far off; but not
thinking himself safe while he was so near Gustavus, and fearing a Siege if he
should continue, he left the best part of his Troops to defend that Place, and,
returning to Stockholm, shut himself up in the Castle of that City, where he
began to indulge his Luxury, without suffering any Business to be brought
before him, as though by his Retreat, and keeping out all bad News, he could keep
out the Enemy, or put a Stop to their Progress.

Gustavus took all the Advantage which the Viceroy's Retreat assorded him; he
laid a Bridge over the River, his Forces passed it without any Opposition, and
continued their March toward Westeras, the Capital City of Westmania. It was
equally dangerous for him to leave behind him a place of that importance, or to
spend too much time in besieging it: Most of his Troops were composed of
Countrymen, that were very unfit for this way of Fighting; he had neither
Powder nor Cannon; the Place was defended by a numerous Garrison, little
differing from an Army, and the Length and ^^issiculty of a Siege might have
discouraged the ^^^^^^lians, and ruined his Designs.

To rid himself of this Trouble, he resov'd to attempt that by a bold Action
and a Stratag^m, which he foresaw was impracticable according to the Or^^nary
Rules of the Art of War: He detached all his Civalry, under the Command of
^^^^ence Erici, his Lieutenant, with Orders to advance behind the Woods, as
near as he could to the City Gat^^; he left Olai another of his Lieutenants,
with the best part of his Foot, behind a Mountain, near the Village Ballunga,
and having commanded him to fellow him slowly, he advanced with a Body of Three
thousand Men, as if his whole Army had consisted only in that Number.

That Evening he appeared in Sight of the Place, and immediately retre^ch'd
himself near the Chapel of S. Olaus, with all the Care and Diligence of a Man
that is afraid of being attacked, and ende^vours to avoid an Engagement; which
the Danes perceiving, and withal seeing the small number of his Men, send all
their Horse to attack him. Gustavus, after a small Resistance, maintained a
running Fight, to get into the Desiles, and insensibly to draw the Enemy among
the Body of his Foot, which was advancing to his Assistance: The Danes,
deceived by this Retreat, which they mistook for the ^light of a routed Enemy,
ran disorderly our of (...), to have a Share in the Victory, thinking to sind
(...) in Consusion and Disorder, so that none remained in the City but the
Swedish Forces of their Part^, and (...) Da^es that were in Garrison in the
Castle, whom the Governor would not suffer to go out.

Gustavus having drawn 'em sar enough from the City, to give Erici an
Opportunity to execute his Orders, made head against the Enemy: He took his
Post at the He^d of all his Foot, which was now got together, and turning about
to his Dalecarlians, with his (...). Sword in his Hand, and a dreadful Look,
which s^^^'d to threaten no less than a sull Vengeance for his Father's Death;
Remember, my Friends, cried he, the Cruclty and Avarice of our Tyrants, and
consider that we must either conquer, or prevent an Ignominious Slavery by an
honorable ^eath.

The Dalecarlians having answered their General's Discourse with repeated
Shouts and Acclamations, immediately let sly a shower of Arrows upon the Danes,
and afterward broke, with Sword in Hand into the midst of their Battalions.
The Ground was quickly covered with dead Bodies; and both Parties enraged with
all the Fury and Obstinacy that usually appear between two neighboring and
hostile Nations, when one of 'em fights to enlarge their Dominions, and the
other to recover their Liberty. Gustavus seemed to be every where; and at the
same time that he charged the Enemies, as the meanest private Sentinel in his
Army, gave out Orders with that admirable presence of Mind, which is so rare
and yet so necessary on such Occasions. The Fight was obstinately maintained
for some time by the undaunted Valor of both Parties; but since People that
revolt and take up Arms for the Recovery of their Liberty, seem always to be
inspired with a more than ordinary Fury, the Swedes made such powerful Essorts,
that the Danes were sorc'd to give Ground, and to endeavor to regain the Walls
of Westeras.

However, they retreated in good Order, and when they were charged by the Horse
under the Command of Erici, who had intercepted their Passage, the Fight was
renewed, and by reason of the unavoidable necessity of Overcoming or Dying, was
more furious than before. The Danes being attacked on all sides, and animated
with Rage and Despair, sought like Persons who took less care to defend
themselves, than to assault their Pursuers, every Man endeavoring to revenge
his Death by that of an Enemy. The greatest part of 'em were cut to pieces, few
were taken Prisoners, and the pitiless and bloody Dalecarlians put all to the
Sword, without giving Quarter; nor were their Officers able to moderate their
impetuous Fury.

The Horse, under the Command of Erici, pursued the routed Enemy so vigorously,
that they entered with 'em into Westeras, by means of the Swedes that belonged
to the Garrison and were in the Dan^^, Service, but declared for Gustavus as
soon as they could with safety. These Troops had no sooner entered the City,
but they disbanded in the Might, and ran to plunder the Town with so much
eagerness, that their Officers were not able to s^op 'em, nor even to find a
sufficient number of Soldiers to mount the Guard, and to take such ^^ecautions
as were necessary to secure their Conquest. They broke into the Houses of
several Merchants that sold Brandy, Wine and strong Waters. And the
^^^carlians, under the Command of Gustavus, being informed that their
Companions were so well employed, left their Colors, and in spite of their
Officers ran to the Town, to get their share of a Liquor, which affords an
enchanting Delight to these Northern People.

The Governor of the Castle perceiving this Disorder, made a Sally at the Head
of his Garrison, to charge the Swedes, his Soldiers having first set Fire to
several Houses on purpose to increase the Tumult and Confusion: Afterward they
entered the City with Sword in Hand, and without any opposition killed a great
number of the Dalcearlians, whom they found for the most part Drunk and
destitute of Arms and Defense. As Soon as Gustavus was insorm'd of so terrible
and unexpected a Disaster, he entered the Town, and was enraged to see his
Soldiers massacred almost in his Presence, without finding any that were able
to oppose the Enemies: He commanded ^lai to raise a ^^rricadoe in the high
Street, and to make Head against the Danes with all the Officers and Volunteers
that were with him, whilst he himself ran through the City, to put a stop to
the Pillage, and to rally his dispersed Troops. The greater part of his Soldiers
sculking in the bottom of the Cellars, and intoxicated with Wine and Brandy,
fled almost with equal fear and precipitation from the presence of their
General and from their Enemies. But ^^^stavus, accompanied with his Guards,
w^^t down himself into the Cellars, stav'd the Vessels, spilt the strong Wat^^s
and Brandy, and by this Pr^^aution, which the ^alecarlians looked upon as unjust
and cruel, drew them out of these ench^^ted Places; at last he beat back the
Daves into the Castle, though rather by his own Pres^^^e than by the Assistance
of his Sol^^ers.

Afterward he cau^'d the Governor's Pulse to be selt, April. 29.
to know whether he might be pre veiled with to deliver up the Castle upon
Composition; but having found him resolute and unmovable, he contented himself
with blocking up the ^ort; he was not willing to hazard an Attack, which
perhaps might ^iscourage his Soldiers; nor to begin a formal S^^g^, for fear of
giving time to the Danes to rally. He only ordered Lines of Contravallation to
be drawn round the Place, (...) hinder the ^e^eg'd from ^^llying out, and to
cut off all hope of Relief: He first took a Spade to break the Ground, and was
immediately imitated by all the Officers of his Army; after which, the Burghers
of the Town, mingled with his Soldiers, carried on the Work with so much
Diligence and Vigor, that in less than two Days they raised the Entrenchments
in some places (...) 24 foot high.

Gustavus had no sooner given the ^ecess^ry (...) to prevent the cenveying of
Suc^^^in^s the (...) but he marched again into the Field; several (...) and
Gentlemen, at the ^^ad of their Vassals, (...) him on the Road, and joined his
Forces; and 70 Swedish Officers at once deserted the Viceroy, and came over to
Gustavus's Army: These Advantages were looked upon as the beginning of a great
Revolution, and the taking of Westeras seemed to be the Signal agreed upon for
the Revolt of the whole Kingdom of Sweden. Arwide, a considerable Lord in
Westgothland, Laurentius Petri of Sudermania, and Olaus Bond of Nericia, came
to assure him that the Nobility and People of their Provinces, waited only for
his presence to take up Arms and to declare in his Favor; and even those who
were either withheld or overaw'd by the Power and Neighborhood of the Danes,
secretly assisted him with Intelligence and Money; the Eyes of all the People
were sixth upon him, and his own Merit, with the rigor of the Danish Tyranny,
procured him the good Wis^es and Love of the whole Swedish Nation.

Gustavus seeing himself at the Head of an Army, and of so potent a Party,
resolved to undertake several Enterprises at the same time, that the Fame of
his Conquests might draw all the People to his Army, and that the Danes might
be at a Loss where to employ their Troops. He sent back these Lords who came to
meet him to their respective Provinces, with Detachments from his Army, which
he gave them to begin the War, and to promote the Revolt and Insurrection of
the People. Arwide, by his Orde^ besieged the Castle of Wadestene in
Ostrogothland, Laurentius Petri the Town of Nicopinc, and Olaus Bond, Or^bro,
the Capital of Nericia, whilst Olai and Erici at the same time invested the
City of Vpsal. This Place was large and very populous, but almost destitute of
Walls and other Fortifications, except some old Towers on the side of the Arch
bishopric. The Archbish. who was Lord of it, had put a Garrison in it under the
Command of a Governor, though rather with a design to show the Inhabitants that
he did not forsake sake them, than in hopes of defending it if it should be
attackt: The Soldiers of the Garrison had no sooner perceived the Dalecarlians
with Sword in hand descending into the Ditch and ready to mount to the Assault,
but they abandoned the Ramparts, after once firing, and lest a free passage to
the Dalecarlians, who entered the Town without opposition; and being reformed
by what happened to them at the taking of Westeras, they pursued the Danes,
without staying to plunder the Houses: The greater part of the Garrison was cut
to pieces, and the Governor in endeavoring to escape by Flight, received a shot
with an Arrow, of which he died a few Days after.

Gustavus having received information that his Forces were in Vpsal, May 11.
either to render him suspected to the Danish Ministers, or to gain and draw
him to his Party. Afterward he sent an Envoy to the Consul of Lubeck, to notify
to him the happy success of his Arms, and at the same time to put him in mind
of the Suplies which he had promised him in behalf of the Regency. His Agent
represented to that Magistrate, how much 'twas the Interest of that Republic,
and of all the other Hanse-Towns, that Sweden should be always separated from,
and at enmity with Denmark; that the Regency of Lubeck could never meet with a
more favorable opportunity to settle the Affairs of that Kingdom; that
Gustavus had already made himself Master of several large Provinces, and that
he had completed all these Conquests at the Head of the Dalecarlians, but that
these Peasants serving for the most part without Pay, were also free from any
Tie or Engagement, and that they were not ignorant that those who begin a
Revolt, and undertake a War with the greatest eagerness, are usually soonest
tired; that his Master stood in need of a Fleet to besiege Stockholm, and the
other Maritim Towns of the Kingdom, as also of some regular Troops to carry on
the War; and that this Lord hoped with these Supplies, within a little while to
expel the Danes out of the whole Kingdom of Sweden.

The Consul of Lubeck gave an account of his Demands to the Regency; but these
Republicans found that their Interest was changed with the fortune of Gustavus.
The rapid progress of his Conquests, his undaunted Courage and aspiring Genius
began to disturb 'em, and Christiern on the contrary ceased to be any longer
formidable to 'em by reason of his violent Proceedings with respect to his own
Subjects.

But though Gustavus's Agent made little progress in his Negotiation, he had the
good fortune to meet with an old German Colonel, named Stephen de Sassi, who
was one of those Soldiers of Fortune that make a Trade of War, and are always
ready to venture their Lives for Gain, without taking any care to enquire into
the Justice of the Cause which they engage to defend. Gustavus's Envoy treated
with him in the name of his Master, and in consideration of a certain Sum
agreed upon, a considerable part of which was paid in hand, the Colonel obliged
himself to Land in Sweden before the end of the Month of August, at the Head of
1200 Men. Gustavus's Agent instantly gave him an account of this Treaty, and
received Orders to continue at Lubeck to solicit that Regency to declare in his
favor; but he thought fit to acquaint him at the same time, that he was
sensible there would not have been so much difficulty in prevailing with these
Republicans, if he had not made so quick a progress, and if the success of his
Enterprise were more uncertain.

Gustavus had not hitherto met with any Disaster, every thing having succeeded
beyond his expectation: He was at the Head of a considerable Army, with which
he had made himself Master of half the Kingdom, and the rest of Sweden waited
only for his Presence to declare in his Favor, when in the full career of his
Conquests, he saw himself suddenly abandoned by the greater part of his Forces;
July 10.
for the Peasants begged leave of him to be dismissed, that they might go and
take care of the Harvest in their Provinces. Gustavus, notwithstanding the
urgent necessity of his Affairs, could not refuse those People who served him
voluntarily, and to whom he was also obliged for all his Authority; and
therefore he consented to their departure, upon the promise they made him to
return with a Reinforcement after the Harvest, reserving only for his Guard and
for the Defense of the City of Vpsal, one Company of Horse and six hundred
Foot, for the most part Dalecarlians, who were resolved to follow his Fortune,
and never to leave him.

He resided at Vpsal, which was as it were the Center of his Conquests, from
whence he gave out necessary Orders through all the Provinces that had declared
for him, and where his Lieutenants carried on the War in his Name: He
endeavored, at the same time to divide and distract his Enemies by secret
Negotiations, till he should be in a condition to reduce 'em by Force.

The Archbishop was more especially formidable to him, by reason of the great
Number of his Vassals and Followers; for he alone was capable of supporting
Christiern's Party by the Reputation of his Family, and his Authority over the
Clergy. He sent Letters through the Provinces, obliging his Relations and Friends
to endeavor to retain the People in their Obedience to the King of Denmark; so
that Gustavus met with, in the single Person of that Prelate, a vigilant Enemy,
that created him more trouble than all the Danes together. However, he made an
attempt to draw him off from their Party, and engaged two Canons of Vpsal, who
imagined they had a great Interest with the Archbishop. Gustavus publicly
granted 'em a Pass, under color that they desired Leave to Retire to their
Metropolitan, and at the same time privately charged 'em with a Letter, which
was submissive, full of Respect, and proper to flatter the haughty and arrogant
Temper of that Prelate. In this Letter he conjured him no longer to oppose the
Liberty of his Country; and offered, with all possible Demonstrations of
Sincerity to restore his City of Vpsal, and his whole Estate, without exacting
any other Conditions than to engage in his Party, and to be their Head;
assuring him withal, That every one would be ready to obey his Orders with
Delight, and that for his own part, he should only reserve to himself the Glory
of putting his Advice and Counsels in Execution.

The two Canons being arrived at Stockholm, delivered Gustavus's Letter to the
Archbishop, and even took the boldness to commend his Moderation, on purpose to
feel the Pulse of that Prelate. But the Archbishop rejected the Letter and
their Service, with a great deal of Scorn and Indignation; and fearing lest the
Danes should suspect that he hearkened to their Proposals, he caused the Letter
to be immediately carried to the Viceroy: He also sent to him, at the same
Time, the Persons of the two Canons, who were the Bearers of it, and demanded
that they should be put to Death as Traitors and Spies.

The Viceroy, who knew not how to destroy his Enemies but when he found 'em
unarmed, would have made no great Difficulty to give him this Satisfaction if
he had not been afraid of offending the Clergy, who almost alone continued to
adhere to the party of the Danes: He also perceived that the Archbishop
required their Death with so much earnestness, only to take off a Suspicion,
which might arise, that he held Correspondence with Gustavus: Besides that,
these Ecclesiastical Persons, terrified with the Danger they had incurred,
protested to him, They took the Charge of Gustavus's Letter, only to obtain a
Pass, and the liberty of departing out of a City, which was no longer engaged
in their Party. Afterward they inveighed against the Rebellion of that Lord,
with an Eloquence that was the effect of their Fear. They promised an
unviolable Fidelity to King Christiern, whom they acknowledged as their lawful
Sovereign; and the more effectually to justify themselves, and appease the
Anger of the Viceroy and Archbishop, they told 'em, That the Peasants had
abandoned Gustavus, and gave 'em an account of the state of the City, and the
Forces of that Lord, which they likewise diminished, according to the usual
Language of Deserters, on purpose to make their Court, and to obtain a more
favorable Treatment.

The Archbishop demanded Troops of the Viceroy, with which he promised to
surprise Gustavus in Vpsal, and bring him back Prisoner, or at least to force
him to flee once more to the Mountains of Dalecarlia. In compliance with his
Desire, the Viceroy gave him three thousand Foot and five hundred Horse, which
was the greatest part of the Garrison of Stockholm: The Archbishop marched, at
the Head of these Forces, with so much Diligence and Secrecy, that he was very
near seizing on the Person of Gustavus in Vpsal; for he received Advice of his
Designs only 2 Hours before his Arrival, by the means of two Swedish Gentlemen,
who seemed still of the Archbishop's Party, Suart, Onegarz.
but had been gained by Gustavus; they departed privately, and came with all
possible speed to give him notice of the Danger that threat'n'd him. The City
was large and open on all Sides, and the Inhabitants were also well-affected to
the Archbishop, who was their Lord, and therefore Gustavus did not think sit,
with so small a number of Troops, that remained under his Command to undertake
the Defense of the Place, but instantly caused the Infantry to file off toward
the Forest of Nostan, and put himself in the Rear with his Troop of Horse, and
his Guards, to secure their March.

He had scarce got out of the City, when the Archbishop entered it, at the Head
of all his Forces, and as soon as he was informed of Gustavus's Departure, he
pursued him with all his Horse. The Danes overtook him at the Ford of Lateby,
where his Infantry, already terrified with a precipitated Retreat, ran away at
the sight of the Enemy, and even his Cavalry, though retained by his Presence,
were dismayed while the whole multitude, pressed forward to gain the Forest.
His Squire being mounted on an unruly Horse, and hurried away in this Disorder,
unhappily fell upon his Master, and threw him backward into the Water, out of
which he was immediately rescued by his Guards. But Gustavus was so far from
being daunted with the Hazard he had run, or discouraged by the Number of his
Enemies, that he rode boldly at the Head of his Guards; and that brave Lord,
who was equally remarkable for the grateful height of his Stature and
undaunted Courage, sustained almost alone the whole Shock of the Danish Army,
while his Troops were gaining the Forest: As soon as he saw them in Safety, he
retired in spite of the Multitude of those that charged him, having lost in the
Encounter only ten or twelve Horse, so that this was all the Advantage that the
Archbishop gained from an Opportunity by which Fortune and the disorder of
Gustavus's Troops seemed to assure him an entire Victory.

The Danger to which he had been exposed by the means of this Prelate, served
only to revive his Courage and resentment, so that he formed a Design to
surprise him by way of Retaliation; to which purpose he recalled part of the
Troops, which he had given to Arwide, and sent them Orders to lie hid in the
Woods on the Road from (...) to Vpsal* At the same time he received the German
Troops, commanded by Col. July 5.
de Sassi; and most part of his Friends alarmed at the Danger he had incurred on
this occasion, repaired to him with great Diligence; the hatred they bore to
Christiern, and the fear of falling again under his Power rendering Gustavus's
Person extremly dear to all the Swedes, insomuch that within a few days he
found himself Master of a new Army, capable of keeping the Field: He encamped
near the Castle of Rimning, and made an Entrenchment there, as if he had only
the same Troops with which he marched out of Vpsal. He also took all the
necessary Precautions to conceal the Knowledge of his Forces from the
Archbishop, and to promote the Confidence and Presumption with which he was
possessed, by reason of the small Advantage he had gained.

This Prelate being puffed up with the Pride of having put Gustavus to Flight,
set forward to return to Stockholm, as that prudent Lord had foreseen, and
marched with the same State as if he led his Enemy Prisoner with him: But his
Troops sell into the Ambush; for Arwide's Infantry that lay hid in the Wood
suddenly appeared, and fell on 'em with terrible Shouts. The Archbishop, who
feared no Enemies where Gustavus was not present, being surpised with an
unexpected Attack, determined to re-enter into Vpsal; but he met with that Lord
on the Road, who had thrown himself, during his March, between the City and his
Forces: Whereupon the Danes were struck with Terror, and saw themselves beset
both in Front and Rear; some of 'em endeavored to advance toward Stockholm,
and others returned toward Vpsal: Every one in this Disorder imagined the
Opposition and Danger to be less where he was not, yet met with the Enemy and
Death whithersoever they went. Thus the greater part of the Danes were cut to
pieces, and the rest provided for their Safety by Flight. The Archbishop, who
had boasted that he would take Gustavus Prisoner, could scarce bring back the
sixth part of the Forces with which he was entrusted by the Viceroy. In the
mean while Gustavus re-enter'd into Vpsal at the Head of his victorious Army,
and perceiving that no Agreement could be any longer made with the Archbishop,
caused a Tower to be demolished, which served both as an Ornament and a Fort in
the Archbishop's Quarter, to hinder the Danes from lodging in it for the future.

The Doctrine of L^ther began to be introduced about this time into Sweden, and
in Gustavus's Army. The German Soldiers first brought it thither, but their
Religion consisted only in their Licentiousness and the Contempt with which
they treated the Monks and all sorts of Religious Orders. Afterward the two
Brothers Laurentius and Olaus Petri, of the Province of Nericia propagated this
Doctrine with very great Success. They had both studied under Luther in the
University of Witemberg; they brought both his Doctrine and Writings into
Sweden, and published them with all the Zeal that is usually shown in the
divulging of new Opinions, especially when it is believed to be necessary that
old Errors should be confuted, and the Truth established.

Laurentius Petri, who was naturally timorous, discovered his Sentiments with
much reservedness and Precaution; he contented himself only with dispersing
Luther's Books in private, and discoursing about them with his particular
Friends; but Olaus, who was bold and cloquent, publicly preached Lutheranism
in the Church of Stregnez, whereof he was Canon and Protonotary: He inveighed
in his Sermons against the ill use the Clergy and Monks made of their Power and
Riches, and was cheerfully heard by the People, who were not ignorant that the
Ambition of the Bishops had caused all the Calamities of Sweden.

Afterward he held Conferences, posted up Theses in Vpsel, disputed every Day
in the University of that City, and finally left no means unattempted to spread
abroad his Master's Doctrine, during the Disorders and Commotions of the Civil
War; a Time always favorable for the Change or establishment of new Religions.
These Opinions were readily embraced by the Youth, and he gained the most part
of the Professors and Scholars of the University, who esteemed it their honor
to become the Ministers and Publishers of that Doctrine, and every one was
desirous to be instructed in it. Thus Lutheranism passed insensibly from the
School into the Houses of private Persons, and the Families were divided, every
one taking part according to his Inclination; while some maintained the Roman
Catholic Religion, because it was that of their Fathers, and some adhered to
it purely upon the score of its Antiquity; others complained of the Abuses
which the Covetousness of the Clergy had introduced into the Administration of
the Sacraments, and attacked those Abuses with so much the more Heat, as they
found it their Interest to discredit 'em. The very Women engaged in these
Disputes, some out of Vanity and others through an excessive Fear of not being in
the true way to Salvation; and every one set up for a Judge of Controversies.
The remaining part of the Bishops of Sweden, after the Massacre of Stockholm,
being more mindful of Gustavus's Conquests than of their Episcopal Functions in
their respective Diocesses, took no notice of the Progress of Lutheranism.
Gustavus, for his part was desirous to conceal his Knowledge of these Opinions,
whether he looked upon them as the Effect of some Disputes among idle Divines;
or perhaps he was not displeased, that in a Kingdom, in which the Bishops had
so far opposed his Designs, there should arise, even from amidst the Clergy, a
Party that made Profession of condemning the Temporal Power, and great Revenues
of those Prelates.

Gustavus after the Flight of the Archbishop reunited all his Forces, which
were divided into different small Bodies, and marched directly to Stockholm. He
did not design as yet to undertake the Siege, as not having a Fleet to block up
the Harbor; but he only caused his Army to draw near, hoping that the
Consternation of the Danes, upon the Defeat of the Archbishop might give
occasion to the Friends, whom he had in the Place to attempt somewhat in his
behalf. The Viceroy and Archbishop having little assurance of the Fidelity of
the Burghers, and being afraid of falling into the Hands of Gustavus, resolved
to make their Escape whilst the Sea continued open. They conferred the
Government of the Place upon an ancient Officer, who commanded the Garrison,
and retired with Precipitation into Denmark, giving out that they only went to
hasten the Succors which were expected daily from Christiern. And it is certain
that he used his utmost endeavors to send an Army into Sweden, but the Danes
terrified with the Massacre of Stockholm, detested both his Enterprise and
Government. and refused to grant him any Kind of Supplies, under pretense that
they were already exhausted by the long continuance of the War.

Gustavus was overjoyed to hear that the two Prelates were departed for
Denmark; since the Viceroy seemed to leave him the Kingdom by his Flight, and
the Retreat of the Archbishop freed him from an Enemy that was always
formidable by reason of his Authority over the Clergy; but the Governor put
things into to good Order in Stockholm, that the Inhabitants were not able to
undertake any Attempt in Gustavus's Favor: at the same time that Lord received
a Courier from Arwide, who brought him word that he made himself Master of the
Castles of Wadestene, Hora, and Scening in Ostrogothland; that at the very
first Approach of his Forces, the Towns of Lincoping, Norcoping, and
Sudercoping had taken up Arms, and expelled the Danes; and that he was marching
to besiege the Castle of Stegeburg, in which Colonel Bernard de Milen a German
by Nation kept Garrison with his Regiment.

The great Joy occasioned by such prosperous Successes was allayed with the sad
News, which Gustavus received of the deplorable Death of his Mother and Sister.
For King Christiern exasperated at the Progress of his Victories, of which he
was certainly assured by the flight of the Viceroy and Archbishop, caused
these Ladies to be wrapped up in a Sack, and cast into the Sea, and gave Orders
at the same time to the Danish Officers, who commanded in those Places, which
still remained under his Dominion in Sweden, to destroy all the Swede^ that
were still among his Troops, as so many Traitors hired by his Enemy; which
orders were put in Execution with a great deal of Inhumanity, especially by the
Governor of Aboo, the Capital City of Finland, who put to Death many
Finlandish Gentlemen of his Government.

Gustavus being extremely afflicted at the Loss of his Mother, and Sister;
published a Proclamation in his Army, as also in all the Places where his
Authority was acknowledge, that all the Danes that could be taken should be put
to death without Mercy; hoping that these violent Proceedings would render
Christiern, more odious to his own Subjects. He left the greater part of his
Forces before Stockholm, to form a Blockado under the Command of Colonel De
Sassi and Fredage, and afterward marched into Ostrogothland; which was almost
wholly gained by the prudent Conduct, and the Valor of Arwide, and had lately
declared against the Danes. Gustavus put Garrisons into all the Towns that
adhered and owned his Authority, caused the old Fortifications to be carefully
Repaired, ordered new ones to be made in all places where they were necessary,
and left 'em under the command of Governors that were zealous Defenders of
their Country, and for the most part had been out-lawed by Christiern. All the
Noble Men of the Province appeared before him to offer their Service, and to
congratulate him upon the happy Success of his Arms. The Bishop of Linceping
alone was disturbed and wavering, notwithstanding so speedy and private a
Revolution, and shut himself up in his Castle of Munquebode, not daring as yet
to declare for Gustavus.

This was the same Prelate who had fortunately escaped the Massacre of
Stockholm; so that the risk that he run on this occasion, made him look upon
all the Parties that opposed Christiern's Interest as so many dangerous
Precipices; neither could all Gustavus's Conquests revive his Spirits, as being
persuaded that he could never be able to maintain a War against so potent a
Monarch as the King of Denmark, and expecting every moment to see this Prince
re-enter Sweden at the head of a formidable Army, to treat Gustavus and his
Followers, as he had done Erie Vasa his Father and the rest of the Senators. H^
exhorted the People both by Word and Writing, not to be concerned in the
Commotions of the State, though the only Reason why he made so great a noise, was
that he might have a suffici-Number of Witnesses, to depose, that he had
constantly persever'd in supporting the interest of Denmark.

Gustavus incensed at the Weakness and Cowardice of that Prelate, who in the
middle of a Province, whereof he was Master, durst not declare against the
Danes, marched toward his Castle at the head of part of his Troops, with a
design to oblige him to explain himself, and to drive him out of his hold, if
after the ill treatment he had received from Christiern, he still persisted in
taking his part. The Bishop being informed of the displeasure and march of
Gustavus, went out to meet him with his principal Clergy, and to appease his
Anger omitted neither commendations nor protestations of his Fidelity. It was
indeed the interest of Gustavus to make himself Master of the Bishop's Castle,
which was fortified, but he durst not put a Garrison into it, lest even those
of his own party should blame him for violating the previledges of the Clergy
in the Person of a Bishop, that could not be accused of appearing in Arms, and
who had volutarily opened the Gates of his Castle. Gustavus contented himself
with giving him a severe reprimand, and the Bishop th^ught himself very happy
to purchase his Liberty at the rate of some Oaths of Fidelity which he was
fully resolved to keep no longer than he should be over awed by the presence
and arms of Gustavus

That victorious Lord having established so good order throughout all his
Conquests solemnly called a Meering or Convention of the Estates of the Kingdom
at Wadestone, to give some form to the Government, and more especially to cause
his own Authority to be confirmed and acknowledged, which as yet he held only
by the right of his Sword, and the Election of certain Pea ants of Dalecarlia.
Few of the Deputies of the Provinces were present in this Assembl^; for the
murder of the principal Nobility, the difference of parties, the disorders of
the War, the marching of Troops, and even the fear of some now Revolution in
Favor of King Christiern hindered the greatest part of the Deputies from
appearing. The Convention was scarce composed of any other Persons than
military Officers and many Gentleman, who were outlawed by Christiern and
resorted to Gustavus's Army as it were to a Sanctuary or Place of Refuge; so
that the whole Body of the State was in a manner comprehended in the Army.
Gustavus represented to them with a graceful mien and a charming Eloquence, the
necessity of proceeding to the Election of an Administrator, who might be
capable of giving the last fatal blow to the Danish Tyranny; and that the
Forces of that Nation now in the Kingdom, were rather Prisoners then Masters in
the places they possessed, that afterward he told them with a great deal of
generosity that he did not intend that his Services should constrain their
choice, assuring them that he would be the first that should acknowledge that
person among them whom they should think fit to Elect, and that in whatsoever
rank they placed him, he should always esteem himself happy in Fighting and
Exposing his Life for the defense of his Country.

The Estates answered his Harangue with the Applause and Applauding
Acclamations that were the to his Valor and Moderation: All the Gentlemen and
Officers in the Convention were inseparably united to his Person and Fortune;
they subsi^ed only by his Benefits, and there was no safety for them in Sweden
except in his Army: The whole Assembly earneastly entreated him to take upon
himself the charge of the Governm. and they were desirous even to confer upon
him the Quality of King, to engage him more effectually to defend his Country;
but he possitively refused that Title, and contented himself after the Example
of his Predecessors with the Quality of Admmistrator, as being more Modest and
more Agreeable to the State of his Fortune and the present posture of the
Kingdom. Then all the Members of the Estates took an Oath of Allegience to him,
and he was acknowledged and proclaimed with a loud Voice in the Assembly of the
Estates, and in the Army, as the General Governor and Sovereign Administrator
of Sweden.

The End of the First Part.
THE HISTORY OF THE Revolutions in Sweden.
PART II.
GVSTAVVS having dismissed the Assembly, Swedes. The success of his Arms, the
glory of his Victories, the numbers and valor of his Troops, and the zeal and
affection of the People, inspired him with Thoughts suitable to his Courage and
Ambition, and flattered him with the alluring Prospect of mounting the Throne
of Sweden, as soon as he should complete the great Work in which he was
engaged, by the entire Expulsion of the Danes out of the Kingdom.

He was not ignorant of the extreme Difficulty of the Task he had undertaken;
the Danes were still Masters of the Capital City, and of several Provinces, and
he wanted Money to carry on the War. But for his comfort he perceived that his
Adversary labored under the same Inconveniency; and his Wants were in a manner
supplied by the Poverty of his Enemies. This Encouragement was sufficient to
keep him from despairing of Success, but he was not willing to build his Hope
on so uncertain a Foundation. He either sold or mortgaged all his Patrimonial
Lands, to make new Levies; wisely considering that he only parted with an
Estate, of which an unfortunate Battle might quickly deprive him, and that a
Victory would make up all his Losses.

He sent some of the Forces, which he had newly Levied, to Arwide, with Orders
to carry on the Siege of Stegeburgh with vigor. Colonel de Sassi and Fredage
besieged Stockholm, which they had blocked up for some time. The Administrator
sent another Body of his Men to Finland under the Command of Arwide's Brother,
and kept a flying Camp with himself, for the security of his Person, and the
execution of his private Designs. He ran through all the Provinces with an
incredible Diligence; and it may be said, in some sense, that he was present in
all his Armies at once. He projected every Enterprise, and both contrived and
executed all the Attempts that were made. He passed frequently through the
Enemies Country, and even under the Canon of their Garrisons, without being
assaulted; the secrecy of his Designs, and the quickness of his Marches,
securing him from their Attacks. He weat to Smaland in Person, and made himself
Master of that Province, almost in less time than would seem necessary to
travel through it.

From thence he marched to Stegeburgh, December (...).
which was still besieged by Arwide, and defended with (...) Courage and
Resolution by the Governor. The whole Fortune of that Officer consisted in the
Government of this Place; and he endeavored to preserve it as his Estate and
Patrimony, rather than out of Zeal and Fidelity to his Master's Interest.
Gustavus soon discovered his weak side, and concluding that he might be more
easily Bribed than Forced, made some advantageous Proposals to him, which
quickly produced the desired effect. The Governor was not able to resist the
Presence and Bounty of that young Conquer or; he not only surrendered the
Place, but entered into his late Enemy's Service, and the whole Garrison
followed his Example. So powerfully was he charmed with that Prince's Valor and
Generosity, and allured with the Pensions and Preferment which he bestowed upon
him.

After the Reduction of Stereburgh, Gustavus made himself Master of the Castles
and Forts of Nicopinc and Tynelso; from whence he marched to Westmania, and
took the Castle of Vesteras, which by a long Elockade was reduced to scarcity
of Provisions, and could not expect Relief. However, be granted honorable
Terms to the Covernor, besides and advantageous Composition in private: For
'twas one of his Maxims, That a Conqueror can never pay too dear a price for
the time he saves; and though he was full of Courage and undaunted Bravery, 'twas
his usual custom to court his Enemies before he attacked 'em, and only to force
those who would not be gained. He had the Art of preparing his Designs for
execution by private Negotiations, and was admirably well acquainted with all
the mysterious Secrets of the most refined Politics.

As Soon as he had made himself M^ster of the Castle of Westeras, he marched
toward Stockholm at the Head of his Army, resolving to Command in Person at
the Sieve, and to complete the Conquest of the Kingdom by the Reduction of the
Capital City. But about two days Journey from the Town, he met with the
unwelcome News of the Defeat of his two Officers that lay before it, and of the
raising of the Siege. Christiern had made a desperate Essort to prevent the
Loss of Sweden; he had set out a potent Fleet, manned with a considerable
number of Land Forces, and Admiral Norbi, who expressed a great deal of Zeal
and Forwardness on this Occasion, was entrusted with the Conduct of the
Expedition.

That Lord could not forgive Gustavus for getting the start of him, and
baulking the secret Designs he had formed against Sweden; and Christiern
imagined that his extreme Aversion and Spite against that Prince, which he did
not endeavor to dissemble, proceeded merely from his Loyalty and Zeal for the
Interest of his Sovereign. He had used a great deal of Diligence, and even
spent a great deal of Money in sitting out the Fleet: His Friends accompanied
him in the Expedition, the Troops that he commanded were absolutely devoted to
him, and he still entertained some flattering Hopes that if he could beat
Gustavus, 'twou'd not be impossible to obtain the Dignity of Administrator, and
afterward to mount the Throne, by improving the violent Hatred with which the
Swedes were possessed, against the Tyranny of his Master.

Gustavus had no Fleet at Sea to dispute the passage of the Danes; their
Admiral entered without any opposition into the Port of Stockholm, April.
and as soon as his Troops were landed, made a Sally with all his Forces to
surprise the Besiegers. There was a lucky Combination of several Circumstances
that seemed to favor the execution of his Designs; for besides the Weakness of
his Enemies at Sea, there was a fatal misunderstanding betwixt the two
Officers that commanded the Siege. The German Colonel, who was an old and
Weather beaten Soldier, claimed the supreme Command, as an Honor due to his
Skill and Experience: But the Swedish Officer was too proud and consident of
his own Courage, and too jealous of the Honor of his Nation, to submit to a Man
whom he did not think braver than himself. After this unhappy Difference they
lodged their Troops in separate Quarters, without the least Communication
between one another: They acted on all Occasions like declared Enemies, and
were more suspicious of each other, than of the Danish Garrison, whom they
despised both for their Weakness and the smallness of their Numbers.

Norbi taking the advantage of so favorable an Opportunity, made a Sally upon
Fredage's Quarters; and the Swedes were so ill prepared to receive him, that
they abandoned their Lines, and endeavored to save themselves by a shameful
Flight. The German Colonel was so far from assisting 'em, that he remained an
unconcerned Spectator of the Action, and even rejoiced at their Misfortune: But
he was soon made sensible of his Imprudence, for his Camp was attacked so
vigorously by the Danish Admiral, that his Soldiers were not able to endure so
surions a Shock, and fled after a slight Resistance. Thus Norbi had the good
Fortune to succeed in his first Attempt; and that he might not lose the Fruit
of so important a Victory, he ordered the Soldiers of the Garrison to fill up
the Lines, and demolish all the Enemies Works, while the rest of the Troops
were in pursuit of the routed Besiegers.

Yet the Shame and Confusion of this Desent, was greater than the Loss they
sustained; for the greatest part of the Swedish Troops rallied again under
their respective Officers. The two Commanders endeavored reciprocally to cast
the ^^ame of this Disaster upon one another. Their common Misfortune
exasperated the Fury of their Aversion, and widen'd the Breach that was between
'em: But Gustavus was too deeply concerned in the fatal Consequences of that
unhappy Division, to suffer it to make a further Progress. He marched with all
possible haste to the Army, and by his Presence deprived 'em both of that Power
and Superiority, which was the main Cause of their Hatred and Jealousy.
Immediately after he gave Orders to his Troops to repair to their former Posts,
and renewed the Siege, notwithstanding the great sharpness of the Winter, that
the News of his Arrival might prevent, or at least lessen the Noise of the
Defeat of his Army.

Norbi was not much alarmed at this second Attempt, which was rather a Blockade
than a Siege. He lose a great Garrison in the Town, and being Master of the Sea
set sail for Finland, where he put to Flight Arwide's Brother, whom Gustavus
had sent to reduce that Province.

The Administrator perceiving that he could not hope to succeed in his Designs,
nor to make himself Master of Stockholm, without a Fleet to block up the Port,
dispatched his Secretary Siguard de Holten to hasten the Succors which that
Republic had promised him, and to obtain a sufficient Number both of Man and
Ships to carry on the War. This Envoy was more favorably received than his
Predecessor; for the Magistrates of that City had heard of the Action at
Stockholm, and believed the Accounts that were industriously spread abroad by
the Danes, who gave out that the Administrator's Army was totally defeated. And
therefore since 'twas their Interest to prevent the utter Ruin of that Prince,
as well as to curb the Progress of his Victories, they were soon persuaded to
grant the Succors which he demanded, thinking by that means to perpetrute the
War betwixt the Northern Crowns. They obliged themselve, to send forthwich
Eighteen Men of War, with Four thousand Soldiers, furnished with one Year's
Pay: But at the same time they resolved to make the Administrator pay dear for
the Assistance they gave him.

They proposed, That he should enter into an Obligation in the Name and Behalf
of the States of Sweden, to pay to their City for the Charge of the Fleet, the
Sum of Sixty thousand Marks of Silver; That till the Kingdom should be in a
Condition to advance so considerable a Sum, the Merchants of Lubeck, Trading to
Sweden, should be exempted from all Customs and Duties, for the Goods which
they should either Export or Import; That no other Nation should be permitted
to Trade in the Kingdom; That the Administrator should not conclude a Peace or
Truce with Denmark, without the Consent of the Regency; and, That in case they
should be attacked by Christiern, he should be obliged to invade Denmark with
Twenty thousand Men, to make a Diversion.

The greatest part of these Conditions seemed very hard to Gustavus: For he
perceived that the execution of this Treaty would ruin the Trade of the
Kingdom, and quite destroy the Revenue of the Crown, which at that time
consisted almost wholly in the Customs that were laid upon the Importation and
Exportation of Goods. But on the other Hand, there was an absolute Necessity
for a Fleet to carry on the Siege of Stockholm, Calmar, and other Maritime
Places. He had no Money either to build or buy Ships, and was sensible that as
long as Christiern should remain Master of the Sea, and consequently of these
Ports, he might easily prolong the War, by pouring in fresh Forces into the
Kingdom. Thus the Administrator was constrained to conclude a Treaty, which
would have been shameful and dishonorable, if it had not been necessary:
Siguard de Holten signed it by his Order, and the Fleet set Sail some time
after. Frederick Brum was Admiral of the Navy, and the Land Forces were
commanded by John Stammel.

The Fleet arrived safely in the Port of Sudercopinc on Whitson-Eve, and the
Troops that were to serve a Shore were landed. As soon as the Administrator
received the News of their Arrival, he sent Bernard de Milen, who was their
Countryman, to administer the Oath of Fidelty to 'em: But they resus'd
obstinately to obey or acknowledge that Officer, though he was a Native of
Germany. They begged earnestly that they might see Gustavus; and the greatest
part of 'em protested that they would never have left their Country, if they
had not expected to serve under a Prince whose Valor was celebrated through all
Germany.

To satisfy these Foreign Auxiliaries, the Administrator was obliged to take a
Journey to Sudercepinc. He charmed 'em with the gracefulness of his Mien, and
gained their Hearts with the winning Eloquence of his Discourse. They took the
usual Oath of Fidelity for the time their Superiors had engaged 'em in his
Service, with all imaginable Expressions of Joy and Cheerfulness; and resolved
to follow his Fortune with as ardent a Zeal, as if they had been born his
Subjects.

He made use of these Troops to reinforce the Army that lay before Stockholm,
ordering 'em to encamp on the side next the Sea, over against the Port, which
was the weakest part of the Camp. At the same time he formed a Squadron of as
many Ships as he could find, and gave the Command of it to Eric Fleming, a
Finlandish Lord, with Orders to Cruise before the Harbor, that all Hope of
Relief might be cut off from the Besieged.

Fleming lying in the height of Stockholm, discovered a Squadron of Danish
Ships making their way directly toward the Harbor. This was a considerable
Convoy, commanded by the Governor of Aboo, whom Norbi had sent to re-victual
Stockholm; for it seems he had not yet received Advice that the Regency of
Lubeck had declared for the Swedes, and that their Fleet kept the Sea.
Immediately Fleming gave Orders to all his Ships to stand in behind the Cape of
Stockholm; and in the mean time the Convoy, with the Ships under his Command,
advanced with a favorable Gale, having ordered two light Frigates to sail
before the Fleet, at an equal distance, to make Discoveries.

As soon as the first of these Frigates had doubled the Cape, she was surrounded
and taken by Fleming, who took out all the Ship's Company, and manned her with
Swedish Seamen and Soldiers. Then, without losing time, he went on Board his
Prize, and put out to Sea to meet the other Frigate, which was making the best
of her way, without the least suspicion of what had happened. As soon as the
Commodore of the Convoy, who was on Board that Vessel, perceived the first
Frigate making toward him, he came in his Boat to learn the Cause of her
return; but instead of receiving the Advice he expected, he found himself in
the Hands of his Enemies. Immediately Fleming gave the Signal for the whole
Fleet to come up; and made himself Master of the Convoy and all the Ships in
his Company, before the Captains, who were at a loss for want of their Admiral,
could agree upon the Order of Battle. There was only one Finlandish Ship that
made Resistance; the Captain defended himself with extraordinary Valor from
Noon till Night; and at last chose rather to burn his Ship, than to fall under
the power of his Enemies. The Commodore of the Convoy was hanged by Gustavus's
Order, by way of Reprisal, or Retaliation, for the Cruelties he had committed
in his Government.

This was a very mortifying piece of News to Admiral Norbi, who, reckoning
himself Master of these Seas, could not endure to be affronted in his own
Element, by such bungling Seamen as the Swedes were generally reputed to be. He
ordered his Fleet to be sitted out with all possible haste; and as soon as it
was ready to put to Sea, he set sail with a Convoy of Provisions and Soldiers
for Stockholm, which was still closely blocked up by Gustavus. As soon as he
drew near the Lubeck-Fleet and Fleming's Squadron, which were Riding at Anchor
in the Road of that City, the Guns on both sides began to play very furiously,
and the two Fleets continued a whole Day firing at one another without
Intermission. Norbi intended to renew the Fight next Morning; but perceiving
some appearances of an approaching Storm, he was forced to stand in to a little
Island, where there was safe Anchorage, though it was very near the Shore.

Having cast Anchor in that place, he was surpised in the Night with so
violent a Frost, that all his Ships were engaged in the Ice. Gustavus hearing
of this Accident, resolved not to neglect so fair an opportunity of obtaining a
complete and easy Victory, by setting Fire to his Enemies Navy. In pursuance of
that Design, he marched immediately with the Forces of Lubeck, who were
encamped on that side, and whom he thought fitter for such an Attempt than the
Dalecarlians and other Peasants, of which his Army was composed. He passed over
into the Island upon the Ice, and gave Orders to the Soldiers to advance as
near the Enemy as they could, during the obscurity of the Night. They quickly
found that Norbi was not asleep; for upon their Approach, they were saluted
with repeated Discharges of great and small Shot. However, they received the
Enemies Fire without shrinking, and marched on boldly to the sides of the
Ships: Some shot Arrows, others darted burning Torches, and some, transported
with the eagerness of their Courage, endeavored to climb up the sides of the
Ships; but they were quickly repulsed and thrown down upon the Ice by the
Danes, who fought with advantage upon the Decks of their Ships. The Action was
extremely hot on both sides: The Danes were attacked with extraordinary Vigor
and Obstinacy, and defended themselves with no less Courage and Bravery; but
notwithstanding all their Care and Resistance, several Ships were set on Fire,
and both the Conquered and Conquerors were forced, with equal haste and
precipitation, to avoid the fury of the merciless Flames. The gloomy Horror of
the Night, the Shrieks of half-burnt Wretches, the falling of Masts and
cracking of the Ships, with the confused Medly of so many dismal Objects,
struck the most undaunted Minds with a secret and resistless Terror. The Danes
were at once assaulted by the raging Fire and their victorious Enemies: They
had already lost several Ships, and could not have saved one of the rest, if
those who commanded under Gustavus would have completed the Victory.

The Lubeck General ordered a Retreat to be sounded in the heat of the Action,
John Stammel.
and in spite of Gustavus's Threats and Entreaties, drew off his Troops, under
pretext that they were too much exposed to the Enemies Fire. It Is not certainly
known whether he was secretly gained by Norbi, as the Administrator suspected;
or whether he had received private Orders from his Superiors to prolong the
War, by ballancing the Advantages on both sides. The Season was not yet so far
advanced, but that the Heat of the Sun in the Morning was strong enough to thaw
the Ice, November.
which was quickly dispersed by a brisk Southerly Gale, which happened to arise
at the same time. Norbi set sail immediately, and retired to the Port of
Calmar, with the rest of his Fleet which was extremely shattered.

Gustavus was enraged at the Lubeck General's Treachery, who, by an ill-timed
Retreat, had robbed him of a certain Victory, and retarded the Conquest of
Stockholm, upon which the success of all his (...) signs depended. He was
convinced, by this Action, that he could not safely rely upon such Allies, who
had only assisted him out of a politic Design to put a stop to the growing
power of Denmark; and concluded that they would not only withdraw their
Assistance, but turn their Arms against him, if he should, by extending his
Conquests, make himself the Object of their Fear. However, the necessity of
having a Fleet to block up the Port of Stockholm, made him dissemble his Anger;
and having sent those Foreign Troops into good Winter Quarters, he continued
the Blockade with an Army of his own Subjects, who were accustomed to endure
Cold, and to encamp in the Snow. In the mean time he took care to keep so
strict a Guard upon all the Avenues of the Town, that 'twas impossible for the
Enemy to supply it either with Men or Provisions.

Norbi hearing of the Extremity to which the Place was reduced, resolved to
hazard another Bottle, as soon as the Sea should be open. He bestowed a great
deal of care and charge upon the Careening and Fitting out of his Fleet, and
Manned it with a considerable Number of Soldiers, whom he drew out of the
Garrisons of the Isle of Gothland, and of the City of Calmar, of which he was
Governor. He was still entertaining himself with the pleasing hope of forcing
Gustavus once more to raise the Siege of the Capital City of Sweden, when he
received advice that all Denmark was in Arms against Christiern.

That violent Prince contemning the Laws and Privileges of his Country,
imagined that he might, without control, dispose of the Lives and Fortunes of
his Subjects as he pleased, and make his own fantastical humor the Standard
and Measure of his Government. The Bishops and Nobility were the principal
Objects of his Fury; for the consciousness of his own Guilt made him conclude
that they could not continue Loyal to their Tyrannical Oppressor. He had put to
Death several Lords and two Bishops without any form of Justice; and both the
Clergy and Nobility were equally incensed against him. Those Barbarities and
the Massacre of Stockholm procured him the hatred of all his Subjects; but
their Hatred was accompanied with so much Fear, that notwithstanding all his
Cruelties, he might have still continued on the Throne if he had not
over-loaded the Danes with insupportable Taxes and Impositions to carry on the
War against Sweden, which was still his predominant Passion.

At last the People grew weary of Slavery and Oppression, and could not longer
bear the unsufferable Yoke of so Tyrannical a Government: They lost their Fear
and Patience, at the same time that they lost their Estates, and cheerfully
embraced the Quarrel of the Clergy and Nobility: All things being ripe for an
universal Insurrection, and the Conspiracy being carried on by the United
Counsels and Interests of all the Estates and Orders of the Kingdom; they
entered into a secret Treaty with Frederick of Oldenburgh, Duke of H^stein, and
Christiern's Uncle. That Prince lived quietly in the Lands of his Appennage,
and had never discovered any Ambition: But he was so dazzl'd with the tempting
Prospect of a Crown, that he heard with Pleasure the Proposals of the
Malcontents, and consented to the Dethroning of his Nephew, concluding that
the Tyrannical Proceedings of that unhappy Prince, would justify his appearing
in Arms against him, and save him from the Character of an Usurper. He levied
Troops in his own Lands to support the Malcontents: And the revolt began in
the Province of Jutland, which borders upon Holstein. The Estates of that
Country, assembled at Arhusen, deposed Christiern publicly, and even had the
confidence to send him the Art or Instrument of his Deposition by Munce, the
chief Justice of that Province.

Christiern was extremely daunted with this Message, which a Wiser and more
Resolute Prince would have answered at the head of his Army. He was still
Master of the Kingdom of Norway, which King Christiern I. his Grandfather had
entailed upon his Family. Copenhagen, and the Islands of the Baltic Sea, had
not yet declared in favor of his Uncle; and he was sure of the Fleet under the
Command of an Admiral, who was inseparably united to his Interest. Yet he
neither endeavored to oppose the Mutineers, nor to dispute the Crown with the
Duke of Holstein. He concluded that the Conspiracy was universal, though it had
only broken out in one Province. He was diffident and afraid of all Men, and
even suspected his Domestic Servants, and the Officers of his Household, fearing
that they might be tempted to betray him to the Prince, his Uncle. He degraded
himself, and forgetting his Birth and Dignity, shamefully begged the advice and
assistance of those whom he had treated most unworthily. His Disgrace exposed
him in his true and naked Colors to the eyes of his Subjects, and showed him
to be as Base and Cowardly under Adversity, as he had been Haughty and Insolent
in Prosperity. He chose rather to live a private Person than to die a King, and
saved himself by an Ignominious flight out of his Dominions, with the Queen his
Wife, S^^^^ite, who notwithstanding the ill success of he^ Counsels, April 13.
retained her wonted Empire and Authority over the mind of this miserable
Prince. He placed his only confidence in the assistance of his Brother-in-^aw
the Emperor, imagining that he would Arm all Cermany to restore him to the
Throne he h^d sursaken; as if he could not have more easily kept the Possession
of his Crown with his own Army, than regain it with all the Forces of the
Empirc.

As soon as Norbi received the news of his Masters Flight and ABDICATION, he
took his leave of Sweden, and gave over his design of relieving Stockholm. He
left a weak Garrison in Calmar, and retired with his whole Fleet to the Isle of
Gothland, under pretext of securing it for Christiern, though his true Design was
to keep it for himself, and under the Name of that Prince to make himself the
absolute Master and Sovereign of the Island, while the Kingdoms of the North
were distracted with such terrible confusions.

Gustavus resolved to make the best advantage of his Enemies retreat. He had
some secret intelligence in Calmar, who prevailed with the Burghers to receive
his Troops in the Night; and the whole Garrison was put to the Sword. At the
same time Arwide seized on the Isle of Docland, and Bernard de Milen Conquered
all Bleking. And these successes were quickly followed with the Reduction of
the whole Kingdom, except Stockholm, and some places in Finland.

The Garrison of Stockholm, weakened by the length of the Siege, straightened
both by Land and Sea, and kept in Awe by the Burghers of the City, who did not
longer conceal their Affection to the Administrator, began to think of
Capitulating. They knew not for whose sake they suffered all the Incommodities
of so close a Siege; and were reduced to such Extremities, by want of Pay and
of necessary Provisions, that they offered to surrender, insisting only on the
Payment of the Arrears due to 'em since they entered into the Place.

But Gustavus did not think fit to observe his usual Maxim on this occasion;
for though 'twas so much his interest to be Master of that City, he rejected the
advantageous Proposals th^^ were made to him by the Garrison. He knew that
their Numbers were extremely lessened, and that they wanted both Victuals and
Powder. But this seeming Severity was only a pretext to prolong the Siege for
some days, which in the present juncture was a necessary piece of policy for
the Advancement of his Fortune, and the carrying on of his secret Designs. He
saw that Sweden was absolutely delivered from the Danish Yoke; that Christiern
was hated and slighted by all the World, and that he wandered about like a
miserable Exile, begging the Assistance of his former Allies to restore him to
the Crown of Denmark. Gustavus had never a nearer Prospect of mounting the
Throne; but at the same time he stood in need of his most resin'd Politics to
manage so nice a Game: He considered that the reduction of Stockholm, instead
of sixing him on the Throne, might set him at a further distance from it: He
knew that Ingratitude is the usual Companion of Security, and was afraid that
the Swedes being freed from the apprehension of a common Enemy, would not
unanimously concur to his Election, and the Establishment of his Authority. And
therefore he concluded that the best resolution he could take in so Critical a
Juncture was to lengthen the Siege of their Capital City, that the uncertainty
of so important an event might keep 'em in awe, and in a dependence upon his
Assistance.

In pursuance of this Design he called a Meeting or Convention of the Estates
at Stregnez, May 25.
whither the Deputies of all the Provinces resorted, attended with a vast
concourse of the Nobility and common People, who flocked thither from all parts
to see Gusta^us, whom they looked upon as the Hero and Guardian Argel of his
Country. As soon as the Assembly was opened they proceeded to the Election of
Senators, to supply the vacant Places of those who lost their Lives in the
Massacre of Stockholm. The Administrator had so great an influence upon the
Deputies, Bernard Milen, Pe^ ter Erland Ivard and Eric Fl^ming, Axc^ Andrew,
Canut Andrew, Peter John, Be^o Claud, Tordo Bond.
and managed the Voices with so successful a Dexterity, that the choice fell
upon such Persons as were entirely devoted to his Interest, and were either his
Relations or Creatures.

The Canut Provost of the Cathedral of Wester as.
Speaker of the Estates represented to the Assembly the absolute necessity of
proceeding speedily to the Election of a King. Then he imyloy'd all his Art in
Painting forth the Qualities of an excellent Prince, one that was Vigilant,
Laborious, full of Courage, and indu'd with a sufficient Stock of Valor and
Prudence, to oppose the unjust pretensions of the Danes to the Swedish Crown;
that in this description they might see, and take notice of the Picture of
Gustavus. He concluded, that after all the Services which the Administrator had
done to the State, and the illustrious Proofs he had given of his extraordinary
Endowments and Virtues, they were obliged in Gratitude to him, and in Justice
to the Interests of those whom they represented, to confer the Royal Titie and
Authority upon their Benefactor.

This Discourse was received with an universal Applause. The Nobility and
Commons Transported with their Zeal and Affection, prevented the Senators and
Deputies. The whole Assembly with a loud Voice Proclaimed Gustavus, King of of
Sweden: 'Twas impossible to gather the Votes, or to proceed according to the
usual Forms that are observed in such Cases. His praises were echoed through the
whole Convention; he was Styled the Savior and Deliverer of his Country: The
Peasants and Burghers mingling confusedly with the Deputies, ^eglecting all
marks of Distinction, and even forgetting the respect they owed to the Senators
and other Lords, strugg^'d and crowded to approach the King. The Name of
Gustavns was repeated by every Mouth, he was the Object of every Eye; and all
in general endeavored to express their Joy at his Election, and to
congratulate their own Happiness, in having an opportunity to contribute to his
Advancement.

The Privce was charmed with so many extraordinary demonstrations of his
Peoples Affection: He owned that it exceeded all his Services, and that their
Kindness was more agreeable to him than the Noble Essect of their Gratitude. He
had so much real or seeming Modesty as to decline the offer they made him: But
the first Words he uttered to that Effect, dampt the Joy of the whole Assembly.
There was nothing to be seen or heard among 'em but Tears and Supplications;
and so deep a Sorrow sat upon every Face, that one would have thought the
Danes had still been at the Gates of the City. At last he was prevailed with to
submit to the pleasing violence, and consented to an Advancement, which was
both a Reward and an Effect of his Valor and Prudence. He was solemnly
acknowledged as King and Sovereign of Sweden, and the two Gothlands; and
received an Oath of Fidelity from the Senate and the Deputies of the Provinces.

The Estates would have immediately proceeded to his Coronation, but he
cunningly avoided that Ceremony, under pretext that he was obliged to return
instantly to the Siege of Stockholm. The true Reason why he refused to be
Crowned so soon was, that he was not yet sufficiently Established upon the
Throne, to refuse the Oaths which the Clergy exacted upon such Occasions for
the preservation of their Rights and Privileges.

He invited the Senate and the greatest part of the Deputies to accompany him
to the Army, that they might be present at the Surrendering of their Capital
City. He knew the place could not hold out longer; for the Garrison was so
pinched with Famine, and so afraid of the Burghers, who began openly to
threaten 'em, that they desired several times to Capitulate; but the Generals
had Orders to prolong the Treaty during the Meeting of the Estates at Stregnez.
As soon as the news of his Election and of his return to the Camp was divulged
in the City, new Deputies were sent to him, and the Governor yielded up the
Place, submitting all the Articles of the C^pi^ulation to his Pleasure and
Discretion.

He required the Governor to deliver up to his Officers all the Money, Papers,
Furnit^re, and other Effects that belonged to King Christren, the Viceroy,
Archbishop Trolle, and Admiral Nor^i. He permitted the Garrison to march out
with their Arms and Baggage, upon condition that for the space of Six Months
they should not bear Arms against the Crown of Sweden or its Allies. He obliged
himself to provide Vessels to Transport ^em to Wismar or Lubeck; and promised
with a great deal of chearsulness to preserve inviolably all the Privileges of
the City.

As soon as the King's Forces had taken Possession of the Town, he made his
public Entry, accompanied with all the Senators, and followed by a vast Number
of Lords, Gentlemen, and Military Officers, ^ll magnisicently Clothed. The
Prince himself ^^gmented the Splendour of the Cavalcade by his graceful Mien,
and his Noble and Majestic Air, which was very advantageoully set off by the
Luster ^f his Youth. He was received at the Gate by the ^onsuls and
Magistrates, who preserted the Keys ^f the City on their Knces: And the People
minging with the Soldiers without either F^^r or Order, ^ade the Air resound
with a thousand joy^^^ Accla^ations. The King went st^ight to the Church, (...)
gave Thanks to God for the ^^ccess of his Arms; (...) which, he gave a splendid
Enter^^inment to all the Seantors and the principal Officers of his Army.

Thus Gustavus became Master of the Capital City of his Kingdom, and began the
public Exercise o^ the Regal Authority: He sent orders to notify his Election,
to all the Provinces, that the People might accknowledge him as Sovereign; and
commanded all the Governors of Places, and the principal Officers of his
Troops to repair with all diligence to their respective Posts. He gave Audience
at all Hours, receiving Persons of Quality with Civility and Marks of Honor,
and Persons of Mer^^ with Demonstrations of Kindness and Esteem. The People
began to breath after so many terrible Di^afters: Trade was restored, and the
Swedes had the picasure to contemplate the unwonted Prospect (...) a lasting
Peace. The whole Kingdom was free^ from the Tyrannical Dominion of its Old
Enemics, and subject to a Prince that was able to pr^tect and defend it. He
introduced a Politeness (...) Manners and Magnificence of Habit into the Cour^
that were not known, or at least not so remarkable in the preceding Reigns.
For there was a certa^ rough wildness in the Temper of most of that N^tion,
which stood very much in need of Polishin^ and Resining. And perhaps he used
these Arts o^ purpose to allure the Nobility from their Count^ Seats and
Castles, and to oblige 'em to depen^ upon the Court for Places, or Pensions to
defra^ the Charge of that Expensive way of Living.

He had not forgotten the danger to which he w^^ exposed by Peterson the
Dalecarl^an; but a good Offi^^ he received from the Wife, atoned for the
Treacher of the Hasband. He remembered also and designed (...) reward the
Kindness and Hospitality of the Cura^ of Sa^^rdsio, who received him into his
House a^^ enter^^i^'d him in his lowest Condition: And hea^ing (...) his
Benefactor was dead, he ordered Crown of Copper Gilt to be placed on the top of
the Parish Church, as a Monument of his Gratitude.

The King sent the two Flemings with a strong Body of Soldiers to drive out the
Danes, who were still Masters of some Places in Finland: And the Arrival of
these two Lords at the Head of a Victorious Army, struck their disheartened
Fnemies with such a Terror that they obeyed the first Summons, and Surrendered
the Places without Firing a G^n. They desired no other conditions, but that
they should be safely conducted to Denmark, and were even glad to shelter
themselves in the Sw^^sh Arm^ (...) the Fury of an incensed Rabble, who (...)
ing the Articles of their Capitualtion would (...) taken a full and Bloody
Revenge for all the ^^^^^ties and Robberies they had committed in the Corntry
during the Reign of Christiern. But Gusha is took care to send 'em under the
protection of a strong Convoy to Denmark, where they sill'd the whole Country
with the News of his Conquests and Election: The Officers extolled his Power,
and the Numbers and Valor of his Armies, that they might not be Censured for
sabmitting to the unequal Force of so potent an Enemy.

Archbishop Trolle was extremely mortified with the report of Gustavus's
Advancement, Sweden and recovering his former Dignity. He stayed in Denmark
after his Masters slight, where he lived obscurely, contemned by the Danes, and
forgotten by the Court. He saw himself exposed to the usual Fate of Traitors,
who are always slighted and abhorred, as soon as they become uscless and
unserviceable; but his Temper was so little after'd by his Misfortunes that he
endeavored to regain his Credit and Interest by new Treasons, and b^
rekindling the slame that seemed to be almost extinguished. He addressed
himself to the new King of Denmark, and told him, in a private Audience, that
he had an undoubted Right to Sweden, as he was the Son of King Christiern I.
and that the Danes themselves would despise him, if he should tamely suffer
that Crown to remain on the Head of an Usurper. He added, that the Swedish
Clergy had not forgotten their old affection to the Danish Interest; and
assured him that there were many considerable Persons in that Kingdom who would
own his Right, as soon as he should think fit to claim it.

Frederic was not able to withstand a Temptation that slatter'd his Interest
and Ambition. He caused himself to be crowned King of Sweden by that Prelate at
Copenhagen; as if there had been nothing else required to put him in possession
of the Crown, but the Ceremony of setting it on his Head. At the same time he
sout an Ambassador to the Senate of that Kingdom, to complain of the late
Election, as a violation of the Treaty of Calmar, and an Injury to the Crown of
Denmark.

The Senate of Sweden would have sent the Ambessedor back without suffering him
to deliver his Message; but Gustavus was so far from being of that Opinion,
that he sent some of his Officers to receive him, and allowed him a magnisicent
Entertainment during his stay in the Kingdom. Afterward he summoned a
Convertion of the Estates, not so much to consult about the King of Denmark's
Propo^ls, as to make that Prince'^ Envoy an Eyewitness of the Confirmation of
his Election by all the Orders of the Kingdom. The Ambassador was introduced
into the Assembly, and in a long Harangue endeavored to convince 'em that they
were obliged to own his Moster's Title to the Crown of Sweden, by virtue of the
Treat^ of Calmar. He magnified the Power of (...) Monarch, and extolled his
Verthes and tare En^^^^^ents; concluding, that they ought to ^^itate the
Example of the Norwegians, and put themselves under the protection of a Prince
that was able to defend 'em against Christiern, who was preparing to force a
Passage into the Kingdoms of the North with all the Forces of the Empire.

After the Assembly had heard this Discourse with a great deal of Impatience
and Indignation, the Speaker of the Estates made a short, but very brisk and
smart Reply. He told the Ambassador, That Sweden had been too long subject to
the Dominion of her Enemies, and would take care to lodge the supreme Power in
better Hands for the future; That all the Inhabitants of the Kingdom had, by a
voluntary Election, put themselves under the Pro^^ction of their Deliverer, who
would preserve his Right and their Liberty in spite of the Pretensions ^n^
Opposition of the Danes; That the Treaty of Calmar was violated almost as soon
as it was concluded; That the Swedes, notwithstanding their intestine
Divisions, chose rather to make the Kingdom the Seat of a bloody War for more
than a hundred Years, than to submit to a Treaty that was so injurious and
odious to the whole Nation; and that now they were united under a Victorious
Prince, he would find it a hard Task to persuade 'em to resume their broken
Fetters.

The Estates were not satisfied with rejecting the King of Denmark's Claim;
but, to give Gustavus a more convincing Mark of their Affection and Fidelity to
his Interest, they proceeded immediately to give Judgment against Archbishop
Trolle, and, in the Ambassador's presence, declared that Prelate a Traitor and
an Enemy to his Country: And, in the heat of their Zeal, they m^de a solemn Act
or Decree, by which they obliged themselves to approve whatever Gustavus should
think fit to do or attempt for the Preservation of his Dignity, Lec. l. 6. p.
237.
granting him full Power to declare War or conclude a Peace without out calling
a Meeting or Convention of the Estates, and resolving that his Enemies should
be reputed Enemies to the State and Nation. Thus the Swedes were so charmed
with the Valor and excellent Qualities of their new Monarch, that they thought
they could not more effectually secure the Liberty and Happiness of the
Subject, than by confirming and eularging the Prerogative of the Crown: And
that cunning, Prince, under the specious Title of the Defender of the Public
Liberty, was advancing by slow, but sure Steps, to an absolute Authority over
the Kingdom.

He kept the Danish Ambassador at Court some Da^s after^ he had received his
Audience; and ordered the principal Lords of the Kingdom to Treat him by turns
at their Houses. Afterward he invited him to be present at a Review which he
took of his Forces, pretending that 'twas merely an effect of his Complaisance
to that Minister, though his true design was to make him a Witness of the
Strength and Numbers of his Troops. He honored him with magnificent Presents
at his departure; and left no means unessay'd to gain him, or at least to make
him give an advantageous Character of his Power and Grandeur. At last he
dismissed him, and sent an Envoy along with him to the King of Denmark, with
Orders to demand the Liberty of the Administrator's Widow, and of the other
Ladies whose Husbands were put to Death by Christiern.

These Ladies were still kept Prisoners in Denmark; and Gustavus knew that he
could neither oblige the Swedes, nor raise his own Glory more effectually, than
by procuring their Liberty. But these were not the only, nor the most important
Instructions he gave to his Envoy: He considered that Christiern had put
himself under the Protection of a Prince who was able to pur him in possession
of the Kingdoms he had lost, especially if he should sind 'em divided. And
therefore he gave secret Orders to his Agent to study the Character of King
Frederic, to discover his Designs and the Inclinations of his Council, and to
dispose 'em to a firm and lasting Peace, which was equally necessary for both
these Monarchs, to settle their Authority in the beginning of their Reigns.

The Swedish Envoy, at his arrival at the Court of Denmark, delivered his
Message publicly, demanding the Liberty of the Princess and the other Swedish
Ladies: But afterward, in a private Audience, he complained, in his Master's
Name, of the Injury that Monarch had received from the King of Denmark, by
sending an Ambassador to Sweden, without acquainting him with his Intention, or
directing the Embassy to him. He represented to him, That the Kings, his
Predecessors, notwithstanding their Pretensions to the Crown of Sweden, were
more careful to observe the common Rules of Decency, even during the late War
betwixt the two Kingdoms; and that they were so far from scrupling to
acknowledge the Dignity and Authority of the Administrators, that they directed
the Letters and Embassies to them, which they sent to the whole Nation. He
added, with a great deal of Courage and Resolution, that 'twou'd be more
proper, for a Prince that was not well fixed upon his Throne, to secure his
Interest at home, than to think of Invading his Neighbors; and that though the
King, his Master, entertained not any ambitious Thoughts of aggrandizing
himself or extending the Limits of his Dominions, his Army and Garrisons were
in so good a Condition, that 'twas beyond the Power of all his Enemies to make
themselves Masters of one Inch of Swedish Ground. And besides, the cunning
Minister took occasion to insinuate, that Gustavus might, if he pleased, be
acknowledged King of Sweden by Christiern himself, who, sixing all his Thoughts
and Designs upon the Reduction of Denmark, had offered to relinquish and resign
his Pretensions to Sweden, provided Gustavus would enter into a League against
the Danes. But he added, that his Master refused absolutely to entertain any
Correspondence with his Father's Murderer, and declared that he was his Enemy
both as a private Person, and as King of Sweden.

Frederic perceived, by the Courage and Resolution of the Swedish Envoy, and by
the Relation of his own Ambassador, that Gustavus's Power was greater than the
Archbishop had represented it: He found that 'twou'd not be convenient, in
thepresent Juncture of Affairs, to renew ancient Pretensions that might make
his Country the Seat of a War. He offered to come to a Friendly Agreement with
Gustavus, and to enter into an Offensive and Defensive League with him against
Christiern; and for a Pledge and Mark of his Esteem and Friendship, he sent
back the Administrator's Widow, and the rest of the Swedish Ladies that had
been retained his Prisoners in Denmark since the Massacre of Stockholm,
appointing an honorable Convoy to attend 'em.

Gustavus, July.
with all his Court, went to meet the Widow-Princess, and received her with all
the Respect that was due to her Birth and Merit. He gave her an Apartment in
the Castle of Stockholm, and advanced her to the Rank she held in the Kingdom
during the Life of the Administrator. He endeavored, with all imaginable Marks
of Honor and Respect, to make her bear with less impatience the Misfortunes of
her Family, and put all the rest of the Ladies in possession of their Estates.
Most of 'em had Youth enough to recommend 'em to second Husbands; but almost
all the Lords of their Quality were either killed in the Massacre of Stockholm,
or were already married. No Woman of Quality, whether Maid or Widow, was
suffered, in Sweden, to contract an Alliance with a Family less noble than her
own. But the King removed that Obstacle and permitted these Ladies to choose
their Husbands as they pleased, though under that seeming Complaisance he
concealed a politic Design; for he managed their Inclinations so dexterously
that they were easily persuaded to choose the principal Officers of his Army. He
exhorted these Illustrious Widows to prefer Merit before Riches, and to bestow
their Fortunes and Affections on Men that had lost part of their Blood in the
Service of their Country, rather than on those who derived their Blood from a
long series of noble Ancestors, but had never spent a drop of it for the
defense and preservation of the State. By these Alliances he secured the
greatest Families of the Kingdom, and at the same time found out a cheap way to
reward his Creatures, and to enable 'em to serve him more effectually.

Whatever Joy he expressed at the Arrival of the Administrator's Widow, the
inward satisfaction of his Mind was not answerable to those external
Demonstrations. She had two Children, who were mere Infants at the death of her
Husband, Prince Steno, for whose Memory and Family the Swedes had an
extraordinary Veneration. Gustavus took the two young Princes, under pretext of
educating 'em in the Palace, and resolved to provide a Husband for the Princess
their Mother, who could not draw any advantage from that Alliance to the
prejudice of his Authority and Government. He proposed and made her accept of
Tureiohanson, the first Senator and Great Marshall of the Kingdom. The King
had considered the Character of that Lord, and found him to be such a Person as
he designed for a Husband to the Princess. He was a Man of great Quality, and
had a considerable Estate both in Sweden and Denmark: He was extremely proud of
these Advantages, but had neither Valor nor Courage to recommend him to the
Esteem and Affection of the Soldiers. His Birth was his only Merit, and
consequently he could not be supposed to have any considerable Interest in a
Kingdom where a brave Warrior was infinitely more esteemed than one that could
only boast of his Descent from an Illustrious Family.

Gustavus made it his next care to sind out the best Expedients to weaken the
Power of the Clergy, whom he suspected and hated for their great Riches, and
for the Affection they still retained to the Danish Government, which had
always maintained their Authority. Archbishop Trolle was still a zealous
Promoter of that Interest: 'Twas by his Advice that Frederic caused himself to
be crowned King of Sweden, and to preserve his Credit with that Prince, he
entertained a secret Correspondence with the Swedish Clergy. The King was
resolved to humble a Body of Men, who by their Power and Cabals had always
disturbed the Government and opposed the Authority of the Prince, and were
never satisfied but when they were entrusted with the largest share of the
management of public Affairs. But he was obliged to defer the execution of that
Design for some time, and was too prudent to begin his Reign with disputing the
Privileges of an Order, whom the most absolute Prince should never touch but
with a tender and wary Hand.

He contented himself at first with managing the Elections for the filling up
of vacant Benefices. He procured two Persons to be named to the Bishoprics of
Stregnez and Westeras, Sommor, and Petrus Magni.
who were entirely devoted to him, and could not pretend to any Power or
Interest in the Kingdom but by his Favor and Protection. Afterward he sent
word to the Canons of Vpsal, that considering the Flight and Condemnation of
their Archbishop, 'twou'd be convenient to choose a sit Person to succeed him.
After the Forms and Proceedings that are requisite in such Cases, and the usual
Citation and Summoning of that Prelate to return to the Kingdom and vindicate
himself from the Crimes that were laid to his Charge, his Contumacy in not
appearing was reputed a voluntary Abdication, and the Chapter proceeded to a
new Election. By virtue of a Recommendation from the Court, which even then was
not much different from an absolute Order, the Choice fell upon one John
Magnus, a Native of Sweden, who was learned in Scholastic Divinity, very
pious, and of an exemplary Life. He was naturally of a fearful Temper, and
unfit for the management of Affairs: He was a Lover of Solitude, and had no
Interest in the Kingdom; and consequently was neither capable of forming nor
prosecuting any Designs against the Government.

Gustavus concluded that by these Nominations he had secured the Quiet of the
State, which was usually disturbed by the Ambition of the Bishops. But as he
was entertaining himself with the delightful Prospect of an un-interrupted
Prosperity, as the glorious Reward and Fruit of his Labors, and was preparing
to make his Subjects sensible of their Happiness under the kind Influences of
his Government, he was engaged, by the Regency of Lubeck, in an Affair that put
him to a great deal of Charge and Trouble.

After the Flight and ABDICATION of Christiern, retired to the Isle of
Gothland, exclaiming against the Danish Rebellion, and protesting that he would
revenge his Master's Injuries upon Frederick and Gustavus, whom he branded with
the odious Name of Usurpers. His Ships cruis'd perpetually upon the Baltic
Sea, and took several considerable Prizes. The success of his first Attempts,
and the Richness of his Prizes made him extremely arrogant; and he was so
powerfully charmed with the tempting Prospect of raising his Fortune by so
quick and easy a way that he resolved to Attack all the Ships that had the
missortune to fall into his Hands, and made the Port of Wisbi, the Capital City
of the Island, a Rendezvous or Retiring-Place for several other Pirates who
infested the Baltic Sea. Thus of Admiral of Denmark he became a Captain of
Pirates, and taking down the Danish Colors from his Ships, assumed the Quality
of Prince of Gothland. He styled himself the Friend of God, and Enemy of all
the World; and boasted with a great deal of Insolence that he acknowledged no
other Superiors but God and the Sun.

The Merchants of Lubeck were possessed of the whole Commerce and Trade of
Sweden, in Exclusion to all other Nations, by Virtue of the Treaty which the
Regency concluded with Gustavus's Secretary: And the Magistrates of that City
had granted a Right of Partner-Ship to the Hanse-Towns of Dantzick, Hamburgh,
Rostock, Wismar, and Lunenburgh. But their Ships were so narrowly watched by
Norbi, and the rest of the Pirates, that few or none of them escaped. The
Regency of Lubeck, which for the most part was composed of the Principal
Merchants of the City, being deeply concerned in these Losses, would have
assaulted Norbi and endeavored to unkennel the rest of the Corsaires, if they
had not been deterred by the expensiveness of the War, and the uncertainty of
the Event. In so pressing a Difficulty they resolved to have recourse to the
Celebrated Valor of Gustavus, and to send one of their principal Magistrates
to engage him in the attempt, under pretext that the Isle of Gothland was an
Ancient Fief or Dependency of the Crown of Sweden. They entrusted the
Negotiation of so important an Affair to one Herman, an Old Consul of the City,
who under the seeming Candor and Simplicity of an honest Merchant, concealed
all the Craftiness and Subtilty of the most dissembling Statesman.

After his Arrival at Stockholm he complimented Gustavus in the name of his
Masters, and Congratulated the Glory and Prosperity of his Reign. Then
complaining of Norbi's Piracies he told the King that the Regency would have
sent an Army to Gothland, to extirpate that Nest of Pirates, if they had not
been certainly informed that the Island belonged to the Crown of Sweden; that
all the Inhabitants of the North were surpised that so potent and Victorious a
Prince would suffer such an infamous Crew to choose a Retreat in his Dominions,
that Sweden was in a manner invested by the Ships of those insolent Pirates;
that his Majesty's Honor and the interest of his Subjects obliged him to Scour
the Seas of these Rovers, who ruined the Trade of his Kingdom; and that it
would be of great Importance for the security of his Government to make himself
Master of an Island which covered the greatest part of the Swedish Coasts.

Gustavus was not ignorant of the pretensions he had to that Island, and of all
the Advantages of its Situation with respect to Sweden; but he was loath to
engage in a Foreign War, and to carry his Army out of the Kingdom in the
beginning of his Reign, lest some disturbance should happen, or Christiern
should make a Descent, in his absence. Nor was he Master of a sufficient Fund
to defray the Charge of so considerable an Expedition, much less to carry on
the War, if Norbi should make a longer Defense than he expected, or if the King
of Denmark should take his part, and concern himself in the Quarrel. And
besides, he was sensible that the only Reason which made those Trading Cities
so desirous to engage him in a War with the P^rates, was, that they might
oblige him at his own Charge to secure 'em in the Possession of those vast
Advantages they enjoyed by engrossing the whole Commerce of Sweden.

Having duly weighed the Importance of these Reasons, he told the Lubeck
Ambassador that he was not disposed to undertake the Employment of a Knight
Errant, and to rove about the World in Quest of Adventures; that his Presence
was necessary in his own Kingdom, and that 'twas reasonable his Subjects should
enjoy the sweetness of a Peace which he had procured for 'em by the success of
his Arms. He added, that he was not ignorant of his undoubted Right to the Isle
of Gothland, but that the King of Denmark had also some pretensions to the same
Island, and consequently that the Attempt in which the Regency of Lubeck would
engage him would certainly make that Prince his Enemy; and concluded with
assuring the Ambassador that he would endeavor to expel Norbi and the rest of
the Pirates out of the Island, as soon as the Difference betwixt him and
Frederick could be brought to an amicable Conclusion.

The Lubeck Envoy perceived by this Answer that the King was dissatisfied that
the Merchants of that City should enjoy the whole advantage of the Swedish
Commerce, without paying any Customs or Duties; and that he was resolved to
repay 'em in their own Coin by taking advantage of their present Necessities.
And therefore to gain him to a Compliance with the Desires of that Republic, he
made the following Proposals: That the Hanse-Towns should furnish him with a
Fleet to transport his Forces into the island; that by the consent of the
Regency of Lubeck, the payment of the Sum due to that Republic from Sweden,
should be delayed for five Years; and that in case his Majesty could not make
himself Master of the Island, the Regency should bear a share in the Charge of
the Expedition. He offered also that the Hanse-Towns, associated with Lubeck,
should keep the Sea with a potent Fleet, to intercept any Succors or Relief
that might be sent from Denmark; and added, that in case King Frederic should
obstinately persist in claiming the Sovereignty of Gothland, the Regency would
undertake to negotiate a Match betwixt his Majesty and Dorothy the Princess of
Denmark; and that in consideration of the Marriage, her Father should resign
all his Pretensions to that Island.

The Ambassador industriously divulged, both at Court and among the People, the
advantageous Proposals he had made to the King, that the Swedes might think
themselves concerned in the success of his Negotiation. And besides, he
endeavored to persuade some of the Senators, by subtle and crafty
Insinuations, that if the King should reject the Offers he had made him, the
Hanse-Towns would be obliged to have recourse to the King of Denmark, and to
join their Forces with that Prince's Army to drive the Pirates out of the
Island. At the same time he gained several Merchants who dealt and corresponded
with those of Lubeck, and consequently were concerned, as well as they, in the
Prizes that were taken by Norbi. Thus he formed a Party in the Senate, and
among the Inhabitants of Stockholm, who had not yet lost their Right to
discover their Sentiments concerning State Affairs. The common People were so
accustomed to hear of Gustavus's Victories, that they fansied him to be
invincible; and being cunningly wheedl'd by the Ambassador's Emissaries, they
ran to the Gates of the Palace, crying out all the way, that 'twas a shame for
Sweden to suffer the Insolency of those Pirates, who ruined the Trade of the
Kingdom; that the Sea was so pestered with 'em that a Boat durst scarce
adventure to sail out of the Port, and that they were not afraid to come within
the reach of the Guns of the Castle. And even some of the principal Lords of
the Kingdom, perceiving that the King was still irresolute, could not forbear
telling him, that the Administrator Suanto would never have suffered these
Pirates to insult the Coasts of the Kingdom.

Gustavus would not bear a Reproach that seemed to accuse him of Weakness and
Cowardice: He replied, in an angry Tone, that neither his Friends nor his
Enemies had over suspected him of want of Courage; that he would no longer
resist their Importunities, but that he might venture to foretell that the
success of that Expedition would not answer their Desires and Expectations.
Thus he was at last prevailed with to sign the Treaty, which was also
subscribed by the Ambassador, as Plenipotentiary from the Regency of Lubeck,
whither he returned to hasten the departure of the Fleet, according to the
Agreement concluded with Gustavus.

That wise Monarch had established his Authority on such solid Foundations,
that he neither dreaded the Murmuring of the People nor the Dissatisfaction of
the Nobility nor could the united Remonstrances of all his Subjects have
engaged him in that Design, if he had not been afraid that the Hanse-Towns
would have entered into a Treaty with the Danes. He knew that Norbi was not in
a condition to oppose the Force of Sweden, and that he might easily find an
opportunity to crush so feeble an Enemy; but he was sensible that 'twou'd be a
dissicult Task to expel the Danes, if they should take this occation to make
themselves Masters of the Island. In order to the execution of the Design he
had undertaken, he commanded the Troops that were appointed for that Expedition
to march, without nolse, toward the Port of Calmar, which is oppo^^te to (...)
And notwithstanding his Unwilli^^ness to undertake a War in the present
juncture of Affairs, as soon as he was engaged in the Attempt he began to
prosecute it with so much Vigor, that he ordered all the Plate in the Palace to
be melted down, to maintain the Charge of the Expedition. He went himself to
Calmar to receive the Lubeck Ships, and saw his Troops embark under the Command
of Bernard de Milen.

The General landed without opposition at the Head of Eight thousand Men, and
in less than 15 Days made himself Master of all Gothland, except Wisbi, the
Capital City, and the only fortified Place in the Island, which he invested.
Norbi surpised at so unexpected an Attack, and finding himself unable to
resist the power of the King of Sweden, set up King Frederick's Colors in the
highest place of the Town, and at the same time sent one of his Creatures to
that Prince, offering to acknowledge him as Sovereign, if he would assist him
with some Troops to oppose the Swedish Invasion.

These Proposals were very welcome to Frederic; for though he had not looked upon
Gothland as a dependency of the Crown of Denmark, 'twas his Interest, according
to the usual policy of all Sovereigns, to curb the growing Power of a
neighboring Prince. He was glad of any opportunity to stop the rapid progress
of that young Conqueror, and would have willingly sent Norbi the Assistance he
desired; but the Fleet of Lubeck and of the rest of the Hanse Towns kept the
Sea, and he was afraid of engaging in a Foreign War, at a time when he had
reason to sear a Domestic Invasion, in order to the Restoration of
Christiern, whom the Emperor had selemnly received under his Protection.

These Considerations made him choose rather to try the effect of a Negotiation,
than to hazard a Rupture with so potent a Neighbor: And in pursance of that
Design, he sint an Ambassa dor to Libeth, to complain of the King of Sweden's
Injustice, and to desire the Regency to employ their Interest with that Prince
to oblige him to withdraw his Forces out of an Island that did not belong to
him. Frederic was not ignorant of the League which that Republic had made with
Gustavus: But to prevent the ill Consequences of that Treaty, his Ambassador
had Orders to represent to the Magistrates of Lubeck, that 'twas their Interest
to put a timely stop to the prevailing power of Sweden; that Gustavus was a
daring and courageous Prince, who would infallibly endeavor to make his
Conquests as boundless as his Ambition, if his Designs were not prevented by a
seasonable Opposition; that the Sovereignty of the Isle of Gothland was an
undoubted Right of the Crown of Denmark; that Norbi was entrusted with the
Government of it by Christiern II. and that since he was willing to submit to
his lawful Sovereign, the King his Master could not refuse to protect his own
Subject, and to defend that Island to the utmost of his power, as a Territory
that belonged to his Crown. He added, that his Majesty would submit his Right
to the Judgment of the Hanse-Towns, rather than disturb the Peace of the North,
and that he was willing the Island should remain sequestered in the Hands of
the Regency of Lubeck, till the Controversy betwixt him and Gustavus, should be
decided by a sinal Sentence.

The Magistrates of that City were easily persuaded to embrace a Proposal,
which if it should take effect, would not only secure 'em from the Pirates, but
free 'em from the Obligation of keeping a Fleet at Sea to cover the Swedish
Conquests. They were extremely pleased with the Sequestration, and resolved
rather to be at the Charge of maintaining a Garrison in the Island, than to
suffer it to fall into the Hands of Gustavus, who might one Day make use of
that opporiunity to disturb their Trade, and to render himself more absolute in
the Baltic Sea. Thus the Regency concluded a secret Treaty with Frederic's
Ambassador, by which they obliged themselves to open a free passage to the
Danish Succers. 'Twas also agreed, that the King of Denmark should send an
Ambassador to Gustavus, to complain of his Expedition against the Isle of
Gothland; and that his Envoy should be followed by Ambassadors from the
Hanse-Towns, who should offer their Mediation, and declare War against either
of the two contending Parties that should refuse to come to an Accommodation.

Immediately the Danish Forces were ordered to Embark, and entered the Port of
Wisbi without any opposition from the Fleet of Lubeck, and soon after the
Ambassador of that Town arrived at Stockholm, to expostulate with Gustavus in
the Name of the King his Master, for besieging a Place in his Dominions without
declaring War against him. At the same Time the Ambassadors of the Hanse-Towns
came to propose a Truce, and to desire an Interview betwixt the two Kings at
Malnogen. They offered the Mediation of their Masters, and required the
Interview in so peremptory a manner, that Gustavus perceived he must either
submit to that Expedient, or expect immediately the Declaration of an open War.

Thus fearing to be Assaulted by so potent a Confederacy, he was forced to
divert the threatening Storm by consenting to the conditions that were proposed
to him. To prevent any Suspicion of Treachery, Frederick, who was Master of the
Place appointed for the Interview, sent Four Senators, and Six of the most
considerable Lords in Denmark, to remain at Stockholm as Hostages, during the
Conference betwixt the two Kings. Gustavus was sensible of the danger to which
he exposed himself, but he was so afraid of irritating the Hanse-Towns, and so
desirous to make the Danes themselves acknowledge his Title to the Crown of
Sweden, that he resolved at all Adventures to pursue his intended Journey. He
repaired to Malmogen, accompanied with the Great Marshal Tureiohanson, and two
other Senators, after he had received another safe Conduct from Frederick, and
the security of the Harse-Towns for the safety of his Person; though it may be
doubted whether any security can be given for a King, when he is in the
Dominions of his Enemies.

The reciprocal pretensions of the two Crowas to the Isle of Gothland were the
Subject of this Conference. September.
The matter was debated on both sides with a great deal of heat; and each party
produced their respective Titles. Bildius, High Chamberlain to the King of
Denmark, and Tureiohanson, for Gustavus, urged the Claims and defended the
Rights of their Masters: But in the Progress of the Conference the Great
Marshal betrayed the Cause and Interest of the Crown of Sweden. He could not
without a secret envy behold the Power and Prosperi^y of Gustavus; and was
unwilling to submit to a Master who not long before was his equal. He had a
very considerable Estate in Denmark, which made him afraid of disobliging that
Monarch, who had threatened to deprive him of all the Lands he possessed in his
Kingdom, if he should persist too obstinately in the Defense of his Master.
That Menace stopped his Mouth so effectually, that he pretended a Cold and a
violent Cough, to excuse him from speaking. Gustavus seeing himself betrayed by
his Treacherons Minister, under took the Defense of his own Cause, and alleged
with a great deal of Vigor and Eloquence that the Isle of Gothland was always
reckoned a part of the Kingdom of Sweden; that the Danes were only admitted
into it by virtue of the Treaty of Calmar; that their Kings had no other right
to it, during the union of the two Kingdoms; but as they were Sovereigns of
Sweden; that 'twas plain and undoubtedly certain that King Albert Mortgaged the
Island to the Knights of the Teutonic Order for the Sum of Twenty Thousand
Rose-Nobles; that Queen Margaret imposed a Tax, which was levied only in
S^eden, to redeem it; that King Eric her Nephew and Successor retired thither
after his ABDIC ATION, and afterward delivered it up to the Danes, to the
prejudice of the Crown of Swed^n. The solidity of these Reasons put the Danish
Minister to silence; but the Ambassadors of the Hanse-Towns, resolving to keep
up the difference, refert'd the Decision of it to the Regency of Lubeck, under
pretext of bringing it to a Friendly Agreement. They would have also obliged
the King of Sweden to withdraw his Troops out of the Island, and proposed that
the City of Lubeck should put a Garrison into Wisbi according to the privare
Treaty they had condaded with the Danish Ambassador. But Gustavus was so far
from consenting to either of these motions, that he protested he would rather
(...) off the Conference and declare War, than suffer himself to be bubbl'd out
of his Conquests: And the King of Denmark, who had put a strong Garrison into
Wisbi, instead of insisting upon the Sequestration, which he had only proposed
to Tempt the Lubeckers to break their Treaty with Gustavus, was easily
persuaded to consent, that every thing should remain in the same posture in
expectation of the Regency's Sentence.

These two Princes gave one another reciprocal marks of Esteem and Respect,
notwithstanding the differences that reigned between 'em. They found themselves
engaged in the same Interest, and entered into a League Offensive and Desensive
against the late King Christiern, without mentioning the Treaty of Calmar. They
gave each other mutual affarances of a sincere Friendship notwithstanding the
Natural Antipathy betwixt the Two Kingdoms. After their last Complements,
Gustavus took leave of the King of Denmark, and left Malmogen to return to
Sweden. Herman.
He had not gone far when he met the Lubeck Ambassador, who engaged him in the
Expedition against Gothland. The sight of that Minister put him in mind of the
Treachery of the Republic, and he was so Transported with fury at so provoking
an Idea, that he stopped the subtle Consul, and asked him fiercely what was
become of the Treaty and the Magnificent promises of his Masters? At the same
time he put his hand to his Poinard, as if he had been going to kill him: But
one of the Senators that accompained him, prevented the Blow, and the
Ambassador made his Escape. Thus Gnstavus retired out of the Dani^^
Territories, and as he entered into his own Dominions, he told those who
followed him, that he would never go out of 'em again but at the head of an
Army.

Some of the Senators and Officers of the Army, who had the largest share in
his Considence and Favor, took this occasion to conjure him that he would not
longer delay the Ceremony of his Coronation. To convince him of the importance
and reasonableness of their desire they told him that 'twas but too probable
the Success of his Arms and the Glory of his Victories had procured him the
Envy and Jealousy of his Neighbors, and perhaps also the secret hatred of some
Great Persons in his own Kingdom; and that if either of 'em could obtain their
desire he would be less Fortunate and Happy. They added that there were several
Lords in Sweden who pretended they could hardly look upon him as their
Sovereign, because he had not yet received the Crown; and concluded that the
Ceremony of his Coronation was absolutely necessary for the Establishment of
his Authority, and the Confirmation of his Title, that neither his Foreign nor
Domestic Enemies might entertain the least hope of seeing any disadvantageous
alteration in his Fortune.

Gustavus was not ignorant of the Importance and Necessity of that Ceremony in
an Elective Kingdom: But nothing could shake the resolution he had taken to put
off his Coronation till he had Executed those secret designs, without which he
thought he could neither settle his Authority nor secure the Happiness of his
Reign. It Is true, he was acknowledged as Sovereign, and the Army was at his
disposal: But he was not Master of a sufficient Fund to carry on a War. The
Revenues of the Crown were either Alienated or Usurped, the Imposition of Taxes
was reputed Tyrannical, the Commons were reduced to extreme Poverty, and the
Nobility exhausted by a long and Expensive War. On the contrary, the Clergy was
Rich and Powerful, especially the Bishops who had seized on the Principal Forts
and part of the Revenues of the Crown. He knew that these Prelates were always
very careful to make the Prince take a Solemn Oath, on the day of his
Coronation, to preserve and maintain all their Privileges: And he was so far
from intending either to take or perform an Oath of that Nature, that he was
firmly resolved to Abrogate and Cancel all those Privileges, which he looked
upon either as forced and involuntary Grants, or unjust Usurpations of the
Lands and Revenues of the Crown.

After he had, in a very obliging manner, thanked these Lords for the Zeal they
expressed for his Interest, he told 'em that the Ceremony of his Coronation
con'd not be performed without a vast Expense; that there were other more
pressing occasions for Money that were absolutely necessary for the Preservation
of the State; that he had received advice of the daily increase of Christern's
Forces and Party; that the Emperor seemed resolved to re-escablish that Prince
in the possession of his former Dominions; that 'twas uncertain whether the
Forces designed for that Expedition would invade Sweden or Denmark; that it was
absolutely impossible to oppose their Descent without an Army by Land, and a
Fleet at Sea; that he was wholly destitute of Money to raise Forces and make
other necessary Preparations; that 'twas well known he had Mortgaged his own
Estate to expel the Danes out of the Kingdom; that he had lately melted down
the Plate that belonged to the Crown to pay the Charge of the Expedition to
Gothland which was thought to be of so great Importance for the security and
freedom of Trade, and that considering the extreme misery of the common People
and the Poverty of the Nobility after so long a War, 'twas high time to demand
a Subsidy of the Clergy, who were actually in possession of above one half of
the Lands and Revenues of the Kingdom, and perhaps made their Coure to King
Christiern in private, on the score of their never having contributed to the
support of his Enemies. He did not then think fit to give 'em a clearer view of
his secret Intentions, but contented himself with telling 'em that 'twas the
part and ought to be the care of his Friends, and especially of those who had
set him upon the Throne, to furnish him with sufficient Power and Authority to
maintain the Honor of the Post to which they had advanced him, instead of
flattering him with the vain show of an empty Ceremony.

Afterward be opened his mind more freely to Larz Anderson, the Chancellor,
who was a Person of an obscure Birth, but full of Ambition, of a vast and
soaring Genius, cunning and cloquent and bold in Council. He was Master of a
very fruitful Invention in contriving Projects and Expedients, and his Mind was
always full of great Designs. In his Youth he entered into Ecclefiastical
Orders, and the Interest of his Friends joined to his own Abilities procured
him the Dignity of Archdeacon of the Church of Stregnez. He had also some
prospect of obtaining the Bishopric, for there were some who Voted for him at
the Election; but he was so discouraged by the Rubs he met with in that Way to
Preferment, that he resolved to try his Fortune in another Road, and left the
Church for the Court, were his Merit was quickly taken notice of, and procured
him the Esteem of Gustavus. His skill in the Laws of the Country, and his
Resentment against the Clergy for excluding him from a Bishopric were
sufficient Qualifications to recommend him to the Favor of that Prince, who
wanted a proper Instrument to humble an Order of Men whom he both feared and
suspected. That wise Monarch having found so fit a Person for the Executing of
his Designs, gave him several distinguishing marks of his Esteem and of the
Considence he placed in him, and advanced him to the Dignity of Chancellor. At
last perceiving that his Friends urged him with so much earnestness to hasten
the Ceremony of his Coronation, he told that Minister that he could not look
upon himself as Sovereign of Sweden, so long as the Bishops were Masters of so
many Forts and retained the Possession of those Lands and Revenues which his
Predecessors had alienated from the Crown to enrich the secular and regular
Clergy. But at the same time he acknowledged that he was afraid the least
Attempt upon the Privileges of the Church would occasion new disorders in the
State, and that the Swedes out of their blind Obedience and Respect to their
Spiritual Guides, would accuse him of profaneness for challenging his own
property, and imagine him to be Guilty of a Crime against Religion for seizing
on those Lands and Treasures, which they believed were consecrated to God, though
they served only to maintain the Luxury and Vanity of idle and seditious
Persons, who were always ready to sacrifice the public Interest to their
Ambition.

Anderson, who was possessed with the new Doctrine that was propagated by
Luther, and perhaps looked upon Religious Controversies as mere Philosophical
Problems, endeavored, like a politic Courtier, to confirm his Master in a
Design, which he perceived was agreeable to him. He told him, that he saw no
reason why he should make the least scruple of obliging the Clergy to
contribute for the Defense of the Kingdom, and even in case of necessity of
seizing those Lands or Revenues which they possessed by virtue of Legacies or
Donations; that the Church was not confined to the Clergy, but included the
whole Body of the Faithful; that in the pure and unspotted Infancy of the
Church, and in those happy Days when that Name was common to the whole Assembly
of Christians, those Riches and Revenues that are at present appropriated to
the Clergy were possessed in Common by the People, who bestowed 'em on public
Uses, and especially for the Relief of the Poor; that the Name of Church was
afterward claimed by the Clergy as their peculiar Privilege, that under the
specious pretext of that Title they might make themselves Masters of those
Revenues, of which they were only the Stewards and Distributers; that the
Estates and Revenues of the Laity ought to be reputed the Patrimony of the
Church as well as those of the Clergy; that the Clergy was the smallest part of
the Church, and ought to contribute proportionably for the security and
preservation of the Government by which they were protected. That he
acknowledged 'twou'd be expedient to find out some other more plausible
Pretenses than the Good of the State, to prevent an Insurrection of the People;
who were commonly possessed both by the Regular and Secular Clergy, that all
Attempts upon their Temporalties strike at Religion it self. That, to frustrate
their Claims, he must take advantage of Luther's Reformation, which began then
to take Root in the Kingdom; and by the help of his Doctrine, which equally
invaded the Temporal Power and the excessive Wealth of the Clergy, he might
afterward seize the Forts that were in the Hands of the Bishops, and reunite
to the Crown all the Lands that were alienated by his Predecessors, with more
Zeal than Policy.

That Pope Leo X. had indeed condemned Luther, but it was well known that
famous Doctor was only odious to the Court of Rome, because he boldly and
publicly censured its great Corruption and Abuses; and that his Opinions,
which might pass for indifferent among other Nations, as long as they were not
condemned by the Church in a General Council, were in the mean time of the
greatest Importance for the settling of his Power in Sweden, and the success of
his Design.

That the People, having their Minds prepared and possessed by Lutheran
Doctors, would see with great satisfaction the Clergy stripped of their great
Estates, especially if care were taken at the same time to ease the People of
the heavy Taxes. That one of the best Expedients would be to restore to the
Gentry the Lands given away by their Ancestors to the Church, and that they
would never be tempted to oppose a Doctrine that should bring so great a
Blessing to their Families. That the greatest part of the Monks looked upon
their Monasteries as dismal, though stately Prisons; and many of 'em would be
glad to quit 'em, and embrace a Religion which restored 'em to all the Rights
of Civil Society. That the inferior Clergy would joyfully take hold of that
occasion to free themselves from the Vows of Celibacy, and exchange their
scandalous Concubinage for lawful Matrimony. That the Bishops alone, as being
most powerful and most concerned in that Change, would probably oppose it; but
that things were in a better posture than in the Reign of King Canutson, there
being no Bishops in Sweden in a condition to make War against their Sovereign;
and, if they should obstinately persist in the old Religion, it might perhaps
be an Advantage to him. That their Number was inconsiderable, and 'twould be no
difficult matter, under specious Pretenses, to remove or banish 'em; whereas,
if they embrace Lutheranism, they might pretend, by marrying, to erect their
Bishoprics into secular Principalities, and consequently frustrate him of the
main Benefit he could expect from the Establishment of the Lutheran Doctrine in
his Kingdom.

That after all, the Archbishop and Primate John Magnus was a timorous and
wavering Prelate, and a Man of no Interest, who probably would think himself
happy, though with the loss of part of his Estate, to be excused from embracing
the predominant Religion of the Kingdom. That the Bishops of Stregnez and
Westeras, whom he had newly preferred to those two rich Benefices, were of mean
Extraction, and of too little Credit among the People to dare to oppose his
Will; and that the Bishops of Vexio and Aboo, knew little of the state of the
Controversy betwixt the Roman Catholics and the Lutherans, and had no great
mind to dive into that Matter. That those Prelates were illiterate Men, and
such as would be affected with nothing so much as the lessening of their
Revenues. That their irregular Lives and Conversations had drawn such a Scandal
upon 'em as would make it inconsistent with their Interest to thwart the
Designs of their Sovereign, but would rather incline 'em to embrace any Offer
that should not oblige 'em to forsake their Pleasures. So there remained only
the Bishops of Lincopine and Scara who might oppose his Designs; two Prelates
really infatuated with their Dignity, jealous of all their Rights, wedded to
their own Opinions, inclined still to the Danish Faction, notwithstanding all
King Christiern's Cruelties, and the most like to blind the People with a
plausible pretense of appearing in the Defense of the true Religion. But when
Lutheranism should be once received by the States of the Realm, by the
plurality of Voices, 'twou'd be an easy thing to make the Resistance of those
Bishops a Crime of State, and to banish 'em out of the Kingdom, with all such
as should appear most stiffly bent for the preservation of the ancient Religion.
To which he added, That he was not ignorant of the great Difficulties which
always attended the Infancy of Governments and Empires; but that those very
Princes, who meet with opposition and resistance in the beginning of their
Reigns, are at last commonly respected and looked upon as the Fathers of their
Country.

Gustavus could not but relish those Reasons of State, that were so agreeable
to the secret Scheme he had laid for the securing of his Government. He foresaw
the Emperor's Credit with the Pope would hinder his Holiness from declaring in
his behalf, and therefore thought 'twou'd be expedient to pull down his
Authority in Sweden, and that nothing could be more conducive to that end than
Lutheranism. He therefore easily sucked in those Tenants, which perhaps he looked
upon but as the Result of some Disputations among Divines; and thought at the
same time, he might reasonably embrace that Party which seemed most favorable
to the settling of his Regal Power, which most Sovereigns either do not or,
will not distinguish from the Good of the State.

The King would have willingly declared in behalf of Lutheranism, but that the
Change of Religion was not a sufficient Ground for him to compass his Designs;
and besides, a sudden Change might have proved of very ill consequence. It was
therefore safest for his unsettl'd Power, to see the Change begun by the
People, and that he should seem afterward to embrace this Doctrine out of mere
Complaisance to his Subjects. But all the Swedes had not the same Inclination
to those new Opinions as the King had, nor so pressing an Interest to change
their Religion. Gustavus foresaw, that this Change would not be the Work of one
Year, by reason of the great and apparent Obstacles that must be first overcome.

He was not ignorant, there would be a great number of eminent Persons in the
Realm, and even in his own Court, that would oppose his Enterprise and quit his
Interest, upon the very first step he should make to abolish the ancient
Religion. And, on the other hand, he could not endure to be charged with the
care and defense of the State, while the strongest Forts, which properly
belonged to the Crown, and the greatest part of the Revenues of the Kingdom,
were in the hands of those who often employed 'em only to curb the Regal Power,
and to favor the Enemies of the State. He chose rather, it seems, to expose
himself to the issue of a Civil War, and even to venture his Crown, than to
Reign so precariously; or rather he saw himself so potent and respected by his
People, that he thought it not at all hazardous to reunite to the Crown a part
of the Church Lands, under the specious pretense of a Reformation, and of the
public Good.

In so great a Design, and so very nice a Juncture, Gustavus showed himself an
able and great Politician. He took great care to conceal his Thoughts as to
Luther's Opinions; but at the same time gave secret Instructions to Chancellor
Anderson, not only to protect, as it were without his knowledge, Olaus Petri
and the other Lutheran Doctors, but also to invite others from the Universities
of Germany, that Lutheranism might make the quicker progress through the Kingdom.

Olaus, and the other Lutheran Doctors, being assured of the Chancellor's
Protection, labored with great application to establish their Doctrine, which
they daily explained in their Sermons with unexpressible Zeal. Most of these
new Doctors surpalt the Swedish Clergy in Learning and Elequence, to which they
added a certain appearance of strictness in their Lives and Conversations,
which always attends the first Heats of a new-broach'd Religion. These Men were
heard with great satisfaction by the common People, who are always greedy of
Novelties that put 'em to no charge, and tend to the lessening of the Power of
their spiritual Governors. The Credit they got insensibly among the Vulgar,
procured them the Attention and Favor of the Courtiers and the prime Nobility,
who were glad to see the Bishops humbled.

While these Doctors endeavored to propagate the Lutheran Doctrine by their
Sermons, Gustavus labored hard to find out some specious Pretenses to
overthrow the Temporal Power of the Bishops and Clergy. Immediately he sell
upon the Ecclesiastics of the second Order, and issued out several
Declarations against the Priests and in behalf of the People, that the Laity
might be obliged, by Interest, to favor these encroachments upon the Clergy,
and that the People might be accustomed, by degrees, to see the Privileges of
the Clergy abrogated.

The Priests in that Kingdom exacted, as it were a Tribute of the People, upon
certain public Sins, and with great rigor extorted considerable Fines from
such as took the Diversion of Hunting or Fishing in the time of Divine Service,
or abused the Women to whom they were contracted before the solemn Celebration
of the Sacrament of Marriage. By one of the King's Declarations this Right was
taken away, and the Priests were prohibited to exact such Impositions for the
future. By another Declaration, the Priests were forbidden to Excommunicate
either their private Enemies, or their Creditors. The Truth is, the Bishops and
their Officials had so far over-stretch'd the Ecclesiastic Jurisdiction, as to
appropriate to themselves all the Concerns of the Nation, that had the least
relation to Religion: An Oath made in a Treaty, the Interposition of a
Clergyman which was oftentimes begged, the least Difference in a Contract of
Marriage, were Grounds sufficient to remove a Cause from the common Courts of
Justice; which made the Clergy powerful and formidable. Gustavus therefore
abrogated that Jurisdiction entirely, under pretext that the Examination of
Suits was not consistent with the ordinary Functions of Clergymen; and by the
same Declaration commanded the Clergy, that they should bring their Differences
before the secular Judges, to whom he committed the Cognizance and Judgment of
all Causes.

At last he published a Declaration against the Bishops themselves, by which
they were expressly forbidden for the future to appropriate to themselves the
Estates and Succession of the Clergymen of their respective Diocesses, to the
prejudice of their lawful Heirs; and commanded 'em to produce before the
Senate, the Titles by virtue of which they exacted Fines and Confiscations.
Thus Gustavus issued out Declarations one after another, proportionably to the
progress of Lutheranism, which excited the Curiosity of all his Subjects, and
made 'em speak every one according to his private Interest or Inclination. The
Nobility and Gentry, without examining the new-preach'd Doctrine, applauded the
King for weakening the Power of the Clergy, which was become so odious; and some
of the most eminent Persons in the Kingdom declared publicly in favor of the
Lutherans, hoping by this new Doctrine to recover those Estates which their
Ancestors had given away for the Foundation of so many rich Monasteries, of
which the Kingdom was full.

Those even among the People who had some knowledge of public Affairs were not
displeased to see the Power of the Clergy moderated, or at least part of their
many Extorsions abolished, the invention of which was attributed to the Court
of Rome, under the plausible Names of Tithes, Indulgences and Alms. But that
which gave 'em the greatest satisfaction, was, that the King had put a stop to
the litigious Proceedings of the Bishops Officials, and other Ministers who
oppressed the Kingdom, under pretext of Correction and Ecclesiastical Judgment.

But both the Regular and Secular Clergy grew very uneasy at this Attempt
against their Authority, nor could they endure to be thus disturbed in the
possession of their Rights and Privileges. The King, slighting their
Discontent, put his Troops into Winter Quarters upon their Lands, which none of
his Predecessors had ever attempted to do, and quartered his Horse in the
Abbeys and Monasteries, pretending that the Peasants were ruined, but in effect
to keep the Monks in awe by the presence and terror of his Soldiers. His
Officers of Justice brought into Question, by his Order, the Title of the
Carthusians to the rich Monastery of Griphysholm, who owned the King's
Ancestors to be the Founders of it, and they were obliged to prove the Donation
or Acquisition of the Lands they enjoyed. Having lost their Title, they had
recourse to Prescription; alleging, that they held the best part of their
Lands from the Piety of the Lords of Vasa, but had lost their Title during the
Confusions and Troubles of the Civil Wars. The King, without regarding the
Prescription, reunited to his own Estate the Lands of this Monastery, which
belonged originally to his Family; and expelled the Monks out of it, under
pretext that it was built upon his own Ground. But perhaps the true Reason was,
because they denied him Admittance into their House, when he was Persecuted by
Christiern. And it is not improbable that he took this way to feel the Pulse of
the People, and at the same time to kindle in the Nobility a Desire to follow
his Example, by appropriating to themselves the Lands that were alienated by
their Ancestors.

The Lutheran Doctors, to make their Court, told the chief Lords of the Realm,
that they had been gulled too long both by the Regular and Secular Clergy; that
Purgatory was a Net in which they caught the best part of their Wealth, and
that with this pious Cheat the Monks especially had bubbl'd 'em of many large
Possessions they enjoyed with so much effeminacy. That they ought to re-enter
their ancient Patrimony as an usurped Estate, without being deterred by an
imaginary Fire. And, though there were such a Thing as Purgatory, yet 'twas but a
Weakness to think, that the Rigor of it could be allayed by the Prayers, or
Songs of a few Monks.

At the same time there was published by Olaus a Version of the New Testament
into the Swedish Language, being but a bare Translation of that which Luther
had published in the German Tongue. Olaus's Disciples failed not to recommend
the Reading of that Work in their Sermons, preaching the great Necessity and
Value of it, and spreading this Book, with great care, over the whole Kingdom.
They did not question but the People, and Women especially, would be pleased to
see themselves enabled to pass their Verdict upon Points of Religion; and that
they would sooner yield to the Authority of some places of Scripture,
Translated according to the Doctrine Preached to 'em, than have any thoughts of
calling into Question the Faithfulness of the Translation.

The Swedish Bishops saw plainly that Olaus's Translation came from the same
Hand that invaded their Privileges, and that their Religion was insulted for
no other end than to pull down their Dignities. They observed in the King's
Management of Affairs a Series of Projects and Designs, and at the same time an
insuperable ^ifficulty to baffle 'em. However as the King took great care to
conceal his Inclination to Lutheranism, and always made an outward show of the
R^man Religion, those Prelates thought, they could not without offense
entertain any Suspicion of his being an Enemy to their Religion.

In short, they resolved to dissemble as he did. But they went in a Body to
attend his Majesty, and prayed him to order that Olaus's Followers might be
brought to their Trials as Notorious Heretics. The Archbishop of Vpsal, who
spoke in the name of all the rest, represented to the King, that Claus's
Translation was but a Copy of Luther's, condemned by the Holy See, and by the
most famous Universities of Europe. Then he suggested to him in a few words,
but with a great deal of respect and moderation, that the Church-Immunities,
and even the Privileges of the People, had been violated by his late
Declarations, which they were sensible he was advised to publish by the Enemies
of their Religion. He therefore prayed him in the name of the whole Clergy to
call 'em in, and exhorted him in pathetick and respectful Terms to be the
Protector of the Religion of the State, and of its Ministers.

In answer to which the King said, that the Clergy having seized upon the
Crown Lands in the time of the Civil Wars, they must not take it in, ^^nis
Officers made a strict inquiry into that ma^^er, and that he required only a
Restitution of what had been usurped, or unjustly a^^enated. As for Olaus, he
told them with a seeming I^difference, that he was ready not only to deliver
him up to 'em, but also any other of his Subjects that should be convicted of
Heresy; but that he could not deny him the Justice to hear him before he were
condemned, adding that he had a good Account of his Life and Manners; that the
Charge laid against him by his Brethren might be the effect of Envy, and that
it was no new thing for most Divines promiscuously to Brand all that differed
from 'em in Opinion, with the odious name of Heretics, though very often upon
frivolous Questions of Scholastic Divinity, that are not essential to Religion.

The Archbishop being equally surprised and displeased to see the King look
upon the Affair of Olaus but as a Quarrel of idle and conceited Divines,
offered, with some heat, to convince that Clergyman, in the presence of his
Majesty and the whole Senate, of many dangerous Errors, not considering that
such Witnesses are always the Judges of the Conferences at which they assist.
The King, willing by his example to accustom his Subjects to a strict Inquiry
into matters of Religon, accepted of the Bishop's offer, and the Conference was
ordered to be held at Vpsal.

The King, March.
attended by the Senate, and followed by his whole Court, went thither at the
time appointed. Olaus, on his side, appeared in the Assembly, with all the
Assurance he had of the King's private Protection. But the Bishops refusing to
enter the Lists with him, under pretense that their Dignity made 'em his
Judges, but perhaps loath to expose themselves with a Man that was both Learned
and Eloquent, they produced a Famous Divine named Gallus, and set him up for a
Champion against Olaus.

The King ordered the Acts of this Conference to be Registered. The two Doctors
disputed very long concerning Purgatory, Indulgences, Bazius Hist. F^cles. Su^s.
Communion in both kinds, Celibacy of the Clergy, the Temporal Power and
Dignities of the Church; but could not agree among themselves, as to the Nature
of their Proofs. The Roman Catholic Doctor used promiscuously the Authority of
the Holy Scriptures, Tradition, the Fathers and Councils. But Olaus would only
admit the Authority of Scripture, and would oblige his Adversary to prove not
only the Doctrine, but even the Discipline of the Church, by so many express
passages of the New Testament.

Among other things, he required him earnestly to show him in the Gospel, and
make it out by the Example of the Apostles, that Bishops might enjoy
Principalities and secular Dignities, and make use (as they did daily) of the
Thunderbolts of the Church against their Enemies, merely for worldly concerns.
The Courtiers, being always of the Religion of their Prince, highly applauded
Olaus. Some of the Senators asked Gallus, whether it were possible that the
Holy Writ should not contain all the necessary Proofs to maintain the
Confession of Faith. To which the C^tholick Doctor gave this Answer, That he
could not lay aside his Proofs from Tradition in matter of Discipline, without
betraying the Cause he was bound to defend; and, though he should confine himself
to the Authority of Scripture, he would never consent, that his Adversary
should make use of so unfaithful Translation as his own.

Olaus undertook to justify it, but might have repented so rash an Attempt, for
'twou'd have been a hard task for him to defend all the Faults he had committed
in that Work after his Master. The King therefore fearing least Gallus should
convince him of having corrupted the Sacred Text to serve his own Opinions, put
a sudden stop to the Conference, by desiring the Arch Bishop to make a new
Translation of the New Testament, to compare it with the other. He ass^r'd him,
he would read it with great satisfaction: And for a further Encouragement, he
told him such a P^^ce of Work would be the more useful in the Kingdom, because
few Fri^sts in it underst^^d the Latin Tongue, and that they frequently
m^st^ok the meaning of the Text, for want of having it in their Mother Tongue.
To which Reasons he added some private Caresses he made to that Prelate, and
dismissed him, with assurances that he would suffer nothing to pass in his
Kingdom in Matters of Religion, without his knowledge and advice.

The Arch Bishop dazel'd by those plausible Reasons and the Caresses of his
Prince, summoned to Stockholm his Six Suffragan Bishops, and the Principal
Persons both of the Regular and Secular Clergy. To whom he represented the
necessity of making a speedy Translation of the New Testament, in opposition to
that of Olaus; he told 'em, it was the King's desire, and that it was an
infallibe means to please his Majesty, and keep him in their Communion. The
Bishop of Lincopire vigorously opposed the undertaking of that Work, saying
that our Savior had left the Interpretation of the Holy Scriptures to the
Bishop^ and Doctors of his Church, left no occasion that there might be for the
simple and ignorant to contend about it. That a Translation in the present
Juncture of Assairs would rather be instrumental to the Propagation of
Lutheranism in the State and by the Authority of that Book the People would
take upon 'em to judge of Controversies. That the Church and Religion were not
liable to Examination, and that he had never approved of the Conference at
Vpsal. That it was far more Prudential to Excommunicate Olaus and his
followers, that the Bishop of Stregnez his Superior ought to secure him, and
bring him to his Trial, or else send him to Rome, and that such Heretics ought
only to be confuted with Fire and Sword.

But all these Remonstrances could not prevail with the Archbishop to deny in
some measure so just a thing to the King, and to which he had obliged himself
in the Conference at Vpsal Thus he persisted in his design, unmoved by the
Arguments of the Bishop of Lincopinc; who told him in the full Assembly, that
he would ruin the Religion by his immoderate complaisance for the Court.

The Regular and Secular Clergy divided the whole Work among 'em, Pufendorf.
to have it the sooner finished. The latter undertook the Translation of the
four Evangelists, the Acts of the Apostles, and St. Paul's Epistles; the
Mendicant Friars, St. Peter's, St. John's, St. James's and St. Jude's Epistles;
and the Carthusians were appointed to Translate the Apocalypse.

Olaus, proud of his pretended success in the Conference at Vpsal, printed an
Account of it, and Published it to his Advantage. Soon after he publicly
Married, though a Priest, to confirm, by so viting an Example, the Doctrine which
he preached. Many of his Brethern followed his Example without the least
reluctance, and publicly ass^m'd the Name of Lutherans, as a shelter against
their Superiors, and a Support to their Marriages. Most of the Nobility got
Ministers to Preach in their Castles, some out of curiosity to hear their
Eloquence, others to please the King, and perhaps in order to get those
Church Lands they had an eye upon.

Gustavus was extremely pleased to see so sudden a change in Matters of
Religion: And he, who never suffered his designs to appear, but according as
Lutheranism got ground, thought he might now without danger seize upon part of
the Church Lands. In order to which he called the Senate to meet at Stockholm,
upon intelligences he procured from time to time, and which he dexterously
caused to be spread all over the Kingdom, that the Emperor himself was
preparing to March with all the Forces of the Empire to restore King Christiern.

No sooner were the Senators arrived at Stockholm, but he desired 'em to take
all possible care to put the Kingdom in a State of Defense against the attempts
of the Enemy. The Lords, who for the most part owed him their Fortunes and
Dignities, guessed presently at his intentions, and gave this answer suitable
to his Designs. That the People were utterly exhausted by the long Wars of
Sweden, and that the Merchants of Lubeck and other Hanse-Towns did absolutely
ruin the Kingdom by their extorted Privilege to drive alone the Trade of
Sweden, and that without paying any Customs. That there was no way left to
recruit his Treasure but by opening all the Ports of this Kingdom to the
Merchants of other Nations; but that the Town of Lubeck must be first paid,
before those Privileges could be cancelled, which Sweden was forced to grant
in lieu of Interest for the Money and Troops that Regency had lent the Crown
against the Danes. The Senate agreed both in the necessity of making that
Payment, and at the same time in the present impossibility of doing it.

The King, under color of easing the People, proposed by his Chancellor to
take for the subsistence of his Troops, the two Thirds of the Tithes belonging
for the most part to Bishops or Rich Abbots. And that cunning Statesman did at
the same time insinuate, that the superfluous Plate and Bells of Churches might
be applied to pay the Regency of Lubeck; by which means its Privileges might
be at once abolished, which tended to the absolute ruin both of the King and
Kingdom.

The Power and Authority of Gustavus were settled by this time upon so firm and
solid a Foundation, that the Resolves of the Senate were in a manner but a mere
Formality. So that all the Senators, with great submission, approved of this
Expedient, of which a solemn Decree was forthwith made; and Commissioners were
appointed by the King, who seized, all over the Kingdom, upon the Church-plate
and Bells which they found to be superfluous, and same time laid up in public
Granaries the Tithes and all the Grains designed for the Subsistence of his
Troops.

This Order of the Senate stunned, like a Thunderbolt, both the Superior and
Inferior Clergy. They saw that they had set a wise and mighty Prince upon the
Throne who was resolved to ruin their Authority, and was so much the more
terrible because of his Dexterity in concealing his Hatred and Designs under
the specious pretense of the public Good. The Archbishop of Vpsal brought his
Complaints to the King, and told him, that his Officers committed such
Depredations in all the Churches, as were scarce to be feared from the most
outrageous Heretics or Fanatics.

The King, having thus at last pulled off the Mask, answered the Bishop with an
Ai^ of Authority, that what had been seized by his Order would be better
employed for the Defense of the Realm, than for maintaining the Grandeur and
Pride of the Clergy. After these words he dismissed him, and would not give him
a longer Audience.

The King's Answer, and the Violence of his Officers, did extremely exasperate
most of the zealous Catholics of the Kingdom. The Clergymen, but the Monks
especially, exclaimed against him with all the extravagance of Spite and Fury,
scattering scurrilous Libels among the People, in which they branded him with
the odious Character of a Heretic and of an excommunicated Prince: And even
some of the hottest of 'em proposed to make void his Election. The Mob, that
were easily set on Fire by any pretext of Religion, joined with 'em in the heat
of their Resentment. The Peasants, among others, could not endure to part with
their Bells, and the Silver Crosses of their Churches, which often made the
most essential part of their Worship. These wild and savage People were the
fittest Tools to carry on the Designs of the Priests, who persuaded 'em that
these Innovations tended directly to the subversion of Religion and Liberty.
Some of 'em took up Arms, pursued the King's Officers, and having recovered
their Bells, brought 'em back to their Villages in a kind of Triumph.

A great Fair was yearly held near Vpsal about this time of the Year, with an
extraordinary Concourse of People from all the neighboring Provinces. This was
a sort of Convention of the Estates for the Country People, who discoursed here
of their Trade, of the Affairs of each Province, but especially of the
Differences that arose about the Preservation of their Rights and Privileges.
The Malcontents, glad of this opportunity to stir up a Rebellion, did
privately dispose the chief of 'em to demand the Revocation of the last Decree
of the Senate, as to the Tithes and Church-bells.

The King had timely notice of their Designs by the secret Intelligencers whom
he kept every where. The Money he liberally distributed among 'em, made 'em pry
into every Corner, and industriously pump out the greatest Secrets. By these
Spies he learnt, that the Country People, animated by the Clergy, were resolved
to rise up in Arms at Vpsal-Fair, unless their Bells were speedily restored.

To prevent the threatening Danger, Gustavus went immediately to the Fair, at
the Head of a Body of Horse; and by his unexpected Arrival surpised the
Mutineers, and put 'em into a great Consternation. He spoke to 'em with a
certain Air of Greatness and Authority, like a Prince that has a Right to
command and will be obeyed. He asked 'em, with a fierce Look, who had entrusted
'em with the Care of the Government, by what Authority they censured the
Decrees of the Senate, and whether they had forgotten that the Bishops and the
whole Clergy were greater Enemies to their Country than the very Danes? Then,
to gain 'em by the most winning and convincing Argument, he told 'em, that by
the late Decree of the Senate, concerning the Tithes, to which he gave his
Assent, 'twas plain the Ease of the People was his principal Aim; that to pay
the Regency of Lubeck in so pressing a juncture of Affairs, 'twas thought more
reasonable to fleece a rich Clergy, than to over-burden the People with new
Taxes and Impositions. He hoped that this Discourse would have either
frightened or wheedl'd 'em into a Compliance with his Desires; but instead of
that, the insolent Multitude began to exclaim with a great deal of Violence,
that they would never suffer their Religion to be altered, nor their Bells and
Churchplate to be taken from 'em. The King, incensed at their Audaciousness,
commanded his Men to fire upon the Mutineers; who, observing the posture of his
Horse just going to give sire, ^^ll upon their Knees, and begged his Majesty's
Pardon. The Ringleaders of the Mutiny were secured, while the rest hid
themselves in the Crowd, or escaped in the Dark. In short, they presently
dispersed, and retired with an awful Idea of a Prince who knew so well how to
extort Obedience.

This mutinous Assembly was no sooner dispersed by his Presence, but a new Plot
was laid to Dethrone him. A certain Groom called Hans, of the Parish of
Biorchstrat in the Province of Westmannia, formed a Design infinitely above the
meanness of his Condition. Afpiring to no less than a Crown, he personated the
eldest Son of the deceased Administrator, though that young Prince died a Year
before. He was persuaded by some disaffected People, that the Swedes, who were
incensed against Gustavus and weary of his Government, would choose rather to
place him upon the Throne, than suffer any change in Religion.

The Impostor was a handsome and bold Person: He spoke with a great deal of
Freedom and Ease, and had a nobler Air than was suitable to his Birth or
Education. He traveled over all the Province of Dalecarlia, under the Name of
Nils Steno; never appeared but in the remotest Places, and such as had the
least relation to the Court; nor did he long reside in the same place. When he
appeared abroad, he was very Reserved and full of Precaution; insinuating that
Gustavus could not endure the sight of him, because it checked his Conscience,
and put him in mind of the Crown he had usurped, to the prejudice of the Family
to which he owed his Fortune and Advancement. Therefore that violent Prince
could never look upon him but with Eyes full of Fury; that he had several times
attempted to Kill him; and that the Princess, his Mother, fearing the worst,
had advised him to retire.

Then he asked the People, in a very moving and pathe^ic manner, whether so
inhuman and cruel a Treatment was a suitable Recompense for the Life his
Father, the Administrator, had lost in the Defense of their Country. At the
Name of Steno, this Cheat always burst forth into Tears.

Falling upon his Knees, he conjured the Peasants to pray to God for the Soul
of the Prince his Father, and to say each a Pater noster in his behalf, while
they were allowed to believe a Purgatory. Then he exclaimed against Gustavus's
Government, calling him an Usurper and an Heretic, that had renounced the
Religion of his Ancestors. And, whereas those Peasants were extremely jealous
of their Customs, he charged him with Innovation for affecting a more stately
Garb than his Predecessors, pretending that he designed to alter the very Habit
as well as the Religion of the Nation, and would oblige all his Subjects to
consent to these unsufferable Changes.

It Is thought, the Bishop of Lincopinc and the chief of the Clergy had a hand
in this Conspiracy, hoping by this means to raise such a Commotion as might
occasion a Revolution in the Government. At least it is certain, that that
Bishop, and those of his Party, seemed to believe that he was really the
Administrator's Son, to give the greater Credit to the Impostor, who by the
secret Protection of the Clergy and other Malcontents, saw himself in a short
time followed by a Crowd of Peasants and other indebted Persons, whose
desperate Condition made 'em ready to embrace the first opportunity of a Change.

Gustavus knew not whether to march against him, or neglect so groundless a
Rumor; he was irresolute for some time, and waver'd 'twixt Hope and Fear; for
though he was sensible of the Danger of slighting the feeblest Enemy, he was
afraid lest by showing too visible a Concern on this occasion he should
strengthen the Party of the Impostor. At last he resolved to desire the
Administrator's Widow to write to the Dalecarlians; and that Princess, in
obedience to his Request, assured 'em, by a Letter, that her Son died above a
Year ago; that all the Inhabitants of Stockholm, who assisted at his Funeral,
were Witnesses of his Death; and that she had but one young Child living, of
whose Education the King took as much care as if he were his own Son.

This Letter had all the success Gustavus could expect; and the undeceived
Peasants forsook their fictitious Prince, who, fearing that they would deliver
him up to the King, fled to Norway; where he found a new Protection, upon the
Recommendation, of the Bishops of Sweden to the Archbishop of Dronthem, by whom
he was received and entertained as Prince of Sweden. By this Prelate's Interest
the Impostor raised new Troops in that Kingdom, and by his own Insinuations he
persuaded a Lady of the highest Quality there, that the Crown of Sweden did
rightly belong to him, and promised he would one day raise her Daughter to the
Dignity of a Queen. The Lady, dazel'd with the prospect of a Crown, made her
Tenants take up Arms in Defense of his Right, furnished him with great Sums of
Money to begin the War, and presented him with a Gold Chain of considerable
Weight, as the Pledge of the Alliance she would contract with him.

The King, upon Advice that the Impostor was preparing to return to Sweden,
ordered a Body of Horse to prevent him. At the same time he writ to Frederic
King of Denmark, complaining of the Protection he gave, in his Dominions, to a
notorious Cheat, protesting he would seek him out at the Head of his Army in
the furthest Parts of Norway, if he were not speedily expelled out of that
Kingdom.

That wise and politic Prince could not, without a secret Jealousy, look upon
the Union of the Swedes, and the Prosperity of Gustavus's Reign, and would have
been glad to see Sweden imbroil'd in Civil Wars by the Counterfeit Steno. But
fearing a Storm from Sweden, when he expected every moment a Descent from
Christiern, he sent Orders to Hans to depart immediately out of his Dominions;
and that unhappy Wretch fled from Norway to Rostock, a Free and Imperial City
in Mecklemburg upon the Baltic. Gustavus, having received advice of his
Retreat, sent to the Magistrates of that City requiring 'em to deliver up the
Impostor, and threatened to stop all their Ships that should he found in his
Ports, if they would not comply with so just a Desire. The Magistrates of
Rostock, having no reason to protect such an abandoned Wretch, caused him to be
Beheaded; by which Execution they put an end to Gustavus's fears, and baffled
all the Hopes of his dissaffected Subjects.

Though the Clergy had not publicly appeared in this Revolt, yet the King was
fully convinced that they would have infallibly declared for the Impostor, if
his Attempt had been attended with success. He knew them to be his most
dangerous Enemies, and that nothing but the Fear of his Power, kept them from
open Rebellion. The Bishops influenced the Curates and inferior Clergy to keep
the People steady in their ancient Religion, being sensible they must lose the
best part of their Revenues, as soon as Lutheranism should be established. Such
powerful Motives as Religion and Self-Interest, put the whole Body of the
Clergy into a ferment, and made them turn every Stone. The Monks, but
especially those called Mendicant Frius, run through all the Provinces, under
pretext of begging Bread for their Subsistence, but in effect to foment the
Discontents of the People. They made sure of their Friends, influenced their
Devotoes, formed Cabals in all the Villages, and spoke so disrespectfully of
their Prince, as if their affected Zeal for the Defense of the Catholic Faith,
could have justified the Spirit of Rebellion.

The King, being under some apprehension that the Clergy and those Monks might
at last occasion some dangerous Revolt, resolved to gain the Bishops, and
especially the Heads and Superiors of the Religious Houses, and to remove such
as would not comply with his Designs. Most of the Superiors of the Mendicant
Friars were Germans and Foreigners, all Doctors in the chief Universities of
Germany, who were sent by their Generals to visit and govern the Swedish
Monasteries. The King issued out a Declaration, forbidding those Foreigners to
meddle with the Government of the Monks his natural Subjects, under pretense
that being Subjects of the Emperor and other Princes who were Enemies to the
Nation, they incited not only the Monks, but even the common People, to
Rebellious Practices. So that they were obliged immediately to leave the
Kingdom, and the King took care to substitute in their Places such Monks as
were entirely devoted to the Court. This Declaration was followed by another,
to prohibit the Visits and too frequent Journies of the Monks. By this Edict
they were not allowed to go above twice a Year out of their Monasteries, and to
stay but a Fortnight each time to receive the Bounty and Alms of the People.
This done, the King applied himself to the Bishops of Stregnez and Westeras,
who were his Creatures, and assured 'em, that in all these Proceedings he had
no other Aim, than to see the Word of God observed in his Kingdom, and to
banish all Superstitions that a worldly Interest had introduced into religious
Worship. He desired 'em cheerfully to surrender the Fortresses that were in
their Hands, promised to make 'em futable and advantageous Returns, and to
advance their Families to the principal and highest Dignities in the Kingdom.
Upon which Declarations of his Affection and the Confidence he placed in 'em,
they told him they should always be ready to submit to his Will without
inquiring into the Reason of his Orders; imagining that their Complaisance
could not be reputed Criminal, so long as they did not openly profess those
Doctrins which they looked upon as erroneous, especially since they could not
oppose the King's Designs, without exposing themselves to his Indignation. But
the Archbishop of Vpsal resisted the Temptation, with a Resolution that could
neither be shaken by Promises or Threats. His Temporalities were seized, his
Family persecuted, and his Person for some time confined to a Convent at
Stockholm, under pretense that he had a hand in the Impostor's Rebellion. In a
word, none of those indirect Persecutions were omitted to which Princes usually
have Recourse when they would reclaim obstinate Subjects, that will not be
reduced by gentler Methods. He answered those who urged him to yield to the
King's Will, that he was advanced to his Dignity without making the least
Interest for it; that King Gustavus himself recommended him of his own accord,
made an Interest for his Choice, and he could not imagine that Prince should
expect from him, by way of Acknowledgment, that he should so basely betray his
Dignity and Ministry. The King, finding him Inflexible, found out an honorable
way to get rid of him, by conferring upon him the Character of Ambassador. He
was ordered forthwith to set out for Poland, and the King sent him word that he
should receive his Dispatches at Dantzie. The Archbishop apprehended presently
the Drist of this Commission, and looked upon his Embassy as little better than
a Banishment. However, he they would the King's Orders with a great deal of
submission, and went for Dantzic, Olaus Magnus. Where having waited some time
(but in vain) for his Dispatches and his Majesty's Orders, and hearing that
Lutheranism got ground every Day in Sweden, he went to Rome to implore the
Pope's Assistance, and inform his Holiness of the Danger that threatened the
Catholic Religion in Sweden, under so politic and so mighty a Prince.

But the Pope was in so bad Circumstances that he could not take much notice of
the Affairs of Sweden. Clement VII.
His extraordinary Ambition to advance and aggrandize his Family, made him
enter the Year before into a League with Francis I. King of France, and the
States of Venice, Florence and Switzerland, against the Emperor Charles V. The
Design of the Confederacy was to procure the Liberty of the Children of France
who were then Hostages in Spain, to recover the Kingdom of Naples to the Holy
See, to maintain Sforza in the Dukedom of Milan, and to defend the Liberty of
Italy; in a word, to oppose the Power of the Emperor, who was grown formidable
ever since the Battle of Pavia.

That Prince was so incensed against the Pope, whom he looked upon as the Author
of the League, that he raised a bloody War against him. But the War it self was
not so grievous to the Pope, as the Emperor's Exhortation to the Cardinals to
summon a lawful Council for the Good of the Church, which wanted to be Reformed
(as the Emperor was pleased to express it) both in her Head and Members.
Clement was extremely averse to a Council, which he dreaded would not only
regulate the Papaal Power, but enter upon some Enquiry that might be
prejudicial to his Person and Dignity. He was always reputed the natural Son of
Julian de Medicis, till Pope Leo X. being of the same Family declared him
Legitimate, upon the Information of his Mother's Brother, and of certain Monks
who deposed that there was a Promise of Marriage, though such an Evidence was
somewhat suspicious in so nice an Affair. There was indeed no positive Law to
exclude Bastards from the Pontificate; but 'twas the common Opinion, that so
eminent and holy a Dignity was inconsistent with so great a Blemish. The Pope
therefore might justly fear, that the Emperor would insist upon it in a
Council, and by his Authority color it with a Pretext of Justice and Religion.

Besides, he knew that the Emperor had a Note in his Hands, which he had given
to Cardinal Colouna in the Conclave, to purchase his Vote. Thus he saw himself
in danger of being deposed, as was Balthazar Cossa, known during his
Pontificate by the Name of John XXIII. and the rather, because Pope Julius II.
had issued out a strict Bull, annulling and making void all Simoniacal
Elections, and putting it out of the Power of the Cardinals, by a posterior
Consent, to make 'em valid.

But Charles V. did not so much aim at his Person, as the Principalities
annexed to his Dignity. His eagerness for a Council was only to get an
opportunity to raise him new Enemies, and to make him depend upon his pleasure.
He would fain have had the Command of the Pope's Territories, which lay so
convenient for him in that juncture of War for the Communication of the
Milanese with the Kingdom of Naples, and the late League the Pope had made with
his Enemies afforded him a plausible pretense to seize on 'em.

He gave Orders to his Army to march into the Pope's Territories. His Troops
besieged, and took Rome by Storm, where they committed such Barbarities as
could not be expected from Infidels. Both the Massacre and Plunder lasted
several Days, the Virgins were ravished in their Mothers Arm, and at the foot
of the very Altars, Rome were thrown into dismal Dungeons, where they were
perpetually alarmed with the fear of an ignominious Death, to make 'em deliver
up the Treasures of the Church. The Pope himself was seized and imprisoned in
the Castle of St. Angelo, by the Emperor's Officers. And that Prince, who
affected the religious Title of Catholic, designed to send him to Spain, as he
had done Francis I. that he might almost at the same time Triumph over the two
greatest Powers of Europe, one Spiritual, and the other Temporal.

Gustavus heard with a secret Joy the News of this War betwixt the Pope and the
Emperor, but especially of the amazing Success of the last. He therefore
resolved to follow his Example, and to make use of this Juncture to give the
fatal Blow to the Dignity of the Bishops of his Realm. His Power was so great,
that he feared no Rebellion; having a considerable number of Troops on foot,
which made him formidable to his Enemies at home and abroad. Most of his
Officers were Foreigners or Lutherans, all equally devoted both to his Person
and Fortune; the Senators were all his Creatures; and the Danes his Allies.

Thus whilst all Europe dreaded his Power or admired his Greatness, he formed a
Design to take from the Lishops all the strong Holds that were under their
Jurisdiction, and at the same time to make an exact Enquiry into all the
Purchases or Usurpations of both the Regular and Secular Clergy, since the
Prohibition of King Canietson. But above all he resolved to get all his
Declarations, and the Decree made in the Senate relating to the Tithes,
confirmed by the Estates of the Kingdom.

In pursuance of this Resolution he called a Meeting of the Estates at
Westeras,

He began to discover his Intention in the ordering of a Treat which he gave
the Bishops, Senators, Deputies of Provinces, and all the Members of the
Estates. The Officers of his Household altered the usual order of the Seats at
Table: The chief Places were given to the Temporal Senators, to the prejudice
of the Bishops, who claimed that Honor by prescription. And the same
Precedence was given to the Gentry, who were placed above the Deputies of the
inferior Clergy. By which alteration the King designed to create a Difference
betwixt the bishop: and the Senators, and to make the Gentry approve his
Intentions to humble the Clergy.

As Soon as the Bishops and other Ecclesiastical Deputies rose from Table, they
retired in great discontent from the Hall, and even out of the Castle, and went
to St. Giles's Church, where they shut themselves in. Being alone, and (as they
thought) safe, they asked one another what might be the Reason of the public
Injury and Affront which the King had put upon 'em. The Bishop of Lincopinc
presiding in the Assembly as being the first Suffragan to the Archbishop of
Vpsal, made a Speech to this effect, That they knew by their own expefience,
that the King never did any public Action, without some private Design; That
this alteration to the prejudice of their Order, was but a forerunner of
greater Persecutions; That the Kings Declarations, the Decrees of the Senate,
the Attempts of his Majestys Officers, his Power and his Armies, were so many
Prognostics of the loss of their Liberty, and the best part of their Revenues;
That under the specious Title of Defender of the Country, he assumed an
absolute Authority, above the reach of the Laws; That he was resolved to seize
upon their Castles and Fortresses, and afterward deprive 'em of that share in
the Government which they had so long enjoyed; and that Religon it self would
be in great danger, if they did not resolve vigorously to oppose the Lutherans.

The Bishop of Stregnez, Somm^r.
who was gained by the Court, replied, that they could not indeed be too
watchful for the Defense of their Religion; but withal he insinuated that they
ought not by an unseasonable Zeal to provoke a Potent Prince, who in all other
respects deserved so well of the Nation. He added, that in his Opinion the
Clergy should contribute part of their Revenues toward the Defense of the
Kingdom; and declared his readiness to put his Castle into the King's Hands,
who was better able to defend it against the Enemies of the State than a
Clergyman.

The Bishop of Lincopinc could not hear that Prelates Discourse without
Indignation. He asked him in an angry Tone, whether he thought he could as
Lawfully dispose of his Church Lands as of his Patrimony, and that in behalf of
a Heretic Prince, or one at least who countenanced Heresy. He taxed him, that
he spoke more like a Statesman and a Courtier, than a true Bishop, and, to
soften those hard and offensive expressions, he conjured him with all
earnestness to stick to the Interests of his Brethren, and to A^t unanimously
with them for the (...) of their Rights and Dignities. He exhorted the whole
Assembly to follow their Archbishops steps, who had generously withstood both
the Caresses and Threats of the Court; telling them, that upon all such
Occasions they were obliged to remember the Oath they had taken at their
Consecration, to venture their Lives in the Defense of Religion and the Rights
and Privileges of their Churches. In a word, he omitted nothing that could
revive in their minds a true Episcopal Zeal, or convince them that the severest
punishment that could be inflicted on 'em for an Apostolical constancy or
stedfastness would be far more glorious to 'em than all the favor of the Court.

This Discourse being pronounced with a great deal of heat, drew in the three
other Bishops, and all the other Ecclesiastics that Composed the Assembly; so
that it was resolved, they were obliged to maintain to the utmost of their
power the Revenues and Rights of the Swedish Church against all opposers. The
Bishops of Stregnez and Westeras, as great Courtiers as they were, durst not
oppose so generous a motion; or perhaps were not sorry to see their Brethren
undertake, at their Perils, to Defend their Dignities. In short, these Six
Bishops took a Solemn Oath to Defend with vigor the Rights and Privileges of
the Church against all the Attempts of the King. They made an Act to which they
subscribed, and which they cans'd to be signed by all the rest of the Clergy
who were present; then they hid it in a Tomb in the Church, lest it should fall
into the King's hands.

The Bishop of Lincopinc endeavored also to procure the favor of some
powerful Lay-Patrons: He privately made sure of Tureiohanson the great Marshal,
whose Birth and Dignity gave him the next rank to the King; but these
advantages were obscured by the defect of his Merit and by his Pride. He talked
perpetually of his Pedigree; and though he had neither Valor nor Courage, he
fansi'd that his Birth and Quality entitled him to the esteem of all Mankind.
The Bishop begged his Protection for the Clergy and that was ground enough to
obtain it. The Marshal, was so over joy'd to see himself courted by so
considerable a Party, that he made a Solemn Promise, to maintain and support
the ancient Religion and its Ministers. Besides him, that Prelate gained some
Lords of West-Gothland, and several Deputies of the Peasants, who combined
together to oppose all the Attempts of the Lutherans.

The next day the Estates met, and the Chancellor opened the Sessions with a
pathetic Speech, upon the Exigences of the State. He told them from the King,
that there was no Fund settled for the Payment of the Forces; that most of the
Frontier places wanted to be Fortified; that the Arsenals were unfurnished, and
that there were few Ships in the Ports. He forgot not to Alarm 'em with an
account of King Christiern's preparations. He put 'em in mind of all the
Cruelties which that Prince committed in the Kingdom, representing in the most
dismal colors, the miserable condition of that Kingdom under his Government.
Besides the Massacre of the Senate, he presented 'em with a frightful Catalogue
of all the Robberies, Plunders, Assassinates, Burnings, Rapes, and other
Enormous Barbarities that were Authorized by a Prince who never gave himself
the trouble to seek for any pretext to excuse or cover his Crimes. A dreadful
Time, when the Kingdom was become a Prey to Implacable Enemies, or to
Treacherous and Rebellious Natives, more cruel than they, whose Credit and
Rewards were more Intolerable, than there very Treasons and Villainies. He told
'em that when the Nation was in these deplorable and hopeless circumstances,
the King alone formed, a generous design to deliver his Native Country. In
order to which he had exposed himself to the greatest Dangers; and, as he had
not spared his life for their defense, so 'twas well known he had Mortgaged all
his Estate to carry on the War against the Danes. That by his Valor and
Conduct, the Swedes had at last Triumphed over their Enemies; but that the same
cruel Enemies were preparing for a new Invasion with all the Forces of the
Emperor, if speedy care were not taken to oppose 'em. To which he added, that
the Revenues of the Crown were so diminished by the Usurpations of the Clergy,
that they were scarce sufficient to answer the Charge of the civil List. That
the Nobility and Gentry were also ruined by the imprudent Bounty of their
Ancestors. That it was plain, the Church of Sweden alone had the command of
more Wealth, than the King, and all the other Estates of the Realm together.
That the Bishops had always made Religion subservient to their Interest, and
the Establishing of their Authority; and by indirect means had made themselves
Masters of the best Mannours and Principal Fortresses. That these Prelates,
growing by degrees Richer and more Potent than their Sovereign had frequently
revolted against their Princes. That their Ambition had occasioned all the
Civil and Foreign Wars, with which the Kingdom had been harrass'd for near the
space of 120 Years. That they had several times called in the Enemies, and
received 'em into their Forts, sticking at no Treachery to compass their wicked
Designs.

That the Senate, sensible of the present Exigencies, and knowing how
prejudical the excessive Power and Wealth of the Bishops was to the Peace of
Sweden, had wisely ordained, that two Thirds of the Tithes should be applied to
the Maintenance and Subsistence of the Army. That the King desired that his
late Declarations, and the Senate's Decree, which aimed at nothing but the ease
of the People, should be confirmed by the Estates. That both the Regular and
Secular Clergy should forthwith restore to the Crown, to the Nobility, and to
all private Persons, the Lands and Estates which they pretended had been
bequeathed to 'em since the Reign and Prohibition of King Canutson.

No sooner had the Chancellor ended his Speech, but the Bishop of Lincopinc
stood up to oppose him, and spoke to this effect. That it was no wonder to hear
of that bold Proposal, to take away the Church Lands from the Clergy, while the
Lutherans were countenanced in their endeavors to extirpate the true Religion.
He declared to the Estates, that he and the whole Clergy were resolved to
defend the Catholic Faith, never to part with any Church Lands, or yield up
any of their Rights or Privileges, without an express Order from the Pope,
whom they owned as the Supreme Disposer of the Church Revenues, as he was the
Infallible Judge in Matters of Religion.

The King, amazed at the boldness of that Prelate, Tureiohanson stood up; who,
far from siding with the King, told him with a great deal of considence, that
the Bishop of Lincopinc could not be too much commended for his Zeal, and that
he wished all the Swedes were inspired with so noble a resolution to defend the
Catholic Faith and the Liberty of the Nation: He was applauded by the Bishops
and the whole Clergy, and their Acclamations were seconded by many Deputies of
West-Gothland, who bewailed in secret the decaying State of the Ancient
Religion, but durst not freely speak their mind for sear of the King's
displeasure.

Tureiohanson's discourse, and the Applause it met with among those of his
party, did both surprise the King, and stir up his Passion: He complained of
their ingratitude and want of respect, and told them that the Swedes could
neither live without Kings, nor endure 'em after they were chosen; that he was
sensible, his Declarations against the Clergy and the Senate's Decree
concerning Tithes, had procured him more Enemies in the Kingdom, than he had
among the Neighboring Nations, who envied the Happiness of Sweden; that he
knew, there were many in that Assembly, who (according to the Swedish Proverb)
wished the Head of an Ax struck deep into his Head, though none were so bold as
to take up the handle; and that they were grossly mistaken, if they thought he
mounted the Throne, as an Actor comes upon a Stage, only to personate a King:
He declared withal, that he expected obedience, and that in the present
juncture of Assairs it was requisite he should use an absolute Power, to resist
the Designs and Attempts both of the Emperor and King Christiern.

But if they thought he could not justly require Obedience and Submission, he
protested that he was ready to resign the Crown. That he only demanded a
re-imbursment for the Charge he had been at for the defense of the State, since
he undertook the Government; that afterward he would let them peaceably enjoy
the Fruit of his Victories, and solemnly promise to leave the Kingdom, for
ever. At these words Grief and Anger drew some Tears from his Eyes, and without
expecting an answer he suddenly left the Assembly, and went into the Castle,
followed by the Principal Officers of his Army; who urged him, to assume an
absolute Power, and offered to execute his Orders without the consent of the
Estates.

The Chancellor staid, to hinder the Estates from taking any Resolutions
contrary to the King's Interest, in his Absence. But nothing was concluded that
Day. The Temporal Senators and principal Lords, alarmed at the angry Retreat of
Gustavus, rose up immediately, as if they had been afraid to be seen in the
Company of the King's Adversaries. On the other Hand the Bishops and the whole
Clergy, most of the Lords of West-Gothland, and all the Rabble of Westeras
conducted Tureiohanson home as it were in Triumph.

That haughty Lord was so puffed up with their Applauses, that he could not
conceal his Joy to see himself at the Head of a Party which he looked upon as
formidable to the King. He fancied that he should Govern the Estates, and by
his Authority influence all their resolutions. He entered his House with the
sound of Trumpets and Kettle Drums, elevated with his present success, without
considering, that the Favor of the People is usually short-lived, and that
it is extremely hard for a great Man to come off with Honor when the Prince's
Authority seems to be slighted or disregarded.

The Estates met again the next Day, which was spent wholly in Contests on both
sides. Olaus Petri made a new Challenge to Dr. Gallus, but it came to nothing;
because Gallus would argue in Latin, and in a Scholastic manner, and Olaus
resolved to dispute in the Swedish Tongue. The Assembly was divided into two
Parties; one that stood up for the Preservation of the Rights and Privileges of
the Church, as the greatest Bulwark of the ancient Religion; and the other,
considering Luther's Doctrine as a problematical and indifferent Opinion, till
the Church should decide the Controversy in a general Council, were for an
entire submission to the King's Will.

The Chancellor omitted nothing to make the chief Deputies sensible, that
Kingdoms ought not to be Ruled by the Maxims of Priests and Monks, who have a
separate Interest from that of the State, owning a Foreign Prince, the Pope,
for their Sovereign. That the safety of the State, upon all Occasions and in
all Emergencies, ought to be the prime and overruling Law; and all other
humane Constitutions being made only for the Preservation of Civil Society, the
Prince and supreme Magistrate ought to be vested with a Power to alter 'em,
according to the Exigencies and Temper of every Nation. That the greatest part
of the Ecclesiastics and Monks had seized on the whole Wealth of the Kingdom,
under different Pretenses of Devotion. That the Bishops, by the Claim they
assumed of being the sole Heirs of the Priests, ruined daily some of the best
Families; and by that Title, as well as their pretended Right to Penalties and
Consiscations, incroach'd insensibly upon all the Estates; that they secured
their unjust Acquisitiones from all Attempts of Recovery, under the Name of
Church Lands; terrifying with the B^g-bear of Excommunication, all that should
^^ser just Complains against their Oppression, and branding with Heresy any
Opinion condemned by the Pope as Heretical, though they deemed him no otherwise
Infallible, than so far as his Infallibility consisted with their Interests.

By such Discourses, and other secret Ways, the Chancellor brought over most of
the Deputies to the King's Party; and gained many of the Clergy themselves to
yield to his Arguments, under pretext that Religion was not the Thing aimed at,
but merely a Temporal Concern; besides, that they were overaw'd by the Power
and the Anger of the King, and terrified with this Notion, That too obstinate a
Resistance was next to downright Treason and Rebellion.

The King had already made sure of the best part of the Assembly, when
Tureiohanson, flattering himself with the imaginary Strength of his Party,
talked of nothing but burning the Heretics, and urged the Estates, with a great
deal of Earnestness, to make a Law to declare Lutherans incapable of possessing
the Crown, with a secret Design to exclude the King, and that he might have a
sufficient Ground to oppose the Solemnity of his Coronation. This Point was
debated with a great deal of heat in the Assembly, every one speaking according
to his Interest or Inclination; when the Bishop of Stregnez, who had been
secretly gained by the Court, desired leave to speak.

As soon as that Prelate had obtained liberty to be heard, Loc. l. 6. p. 270.
he told the Estates, That he was surpised to see Men in that Assembly who had
the considence to speak so publicly of the King's Abdication, almost within
his hearing, or at least under the Canon of his Castle. That Matters of such
vast Importance were not to be decided by Caballing, or Plurality of Voices.
That there were many in that Assembly who could signalize their Courage against
his as in a Field of Battle, and yet perhaps could hardly bear the very Looks
and Presence of their King, if he should appear in Arms. He asked 'em what
Forces they had to oppose a Prince who had the sole Command of all the Troops?
And, in case he were willing to Abdicate, whether they had a sufficient Fund to
repay him the vast Charge he had been at for the Defense of the State?

He added, That 'twas not an easy matter to reckon with a great Captain at the
Head of a considerable Army, who might as long as he pleased retain the
Sovereign Power, for a Pledge of Payment. That they were grossly mistaken if
they thought that Sweden under another Prince, or another Form of Government,
was able to make a long Resistance against so many Enemies with which the
Kingdom was surrounded. That all intelligent Persons were sensible, that the
Power and Strength of the Kingdom lay more in the King's Person than Dignity;
that his Majesty could never make a step to quit the Throne, but what would
make way for the Kings of Denmark, Christiern or Frederick to ascend it; and
that 'twas only his Courage and Valor that kept all the Enemies of the Nation
in awe.

The same Prelate added, That though the King did not appear a Friend to the
Clergy, yet the prevailing Power of Truth, and the cordial Affection he bore to
the State obliged him to own, that the safety of the Kingdom depended entirely
upon his Royal Person. That he acknowledged the Great Marshal's Zeal was to be
commended, by which he had laid eternal Obligations upon both the Regular and
Secular Clergy; but that a violent and unlimited Zeal had often occasioned
great Mischiefs. That for his part he thought it more expedient for 'em to quit
some Rights, and to give up some of their Privileges, at a time when their
Compliance was so necessary for the preservation of the Kingdom, than by too
great a Stiffness and Self-interessedness to exasperate a Prince who was
equally powerful and necessary. Rome, without separating from the Communion of
the Roman Church.

This Prelate's Discourse made the greater Impression upon the Estates, because
'twas not expected from one of his Character. The Bishops and the whole Clergy
were full of Rage and Indignation, but he received a loud and general Applause
from almost all the rest of the Assembly. In short, his Discourse seemed at
once to have dispersed all those Enchantments, which had made 'em so long
oppose the King's Designs. They looked upon his Absence both as their Fault and
Misfortune. Their Heat against their Prince was changed to an Emulation among
'em to give him what satisfaction he demanded, that they might have the
Happiness to see him sooner at the Head of the Assembly. Immediately they made
a Declaration suitable to his Intentions, notwithstanding the clamorous
opposition of the Clergy; and notice was given to the Great Marshal that it was
not safe for him to make so great a noise in the Assembly. Pafendorf.
The Deputies of the Commonalty, believing that the Contest was merely about
Temporal Assairs, made high Protestations, that they would cut in pieces the
first Man who should offer to oppose the King's Will. Tureiohanson and the
Lords of West-Gothland, that they were forced to be silent and withdraw.

At last it was solemnly Enacted by the Estates, That the Bishops should
immediately put their Forts into the Hands of the King's Officers, and disband
their Troops and Garrisons. That those Prelates should not any more be admitted
into the Senate, as being a hinderance to the discharge of their Ministerial
Functions. That it should not be in their power to deprive the lawful Heirs of
Ecclesiastics, of their Right of Inheritance; nor should thereafter convert to
their own Uses the Penalties and Forfeitures, which properly belonged to the
Crown. That all superfluous Church-plate and useless Bells should be applied to
pay the Regency of Lubeck. That all Church Lands that had accru'd to the
Clergy, by Foundations made since the Prohibition of K. Canutson, should be
reunited to the Crown. That the Nobility and Gentry might recover their
Estates mortgaged to the Church, by paying off the Mortgage. That the two
Thirds of the Tithes, enjoyed by most Bishops and Abbots, should be sequestered
for the subsistence of the Troops, so long as there should be any Ground to
apprehend a War in the Kingdom; and that in time of Peace they should be
applied to the Erecting and Indowing of public Schools and Hospitals in all
the Provinces. That those among the Clergy should be severely Punished, who
should offer to Excommunicate any one for a merely Temporal Concern. That the
Magistrates should restrain the Mendicant Friars from their usual Rambles, and
the King should dispose, at his pleasure, of all the Privileges of the Clergy.
Lastly, by the Chancellor's cunning Insinuation, it was ordered, That all
considerable Churches should be provided with learned and godly Men, that
should expound to the People the pure Word of God; which in the Language of
those Times signified, that Lutheranism should be preached with Authority.

No sooner was this Act put into form, but all the Deputies signed it; and even
the Bishops, who were not well united among themselves. Some of 'em were gained
by the Court, and others out of fear were forced to subscribe; though they
plainly saw that they signed the Abdication of their Dignities, and even an
Article contrary to the Catholic Religion. The Estates prayed the Chancellor
and Dr. Olaus Petri to carry the Act to the King; and charged 'em to assure his
Majesty, that he should never hereafter find any opposition to his Will in that
Assembly.

The King, having thus brought 'em to his own Terms, went to the Assembly,
where, by the Chancellor's Mouth he thanked the Deputies for their having at
last taken Resolutions suitable to the present Exigencies. He assured 'em, That
henceforward he would have a particular regard for the People; and that he
hoped, by the help of that Supply alone which they had now granted him, Sweden
should have no cause to fear her Enemies. Then he dismissed the Estates, with
Assurances of his Gratitude to such among the Deputies as had expressed most
Zeal for his Interest.

By this Act Gustavus, finding himself Master in a manner both of the Wealth
and Religion of the Church, went at the Head of a Body of Horse to see the Act
put in execution. He past successively from Province to Province, attended by
Olaus Petri and many other Lutheran Doctors, whom he ordered to Preach before
him in the principal Churches. At the same time he commanded the Titles of all
Church Lands to be brought before him; Re-uniting presently to his Demesne, and
restoring to the ancient Proprietors or their Heirs, such Lands as the Clergy
had acquired since the Reign of King Canutson. By which means he recovered both
from the Regular and Secular Clergy more than two Thirds of their Revenues, and
by computation seized upon Thirteen Thousand considerable Farms, some of which
he reunited to his own Demesns, and with the rest he recompensed his Creatures
and the Principal Officers of his Army. At the same time he made great Sums of
Money of the Church-Plate, which he caused to be melted down to enrich the
public Treasury.

The Progress of the King all over his Kingdom gave the Final Blow to the
Catholic Religion. An open War was in a manner declared against the Clergy,
and the Foundations of the old Religion were undermined by the Flight or Change
of its Ministers. There could be no want of pretenses at a time when none were
required to turn Priests out of their Benefices for persevering in the
profession of their Ancient Religion.

Most Curates and other Beneficed Clergymen scrupled not to own the Lutheran
Doctrine, to keep their Dwelling-Houses and part of their Livings. Many of 'em
were only required to Marry, and to introduce into their Churches the Divine
Service in the Vulgar Tongue, which was the surest mark of a Priest's
conversion to Lutheranism. The Bishop of Lincopinc retired to Poland, and the
rest of the Prelates lay sculking in their Houses without dareing to perform
the Functions of their Ministry, for fear of exposing themselves to new
Persecutions. They waited with a servile patience for the King's Orders to
dispose of their Persons and Dignities, always ready to yield him obedience;
but much more vexed at the Alteration he made in their Revenues, than for the
change of Religion. The Bishop of Scara, who was not well acquainted with the
controversies that were agitated among the Divines on both sides, was the only
Bishop who resolved to defend by the strength of Arms his Dignity and the
Revenues of his Church. In pursuance of this Design, he engaged Tureiohanson
with several Lords of West-Gothland, who endeavored to raise an Insurrection
in that Province; but the Country People were so prepossessed with Esteem and
Respect for the King, that they refused to rise up in Arms; and the Bishop saw
himself abandoned by the whole Chapter which began to savor Luther's Opinions.

The greatest part of the Monks quitted their Monastries, some out of a desire
of Liberty, and others for want of a settled subsistence. Those who remained
steadfast in their Religion fied to the Dalecarlians, who had openly declared
against Lutheranism. There these miserable Fugitives thought to have their
Wants relieved and their Grievances redressed. Dalecarlia, as I said before, is
a remote Province in the Northern parts of Sweden, inhabited by a rude and
ignorant People, fond of their Ancient Religion, almost mere Savages, inured to
hardship, and in that respect fit for War, but incapable of Discipline. The
whole Province swarmed with Ecclesiastics, both of the Secular and Regular
Clergy, old Men and Women loaded with young Children; who having quitted their
Households, chose rather to wander in the Mountains, than embrace Lutheranism.
The Dalecarlians, moved with their complaints, and incensed at the sight of the
new Pastors in their Churches, or of the old ones who altered the usual
Ceremonies, took up Arms with a great deal of fury: The Priests and Monks
joined with 'em, and all the Catholics and Malcontents espoused their
Quarrel; some out of zeal for their Ancient Religion, and others out of spite
because they had no share in the Spoils of the Church.

The Bishop of Scara no sooner heard of this Commotion, but he fled privately
to that Province, to join with the Rebels. He was accompanied by the Great
Marshal, and many Gentlemen of West-Gothland; who had engaged not to lay down
their Arms, till they had obtained the Restoration of the Ancient Religion.
They were received with great Acclamations by the Dalecarlians, who gave the
general Command of their Forces to Tureiohanson.

This Lord had three Sons, the two Eldest of whom were near the King's Person,
and the Third was Grand Provost of the Cathedral of Vpsal, who hearing that his
Father was at the head of the Rebels, made it his business to scatter
Manifestos against the King through the whole Province of Vpland; exhorting the
People to take up Arms and revenge the Injuries that were done to the Altars;
and to encourage the People by his example, he put himself at the head of some
Troops. In the mean time the great Marshal, his Father sent order to his two
other Sons, to steal away from the Court, and join their Brother, or come to
him with as many of their Friends as they could persuade to follow 'em. But
these young Lords, were highly displeased with their Father's Rebellion, which
obliged 'em either to declare against him, or against their Sovereign, and of
two Duties which appeared to 'em equally indispensable, to choose the one, and
renounce the other.

But their Allegiance to the King prevailed at last over their Duty to their
Father, and even to Religion it self. They concluded, that in a State-Affair
they ought to adhere to the Supreme Authority, and that the difference of
Religious Worship was not a sufficient ground to excuse 'em from the obedience
they owed to their Lawful Prince. They considered besides, that their Loyalty
to the King might probably obtain their Father's Pardon; and that it was more
agreeable to the rules of prudence, to put themselves in a condition by their
Fidelity to obtain Pardon for their Father, than to make themselves guilty of
the same Crime, in expectation of a better Fortune. Upon these considerations
they delivered their Letters to the King, protesting that they were ready to
lay down their Lives for his service. Gustavus received 'em very graciously,
and promised to prefer 'em: But seemed neither to be surpised nor alarmed at
the News. Nor did he make any apparent preparations, in order to reduce the
Rebels; saying that he would decline appearing in Arms, that his Subjects might
not be obliged to fight against each other, and that he hoped to crush the
Rebellion by gentler Methods.

Yet he lost no time, but made his Troops secretly file off by different ways,
toward the Borders of Dalecarlia, that he might be all of a sudden in a
condition to reduce the Rebels by the fear of Punishment. Upon the first News
of the Insurrection he had sent some Persons from Court, who had Friends among
the Malcontents, and were not unknown among the Dalecarlians, with
instructions to reduce the Rebels by fair means. These Agents applied
themselves first to the Bishop of Scara, the great Marshal, and other
Malcontents that had joined the Dalecarlians. They endeavored to gain the
leading Men by advantageous Offers, but they found 'em most obstinate; and
those who were willing to treat, had so little an influence upon the party, and
stood upon so high Terms, that the Agents did not think fit to buy 'em off at
so great a rate. They had better success among the Dalecarlian Peasants, whom
they prevailed upon to send Deputies to the Court; persuading 'em, that his
Majesty would deny nothing to a People to whom he owed his Crown and Glory; but
their true design was only to amuse 'em, that they might be less cautious in
providing for their own defense.

The Deputies of the Dalecarlians, not penetrating into the King's Policy, but
concluding by the steps he made, that he stood in Awe of 'em, thought they
might easily make their own Terms. In the Name of their Province, and of all
the Roman Catholics of the Kingdom, they demanded that Lutheranism should be
punished in Sweden as a Capital Crime; that the Marriage of Priests and Monks
should be Abolished; the Bells and Church-Plate restored; and all Persons Burnt
without any Regard or Distinction, that should be convicted to have eaten Flesh
on Fish-Days. That the King should oblige himself, after the example of his
Predecessors, never to pass the River of Brunebeck, which separates their
Province from Westmania, without giving 'em Hostages for the security of their
Privileges. But, above all, that both King and Courtiers should reassume the
ancient Habit of Sweden, and not be beholden to strangers for new Fashions and
Dresses.

Gustavus gave the Deputies great hopes that he would grant at least part of
their Demands; while he secretly put all things in a readiness to surprise the
Rebels, with his whole Army. Having received advice, that his Troops were come
within a days March of their appointed Rendezvous, he immediately dismissed the
Deputies, and ordered them to tell their Countrymen that he would never
condescend to treat with his Subjects, and that they might appear in Arms in
the Plain of Tuna, to fight the Battle he was resolved to offer them at the
head of his Army. He added, that if they would avoid the effects of his
indignation, they must expel the Malcontents out of their Province, lay down
their Arms, and submit to his Mercy.

As Soon as the King had dismissed the Deputies, Tureiohanson and those of his
party suspected the Dalecarlians, and fancied they had made a separate Peace
for themselves; and the Peasants reciprocally thought they were betrayed by the
Lords. In short, they were jealous of each other, and their mutual suspicion
and distrust was by degrees changed to Hatred and Enmity.

The Bishop of Scara and Tureiohanson not thinking themselves safe with the
Dalecarlians made their escape privately into Norway; from whence they retired
to King Christiern in the Low Countries; and the rest of the Malcontents,
alarmed at their flight, some fled one way, some another. The Dalecarlians,
seeing themselves without a Head or Leader, resolved to submit, and yield to
their Prince's Mercy. They went to the Plain of Tuna, where the King staid for
'em at the Head of his Army. He commanded his Horse to surround 'em, and the
Rebels at the same time to discover their Ring leaders. The affrighted Peasants
declared their names and the King immediately caused 'em to be Beheaded, to
curb by so necessary a severity the seditious and inconstant Humor of these
People. Thus by an innocent Artifice and commendable Diligence, he appeased a
furious Infurrection, without any Effusion of Blood, or Diminution of his
Forces.

These were the last Efforts of an Unbridl'd and Tumultuous Liberty, which was
forced to give way to a more absolute, and consequently more peaceful Dominion.
After this the whole Kingdom submitted to the King, and all his Subjects
embraced Lutheranism; some out of regard to their private Interest, and to make
their Court, and others out of their abhorrence of the irregular Life of the
Clergy. Lutheran Doctors gained some Proselytes by persuading 'em that their
Masters Opinions in Matters of Religion, which were falsely reckoned
Innovations, were nothing else but primitive Christianity restored and purged
from all Monkish Superstitions; and many were glad to be convinced of the Truth
of the prevailing Religion, that they might preserve their Estates without
being forced to seek their Fortunes abroad.

Gustavus, seeing that most of his Subjects had changed their Religion, at last
declared himself a Lutheran. He made Olaus Petri Pastor of the Church of
Stockholm, and his Brother Laurentius Petri Archbishop of Vpsal. Upon this new
Prelate, he bestowed a Lady who was related to him, that the Honor of his
Alliance might oblige the People to entertain less scandalous notions of a
Married Priest; or perhaps that so illustrious a Match might make amends for
the great Revenues he had withdrawn from so rich a Benefice. The King's
Coronation followed soon after, Vpsal by this Prelate, with great Solemnity,
January, 12.
and at the same time he Conferred the Honor of Knighthood on all the Senators,
and the chief Lords of the Court.

Sweden was Lutheran all over, King, Senators, Bishops, and all the Nobility
made public Profession of that Religion. But, whereas most of the Country
Curates and others of the inferior Clergy had embraced it merely by force, or
out of weakness, an extravagant Medly of Roman Ceremonies and Lutheran Prayers
was introduced into several Churches in the Kingdom. Some Married Priests, and
Curates continued still to say Mass in several Places, according to the Roman
Ritual and Liturgy. Baptism was administered with all the Prayers and Exorcisms
appointed by the Church; and the Dead were Buried with the same Prayers that
are used to beg God to relieve the Souls of the Faithful, though the Doctrine of
Purgatory was condemned by the Lutherans.

The King, desirous to establish an uniformity of Worship throughout the whole
Kingdom, a thing so necessary for the public Peace, especially in a Monarchy,
call a general Assembly of the whole Clergy, in the form of a National Council.

The Assembly was held at Orebro, Nericia, Loc. l. 6. p. 276. Bazius Mist.
Eccle. Succ.
and the Chancellor Lardz-Anderson presided in the Kings Name. This Lutheran
Council was composed of the Bishops, Doctors, and Pastors of the principal
Churches. They owned the Augsburg-Confession as the Rule and Standard of their
Faith, and solemnly renounced their Obedience to the Pope, as Head of the
Church. They ordered the Roman Worship to be entirely abolished, prohibited all
Prayers for the Dead, borrowed from the Lutheran Churches of Germany the manner
of administering Baptism and the Communion, declared the Marriage of Priests
Lawful, and Condemned Celibacy and Monastic Vows. They confirmed the Ordinance
of the Estates at Westeras, by which the Church lost her Privileges, and the
greatest part of her Revenues. And, which is observable, these Regulations were
made by almost the same Persons who the Year before had showed so much zeal for
the Defense of the Ancient Religion; so few there are that can long withstand
the fear of Persecution, or the hopes of Favor.

Yet they met with great difficulties in abolishing the Practice of the Roman
Church in the Administration of the Sacraments. The People, and the Women
especially, could not be satisfied without the Ceremonies of Baptism, and the
Prayers for the Dead. The whole Kingdom was filled with Marmurings and
Complaints upon the Occasion. Most Women, through an excessive Fear, proceeding
perhaps as much from their Temper as Virtue, thought their Children could not
be well baptized without the use of Salt and Exorcisms. And a small residue of
Faith as to the belief of Purgatory created such a disturbance in their Minds,
on the account of their deceased Relations, as could not be allayed by all the
Eloquence of the Lutheran Doctors.

Gustavus, fearing the Complaints and Discontent of the People should break out
into a new Rebellion, ordered the Lutheran Ministers to comply with those who
stood up obstinately for the ancient Ceremonies, and not to use the new, but
where they found a Temper disposed to receive 'em.

The King having thus completed the alteration of Religion, Swedish Provinces
were formerly overspread with vast Forests. King Olaus Traetelga, Amund, An.
891.
and some of their Successors, caused a great part of 'em to be Dis-forested,
and bestowed these new Lands in Fee-farm upon the Nobility and Gentry, for
which they were to pay a certain Duty to the Crown. The Lords and Gentlemen
had, by degrees, during the Civil Wars, exempted themselves from paying those
ancient Duties, and a long Prescription seemed to have abolished 'em, till they
were revived by the King, who required both from the Nobility and Gentry,
either to part with their Fiefs or to pay Rents at which they were originally
taxed. The Claims and Demands of this Prince differed not much from the most
arbitrary Laws and Decrees; and the Parties concerned, alarmed at this
after-clap, offered to come to a fair Composition. The chief Lords of each
Province came and treated about it with the Chancellor, and agreed to pay to
the King Ten Marks of Silver for every Fief or Manor, or (as it was then
called) for every Land that paid Tribute to the Crown.

Thus every thing succeeded with this Prince according to his desire, and even
beyond his hope. He looked upon the alteration of Religion as the happiest and
most important passage of his Reign; and the humbling of the Clergy, who were
no less formidable to him than the Danes, as a second Conquest of Sweden. Of
all his Enemies he had none left but Christiern, that could make him uneasy, or
occasion the least disturbance. That Prince was still in Flanders, from whence
he earnestly solicited the Emperor, his Brother-in-law, that he would
contribute his assistance in order to his Restoration. Gustavus kept Spies
about him, who gave him Intelligence, that Christiern was levying Soldiers in
Holland. From thence he concluded, that the Threats and Design of a Descent in
the Northern Kingdoms were ready to break out into Action, and that Sweden and
Denmark were like to be the Scene of the War. He immediately sent notice of it
to Frederick K. of Denmark; and at the same time thought it convenient to
fortify himself against the Designs of the House of Austria, by some
considerable Alliance. He conceived, that the Lutheran Princes of Germany, who
were extremely jealous of the Emperor's Power, would be easily persuaded to
support his Interest, by reason of their Conformity in point of Religion. Upon
these Considerations he demanded in Marriage the eldest Daughter of the Duke of
Saxe Lawenburg. The Duke, charmed with the valor and fame of Gustavus, heard
the Proposal with great satisfaction, and sent the Princess, his Daughter, with
a numerous Attendance to Lubeck, whither Gustavus sent his whole Fleet to
receive her. After her arrival at Stockholm, Sept. 24.
At the same time the King sent the late Administrator's Son to the Duke of
Saxe, his Father-in-law, under pretext of improving his Knowledge, by making
him Travel; but in effect that he might remove, from the sight of the Swedes, a
young Prince that seemed to have a better Title to the Crown, whose Presence
stirred up the Compassion of the most Moderate, and might serve for a Pretense
to all dissaffected Persons.

Gustavus's Nuptial Ceremonies were scarce at an end, when he received
Intelligence, that a great number of Troops raised for the late King
Christiern, were privately Imbarking at one of the Ports of Holland. Upon which
he dispatched a new Courier to the K. of Denmark (according to a former
Agreement) and at the same time put himself at the Head of his Army, both to
observe the Enemy, and to hinder the Catholics and Malcontents from favoring
the Descent of that Prince.

The Emperor had all along flattered him with hopes, that he would undertake
the Expedition himself, with all the Forces of the Empire. But the almost
continual War in which he was engaged with France, broke that Design; so that
Christiern, discouraged by so many Disappointments and weary of personating so
long, in a Foreign Country, a King without a Crown, resolved, with some Troops
he had gathered from several Parts, to try his Fortune, and endeavor to force
a Passage into his own Dominions.

Tureiohanson, who was always as brave as a Hero at plotting and contriving
Work for others, used all possible Arguments to persuade that Prince to make an
Attempt upon Sweden. To flatter him, and at the same time to engage him in a
Design that could not be prosecuted without his Assistance, he assured him,
that the Swedes were so incensed at the late Change of Religion, that they
longed for his Restoration. That 'twou'd be sufficient to land 3000 Horse in
that Kingdom, and that the first Mass that was said in his Camp would draw
thither all the Malcontents, and even many of Gustavus's own Soldiers. That
notwithstanding the famed Politics and Subtilty of that Prince, he had signed
his own Abdication in the Assembly of the Clergy at Orebro, by abolishing the
Catholic Religion. That, excepting a small number of Courtiers, and some
military Officers who had a share in the spoils of the Clergy, the whole Nation
detested his Tyranny and the Change of Religion. That he had disbanded his
Foreign Horse, and that his Foot consisted only of an undisciplined Militia,
the greatest part of whom would certainly desert Gustavus, as soon as King
Christiern should declare, that his only Design was to restore the true
Religion, and to redress the Grievances of the Clergy.

Upon these plausible Assurances, Christiern resolved to try the chance of War,
with about Ten thousand Men of different Nations, whom he had listed in his
Service during his abode in the Low Countries. With this Body of Men, embarked
in Thirty Ships, he set out of a Port in Holland, and steered his Course for
Norway, which at that time was almost destitute of Troops and Garrisons, which
seemed to be a needless Precaution in a Country that was sufficiently defended
by the Barrenness of its Soil, and the Rocks and Mountains with which it is
overspread. Christiern knew, that he was less expected there, than in Denmark
or Sweden, and from thence he designed to enter Sweden, either by West-Gothland
or Dalecarlia; imagining, that the Country People of these Provinces, were
still so incensed at the Execution of their Countrymen, that they would
immediately rise up again in Arms, and favor his Attempt.

This unfortunate Prince met in his voyage with a terrible Storm, Norway, and
with much a do got to the Bay of Bahus, with the shattered remainders of his
Fleet; where he landed without the least opposition, and resolved to march to
West-Gothland, as a more commodious place for the subsistence of his Troops:
But, upon Information that there was a considerable Body of Horse upon the
Borders, to oppose his Passage, he was obliged to march Northwards, toward
Dalecarlia. In his way he besieged a Town called Obslo, which yielded on the
first Summons, not being in a condition to make any Resistance. After that he
stormed the Castle of Carlostadt, and some days after made himself Master of
Congel. These small Successes drew into his Army a great number of Country
People of Norway, encouraged with the hopes of plund'ring the Sweedish
Frontiers; and Archbishop Trolle joined him with some Troops he had raised in
Brandenburg.

Christiern had perhaps as little Respect for the Church of Rome as Gustavus;
but 'twas his Interest to appear a zealous Assertor of that Religion since his
Enemy was a professed Lutheran, and since the Success of his Designs depended
entirely on the Assistance of the Clergy and Catholics. He published a General
Pardon, by way of a Manifesto; in which he declared, That his principal Design
was the Re-establishment of the old Religion. This Declaration was
industriously dispersed by the Archbishop's Emissaries; who made it their
Business to persuade People every where, That Christiern had learned Wisdom and
Moderation in the School of Adversity; That he was become a mild, affable and
most gracious Prince; but especially, that in Flanders, and so near the House
of Austria, he had contracted an unalterable Affection and Zeal for the
Catholic Religion.

This Manifesto, and these private Insinuations drew into his Party many
Swedes, who still adhered to that Religion: And among others some Dalecarlians,
who invited him to march into their Province. These Peasants could not brook
the Change of Church Ceremonies, but, above all things, could not endure to
hear the Praises of God sung in their Mother Tongue. They offered to take up
Arms, and to declare for him, as soon as he should enter into their Province;
provided that he would oblige himself, after his Restoration, to cause all the
Lutherans to be burnt.

But his March into that Province was stopped by the Snow, that covered all the
Mountains which separate Dalecarlia from the Kingdom of Norway. However, that
he might find some Occupation for his Army, he advanced toward Akerhuys, and
laid Siege before it, notwithstanding the sharpness of the Winter. Magnus
Gyllenstiern, a Danish Lord, and Viceroy of Norway, got into the Place, and
resisted all the Promises and Threats with which Christiern endeavored to
corrupt his Fidelity. He dispatched several Couriers to King Frederick, his
Master, to acquaint him with the Enemy's Descent; assuring him, That Christiern
was very much straightened for want of Provisions, and that Akerhuys was so well
defended by the Snow and cold Weather, that he could hold out above Four
Months, in expectation of Relief from Denmark.

No sooner was the Sea open, but Frederick ordered his Fleet to put to Sea,
with a considerable Body of Landforces, under the Command of Canut
Gyllenstiern, Bishop elect of Odensee in Funen, and Erie Gyllenstiern, the
Viceroy of Norway's Brothers; Concluding, That they would use all possible
Diligence to save their Brother from falling into the Hands of a Prince, who,
without regarding the Faith of Treaties, seldom gave his Enemies Quarter.

Gustavns on the other side, sent several Detachments of his Forces, to cover
the Swedish Frontiers, with Orders to his Officers to observe Christiern's
Motions, and to act jointly with Frederick's Generals. He sent also a
considerable number of Troops into Dalecarlia, to prevent an Insurrection of
that rebellious People, and put himself at the head of the main Body of his
Army, to keep the Catholics and Malcontents from assisting the Rebels. The
two Danish Generals set sail for Norway, with a Design to attack Christiern's
Fleet; which they sound in the Bay of Bahuys, and burnt entirely, after a Fight
that lasted a whole day. After so important a Victory they landed their Forces,
and marched immediately to relieve the Viceroy.

Christiern, upon the News of the entire Destruction of his Fleet, and the
Descent of the Danes, raised the Siege of Akerhuys. He attempted once more to
enter Sweden by the way of West-Gothland, but met in his Way 3000 Swedish
Horse, who stopped his Passage. The Danes and Swedes advancing to attack him, he
threw himself into the little Town of Congel, where he entrenched himself, not
so much in hope of escaping from his Enemies, as to avoid the fatal Blow for
some Days. There he found himself invested on all Sides, surrounded with dismal
Mountains, that were still covered with Snow; in great want of Provisions, and
straightened with Hunger more than by his Enemies. He was naturally subject to
furious and violent Passions, which were sowr'd and heightened by his
Disasters: He grew so jealous and diffident that he suspected Tureiohanson of
entertaining a private Correspondence with King Gustavus, because he had told
him in Flanders, That there were few Horse in the Swedish Army; he looked upon
that unfor tunate Lord with an Indignation that seemed to denounce his
approaching Fate; and asked him, Whether the Troops that appeared upon the
Frontiers of Gothland were Squadrons of Swedish Women? The Great Marshal would
have replied in his own Vindication, but he was ordered to withdraw, and the
next day he was found in the Streets of Congel, wallowing in his Blood, having,
in all probability, been murdered the Night before, by secret Orders from
Christiern.

In the mean time, that miserable Prince perceived that his Ruin grew daily
more inevitable; the Famine increased in the Town, all the Avenues were
possessed by the Enemies, and their Trenches were so strong that 'twas
impossible to force 'em to fight. In these unhappy Circumstances, the starved
and despairing Christiern had not so much as the sad Comfort of hoping to die
with his Sword in his hand. Most of his Troops perished for hunger or deserted
before his Eyes; his Orders were slighted, and there was not the least shadow
of Discipline in his Army. Death, which seemed unavoidable, made 'em forsake a
Prince, who was neither loved nor feared. Many of his Officers fled into the
Danish Camp, and thought themselves happy to exchange their Liberty for Bread.

The Bishop of Odensee, moved with Compassion for a Prince, that had been his
Sovereign, offered him an Interview, to which Christiern consented, and both
repaired immediately to the Place appointed for their meeting. The Bishop
advised his late Sovereign to submit to less implacable Enemies than Hunger and
Misery, assuring him that 'twas still in his Power to procure honorable Terms
from the King, his Uncle, since the Royal Family of Oldenburg was possessed of
so many Sovereignties, that there might be a Treaty set on foot, to the
Advantage and Satisfaction of both Parties. He added, That if he would suffer
himself to be carried to Copenhagen^ Frederick's Resentment would be mitigated
at the Sight of an unfortunate Nephew; and at the same time he assured him,
That in case he could not obtain honorable Terms, suitable to his Birth and
Dignity he would bring him back to Norway, and even to Congel, of which he
owned him to be Master, or els^ would conduct him safe into the Emperor's
Territories.

Christiern was so sensible of the hopelessness of his present Condition, and
so earnestly importuned by his Soldiers to accept of such Advantageous
Proposals, that he consented to treat with that Prelate and his two Brothers,
who commanded the Danish Forces. He obtained a Safe Conduct and Provisions for
Archbishop Trolle and all his Party, and put himself into the Bishop's Hands:
Who, after some short stay in Norway, to settle Affairs in that Kingdom,
departed thence with Christiern, to whom he gave repeated Assurances as to the
Safety of his Person. But the Bishop, it seems, had exceeded his Commission;
without considering, That Princes seldom forgive Attempts upon their Crowns,
and that an Usurper can never promise himself a quiet Possession of his Dignity
while the dispossessed Prince is alive, and at Liberty.

As soon as Christiern arrived at Copenhagen, Aug. 2
King Frederick sent a Captain of his Guards to secure his Person, and carry
him to the Castle of Sonderburg; where he lay in Prison fourteen Years. It Is
true Christiern III. his Cousin German, Son and immediate Successor to
Frederick, did somewhat allay the Rigor of his Confinement; but he was forced
to purchase that Favor with a formal Resignation of his Right to the Crowns of
Denmark, Sweden and Norway. After his signing of that Act, he was suffered to
take the Divertisement of Hunting or Fishing; the Revenues of the Castle of
Calemburg and of the Isle of Sebergard were made over to him for his
Subsistence, and the Castle of Coldinger for his Habitation. There he was
treated like a Prince, as long as he lived; but, in the mean time, the
Governor of the Castle kept an Eye upon him, and was obliged to answer for the
Security of his Person.

Archbishop Trolle, his unfortunate and only Consident, retired to Lubeck by
Virtue of the safe Conduct he had got from the Bishop of Odensee. There he
formed some time after, a League with that Regency, and Prince Christopher of
Oldenburg, a Younger Son of that Family, with a design to release Christiern
II. who was still a Prisoner in the Castle of Sunderberg. In order to which
that Prelate levi'd Forces and scrupled not once more to profane the sanctity
of his Character: He was wounded and taken Prisoner in a Battle fought in Funen
betwixt the Forces of Christiern III. Lubeck; and was carried to Sleswick in
Holstein, where he di'd of his Wounds.

Gustavus, being thus happily delivered from all his Enemies, Reigned
afterward without any Disturbance or Molestation, and with as much Authority
as if the Crown had been his Birthright. All the Princes of Europe, that had
no dependency upon the House of Austria, gave him extraordinary marks of the
singular Esteem they had for his Personal Merit and Valor. Francis I. King of
France, notwithstanding their Difference in Point of Religion, sent him the
order of St. Michael, the only Order that was then established in France. A
desensive League was made betwixt these two Princes against the Emperor and the
House of Anstria, by which they were both engaged to Assist each other, in case
of War, with 6000 Men, to be paid by the Assistant; and, if Occasion required,
to Assist the Invaded Prince with 25000 Men and Fifty Ships. Gushavus was the
first King of Sweden, who raised the Reputation of the Crown, and made it
appear to the World, what Insurence it might have upon the general Affairs of
hurope. The Princes of the League of Smalcalden invited him to join with them
for the common Desence of their Religion, and thought themselves happy to have
so great a King on their side.

To complete his Happiness, there was nothing wanting but the fixing of the
Succession upon his Royal Issue. This was a very nice and difficult Point; for
the Nobility was extremely Jealous of that Privilege, well knowing that
Arbritary Power does commonly attend a Hereditary Succession, and that it would
by degrees destroy the Liberty of the Nation.

However the King called a meeting of the Estates of the Kingdom at Westeras,
to abrogate the Right and Custom of Election. He put 'em in mind of the great
Services his Family had done to Sweden, and of the fatal Consequences of the
Division; and Contests of opposite parties at Elections. His Anchority was
already so well Established that there was not one in the Assembly who durst
oppose his Designs. The Heads of the Principal Families, and the Ancient
Senators were killed in the Massacre of Stockholm, and the young Lords that
came into the World since his Accession to the Crown, were accustomed to a
blind Obedience. There was not the least Foot-step left of their former
Liberty, or of the Ancient constitution of their Government, so that the
Deputies consented with great Submission to the abrogating of the Right of
Election, in behalf of Prince Eric and the other Princes his Children and
Successors both in the direct and collateral Line.

This Resignation was solemnly entered as a Fundamental Law, called the
Hereditary Union, Christiern III. King of Denmark, who still pretended a Right
to the Crown of Sweden; for by this Hereditary Union the Treaty of Calmar was
entirely disannuli'd and abrogated. Christiern quartered the Three Crowns in
his Coat Armorial, which are the Royal Arms of Sweden, as a public Claim and
Mark of his Right to that Kingdom, under pretext that Queen Margaret the
Daughter of Waldemar Reigned over the three Kingdoms of the North; though 'twas
probably a like reason that made the Kings of Sweden take these Three Crowns
for their Arms, since they are found in the Shields and Seals of the Kings
Steric and Birger II. about the middle of the Twelfth Age.

King Gustavus sent an Embassy to Christiern, to complain of his Attempt; but
could obtain no satisfaction from a Young and Ambitious Prince, who was puffed
up with some Advantages he had gotten over the Hanse-Towns, and obstinately
resolved to pursue his Ancient Claim. Gustavus finding himself weakn'd and
spent with Age, and the Fatigues of War, concealed his Resentment; and did not
think it convenient to engage in a new War, or to hazard his Fortune and that
of his Children, at a time when he maintained his Authority rather by his
Reputation, than by his Valor. He was so far from dreading the opposition of a
pretended Claim against the actual Possession of a Crown which had lately been
Entailed upon his Issue by a Solemn Act, that he contented himself with
procuring a Treaty to be set on foot at Bromsebroo,

Gustavus, having thus settled a solid and durable Peace in his Dominions,
applied himself wholly to the Improvement of Trade; in order to which he
received into his Ports all Merchant Ships from France and Holland, that his
Subjects might be freed from their dependence on the Lubeckers, who were
possessed of the whole Trade of Sweden. He erected Citadels on the Frontiers of
his Kingdom, and built Royal Palaces in several Places with a Magnificence that
till then was unknown to the Swedes. Eric, that his Family might be supported
by a considerable Alliance. In pursuance of this design he cast his Eyes upon
Elizabeth Queen of England, who was then Courted with great Assiduity by the
greatest Princes of Europe. But that Politic Queen had the dexterity to manage
her Lovers as she pleased and to feed 'em all with hopes, according to her own
Inclination and the posture of her Affairs; by which it appeared, that she had
taken a secret Resolution never to Marry any of 'em.

Gustavus sent an Embassy to her, to propose a strict Alliance betwixt both
Nations; and the chief Ambassador was charged to feel her Pulse, as to this
Match. Denis Beure, the Prince's Governor, had that particular Commission from
the King. He was a Frenchman born, but a zealous Calvinist; who imagined that
if he could negotiate that Match for his Pupil, Calvinism in Sweden.

Queen Elizabeth received, with all the external Marks of kindness and respect,
the Proposals he made to her in the Name of his Master, relating to Trade, and
the Alliance or League betwixt the two Nations; and gave him a favorable
Answer with respect to Prince Eric, but only in general Terms. The Ambassador,
fancying that all her obliging Expressions concerning that Prince were real
Promises, made haste home to Stockholm, as if he had consummated his
Negotiation. At his return he assured the King, that nothing but the Prince's
Presence was wanting to bring it to perfection, and that he was consident his
good Mien and personal Merit would fix the Queen's Affections. Prince Eric,
flattered with so tempting a Prospect, was very earnest with the King his
Father, and pressed him hard to consent that he might take a Journey to
England. But Custavus, jealous of the Glory of his Family, would not expose the
presumptive Heir of the Crown to a Refusal, nor give his consent that he should
go out of the Kingdom, before some Articles were signed.

It Is possible a more important, but more secret Reason, induced the King to
reject that Voyage. Eric was a Prince endowed with many excellent natural
Qualities. He had a majestic Presence, an Air of Authority which drew Respect
from all Men, a fiery Briskness in his Behavior, and a certain Ardor that was
usually taken for Courage or Valor. But the luster of all these external
Advantages was obscured by some inward Defects that were not unknown to the
King his Father, which he was willing to hide from the English. This Prince
inherited a sort of Extravagancy or Distraction from the Queen his Mother,
which now and then seized upon his Brain, and prompted him to outrageous Acts:
There was a certain peevish Sulleness that appeared in his Behavior and
Actions, which by an odd kind of Contagion seemed to infect all those who
approached him. And in his most lucid Intervals he discovered so much hardness
and wildness of Temper, that People were afraid of his Government, even before
he was owned and declared to be the next Successor to the King his Father.

These Considerations made such an impression upon Gustavus, that he was
sometimes resolved to leave the Crown to his second Son, a generous and
good-natured Prince, who, by his Caresses and obliging Behavior, had won the
Hearts of all those who were to be his Brother's Subjects. But the King,
fearing lest this Preference would stir up a Civil War both in his Family and
Kingdom, resolved at last to regulate the Succession according to the order of
Birthright. In the mean time to satisfy Prince Eric, whom his Tutor had
inspired with a violent Passion for Queen Elizabeth, he consented at last, that
Prince John, his second Son, should go to the Court of England under pretense
of Traveling, and endeavor to draw at least a verbal Promise from the Queen.

This young Prince, being arrived at London, was received by Queen Elizabeth
with great Demonstrations of Joy. He had a share in all her Divertisements, and
she frequently invited him to Hunting. In short, that wise Princess, who made
those several Proposals of Marriage subservient to her Interest and politic
Ends, omitted nothing that might amuse the young Prince, by insinuating that
both his Presence and Proposals were agreeable to her. But she declined
engaging further in that Affair, pretending that she could not in the present
Juncture conclude that Marriage so soon as she could have wished.

Upon the return of this Prince into Sweden, the King presently concluded that
his eldest Son Prince Eric would have no better success in the Pursuit of this
Match, Philip II.
than the K. of Spain, the D. of Alenson, the Archduke of Austria, E. of
Leicester, my Lord Courtney, and so many others, whom this Princess had
flattered with the same Hopes, one after another, and often at the same time.
But Prince Eric was so deluded by his Tutor's Suggestions, that he imagined his
Presence would surmount all Obstacles; and pretended that his Brother had
thwarted his Inclination, either out of Jealousy or Self-interest. He solicited
the Senators and the King's Ministers, both by Entreaties and Threats, to
procure the King's Consent for him to go to the English Court. Gustavus
considering his fierce and unruly Temper, and fearing that he would either go
without his Consent, or raise some Disturbance in the State, was at last
persuaded to grant his Desire, and named the Persons that were to attend him.

Then he made his last Will, and divided his Dominions among the Princes his
Children: He left his Crown to Prince Eric, the Dukedom of Finland to Prince
John, East-Gothland to Magnus, and Sudermania to Charles. The younger Princes
being to enjoy their Provinces by the Title of Principalities, but on condition
of paying Homage and Fealty to the Crown of Sweden.

Prince Eric was so highly displeased at this Distribution, that he was ready
to take up Arms to demand the Revocation of the Will; but the fear of his
Father, who was King of his Children as well as of his Subjects, kept him in
awe. He concealed his Anger, with a Resolution to do himself Justice when the
supreme Power should fall into his Hands; and was just ready to set Sail for
England, when he was detained at the Port of Elsburg, by the News he received
of his Father's Decease.

That great Prince was seized at Stockholm with an inward Fever, that wasted
him by degrees; yet he continued still to manage Affairs with his usual
application, and resolved to Reign to the last moment of his Life. Some hours
before his Death he sent for Eric Steno the Secretary of State, to whom he
dictated Memoris concerning the most secret Affairs of the Kingdom. Then he
sent for the young Princes, and charged 'em to love one another, and submit
peaceably to Prince Eric, who was now ready to mount the Throne. He gave each
of 'em his Blessing, and made 'em presently withdraw, lest his Mind should be
disturbed by the Tears of his Family. He dismissed even his Physicians, (who in
that Extremity continued still to flatter him with hopes of Life,) that he
might spend the last moments of his Life in fixing his Thoughts wholly upon
God. Thus he died peaceably in the Arms of his Servants, Vpsal, Sept. 29.
where his Funeral was solemnized with public Orations and Panegyricks, with
the Tears of all his Subjects, and the immortal Memory of his glorious Actions.

He owed his Crown merely to his own Valor, and Reigned with as absolute a
Power as if the Crown had been his Birthright. He made what Alterations he
pleased in Religion, the Laws, and the Property of his Subjects, and yet died
adored by the People, and admired by the Nobility. He left his Kingdom in Peace
with all his Neighbors, secured by a League with France, and enriched by a
fiourishing Trade with all the Nations of Europe; the Revenues of the Crown
were much augmented, his Treasury full, his Arsenals well furnished; there was
a considerable Fleet in the Ports, the Frontier-places were fortified, and, in
a word, Sweden was in a condition to strike her Enemies with Terror, and
inspire her Allies with Respect.

A CHRONOLOGICAL ABRIDGMENT OF THE History of Sweden.
ALL Nations have had Historians that have spoken of the Antiquity of their
Original with so much Partiality and Exaggeration, that a considering Person
will hardly venture to depend upon the Authority of the Authors of ancient
Chronicles, and the Accounts of those remote times. The least Affinity of Names
is reckoned a sufficient Ground by most of those ancient or modern Writers, to
choose at pleasure among the ancient Hero's, and even among the first
Inhabitants of the World, such a Founder as they thought fit to name for their
Country. Among those Historians that are so fond of Antiquity and zealous for
the Honor of their Country, those who have published an entire Body of the
History of Sweden, have, in my Opinion, outdone all the Writers of other
Nations. They scruple not to affirm that Sweden is the ancientest Monarchy, not
only of the North, but even of all Europe. According to those creditious or too
partial Authors, Magog, Noah's Grandson, came from Scythia to Finland; from
whence, coasting the Gulf of Bothnia to Gothland, he settled his Son Gethar or
Gog, in that Country, who is said to have been the first Prince of the Goths;
and the Stock of the Royal Line. I will not undertake, in this place, to decide
that famous Question, whether Sweden be the original Habitation, or only a
Colony of the ancient Goths. Both these Opinions are asserted by several
Authors. But I am fully satisfied, that 'twou'd be a very difficult Task to
give a clear and distinct Account of the first Inhabitants of Sweden, from
whence they came, and when they settled in that Country. Nor would it be less
difficult to prove, what those ancient Chroniclers seem to suppose, that Sweden
had Kings almost as soon as Inhabitants; for it is probable, that the Heads of
Families were the first Princes of the Earth, and that Men did not voluntarily
submit to a Monarchical Government, till they were convinced, by a long
Experience, of the Inconveniences of a tumultuous Liberty.

But, supposing some ancient Manuscript had faithfully preserved the Names of
the several Lords that have Ruled in Sweden, Who can tell whether they were
Kings, or only Princes of some particular Country, or perhaps Judges and
Captains in their respective Jurisdictions? And it is even not improbable that
those Heads, whose Names are preserved, were Cotemporary, and at the same time
Governors of several Provinces; and that the reason why Historians ranked 'em
successively in their Writings, was, that they might have a longer series of
Kings, to fill up their Chronology. In the mean time it is certain, that there
is no fixed Era to be found in the History of Sweden, till about the middle of
the Twelfth Age; before which time the Relations of that Country are full of
Darkness and Confusion, History intermixed with Fables, and embellished with
fictitious Wonders, extracted from old Legends, or ancient Songs in heroic
Verse, which were the only Annals of those Times.

In those remote Ages, all the Princes and Hero's are either Giants or famous
Magicians, who signalize their Strength and pretended Power by robbing one
another, and by committing barbarous and unheard of Cruelties against their
Enemies. Justice and Honesty were unknown in those Ages, and even had not so
much as a Name among these barbarous Nations. All Controversies were decided by
force, the most violent Men were most respected, and 'twas reckoned a dishonor
for a Prince not to ravish a Princess, before he married her. A wild Beast
killed in the sight of the People, or an Enemy surpised and assassinated in
his House, was enough to make the bold Murderer a Hero while he lived, and
sometimes a God after his death.

I shall however give the Reader a Catalogue of those ancient Kings, as I have
collected 'em from Swedish Authors, beginning with Eric I. who reigned (as they
relate) 2000 Years before our Savior's Birth. The Chronology you will find in
the Margin, according to the computation of those Writers; but I shall assert
nothing till I come down to nearer Ages, where the Truth begins to appear with
more certainty and clearness.

THE Fabulous History OF SWEDEN.
Eric I. Years of the World.

THIS Prince's Birth is altogether unknown to us, Cimbric Chersonese, which at
present are part of the Kingdom of Denmark; but the Danish Historians will not
acknowledge the Truth of a Story that seems to have been invented by some
Swedish Writer, to raise his Nation to the Honor of Antiquity, and at the same
time to a kind of Superiority over the neighboring Nations.

Vddo, Alo, Othen, Charles I. Biorn, Gethar, Gylto.
We have no account of the Reigns of these Princes, their Names are preserved.
By some Authors they are called Judges: Nor is it known whether they governed
at the same time, or successively in several Provinces of the Kingdom.

An Interval of 400 Years, during which the Fabulous History is altogether
silent.

Othin.
A famous Magician,

Humblus.
If we may rely upon the Testimony of the Swedish Historians, Dan in the
Cimbric Chersonese, who lest his Name to the Country. Norus, his second Son,
went by his Orders into the most Northern Provinces, where he sounded the
Kingdom of Norway. One may easily perceive, that the Affinity of the Names Dan
with Danemark, and Norus with Norway, has given birth to this Story.

Sigtrug.
History is altogether silent concerning the For^une and Adventures of the
Posterity of Humblus: Only it is observed by the Swedish Authors, that Sigtrug
Usurped the supreme Power. It Is plain, that at that time there was no settled
Form of Government in Sweden; and it is probable the Crown was only Hereditary,
when the Sons of the deceast King were strong enough to maintain themselves in
that station; nor were they advanced to it, before they had signalized
themselves by some bold and extraordinary exploit.

Suibdager,
King of Norway, Denmark from Gram King of Cepers. The Swedes charmed with his
Valor, or awed by his Power, chose him for their Sovereign; by which Election
he saw himself at the same time absolute Lord of the three Northern Kingdoms.
This Prince, according to the Swedish History, is the first Foreigner upon whom
the Crown was conferred.

Hasinund,
Son and Successor of Suibdager, Danes.

Vffo,
Son and Successor, Hasinund, carried on a War against the Danes with success;
but at last Hading, King of Denmark, under color of an Interview for a Treaty
of Peace, drew him into a place, where he caused him to be Assassiinated.

Huning,
Vffo's Brother and Successor, Denmark to revenge the Death of his Brother,
changed of a sudden his violent hatred against his Enemy into an excess of
Friendship. A Solemn Peace was concluded betwixt these two Princes, with a
Solemn Oath on both sides, that upon the Death of either, the other should not
survive him. It happened not long after, that Hading was salsly reported to
have been Assassinated by his own Daughter; which Huning believing, resolved to
die according to his promise. In pusuance of this design, he regaled his
Friends and the chief Persons of the Kingdom with a sumptuous Entertainment,
and at the conclusion of the Feast, being Drunk, he threw himself into a deep
Tub full of Mead, and so drowned himself. Hading was vexed at the News, but
resolving to imitate the Generosity of his Friend, he very co^^ageously Hanged
himself in the sight of all his People; if there be any credit to be given to
those ancient Histories, or rather to the Histories of those Ancient Ages.

Regner,
The Son and Successor of Huning, Sweden, notwithstanding all the opposition of
his Mother-in-Law Torilla. He Governed his Subjects with much Equity and
Moderation. But these peaceful Virtues were so far from procuring him the Love
and Esteem of a Cruel and Barbarous People, that he was slighted and contemned,
because he would not gratify their savage Humor by Plundering the Neighboring
Countries, and perhaps also because he was too generous to cause his private
Enemies to be Assassinated.

Hothebrod,
The Son and Successor of Regner, Finlanders, Russes, Esthonians and
Curlandians: After which he Attacked Roe King of Denmark, whom he killed at the
Head of his Army. He pursued this Victory with so much vigor, that he made
himself Master of the whole Kingdom: But he did not long enjoy his Conquest;
for the Danes revolting at the instigation of Helgo Roe's Brother, Hothebrod
was routed and killed, and by this means the Swedes were expelled out of
Denmark. These pretended Conquests of Kingdoms were only Inrodes made by the
victorious party into the Enemies Country. For since there were no places of
strength where Garrisons could be left to secure the Conquest, as soon as the
Victorious Army retired with their Booty, the Conquered Nation took up Arms and
chose a new King or Captain, to Command 'em.

Attila I.
Succeeded his Father Hothebrod, and Married the Mother of Rool King of
Denmark. But that Match instead of producing a lasting Peace between the two
Kingdoms, and a good Understanding betwixt the Kings, served only to re-kindle
the War with greater fury than ever. The Queen of Sweden having seized upon the
Treasury of the King her Husband, fled to her Son in Denmark. Attila incensed
at her persidiousness, invaded Denmark with his Forces, and routed the Danes.
Rool was defeated and killed by one of the Swedish Generals, and Hother,
Attila's Brother was made King of Denmark.

Hother,
King of Sweden and Denmark, routed the Danes, Balder, a Prince of that Nation;
after which he marched against the Russes, but lost his Life in that Expedition.

Rodric.
This Victorious Prince, Russes, and subdued the Finlanders, Wendi, and
Slavonians.

Attila II,
The Son and Successor of Rotherick; Frovia General of the Danish Forces, and
killed him. Frovia left two Sons, who as soon as they were grown up to Age went
to Sweden, and offered their service to Attila, pretending to be Soldiers of
Fortune. They were received into the King's House whom they afterward
Assassinated to revenge the Death of their Father.

Botwil, Charles II, Grimmer, Lordon, Gothar, Adolphus, Algot, Eric II. Lindorp.
The Fabulous Chronology mentions only the names of those Nine Princes,

Alaric.
Under this Prince's Reign the Swedish Monarchy was divided into two Kingdoms,
Alaric reigning in Sweden, and Gestiblind in both the Gothlands. This Division
and the Neighborhood of two Barbarous Nations, occasioned Bloody Wars betwixt
'em. Alaric, according to the custom of those Times, challenged Gestiblind to a
single Combat; who declined it by reason of his Age, but offered in his stead
Eric Prince of Norway, who was come to his Assistance. These two Champions
fought with all the Fury and Obstinacy that Men are capable of, when they
resolve either to vanquish or die. Alaric was slain; and Gestiblind, to reward
Eric's Valor, not only gave him the Crown of Sweden, but appointed him his
Successor in the Kingdom of Gothland; by which means these two Crowns were not
long after reunited upon the Head of that Prince.

Eric III. surnamed the Wise.
This Prince lived in a profound Peace, Wise, which he preferred to that of
Brave and Courageous, though he really deserved it by the Valor he showed in the
Combat he fought with King Alaric.

Halden I.
The Son and Successor of Eric the Wise; A. C. 43.
he signalized himself in the Wars of Norway, and restored Fricdelef King of
Denmark to his Fathers Throne, from which he had been expelled by an Usurper.
Returning to Sweden at the Head of a Victorious Army, he resolved to make his
Will the only Standard and Rule of his Government. Upon which his Subjects
revolted, his Officers and Soldiers forsook him, and he was at last put to
Death by the Malcontents.

Siward,
Haldan's Son was owned for his Successor, Goths were again separated from the
Swedish Monarchy, and chose for their King a Prince called Charles of the
Family of their Ancient Kings; who to establish his Authority, made a League
with Harald King of Denmark, and gave him his Daughter in Marriage. Siward, to
prevent the ill consequences of the Confederacy gave his Daughter Vlvilda to
Frotho the King of Denmark's Brother; who by reason of his Valor was more
respected among the Danes, than the King his Brother. These cross Matches
kindled a civil War in Denmark, and Frotho was supported by those who admired
and endeavored to imitate his Bravery. He fought with the King his Brother,
routed his Army, and slew him with his own hand in the heat of the Fight. King
Harald left two Sons, Haldan and Harald, who, to revenge their Father's Death,
surpised Frotho in his House, Burnt him alive, and Stoned Queen Vlvilda. This
furious piece of Revenge, which was esteemed by those Barbarous People as a
most brave and generous Act, made all the Danes unanimously resolve to follow
the young Princes. They Marched into Sweden, gave Battle to King Siward, cut
his Army in pieces, and slew him in the Fight.

Eric IV.
The two victorious Brothers divided their Conquests; Denmark falling to
Harald's lot, and Sweden to Haldan's. But the Swedes set up Eric, Siward's
Grandchild against Haldan; which occasioned a new civil War. Eric was
victorious for several times on Land. But Harald, coming with a great Fleet to
his Brother's Assistance, routed Eric's Navy, who rather than yield up himself
to his Enemies Mercy threw himself into the Sea.

Haldan II,
Succeeded Eric, Siward and his seven Sons, whom he killed in a single Combat:
Such great Exploits procured him the admiration of the Swedes, who celebrated
his praise in their Heroic Songs, and after his Decease ranked him among their
greatest Heroes.

Vnguin.
This Prince, Goths, was appointed by Haldan for his Successor to the Crown of
Sweden. But the Swedes resolving to maintain their Privilege of choosing their
own Master, Elected Raguald. One Battle decided the Difference, in which Vnguin
was slain by Raguald.

Raguald.
This Prince, Vnguin, pursued Siguald his Son to Denmark, whither he had
retired, who, being assisted by the Danes, gave him Battle in Seland, and
killed him with his own Hand at the Head of both Armies.

Amund.
He succeeded his Father Raguald, Denmark, where they occasioned great
disorders. If we may believe the Chronicles, 'twas the usual custom of Young
Princes in those Times to Travel through the Neighboring Countries in quest of
hazardous Adventures to signalize their Courage and Valor. To kill a Giant in
single Combat, or a Wild Beast in the presence of a King; to carry away a Young
Princess, and to Debauch or Ravish a Queen, were reckoned among their Noblest
Exploits, and worthy of Immortal Honor. And the bold Hero at his return to his
Country was always preferred before the rest of his Brothers when the Throne
became vacant by his Father's Death.

Haquin.
This Prince during the life of his Father Amund, Denmark, routed King Sigar in
a pitched Battle, and put the whole Country under Military Execution, to
revenge the Death of his Brothers, who were killed by the King of Denmark's
order. He was advanced to the Throne after his Father's Death, and had the good
fortune to die in peace; nor was the tranquillity of his Reign disturbed by any
Civil or Foreign War.

Osten.
He was the Son of Gether King of Norway, Sweden by Election. To revenge his
Father's Death, who was Assassinated by the Norwegians for his cruelty; he
entered that Kingdom at the head of his Army, and having destroyed the whole
Country with Fire and Sword, without sparing either Age or Sex, he appointed
his Dog to reign over 'em, as reckoning 'em unworthy to obey a Man. Perhaps
this Story is a mere Fable occasioned by a punning Allusion to the Name of the
Person whom he entrusted with the Government during his absence; though, if we
consider the wild and barbarous Genius of that Age, it, may not improbably be
supposed that he gave the Title of Viceroy to a real Dog: Nor will that Act of
Revenge seem more surprizingly extravagant, than the fantastical Humor of a
certain Roman Emperor, Caligula.
who made his Horse a Consul.

Alver.
This Prince being one of the most considerable Persons of the Swedish Nation
was chosen King after the Death of Osten. Russians, and made 'em tributary to
the Crown of Sweden. He died in Peace after a short Reign.

Ingo.
He was chosen King after the Death of his Father Alver, and fixed his
residence at Vpsal, Vpsal, to distinguish themselves from other Petty
Sovereigns, who founded little Monarchies in several Provinces of the Kingdom.

Fiolmus.
History has only preserved the Name of this Prince, Swedish Chronicles.

Ingell.
He was so incenst at his Brother Olaus for admonishing him of his Wife's
Infidelity, Ingell, who was killed by Olaus.

Germunder,
The Son and Successor of Ingell. Harald King of Denmark, his Brother-in-Law,
who finding himself unable to sustain the Shock of so potent an Enemy, begged a
Peace, and having obtained it, desired Germunder to make a visit to the Queen
his Sister. Immediately that unfortunate Prince Disbanded his Army, and went to
the Court of Denmark, where he was apprehended and afterward hanged by the
Command of the Treacherous Harald, in the sight of all his Vassals whom he
invited to be Witnesses of that dismal Spectale.

'Twas not the custom in those days to exchange Hostages; the Kings kept no
Guards, nor did their Household consist of a numerous Train of Officers. During
the War they were served by the principal Persons of the Nation; but as soon as
a Peace was concluded, every man retired to his own House, and left the Prince
alone with his Family and Domestic Servants.

Haquin Ringo.
No sooner was the Young Prince able to bear Arms, English, Irish, and Saxons
declared for the King of Denmark, and Haquin was Assisted by the Norwegians,
Curlandians and Esthonians. The two contending Princes Armed all their
Subjects, and even the Women were inspired with a generous Ambition to obtain a
share both in the Hazard and Glory of so important an Action. Hetha Commanded a
company of Women in the Swedish Army, and Visna marched under the Danish
Standards. At last the two Armies came to a decisive Battle, in which Harald
was killed, and the victorious Haquin having made himself Master of Denmark
entrusted Hetl^a with the Government of that Conquered Kingdom. Historians
observe that the King of Sweden owed his Victory to the Valor of the
Dalecarlians who inhabit one of the Northern Provinces of that Country.

Egil.
The Son and Successor of Haquin. Amund King of Denmark, subdued a seditious
party that rebelled against him, and after all was unfortunately killed by a
Wild Ox at Hunting.

Gother.
He seized and carried away the Daughter of Amund King of Denmark, Schonen and
Haland which belonged to the Danes. At last he was killed by his own Subjects
who revolted against him for establishing some new Laws that seemed to encroach
on the Privileges and Liberty of the Nation.

Adelus.
Gother was succeeded by his Son Adelus, Danes to revenge the Death of his
Sister who lost her life by the ill-grounded jealousy of her Husband, Jammeric
King of Denmark. The King of Sweden invaded Denmark and besieged that cruel
Prince who was no less odious to his own Subjects than to his Enemies. Jammeric
was taken after a Siege that lasted some Months, and his Legs and Arms were cut
off by the Victorious Swedes, who pillaged his Treasures, and reunited the
Provinces of Schonen, Haland and Bleking to Gothland, from which they were
formerly dismembered.

Ostan.
This Prince lost both his Crown and his Life by endeavoring to impose a Tax
upon his Subjects:

It Is plain from this instance, and from the History of the preceding Kings,
that the fate of those Princes seemed to be in the Power, and to depend upon
the Humor of their Subjects.

Ingomar.
Historians relate that Gothland was at that time subject to a distinct King,
Snio King of Denmark and Ingomar King of Sweden were both Captivated by the
Charms of that young Beauty; and though the former was more agreeable to the
Daughter, the latter was preferred by the Father who made the King of Sweden
happy in the Possession of his Mistress with the Reversion of a Crown for her
Dowry. The King of Denmark could not patiently bear the loss of so considerable
a Prize: He entered Sweden at the Head of an Army, and having vanquished his
Rival, he seized on the fair Queen, who without reluctance followed the
Conqueror of her Husband. But Ingomar was rather irritated than discouraged by
his mifortune: He made new Levies, invaded Denmark, routed and killed Snio, and
was so far from scrupling to receive his Beautiful Wife, that the difficulty of
the Conquest served only to lighten the pleasure of the Victory. At last he was
killed in a War which he undertook against the Russes.

Halstan I. Raguard, Wartman, Lordon, Rodolph, Gostag, Arthur, Haquin, Charles
IV. Charles V. Birger, Eric V. Torril, Biorn II. Alaric II.
Here there is a long Interruption in the Swedish History; Ninth Age are
preserved, the Memory of their Actions is entirely lost, neither do we find in
the Chronicles so much as an account of their Families.

Biorn III.
The reign of this Prince may be reckoned a considerable Era in the History of
Sweden: Lewis the Gentle sent Angsarus Bishop of Breme, who preached the
Christian Doctrine in that Kingdom, and converted several Petty Kings. But
notwithstanding all the labors of that Prelate, Idolatry prevailed in the
Kingdom till the end of the Tenth Age, when the People began to erect Churches
to the Honor of the true GOD, under the Reign of King Olaus the Tributary, who
openly professed the Christian Religion.

Braut-amund,
This Prince perceiving that the People were very numerous, Grounds and
bestowed 'em on his Subjects, who by way of acknowledgment were obliged either
to pay a certain Tribute, or to Assist the King on Horseback in time of War.
From hence we may reckon the Original of the Fiefs of this Kingdom, which at
first held immediately of the Crown, but were afterward usurped by the Clergy
and Nobility. King Braut-amund did not long enjoy the Advantage of this new
settlement; for his Brother Sivard rebelled against him, and killed him at the
head of his Army, in the third Year of his Reign.

Sivard II.
The Swedes immediately placed the Crown on the head of the Victorious Rebel,
Force was the supreme Law, and a fortunate Malefactor was praised and rewarded
for a Crime that would have been severely punished if it had not been attended
with success. Sivard seeing himself fixed on the Throne Invaded the Norwegians,
whom he surpised before they could put themselves in a posture of defense: He
pillaged the whole Country, ravished the most Beautiful Women, and after he
had satiated his own Lust, left 'em to be abused by the chief Captains of his
Army. But these Barbarities were in some measure expiated by the speedy
Vengeance that overtook the impious Tyrant: The Norwegians, animated with
Despair and Fury, made head against their Oppressor, the very Women ran to
Arms, and Sivard himself fell by the hand of one of those Heroins whom he had
abused, as a Sacrifice to her injured Virtue, and to the Honor of the Nation.

Herot.
This Prince had a Daughter who was reputed a complete Beauty: Regner King of
Denmark demanded her for his Wife; but the King of Sweden, according to the
usual custom of those Times would not bestow the Princess upon him till he had
signalized his Courage by fighting against two Bears of a prodigious bigness,
who infested the Country about Vpsal. Regner accepted the condition, slew the
two Bears, and received the dear Recompense of his Valor. Some Authors relate
that these pretended Bears were two Robbers who made a terrible havoc in the
Country, and for that Reason were called Wild Beasts by the People.

Charles VI.
He was Elected by the unanimous consent of the Swedes, 's Children being
excluded from the Succession. One of the Sons of the Decea'd King was incited
by his Brother-in-Law, Regner King of Denmark, to oppose the pretended
injustice of that Election. Great preparations were made on both sides, and at
last they came to a decisive Battle, which put an end to the dispute by the
Death of both the Competitors. But though neither of the two contending Parties
could boast of their success; Regner looked upon the defeat of both as an
important Victory, and during the general disorder made his Son Biorn, King of
Sweden.

Biorn IV.
Biorn was the Son of Regner King of Denmark, Herot King of Sweden. He
endeavored to make himself the absolute Master of his Subjects, and treated 'em
as conquered Slaves. But he was at last convinced of the impracticableness of
that attempt, and that he had to do with a People who loved their Liberty too
well to suffer a stranger to deprive 'em of it; for they took up Arms against
their Oppressor, and forced him to retire to Norway.

Ingiald.
After the flight of Biorn, the Grandson of Braut-amund, was advanced to the
Throne at the desire of the whole Nation. It Is said that he was nourished in
his Youth with the Hearts of Wolves, to make him Strong and Fierce, and that
his Temper and Actions were suitable to his Food and Education. The
Inauguration of the Prince, and the Ceremony of taking Possession of the Crown
consisted at that time in a splended Feast, to which all the principal Persons
of the Kingdom were invited by their new Sovereign. As Soon as the Entertainment
was over, a large Vessel called Bragagebar was filled with Wine, which the
Prince was obliged to Drink up before he mounted the Throne. Then he Swore
solemnly to extend the Limits of the Kingdom, and to make his Enemies feel the
weight of his Sword. Ingiald took this Oath at his Accession to the Crown,
which was accompanied with all the usual Ceremonies. Most of the Provinces in
the Kingdom were at that time subject to distinct Kings, who only paid Homage
to the King of Vpsal when they were over-awed by his Power. Ingiald, according
to the custom, invited 'em to the Solemnity of his Coronation, and regaled 'em
with a great deal of Magnificence; but the Scene was changed at night: For the
King of Vpsal resolving to rid himself of so many petty Sovereigns who seldom
owned his Authority but when they were forced to obey him, ordered 'em to be
burnt in the House whither they retired after the Feast, and immediately seized
upon their Estates, and on the Government of their Provinces. This open
violation of the Law of Nations, and of the public Liberberty of Sweden,
rendered the King so odious to his People, that when his Dominions were invaded
by the King of Denmark, they refused to Assist him. Thus he saw in himself a
memorable Instance of the Vanity of a mere titular Sovereignty, and of the
weakness of a King that does not reign in the Hearts of his Subjects. The
Danish Army advanced without opposition, and the unfortunate Ingiald fearing
least he should fall into the Hands of his Enemy, burnt himself in his House
with his whole Family.

Olaus Tratelia.
The surname of Trataelia was given him, Braut-amund, he disforested several
Lands, which he bestowed as Fief^ upon his Subjects; so that almost all the
tilled Ground in the Kingdom was at that time tributary to the Crown.

Ingo II.
The Son and Successor of Olaus. Peaceable Prince, and consequently despised by
his fierce Subjects, who delighted in nothing else but War.

Eric VI.
He owed his Advancement to his own subtlety, Swedes who took him for a
profound Magician. He persuaded 'em that the Winds and Tempests were at his
disposal, and by that means easily gained the Respect and Admiration of a rude
and barbarous Nation.

Eric VII. surnamed the Victorious.
This Prince is somewhat better known in History than his Predecessors. Baltic
Sea with an Army, made a descent into Livo^ia, and made himself Master of that
Province. He enlarged his Dominions with the Addition of the Provinces of
Schonen and Haland which he conquered from the Danes, and after a long series
of Victories did, beloved of his Subjects and feared by his Neighbors and
Enemies.

Eric VIII.
He was converted by two Priests, called Adelwart and Steven, who came from
Hamburgh to Preach the Christian Doctrine in Sweden; and signalized his Zeal by
ordering the Idolatrous Temple at Vpsal to be demolished. But the People
looking upon that Action as a Sacrilegious contempt of their Gods, Assassinated
the King and the two German Missionaries; so that both he and they seem to have
a just right to the glorious Title of Martyrs.

Olaus the Tributary.
He succeeded his Brother Eric, and was so far from being discouraged by that
Prince's cruel and untimely Death, that he made open profession of the
Christian Religion. Some Authors reckon him the first Christian King of Sweden,
because under his Reign there were several Churches built to the Honor of the
true God, and the People were generally converted to the Christian Faith, by
the Ministry of certain English Priests, who notwithstanding the seeming
Purity of their Zeal, were accused of promoting their own Interest, and
carrying on their Politic designs under the specious pretext of propagating
the Gospel. For 'twas by their advice that Olaus made his Kingdom subject to
the Holy-See, and obliged his Subjects to pay a certain Tribute to the Pope,
which was commonly called Peter's Pence. But his Successors soon grew weary of
that Religious Bondage, and abrogated an imposition that was found to be
burdensome to the People, and prejudicial to the Crown.

Amund the Burner,
The Son and Successor of Olaus. Burner, because he ordained that when any man
injured his Neighbor, his House should be burnt; from whence it may observed
that the Swedes were still a very rude and barbarous People about the beginning
of the eleventh Age. This Prince was killed in a Battle against Canut the Rich,
King of Denmark.

Emund Slemme.
The difference betwixt the Crowns of Sweden and Denmark concerning Schonen was
terminated by a Treaty to the prejudice of the former, Denmark, which they had
always reckoned a part of Gothland. It Is almost impossible to read the History
of these Nations without observing the many advantages that a crafty Politician
has over a blunt Soldier; for there is hardly one Treaty recorded in their
Chronicles, in which a considering Reader may not find several remarkable
Instances of the subtlety of the Danish Ministers in the Management of
Negociations. Their Wit did more Execution than the Swedish Valor; and with
one dash of a Pen they could easily heal the Wounds they received by the Swords
of their Enemies.

Haquin the Red.
After the Death of Emund there was a warm dispute about the Election of a new
King. Swedes Voted for Stenchil whose Mother was Olaus the Tributarie's
Daughter: And the People of Gethland declared unanimously for their Countryman
Haquin, who was the Son of a Peasant, but celebrated for his Valor and Courage.
However the two Competitors submitted to a friend^. Agreement, though in those
Times such controversies were wont to be decided in a single Combat. Haquin who
was already very Ancient Reigned First, and left the Crown to Stenchil, who was
appointed to Succeed him.

Stenthil II.
He made it his principal care to execute the Laws and defend the Established
Religion;

Ingo III.
The whole Nation approved the Election of a Prince, curb and subdue several
petty Tyrants that oppressed the People, but he perished in the Attempt; for he
was surpised in his House, and Barbarously Murdered by the disaffected Party.

Halstan,
Succeeded his Brother Ingo. Swedes love and admire these peaceful Virtues.

Philip,
Succeeded his Father Halstan both in his Dignity and Virtues. Folquingians,
who were entrusted with a very considerable share in the Government by several
succeeding Princes.

Ingo IV,
Succeeded his Father Philip, Ostrogoth Lords who dreaded his Power and Justice.

Under the five last Reigns, Sweden enjoyed a profound and uninterrupted Peace.
This may be justly reckoned the Golden Age of that Monarchy, during which the
public Tranquillity was neither disturbed by Civil nor Foreign Wars. And it
ought to be observed that the People owed their Happiness to the Wisdom and
Moderation of those Princes, who were equally careful to abstain from invading
the Dominions of their Neighbors and from incroaching upon the Liberty and
Privileges of their Subjects.

Raguald.
The Swedes were of too fierce and active a Temper to relish the soft delights
of Peace. Raguald, merely on the score of his Strength and of the largeness of
his Stature. But they were soon convinced of their imprudence in lodging the
Sovereign Authority in the hands of a cruel and violent Prince, who hated and
contemned the Laws and Privileges of his Country, and made it his only care to
extend the Prerogative of the Crown, and to establish an Arbitrary and Despotic
Power, in a Country where the Kings were almost only considered as the Captains
or Generals of the People. They loved a Warlike Prince, but could not endure a
Tyrant; and since he treated 'em as Slaves they resolved to treat him as an
Enemy. According to the custom of those Times when the King entered into any
Province, he received Hostages from the Inhabitants for the security of his
Person, and was obliged to give Hostages for the security of their Privileges.
But the fierce and haughty Raguald scorning to imitate his Predecessors,
entered West-Gothland in Arms; and the People resolving to maintain so
important a Ceremony, assaulted that imperious Prince, and killed him in his
Passage through their Territories.

Suercher II.
Raguald had mortified the Swedes so effectually, Suercher was Elected by the
unanimous consent of the whole Nation, and was both an exact Administrator of
Justice, and a Zealous promoter of Religion. But the Quiet and Happiness of his
Reign was disturbed by the Extravagancies of his lewd and unruly Son, who was a
professed Enemy both to the Religion and Laws of his Country. He made an
Irruption into Haland at the head of a Company of Robbers and other Licentious
Villains, the wicked Instruments of his Criminal passions, and seizing on the
Wife and Sister of the Governor of that Province, abused 'em in a most
Barbarous manner, and afterward exposed 'em to the brutish Lust of his
Followers. The Danes took up Arms to pursue the Ravisher; the Swedes would not
Assist a Prince whom they looked upon as the scandal of their Nation; and
Suercher soon after received the Melancholy News of the Death of his unhappy
Son, who was Attacked and killed by the Danes, with his infamous Retinue. Nor
was this the only disaster that befell the unfortunate Suercher; for he was
Assassinated in his Sled by a company of disaffected Persons as he was going to
Church with his Family and Servants. The Illustrious Family of the Counts of
Brahe reckon their descent from this Prince.

The succeeding History and Chronology of the Swedish Monarchy is more certain
and exact.

Eric IX.
After the Death of Suercher, Sweden was again separated into two distinct
Kingdoms. The inhabitants of both the Gothlands voted for Charles the Son of
Suercher; but the rest of the Swedes declared for Eric, whose Posterity enjoyed
the Sovereign Authority for the space of 200 Years. His Valor recommended him
to their choice, and his Piety procured him the Title of a Saint after his
Death. He entered Finland at the head of an Army; but that Expedition was not
so much an effect of his Ambition or Desire of Glory, as of his zeal for
propagating the Christian Religion. Nor did he content himself with opening a
way to the Missionaries who were sent thither to preach the Gospel, but became
an Apostle himself, and endeavored with all possible Ardor and Application to
complete the conversion of that People. He collected the Ancient Laws of the
Kingdom into one Body, and added new Edicts or Statutes that were of excellent
importance for the advantage and security of the public: But these peaceful
virtues were so far from gaining the hearts of a people that were accustomed to
live by Robbing and Plundering each other, that they were extremely incensed
against their Religious Prince for attempting to establish and execute the Laws
of Justice and Equity at a time and in a Country, in which Force and Power were
reckoned sufficient Arguments to excuse, and even to justify Injury and
Oppression. The devout King Eric was Barbarously Assassinated by his seditious
Subjects; and the King of Gothland was suspected of encouraging, and
corresponding with the Rebels.

Charles VII.
The Swedes advanced this Prince to the Throne, Gothlands might be reunited to
the Crown. He took all possible care to keep his Subjects from suspecting that
he had a Hand in the death of his Predecessor. In pursuance of that design, he
began the Exercise of his Regal Authority by ordaining that all the Laws of St.
Eric should be punctually observed: He recalled Canut, that Prince's Son, who
after his Fathers Death had made his escape into Norway: And to remove all the
pretexts that might be used for embroiling the Kingdom in a civil War, he made
a Law that Canut should inherit the Crown after his Death, and that for ever
afterward the King should be chosen by turns out of the two Royal Families.
Afterward he erected several Monasteries to gain the Esteem and Affection of
the People, who are always extremely fond of such external Marks of Piety and
Devotion.

He sent an Embassy to Rome to obtain from Pope Alexander III. the Title of
Archbishop, and the Pallium for the Bishop of Vpsal, who was Primate of the
Kingdom. The Pope was easily prevailed with to grant, or rather to sell him the
favor he desired, according to the usual Maxims of the Court of Rome; and that
Prelate was invested with the Archiepiscopal Dignity, on condition that the
Estates of all those who died without Children in the Kingdom should be
entailed upon the Holy-See; but the Swedes soon grew weary of that Religious
B^^dage, and freed themselves from so (...).

Canut.
Though King Charles had made a solemn Law to settle the Succession upon this
Prince, Norway, and resolving at once to recover the Throne, and revenge the
Death of his Father, he invaded Sweden, routed King Charles, killed him in the
Battle, and by that Victory made himself Master of the Kingdom. He lest no
means unattempted to extirpate the whole Race of his Predecessor; but since
'twas never in the power of a Tyrant to secure his Ursupation by the Death of
his Successor, all the cruel Diligence with which he persecuted the Family of
the late King, could not hinder the Swedes from Electing Suercher the Son of
that Prince, according to the Law by which 'twas ordained that the two Families
should enjoy the Crown by turns.

Suercher III.
This Prince imitating the Barbarous policy of his Predecessor, Eric. But one
of those Princes escaped his fury, and raised an Army to make head against his
Persecutor.

Eric X.
He defeated King Suercher in a Battle, Charles for regulating the Succession;
and to convince the posterity of that Prince that he really designed to put the
Treaty in Execution, he appointed John the Son of Suercher to succeed him,
excluding his own Son Prince Eric, who was obliged to content himself with a
distant prospect of inheriting the Crown after the Death of Prince John.

John I.
He conquered some places in Livonia, Esthonians renounce the Idolatry that
prevailed among 'em: But the People of that Country looking upon their forced
Conversion as a sort of Slavery, took up Arms and drove the Swedes out of their
Province. In the mean time King John Died in the Isle of Wiensingso, after he
had reigned three years.

Eric XI. called the Stammerer.
He was the Son of Eric X, Regency of Lubeck. The Danes Besieged that City with
a numerous Army, and shut up the Port with an Iron Chain, which was defended by
a potent Fleet. But when the City was reduced to the utmost extremity, the King
of Sweden sent a considerable number of Ships manned with Soldiers, under the
Convoy of several Men of War, who beat the Danes, opened a passage through their
Squadrons, broke the Chain, with which the Mouth of the River Trave was blocked
up, relieved the City with Men, Provisions and Ammunition, and by that
seasonable and important supply delivered the Republic from the Danish Yoke.
The Regency, as a Testimony of the public gratitude for so signal a
Deliverance, ordained that the Swedish Merchant Ships should from that time be
exempted from the payment of Customs and Duties.

Waldemar.
Suercher should have had their turn in the Election, by virtue of the Treaty
concluded with the House of Eric: But it seems the Swedes had either forgotten
or neglected that Agreement; for though Eric the Stammerer left no Issue, they
Elected Waldemar the Son of that Prince's Sister, and of Ierl or Count Birger,
who was General of the Swedish Forces during the preceding Reign. It may
perhaps appear strange that the Son, though an Infant, was preferred before his
Father; but it is plain from the Swedish History that though the Kingdom was
always Elective, 'twas the perpetual custom of the People to choose a Prince of
the Royal Family, preferrably to all the other Lords of the Kingdom. In the
mean time the Count or Ierl Birger was entrusted with the care of the
Government, during the Minority of King Waldemar: And that Wise Lord, who was
his own Son's Minister, made it his principal Care to raise the Honor and
Authority of the Crown. He concluded a Peace with the Neighboring Princes, and
then applied himself wholly to the contriving and pursuing of those Maxims that
might make him absolute in the Kingdom. He built and fortified the City of
Stockholm, instituted good and useful Laws, and exacted a punctual observance
of 'em. Upon advice that some Lords began to grow Jealous of his Authority, and
to complain that he made an ill use of it, he suppressed those brooding
Commotions, by ordering the principal Fomenters of 'em to be beheaded.
Afterward he married the King his Son to Sophi: the Daughter of Eric King of
Demark, that the Authority of his Family might be secured by so powerful an
Alliance. As soon as the young Prince was of Age, he advanced his Father from
the Dignity and Title of a Ierl to that of a Duke, as a Recompense for his
paternal Care; and by his Father's Advice he created his Brother Magnus Prince
of Sadermania, Eric Prince of Smaland, and Benedict Prince of Finland. Birger
having s^ttl'd his Family, and established his Son upon the Throne, died not
long after; and the Peace and Happiness of Sweden ended with the Life of that
Great Man.

King Waldemar repenting his Kindness to the Princes his Brothers, endeavored
to deprive 'em of the Estates he had bestowed on 'em by way of Appenn^ge,
especially Duke Magnus, whom he accused of aspiring to the Crown. These
Animosities occasioned a furious intestine War, which was fomented by the
Danes, and ended in the Defeat and Abdication of King Waldemar, who was taken
Prisoner, and after he had resigned the Crown retired with his Danish
Auxiliaries to Malmogen in the Province of Schonen.

Magnus Ladisias.
The Merit of this Prince entitled him to the Possession of the Crown, Meler,
Wener, Weter, and Hielmer, and all the Duties or Rents of the difforested (...)
were solemnly vested in the Crown.

This wise Prince made use of so considerable an Augmentation of his Revenues
to secure his Authority against the natural Inconstancy of a Nation, that could
neither live without a King nor submit to the Dominion of a potent and resolute
Prince. He invited several German Lords to his Court, and advanced 'em to the
principal Offices in the Kingdom. The Promotion of these Strangers, and the
Interest which the King had in Foreign Countries made the Swedish Lords
extremely uneasy, and at last irritated 'em to such a degree that they
assassinated all the Germans. The King was highly incensed at so bold an
Action, but had the Prudence to conceal his Indignation: In the mean time he
made secret Levies, and as soon as he saw himself in a condition to execute his
Revenge, he surpised the Malcontents and caused their principal Ringleaders
to be beheaded. The Spirit of Rebellion seemed to be quite extinguished by the
Severity of so terrible a Blow, and that wise and daring Prince would have
certainly established his Authority upon such sure Foundations, and advanced it
to so great a height, that he might have bequeathed an absolute Power to his
Children, if the Accomplishment of his Designs had not been prevented by his
Death. He left three Sons, Birger, Eric, and Waldemar, the eldest of whom was
not 11 years old

Birger II.
During the Minority of this Prince, the Care of the Government was entrusted
to Torckel Enutson, who made himself Master of Carelia, took Hexholm from the
Russes, and fortified Wiburg, to cover the neighboring Places from the
Incursions of that People. After the King was of Age to undertake the
Management of Affairs, he married Meretta the Daughter of Eric, King of
Denmark; Prince Waldemar his Brother toook to Wise the Daughter of the Regent
Enutson, and Prince Eric married Ingeburgh the Daughter of Haquin King of
Norway. This Prince was so far from being deterred by the Fa^^ of his Uncle
King Waldemar, that he seemed re(...) follow the same Methods which occasioned
all the Disorders that discurb'd the Reign of that Prince. He sei^d on the
Tithes, and imprisoned some Bishops, who took the liberty to complain of his
Incroaching upon their Privileges. Nor did the Princes his Brothers meet with a
better Treatment; for instead of suffering 'em to live unmolested in their
respective Governments, he endeavored to make 'em depend absolutely on the
Court, and to reduce 'em to an entire subjection to his arbitrary Commands. The
injured Princes, perceiving the general Dissatisfaction of the People, took up
Arms, and were followed by all those who were offended at the public Violation
of their Liberty and Privileges. In the mean time the King levied Forces to
oppose the Designs of his Brothers, and was assisted by his Brother-in-law the
King of Denmark: But finding himself unable to resist the prevailing Faction,
he resolved to execute his Designs by Treachery, since he could not depend upon
the Success of his Arms. In pursuance of that unmanly Resolution, he invited
his Brothers to Court, under the pretext of a sincere Reconciliation, and as
soon as he had made himself Master of their Persons, by that infamous
Stratagem, he ordered 'em to be cast into a Dungeon, where they were starved to
death.

The Swedes abhorring the Baseness and Inhumanity of their Treacherous
Sovereign, took up Arms immediately, advanced Magnus, the Son of Duke Eric to
the Throne, and marched in pursuit of King Birger, who had the Misfortune to
see his Army defeated and his Son taken Prisoner by his Enemies. That unhappy
Prince was made a Sacrifice to the Fury of the incensed Multitude, who cut off
his Head to deliver Magnus from so dangerous a Competitor; and his miserable
Father dreading the same Fate, fled to Denmark, where he died in an obscure and
ignominious Retreat.

The Reader will find, at the beginning of this Work, the Names of the
succeeding Princes, with a short account of their Actions.
1330 Magnus Smeck, the Son of Duke Eric. 1372 Albert of Mecklenburg. 1395
Margaret, the Daughter of Waldemar K. of Denmark and Q. of the three Northern
Nations. 1424 Eric XIII. Duke of Pomerania, Sovereign of the three Kingdoms of
the North. 1441 Christopher of Bavaria, K. of the three Northern Nations. 1445
Charles Canutson, a Swedish Lord, elected K of Sweden and Norway 1457
Christiern of Oldenburg, Ancestor of the present King of Denmark. King of the
three Northern Nations. 1470. Steno I. King Canu^son's Nephew, Administrater of
the Kingdom of Sweden. 1504 Suanto Sturius, Administrater of Sweden. 1512 Stero
II. the Son of Suanto, Administrator. 1520 Christiern II. Sovereign of the ^
Kingdoms of the North. 1523 Gustavus Vasa, a Swedish Lord, Administrator, and
afterward King of Sweden, procures the Crown to be entailed
A Table of the Principal Matters.
A.
ANderson, Chancellor of Sweden, his good and bad Qualities. 42. his
Employments, 43. he embraces the Dectrins of Luther, 44. he confirms Gustavus
in his design to humble the Clergy, ibid. he advises him to make use of
Luther's Reformation in order to suppress the Temporal power and riches of the
Clergy, ibid. he presides in the King's behalf in a Lutheran Council held at
Orebro, 92.

Arwide Besieges Stegeburg, 2.

B.
The Bishops of Sweden. Gustavus King of Sweden impatiently suffers the Power
and Riches of the Clergy, 41. his designs to humble them, 43. he infringeth
their Privileges, 49 and 100. he prohibits by Declaration the Bishops to
appropriate to themselves the Goods and Succession of Ecclesiastical Persons in
their Dieness, 50. they go to meet the King in a Body, and entreat him to grant
that Olaus and his followers may be tried as H^reticks, 53. A conference
between Olaus and one Gellus, whom the Bishops set up in opposition to him, 55,
etc. A Translation of the Now Testament made by the Clergy of Sweden, 56.57.
the King gives the precedence to the secular Senctors to the prejudice of the
Bishops, 71. the Bishops meet together in the Church of St. Giles upon this
occ^sion, ibid. what was translated in this Assembly of the Bishope, ibid. etc.
the Bishop of Lincopine by the strength of his Arguments induces the Bishops
to take a resolution constantly to maintain the Revenues and Rights of their
Churches in the Convention of the States. 73. they take a Solemn Oath among
themselves to stand in defense of the Rights and Privileges of the Clergy
against the Enterprises of Gust^vus, ibid. they engross an Act, and cause it to
be signed by all the Ecclesiastical Persons of the Assembly; ibid. the Bishop
of Lincopine desires the Protection of the Grand Marshal, and obtains it, 74.
the m^st part of the Bishops durst not exercise any of the Functions of their
Ministry, for Fear of incurring new Persecutions, 85. they Servi^ely wait in
their Houses to know what the Prince shall think sit to order (...) their
Persons and Dignities, being always ready to obey his (...). ibid.

C.
Charles V. (...) C^^ment VII. and for what reason, ^^ His (...) 69. their
Crucity, and (...) in that City* ibid. Charles V. imprisons Pope Clement in the
Castle of St. Angelo, 70.

Christiern fits cut a potent Fleet to relieve Sweden, 4. which b^ats
Gustavus's Army, and raises the Siege of Stockholm 5 and 6. the Estates of the
Province of Jutland depose Christiern, and cause the Act of his Deposition to
be signified to him, 13 and 14. he was much dejected at this Declaration, 14.
he degrades himself, 14. he shamefully Flies out of his own Dominions, and
takes Ship with the ^u^en his Wife and the Princes his Children, ibid. he su^s
for help from the Emperor his Brother-in-Law, ibid. he causes certain Troops
to be privity embarked in a Port of Hotland, 95. he takes a resolution t^
re-enter his Dominions with those Troops, ibid. he departs from Holland with a
design to make a descent in Norway, 96. His F^eet is miserably shatte^d with a
Tempest. 96. and 97. he is very near Ship-w^a^kt himself, ibid. his Troops Land
without any opposition, 97. he gains some small advantages, 97. he publishes a
Manifes^^ which draws many Swedish Roman Catholics to his Army, ibid. he
^estages Ascerhuys, notwithstanding the sharpness of the Winter, 98. he raises
the Siege, 99. he is shut up in Congrel, and there constrained by ^^nger to
surrender himself into the hands of his Enemies, 99. etc. the Treaty he made
with the Bishop of Odensee who commanded King Frederick's Forces. 100. he
arrives at Copenhagen, is arrested by a Captain of King Frederick's Guards, and
imprisoned in the Castle of Sonderburg, 101. to moderate the riger of his
Captivity, he is compelled to renounce the Crowns of Denmark, Norway and
Sweden, ibid. King Frederick gives him the Castle of Coldin^er to be the place
of his residence, and the Revenues of the Castle of Calemberg and of the Isle
of Sobergard, for his maintenance, ibid. Archbishop Trolle and the Government
of Lubeck levy Forces to relief him from his Confinement in the Castle of
Sonderburg. 102. a Battle fought between the Forces of Christiern III. and
these of Lubeck. ibid.

Christina the Administrator Steno's Widow; Gustavus sends an En^^y to King
Frederick to demand her (...), 24. Frederick sends her back with an honorable
Convey, 26. Gustavus g^es: meet her, ibid. and receives her with all the marks
of honor and kindness, ibid. he persuades her to marry Tureiohanson the first
Senator and grand Marshal of the Kingdom, 27.

Clement VII. endeavors to advance his Family, 68. he enters into a League
which Francis I. King (...) the Republics of Venice and Florence, and the
Switzers had made against the Emperor, 68. Charles V. raises a bloody War
against him, ib. and threatens to call a Council, ib. the extreme aversion
Clement had to a Council, ib. and for what reason ib. and 69. whose Son be was
repated to be, and by whom declared legitimate, ibid. he is arrested and made a
(...) in the Castle of S. Angelo by the Officers of Charles V, 70. who resolves
to carry him into Spain, ibid.

The Clergy of Sweden. Gustavus endeavors to humble 'em, 43, 48, etc.
publishes several Declarations against 'em, 49, etc. he infringes their
Privileges, 51, etc. they complain in a Body, 53. the secular and regular
Clergy undertake a Translation of the New Testament, in opposition to those of
Olaus and Luther, 57. Convention of the Estates of Stregnez. See Stregnez.
Convention of the Estates of Sudercoping. See Sudercoping. Convention of the
Estates of Westeras. See Westeras.


Council. A Lutheran Council held at Obreo, the Capital Town of Nericia in
Sweden, with an account of their Transactions, 92. etc.

D.
Dalecarlians; their zeal for the Roman Catholic Religion, 86. they take up
Arms for the re-establishment of it, ibid. they give the Command of their
Troops to Turciohanson the grand Marshal, 87.

Danes: the King sends the two Flemings with considerable Forces to drive the
Danes out of some Places which they still held in Finland, 21. the Danes
terrified at their arrival, ibid. desire presently to capitulate, ibid. but
notwithstanding their Treaty, the People strive to cut 'em in pieces to avenge
the Cruelties and Robberies they had committed under the Reign of Christiern,
ibid. Gustavus sends 'em under a strong Convey to Denmark, ibid.

E.
Eric the Eldest Son of Gustavus King of Sweden 104. his Father designs to
marry him to Elizabeth Queen of England 105. his good and bad Qualities 106.
107. What induced his Father to think of leaving the Crown to his Younger
Brother 107. However Gustavus leaves the Crown to him by his last Will and
Testament, and to his three Brothers as many Provinces by the Title of
Principalities 108. Eric is highly offended at that distribution, but conceals
his resentment 108, 109.

F.
Fleming, Gustavus gives him the Command of his Fleet 8. he attacks and takes a
considerable Convoy which Admiral Norbi had sent to supply Stockholm with
Provisions 9. he causes the Governor of Oboo, Commandore of the Convoy to be
hanged by the Order of Gustavus, and for what reason 9.

Frederick of Oldenburgh, Duke of Holstein Uncle to Christiern, disposesses his
Nephew Christiern II. King of Denmark 13. he causes himself to be Crowned King
of Sweden, by the Archbishop of Upsal at Copenhagen 22. he dispatches an
Ambassader to the Senator of Sweden, to complain of the Election of Gustavus
ibid. the Senators refuse to give him audience ibid. but Gustavus sends
Officers to receive him ibid. treats him Magnificently, and introduces him into
the Assembly ^f the Estates ibid. the Ambassador's Speech to the Estates 22,
23. their Answer 23. Frederick makes a League Offensive and Defensive with
Gustavus 26. he sends back the Administrator s Widow with an Honorable retinue
ib. Norbi finding himself straitn'd in the Isle of Gothland by Gustavus, sets
up Fredericks Colors on the Town-Walls 35. and offers to acknowledge that
Prince as his Sovereign, if he would Assist him against Gustavus ibid.
Frederick sends an Ambassador to Lubeck, to complain of Gustavus's attempt upon
the Isle of Gothland, as belonging to Denmark 35, 36. he entreats the Regency
of that City to enterpose their mediation to persuade Gustavus to recall his
Forces 36. the Magistrates of Lubeck make a private Treaty with Fredericks
Ambassador 37. Frederick conveys some Troops into Wisbi ib. an enterviw between
the two Northern Kings. Frederick and Gustavus in the Town of Malmogen, ibid.
what happened on that occasion, 38. the Viceroy of Norway gives notice to
Frederick of King Christiern's descent in that Kingdom, 9^. Frederick gives
order for the Imbarking of Troops to Assist the Viceroy, under the Command of
the Viceroys two Brothers, ibid. who burnt all Christiern's Ships, so that not
so much as one of 'em escaped, 99. they oblige him to raise the Siege, and to
retire to Congel, where he was forced by hunger to surrender himself into the
hands of his Enemies, 99. etc. he causes Christiern to be carried by a Captain
of his Guards, contrary to the promise made him by the Bishop of Odensee
General of his Army, and to be conducted to the Castle of Sonderburg, 101. he
compells him to renounce his claim to the Kingdoms of Denmark, Sweden and
Norway, ibid.

G.
Gothland. Norbi, after the Flight and Abdication of Christiern II. retires
with his whole Fleet into the Isle of Gothland, 29. Bernard of Milen makes a
descent at the head of Eight Thousand Men, and gets possession of the whole
Island except Wisbi, 35.

Gustavus, Administrator of Sweden Pawns all the Lands belonging to his Family
to levy new Forces, 2. he sends part of those Troops to Arwide, with order to
carry on the Siege of Stegeburgh with Vigor, ib. his extraordinary vigilance,
ibid. he makes himself Master of the Castles of Nicoping and Tynelso, 3. he
takes the Castle of Westeras by composition, ibid. he marches at the head of
all his Forces toward Sttckholm, ibid. he was informed on the road, that his
two Lieutenants were defeated, and that the Siege was raised by the
misunderstanding of his Commanders, 4. he repairs to the Army, and renews the
Siege of Stockholm, 6. he dispatches Siguard de Holten his Secretary to Lubeck,
to obtain Men and Ships of that republic, ibid. he procures eighteen Ships and
four Thousand Men, ibid. the hard conditions upon which they were granted, 7.
Gustavus sends Bernard de Mil^n, who was of their Nation to Administer an Oath
of fidelity to em, ^. they refuse to take an Oath to any other Person but
Gustavu^ himself, ib. he goes to S^dercoping to receive their Oath, ibid. he
causes his Troops to encamp before Stockholm, ibid. he gathers together all his
Ships, and forms a Squadron to cruise with the Lubeck Fleet before the Port of
Stockholm, ibid. the Fleets meet and (...) cath other, 10. Gustavus being
informed that Norbi's Vessels stuck in the Ice, resolves to burn 'em. ibid. he
marches the Lubeck Troops, and advances to the Enemies Ships, ibid. he s^ts
fire to 'em, 11. John Stammel General of the (...) hinders Gustavus from ^^^^ly
destroying the Danish Fleet, by founding (...) in the middle of the Fight, ib.
Gustavus is enraged at the pe^fidiousness of General Stammel, ibid. Gustavus
takes an advantage of Norbi's retreat, and makes himself Master of C^lmar, 17.
the whole Kingdom shakes off the Yoke of the Danish Tyranny ex^ept Stockholm,
ibid. the Garrison of this place offers to surrender upon Articles of
Capitulation, 15. Gustavus refuses their proposals, 15. for what reason, 16. he
convinces the States at Stregness ibid. he is publicly preclaim'd King of
Sweden, 17. the extraordinary affection the Swedes expressed to him, ibid. he
declines at first to accept the Crown, 18. but is pervail'd with by the
importunity of the whole Assembly, ibid. the Senate and Deputies of the
Provinces take an Oath of Allegiance to him, ibid. the Estates would have him
Crowned at the same time, ibid. he put off that Ceremony under pertext that he
was obliged to return immediately to the Siege of Stockholm. ib. the true
reason why be defer^'d this Ceremony ibid. he invites all the Senators and the
most part of the Depaties to Accompany him to the Army, and to Assist at the
Siege of Stockholm. 18. the City is surrendered, 19. the Articles of the
Tre^ty, ibid Gustavus makes his public entry into Stockholm attended with all
the Serators and a vast number of Lords, Gentlemen and Military Officers, ibid.
he is received at the gate of the City by the Consuls and Magistrates, who
present the Keys kneeling, ibid. (...) alights at the Church to return thanks
to God for the (...) of his Arms, ib. he makes a sumptuous Entertainment for
all the Senators and principal Officers of his Army, 19, 20. he dispatches his
Orders throughout all the Provinces to cause his Authority to be unknowledged
by the People, 20. he begins to exercise the Regal Functions, ib. be
introduces into the Court a greater politeness in Manners, and a more splendid
magnificence in Apparel, and for what reason. ib. he sends to enquire for the
Curate of Suverdsio, who had entertained him in the time of his trouble, ib.
having received information that he was dead, he causes a Crown of Copper gilt
to be set upon the top of the Parish Church, as a Monument of his Gratitude,
21. he sends the two Flemings to go and drive the Danes out of some places
which they still possessed in Finland, ib. the Danes surrender these Places,
and Gustavus according to the Conditions granted to them, orders 'em to be
safely conducted to Denmark, ib. he convenes the Estates of Sweden at
Sudercoping, 22. upon what account, ib. he magnificently treats the Ambassor of
Frederick, the now King of Denmark, ib. he causes him to be admitted into the
Assembly of the States, ib. he detains him some days at Court, 2^. he endeavors
to oblige him, ib. he dispatches an Envoy to the King of Denmark to demand the
Liberty of the Administrator's Widow and the other Ladies, whose Husbands were
put to death by Christiern's Order, besides some other secret Negotiations, ib.
Gustavus complains, by his Envoy, in a private Audience, that Frederick had
sent an Ambassador into Sweden, without acquainting him with it before, 25. he
gives him to understand he could easily conclude an agreement with Christiern,
who might afterward easily make himself Master of Denmark, ib. Frederick
offers to enter into an offensive and defensive League with Gustavus, 26.
Gustavus. followed with the whole Court, goes to meet the Administrator's
Widow, ib. the obliging manner in which be receives that Prin^^^ ibid. he
persuades her to marry Turciohanson principal Senator and Grand M^ shall of
Sweden, 27. for what reason, 27, 28. he resolves to humble the Clergy, 28.
whose fidelity he suspected, ibid. he supplice the vacant Benefices with his
creatures, ibid. he proceeds to nomination of a now Archbishop of Upsal, in
the place of Trolle, wh^ had retired to Denmark, 28, 29. he causes the
Election to fall upon Jeannes Magnus, a person of merit but timorous, 29. the
Ambassador of the republic of Lubeck congratulates Gustavus in the Name of his
Master, upon the glory and prosperity of his reign, 31. the republic is
desiroours to engage him in a War with Norbi, Governor of the Isle of Gothland,
ibid. he declines it 32. but afterward signs a Treaty with the Ambassa^^r of
Lubeck, by which he obliges himself to undertake an Expedition against Norbi,
34. for what reason ibid. his General Bernard de Milen in less than fifteen
days makes himself Master of all Gothland, except Wisbi the Capital Town of the
Island, 35. Frederick sends Forces thither, 37. an interview between Gustavus
King of Sweden and Frederick King of Denmark, concerning their Pretensions to
this Island, ib. these two Princes, notwithstanding their Differences, give
each other reciprocal marks of kindness and esteem, 39. they enter into an
offensive and defensive League against Christiern, ib. Gustavus takes leave of
Frederick, 40. as he goes out of Malmogen he meets Herman the Ambassador of
Lubeck, whom be offers to kill, and for what reason, ib. some Senators and
Officers earnestly entreat him no longer to defer his Coronation, ib. why he
put off a Ceremony that is so essential and necessary in an Electice Kingdom,
41. he resolves to humble the Clergy, 42. he discovers his defign to the
Chancellor Larz Anderson, ib. he tells him, that he could uever take himself to
be really King, till he saw himself Master of all the Fortresses of the
Bishops, and till he had reunited to his Demeans the Revenues and Rights of
the Crown, which his Predecessors had alienated in favor of the Priests and
Menks, 43. he fears lest this Ente^prize should cause new Troubles and
Commotions in the State, ib. Anderson advises him for that purpose to make
advantage of Luther's Reformation, which opposed the Power and Riches of the
Clergy, 45. Gustavus approves his Sentiments and Reasons, 47. he determines to
ruin the Pope's Authority by the means of Lutheranism, ib. he gives secret
Orders to Chancellor Anderson, to protect as it were, without his knowledge, the
Lutheran Doctors, and even to send for mere out of the Universities of Germany,
49. Gustavus at first attacks the inferior Clergy, ib. he publishes several
Declarations against the Curates, 49. etc. he issues out a Declaration against
the Bishops, expressly prohibiting them to pretend a right to the Estates and
Inheritance of Ecclesiastical Persons within their Diocesses, 50. he appoints
Winter Quarters for his Army in the Lands belonging to the Priests and Monks,
51. he causes his Horse to lodge in the Abbeys and M^nasteries, ib.
here-unites to his Demeans the Revenues of the rich Monastery of Griphysholm,
ib. Gustavus assembles the Senate at Stockholm, 58. he directs his Chancellor
to prepose the appropriating of two thirds of the Tithes for the maintenance
of his Forces, under color of easing the People, 59. he nominates
Commissioners to take away in all the Provinces of Sweden, such Silver-plate
and Bells as were found to be superfluous, ib. the Archbish opof Upsal
complains to Gustavus, who answers him in high Terms, 59, etc. seandalous
Libels are dispersed abroad against Gustavus, treating him as a Heretic and an
excommunicated Person, 60. the Peasants being preposs^ss'd by the Monks and
Clergy, resolve to take up Arms against the King at the Fair of Upsal ib. he
prevents 'em and reduces 'em to Obedience, 61. a new Conspiracy formed to
dethrone Gustavus. 62. one Hans excites the Peasants of Dalecarlia to revolt
against the King, bygiving out that he was the eldest Son of the Administrator
Steno, 62, etc. Gustavus makes the Administrato^'s Widow write to the
Dalecarlians, that she had lost her eldest Son above a year ago, 64. these
Peasants being dis^abus'd abandon the Impostor, ib. Gustavus gives order for
the marching of a Body of Horse to defend the entrance of his Kingdom from the
Inroads of Hans, who had raised some Forces in Norway. ib. he writes to the
King of Denmark, who commands Hans to depart out of his Dominions, 64, 65. Hans
having fled to Rostock, Gustavus sends to demand him of the Magistrates of that
City, who cause him to be beheaded, 65. Gustavus sets forth many Declarations
against the Monks, 66. he gains some of the Prelates, who promise to surrender
the Forts that were in their possession, 67. the King not being able to move
the Archbishop of Upsal neither by threats, promises nor any other means, gets
rid of him under pretext of sending him Ambassador to Poland, ib. he designs to
wrest out of the hands of the Bishops all the Forts that depended on their
Episcopal Sees, 70. He resolves to make the Estates confirm all the
Declarations and Decrees which the Senate had made against the Clergy, relating
to the Tithes, ib. he convenes the Estates at Westeras, 71. he appears among
'em accempanied with a great Retinue, ib. he gives at an entertainment, the
precedence to the Temporal Senators, and to the prejudice of the Bishops, ib.
his proposals against the Clergy, and what passed in this Convention with
respect to him, 75, etc. he obtains all his designs of the Estates, 83.

He sets forward at the head of a Body of Horse to put the Order of the Estates
in Execution, 84. he appoints Lutheran Doctors to Preach in his presence in the
principal Churches, ib. his progress through the Provinces, puts a final end to
the Roman Catholic Religion, 85. he receives above two thirds of the Revenues
of the Clergy and Monks, ib. he seized on about thirteen Thousand Farms or
Manors, ib. Gustavus seems to take no notice of the revolt of the
Dalecarlians, 88. he gives Orders to some Troops secretly to file off toward
the frontiers of that Province, ib. he amuses the Deputies of the Dalecarlians,
89. he causes Ringleaders of the revolt to be beheaded and pardons the rest,
90. he declares himself a Lutheran, 91. he makes choice of Olaus Petri to be
Pastor of the Church of Stockholm, ib. he nominates Laurentius Petri to the
Archbishopric of Upsal, and gives him in Marriage a Lady of his kindred, ib.
he causes himself to be Crowned at Upsal by that Prelate, ib. he confers the
Order of Knighthood upon all the Senators and Principal Lords of the Court, ib.
he Assembles a general Convocation of the whole Clergy of the Realm, in form of
a National Synod to establish an uniformity of Divine Service, 92. he requires
the Nobility of the Kingdom to resign their Manors, or pay the Sums of Money
charged upon them, 93. he is informed that Christiern was raising of Soldiers
in Holland, 94. he demands in Marriage the eldest Daughter of the Duke of
Saxe-Lawemburgh, and takes her to Wife, ib. he obliges the Son of the deceased
Administrator to reside at the Court of the Duke of Saxe-Lawemburg, his
Father-in-Law, ib. etc. he makes a defensive League with Francis I. King of
France, against the Emror and the House of Austria, 102. he enters into the
League of Smalcald, ib. he designs to procure the Crown to be entailed upon his
Children, 103. he convenes the States General at Westeras, on purpose to cause
the right and cust^m of Election to be ab^lish'd ib. an Act is passed in this
Assembly b^ which the Crown and Sovereign Power is settled on Gustavus's His
and Successors, ib. his magnificence, 105. be intends to marry Er^c his ^dest
Son, ib. he has an eye upon Elizabeth Queen of England, ib. sends Ambassado^s
to propound a strict Alliance betwixt the two Kingd^ns, and to discover the
Queens inc inations, with respect to this Match, ib. he is not willing to
consent that his Son Eric should pass into England, till the Articles of the
Marriage were signed and why, 106. the reas^ns that induced him to think of
leaving the Crown to his see^nd S^n, 107. he makes his last Will and Testament
and allots the in e^irances of the Prince^s his Children, 108. he is soiz'd
upon with an inward sever, which insensibly was^s him, 109. a few hours before
his Death, he dictat^s to St^no Secretary of State, certain M^m^i^s concerning
(...) m^st secret Aff^irs of the Kingdom, ib. he dies ext^eam'y bel^v'd by the
People, and h^neur' by the Nobility. 109.

H
Hans, a Grocm of the Sta^^e, indeav^urs to pass for the eldest Some of the
deceased Administrator, 62. he takes a progress through (...) the whole
Provinces of Da^^carlin, under the name of Nils S^e^^, ibid. Hans Censur^s the
Canduct of Gustavus, and disparageth him am^ng the commom People, 62.6^. he
(...) those Peasants being assured by the Administ ater's W^dow, that (...) was
not her Son, abandon him, 6^. Hans makes his of (...) way, ib. he is received
there by the Arch-Pishop of Dre^th (...) publicly treated by this Prelate as a
Prin^^ of ^weden, ib. he lev^s Forces in this Kingdom by the Authority of the
same P^^^ate, ib. ^r^derick commands him to dep^^t out of his (...) he passes
to Rostock, where the Magistrates of that City cause him to be beheaded, ibid.

Herman, an Ancient C^^sul of Lubeck s^nt to Gustavus by that republic, 30,
31. upon what account, ib. his Ch^^acler ib. ^e en^eaveurs to engage Gustavus
by his inter^st to dec^^re War against Norbi, Crvernour of the Isle of
Gothland, who disturbed the Comm^rce of the republic of Lubeck by his frequent
piracies, 31. Gu^tavus refuses to be concerned, 31, 32. the plausible prop^sals
he off^^'d to Gustavus to oblige him to undertake this War, 32, 33. he
publishes these proposals to the People, and mak^s a party in the Senate and
among the inhabitants of Stockholm, 33. Gudavvs signs the Treaty, 34. Herman
returns to Lubeck, ib.

Siguard de Hosten Secretary to Gustavas, Administrator of Sweden, 6. his
Nag^tiation with the republic if Lubeck, 6, etc.

L
Lincep^ne, this (...) their Revenues and Friviledges against the enterprise of
Gustavus, 71, 72. he reprehends the Bis^op of Stregnes for his inconsiancy, 72.
he engages the great Marshal to espouse the cause of the Bishops, 74. he
retires into Poland, 8^.

Lubeck, the Regency of this City, sends a Fleet of eighteen Vessels with four
thousand Men on beard to the Assistance of Gustavus, 6. on what conditions, 7.
this Fleet happily arrives in the Port of Sudercoping, ib. the Republic
dispat^^es one of their Magistrates to Gustavus to oblige him to den^un^e War
against Norbi, who by his frequent incu^sions ruined their Trassick, 30. they
depute for that Embassy Herman an ancient Consul of that City, ib. who
concludes a Treaty with Gustavus, 34. Friderick sends an Ambassad^r to Lubeck
to prevent the Execution of this Treaty, 35, 36. the G^vernment of Lubeck makes
a League with Tr^l^e, Archbishop of Upsal, 102.

L^^^^r, Lutheranism. Anderson persuades Gustavus to introduce L^^heranism into
the Kingdom, in order to humble the Clergy, whose too g^^at power gave him a
cause of jealcusy 45. this Prince at first considers these Doc^^ins as the
ess^ct of some Theol^gical disputes, 47. he ^ndeave^rs to est thlish them in
his D^miniens, 47, 48, he protects the Lutheran D^ctors, and gives order to
sond for others out of Germany, 49. the Dectrin of Luther (...) received by the
People, ib. Olaus a Lutheran Dect^r, publish^th a Swedish Version of the New
Testament, which was only a Translation of that which Luther had caused to be
Printed in high Dutch. 52. the most part of the Curates and Incumbents of
Sweden publicly prosess the referened Religion, 85. one of the surest marks to
(...) at that time these Eccl^siastical persens who had embra^'d Luther^nism,
was that they marri^d, and introduced into their Churches the Divine Service in
the Vulgar Tongue, ib. many Deputies of the Assendly of Wes^^^^s (...)^ upon
the Opinions of Luther as Problematical Questions, 79. the Dalecarlians declare
openly against Luthenarism, 86.

M.
Johannes Magnus, Arch-Bis^^p of Upsal, 29. who he was, ib. his constancy in
maintaining his Rights and Privileges, 67.

Malmogen, a Town where an enterv^^ was agreed upon between Friderick King of
Denmark, and Gustavus King of Sweden, 37. the Occasion of that intervi^^^, 38.

Bern^rd de Milen Gu^^^^us (...) the Command of the Troops which he sent
against Norbi G^vernour of Gothland, 35. he makes a des^^rt (...) at the head
of eight Thousand Men. ib. (...) all Gothland in less than fifteen (...)
Is^and, ib. he besieges that place. ib.

The Monks being oppressed by Gustavus King of Sweden foment feditions among
the People, and cabal against him in all the Villages, 65, 66. the King sets
forth a Declaration, prohibiting Foreign Monks to meddle with the Government as
those of Sweden, 66. he forbids the Monks to go out of their Monastries above
twice a Year, and that only for fifteen days at each time, to gather Alms, ib.
the greater part of the Monks abandon their Convents, some through
licenciousness, and others for want of subsistence, 86. Gustavus seizes upon
above two third parts of the Revenues of the Monks.

N.
Nicopinc; taken by Gustavus, 3.

Norbi; Admiral of the Danish Fleet, 4. the secret Designs which he formed
against Sweden, ib. the hatred he bore against Gustavus, ib. King Christiern
entrusts him with the Command of a Fleet, and a considerable number of Land
Forces, ib. Norbi enters the Port of Stockholm, ib. he makes a Sally upon
Gustavus's two Lieutenants who commanded the Siege of Stockholm, defeats and
puts 'em to Flight, 5. he leaves a strong Garrison in the City, and sets sail
to Finland, 6. be expe^^s thence the Brother of Arwide, who carried on the War
in those Parts for Gustavus, ib. Norby sends a considerable Convey to supply
Stockholm with Provisions, 8. he receives the morti ying News that his Convoy
was taken by Gustavus's Fleet, 9. he fits out his own Fleet and sets Sail with
Provisions and Soldiers, which he hopes to convey into Stockholm, 9, 10. he
meets in his passage with the Lubeck Fleet and Fleming's Squadron, 10. the
Signs of an approaching Siorm oblige him to retire, ib. in the Evening he
stands in to a small Island, where he was surpised in the Night with an
extraordinary Frost, ib. the Lubeck Troops, commanded by Gustavus, set Fire to
his Ships, 11. Norby be^rs off, and retires into the Port of Calmar with the
shattered remainder of his Fleet, ib. be resolves to hazard another Battle, 12.
he is informed that the whole Kingd^m of Denmark had revolted against
Christiern, ib. being certify'd of the Flight and Abdication of their Prince,
he leaves Sweden and gives over the Design of relieving Stockholm, 15. he
leaves a weak Garrison in Calmar, and retires with his whole Fleet to the Isle
of Gothland, of which he was Governor, ib. he treats Frederick King of Denmark
and Gustavus King of Sweden as Usurpers, and protests to make War against 'em
both, 29 he cruises in the Baltic Sea, and takes diverse considerable Prizes,
30. he lays aside Christiern's Flag, and assumes the quality of Prince of
Gothland, ib of an Admiral of Denmark he becomes a Pyrate, ib. he styles
himself the Friend of God and an Enemy to the whole World, ib. he ruins the
Commerce of Lubeck and the Hanse-Towus, ib. Gustavus concludes a Treaty with
the Republic of Lubeck, by which be is obliged to declare War against him, 34.
Norby perceiving that he was unable to oppose the Power of the King of Sweden,
sets up the Danish Colors on the t^p of the T^ron. walls, 35. he offres to
acknowledge the King of Denmark as his Sovereign Prince, if he would assist him
against the Swedes. ib.

O.
Olaus Petri preaches the Doctrine of Luther in Sweden, 40. he publishes a
Swedish Version of the New Testament, 52. a Conperence b^^^^een Olans and
Gallus held at Upsal, in the presence of the King and the whole Senate, 54,
etc. be prints an account of it to his own advantage, 57. he takes a Wife, ib.

Frederick of Oldenburg Duke of Holstein, Uncle to Christiern II. 13. the
Estates of the Kingdom of Denmark conspire against Christiern, and secretly
treas with Frederick. See Frederick.

P.
Popedom; whether there be any Laws that positively exclude Bastards from the
Papal Dignity, 69.

Purgatory; the Lutheran Doctors discourse against Purgatery, 52.

R.
Religion; what course Gustavus took to extirpate the Roman Catholic Religion.
See Lutheranism.

Rostock; Gustavus requires the Magistrates of Rostock to deliver up the
counterfeit Steno, named Hans, who had retired thither, 65. they cause him to
be beheaded, ibid.

Rome; taken, pillaged and laid waste by the Army of the Emperor Charles V. 69.

S.
Stammel; General of the Forces of the Republic of Lubeck, 7, etc. his persidi
usness, 11.

Scara; the Bishop of Scara takes up Arms to maintain his Dignity and the
Rights of his Church, 85, 86. he engages Tureiohanson in his Party with several
Lords of West-Gothland, who endeavor to cause the Province to revolt, but to
no purpose, 86.

Stegeburg; Arwide besieges this place by Gustavus's Order, 2. the Governer
defends it with great Courage and Resolution, 3. after ward being won with the
kindness of Gustavus, he delivers up the Town to him, and brings over the whole
Garrison to his Army, ib.

Stockholm; Colonel Sassi and Fredage invest the City, 2. Admiral Norbi obliges
'em to raise the Siege. 5. Gustavus besieges it again, 6 he gives Orders to his
Fleet, in conjunction with that of Lubeck, to cruise before the Port of
Stockholm, 8. he follows them and comes up to the City, 12. he makes himself
Master of it, 19.

Stregnez; Gustavus calls a Meeting of the Estates in that place, 16. is
proclaim'a King of Sweden in Stregnez, 17. the Bishop of Stregnez devotes
himself to the Interest of the Court, and abandons that of his Church, 66. The
Bishop of Lincopinc reproaches him on that account, 72.

Sudercopinc; Gustavus ca^^s a Convention of the Estates at Sudercopinc, 22,
the long Di^course which the Danish Ambassador made before the States of
Sweden, ib. their Answer to his Speech, 23. the Estates, in the Embassador's
Presence, declare Ar^^h^shop Trolle to be a Traitor and an Enemy to his
Country, ib. they oblige themse^ves, by an cu^hentick Act. to approve
whatsoever Gustavus their King shall think sit to (...) for the preservation of
his Dignity, without being obliged to call a Meeting of the Est^^es (...) to
make Pet^e or War, 23, 24. they declare Gustavus's Enemi^s to be E^^mies (...)
the (...) and Nation, 24.

Swe^ion its Commence is re^^^^^, 2^. the alteration of ^eiigion in this
Kingdom, 8, etc.

T.
Testament; a Version of the New Testament set forth by Olaus Petri a Lutheran,
59. a Translation of the New Testament made by the Clergy of Sweden, 56.

Trolle, Archbishop of Upsal; is troubled at the News of Gustavus's advancement
to the Throne of Sweden, 21. for what reason, ib. he persuades Frederick the
new King of Denmark that he had a Right to the Kingdom of Sweden, 22. he crowns
that Prince at Copenhagen as King of Sweden, ib. he appears at the Head of the
Troops which he had levied in Brandenburg under Christiern, who had made a
Descent in Norway, 97. he causes Christiern's Manifesto's to be dispersed
throughout the Kingdom of Sweden, 97. he retires to Lubeck, 102. he makes a
League with the Government of that City; be is wounded and taken in a Battle,
and dies of his Wounds, 201, etc.

Tureiohanson, principal Secretary and grand Ma^shal of Sweden; is married to
the Relict of the Administrator Steno, 27. his good and bad Qualities, ib. he
is chosen by Gustavus to maintain his Pretensions to the Isle of Gothland, in
the Interview as Malmogen, 38. he acts contrary to the Interest of the Crown of
Sweden, and why, ib. he promises his protection to the Clergy, 74. he makes a
Spe^ch in the Convention of the Estates at Wester^^ in behalf of the Clergy,
against the Interest and Designs of Gustavus, 77. he is conducted b^^k to his
House with the sound of Trumpets and Drums, 78. he exhorts Christi^r^^
undertake an Expedition against Sweden, 95. Christiern causes him to be off
^^^^ated at Congel, 100.

U.
Uspal; The Conference of Upsal, 54. Gustavus orders the D^bates to be
committed to W^i^ing, 55. ^l^us c^ufes the Account to be printed, 57. the
Archbishop of Upsal obstinately m^intains his own Dignity and the (...) his
Church, 67. Neither the Threats nor ^r^mises of Gus^av^s are able to prevail
upon him, nor even any Persecution, nor the Damage which he sustained (...) in
his Estate or Person, ib. Gustavus gets rid of him under color of employing
him in an honorable Embassy to Poland, ib. be goes to Rome to implo^e the
Pope's essistance, 68.

W.
Westeras; Gustavus calls a Meeting of the Estates at Westeras, 71. upon what
occasion, ib. the Chancellor opens the A^^^mbly. 7^. the King by his Chancell^r
demands that the D^^l^^ations ^e had set serth against the Clergy, and the
De^^e^ which the Senate made with reference to the Tithes might be cons^^^'d,
75. several Demands of the King against the Clergy, 76. what passed in the
C^nvent^^n between the secular Members and the Clergy, 74, etc. what was at
l^st resolved and ordained by the Estates, 83. a second Conven^^en of the
Es^ates at West^^as, 103. Gustavus procures the Right and Cus^om of the
^^^ction of Kings to be abolished, and causes the Crown to be entai^^ upon his
Pesterity, ib. etc.

Wisbi; the Copital Town of the ^st^ of Gothland, besing'd by Gustavus's
Forces, 35. Frederick sends some Troops tor^lieve it, 37.

FINIS.

