A SERMON PREACHED Before His EXCELLENCY THE Ld. Lieutenant AND THE Two HOUSES
of PARLIAMENT, IN Christ's- Church, DUBLIN; When They First Met there together:
On Sunday, October 16. 1692.

By JOHN Lord Archbishop of TVAM.

Published by His Excellency's Special Command.

LONDON, Printed for R. Clavel at the Peacock in St. Paul's Church Yard, 1692.

JUDGE. XVII. 6. In those days, there was no King in Israel; but every Man did
that which was Right in his own Eyes.


THE Book of Judges contains Memorials of the State and People of the Jews,
from the Death of Joshua to the Time that Eli Judged Israel; with whose
Government the first Book of Samuel begins, and carries on their History. We
have here an Account of many Vicissitudes of their Government; and of many very
Remarkable Passages concerning the Manners and Behavior, the Sufferings and
Deliverances of that Stubborn and Apostatizing People: From the day that they
left Egypt, they were on every Turn, murmuring against Moses their Deliverer;
all their Grievances are put to his Account: If they at any time want Flesh, or
Bread, or Water, they immediately charge him with mis-management, and wish they
had still continued Slaves, so they might have eaten Onions, and Garlic, and
Flesh in Egypt: So that God was forced often to stop their Mouths by Miracles,
and sometimes to vindicate the Authority of his Servant, by extraordinary
Judgments on those that Rebelled against it: So difficult a thing it was, to
keep them to their Duty, even when Moses was King in Jesurun, and was
Conducting them from Bondage into Liberty. But they had not long past over
Jordan, and Enjoyed Rest from their Enemies, before they fell to their old
Trade. They served the Lord all the days of Joshua, and of the Elders that
outlived him; but these were scarce Cold in their Graves, and but just
gathered to their Fathers, when there arose another Generation, which knew not
the Lord, but did evil in his sight, and followed other Gods; insomuch, that
his anger often waxed hot, that they could not stand against their Enemies.
Nevertheless, upon their Repentance, God still raised them up Judges, and
delivered them all the days of the Judge: But as soon as he died, they again
corrupted themselves, more than their Fathers, and ceased not from their own
doings, nor from their stubborn way.

This is the Account we have of them, in the Second Chapter, which describes
the Heads and Contents of the Book following; which is filled with little else
but such like various Turns of their Affairs, of their Sins and their
Punishments, and of their Repentance and Deliverance.

The Text is an Historical Remark, which the Collector of these Passages makes,
of a certain Inter-Regnum, or Intercision in their Civil Government, and of the
Consequences that Naturally and Usually attend such a State and Frame of
Things. And accordingly, I shall take an Occasion to offer to your
Consideration the great misery of a People, when they are without restraint
from civil Government: Which I shall with all plainness endeavor to lay before
you, from two Heads of Discourse, which are obvious in the Text.

I. Here is a Vacancy in the Throne; In those days there was no King in Israel.

II. A General Debauchery, or Universal Depravation of Manners; Every Man did
that which was right in his own Eyes.

When we have viewed and considered these Particulars, I shall in a few
Practical Inferences bring them home to our own Doors, and there leave their
Application.

I. Here is a Vacancy in the Throne: There was in those Days no King in Israel.

By the word King in this Text, we are not, I conceive, to understand that Form
of Government only which we call a Monarchy, but Civil Government in general;
if the Text did intend that Form precisely and exclusively of all others, it
would, I confess, be the strongest Argument of the Excellency and Usefulness
thereof, and a reflection upon all other Models, as being less sufficient for
their ends. We might from such an Exposition infer, That the Monarchical
Government is the most Powerful and Effectual Restraint to the Passions and
Vices of Men. As if we should say, There were other Governors, the standing
Council of the Great Sanhedrim, and other Inferior Judicatories; but these
could not check the insolences of Men, nor stop the course of impiety or
violence; these could not hinder, or durst not punish the Riots and Unlawful
Assemblies of the Wicked and Unruly Sons of Belial. There was no King, and
therefore every Man did as he pleased, as if no Lord were over them.

But I conceive such an Exposition is too narrow, and not altogether true: For,
as Solomon observes, Prove. XXX. 27. The Locusts who have no King, yet go forth
all of them by Bands. So, other Constitutions of Government may have Unity, and
order and strength, to enforce their respective Laws; and the Finger of their
Discipline is found sometimes to be heavier than the Loins of Monarchy; the
Generosity and Clemency of Kings (at least of some Kings) Dispensing in some
matters with a rigid conformity to their Laws; while others who affect a show
of more liberty, prove generally more severe Exactors of obedience. And
therefore, by No King in Israel, I am content you may understand a Cessation of
Civil Authority in general, and not of any particular Form of its
Administration. So that, No King, shall signify no Government in Israel. But
then, this kind of Government being here put to signify any other, we may
reasonably conclude, Either

1. That this, viz. A Monarchy, is the best of all the several kinds, the most
apt and sufficient for its ends, Parcere Subjectis, and Debellare Superbos, for
the Terror of Evil Doers, and the Praise of them that do Well. Or,

2. That, that Government by which God presided over the Jews, in the times of
Moses, and Joshua, and the Judges, did more resemble that of a King, than any
other sort of administration, whether of Aristocracy or Democracy. And
therefore we may have leave to think, that such a Paternal Government in a
Gentle and well-tempered Monarchy, is most like the divine Theocracy over that
Nation, and consequently, where ever it obtains, in any other, is most
Acceptable and Pleasing unto God, as the nearest Approach to the Pattern in the
Mount, the primitive model and Scheme which he contrived for his own People:
And therefore if any Form of Government be of Divine Right, more than another,
such a kind of Monarchy bids fairest for the Character, as being a Copy from
the Divine Original. The rays of Sovereignty did not indeed dazzle the eyes
here, so much as in the Tyrannies of the Nations, but they were more Benign,
and better suited to the Nature and Genius of a free People: The circumstances
of Majesty were not so glittering and gaudy, nor the power so Absolute and
Despotical; but was sufficiently qualified to answer all the Necessities both
of Prince and People. Power is a wild and often a Destructive thing, if it be
not fixed by Law, and sweetened by some Allay; and it becomes not only more
useful and Beneficial, by being somewhat Limited and Circumscribed, but also
more durable and strong, by the willingness of the People to live under it,
where it is their Interest to support and Maintain it, as well as Duty to obey
it.

But in this Government of the Jews, there could be no defect; every want was
supplied by the special Providence of the All-Wise and Almighty Monarch: For
when the Lord raised them up Judges, the Lord was with the Judge, and delivered
them out of the Hands of their Enemies all the days of the Judge, Chap. II. 18.
All the defect was in the Frowardness of the people, when they would not
hearken to their Judges, Verse. 17. but went a Whoring after other Gods; either
inventing new Gods, or new-ways of worship, after the fashion of their
neighbors, and at last throwing off, with their Religion, even their form of
civil Polity, both which God had instituted for them. Thus at one time, as soon
as Moses turned his back, they cry out to Aaron, Make us Gods to go before us;
and of their Idols so made, These be thy Gods, O Israel; and at another time to
Samuel, for a King to Rule them, after the manner of the Nations. And these
things became matter of Gods high and just Displeasure against them; not that
such a form was simply, and in it self, unlawful, but because they were given
to Change, and grew weary both of the worship which he had prescribed for them,
and the Government by which he had delivered them at first out of Egypt, and
carried them into Canaan, and there frequently rescued them from such as
oppressed and held them in Subjection. The provocation had been equal, to have
desired a Parliament, or any other Regimen, than that which God himself had
chosen for them; and this appears in the reason he gives of his displeasure, to
Samuel, 1 Samuel VIII. 7. For in so doing they have not rejected thee but me,
that I should not Reign over them.

Having said thus much of the first thing in the Text, viz. the dissolution of
the civil Government among the Jews, or the Vacancy of the Throne; I need not
trouble you with the enquiry about the period of time to which this observation
refers; about which, I cannot find that Agreement on which one may build any
certainty: But certain it is, it could not be after the times of Eli and of
Sampson, though it is so placed in the History, because we find Phineas the Son
of Eleazer was alive, and attended the Altar, even after this, Chap. XX. 28.
The things therefore here Recorded, and in the following Chapters of this Book,
are most probably conceived to happen soon after the death of Joshua, and the
Elders that were Contemporary with him; when, as you already heard, they
forsook the Lord, and God forsook them; and leaving them without Rule and
Government to do what was right in their own Eyes, they became an easy Prey to
every Tyrant.

But it does not much concern us to know when those days were, if there were at
any time such days, in which there was No King in Israel: And that there were
such, appears by the frequent mention of this Phrase, in several parts of this
Book; the Writer whereof seems not so Critical about the Chronology, as the
matters he relates; as not confining himself so much to the Laws of Method, as
the simplicity of Truth.

And so I come, from considering the Vacancy in their Government, to view the
Consequence of such a State.

II. In the Second Point in the Text, which is this, An universal Debauchery
and Depravation of manners; and who indeed could expect other? Who, that
considers how difficult it is, even with Bit and Bridle, to restrain the hard
mouth of the multitude? It will try the Patience, the Wisdom, the Courage of
the most able and experienced Rulers, even in the best Governments, when they
are Armed with Power, and bear not the Sword in vain, to quench the Fire of
Ambition, and keep down the Passions of Men from boiling over into Lust, and
Rage, and Revenge: But when there is none to guide the Chariot, to Address the
Motion, to check and arrest the Furies that draw it, into what precipices will
they not run? God help those that sit in the One, or stand in the way of the
Other. This State of things is Deplorable, but it is unavoidable from the Other;
every Man will then do what is right in his own Eyes. Whether this Expression
does more fully describe the Sinful or the Miserable estate of a People, is a
question; but that it does both; I think is none.

1. It does import the Sinfulness and Wickedness of a People walking by this
Rule: For to do what is right in our own Eyes, is what we daily confess to be
our Sin, in following too much the Devices and Desires of our own Hearts. It is
an Expression that is best measured by it is contrary, viz. To do what is right
in the sight of God: And therefore we are Commanded, Numb. XV. 39. to seek his
Statutes, and not to go after our own Hearts, and our own Eyes; and throughout
this Book, these Phrases are set in Opposition to each other. The Phrase
indeed, considered abstractively, is capable of a better sense, to follow the
Conduct of Right Reason; but it is plain, that cannot be the Construction here,
but the contrary: And I think there is no Expression that gives us a more full
and complete Character of a Person or a People wholly abandoned to a Vicious,
Profligate and Sensual Life.

2. It does as necessarily imply the Miserable Estate of any People: For no Man
is secure of any thing, though never so dear or valuable. The World is too
narrow for the Ambition and Avarice of Men: They will not gaze, like other
Beasts, in common; but every man would have a property in all: So that every
man must be perpetually on his guard against his Neighbor; and none can taste
or enjoy his property, for fear of loosing it. Every Man then, will be a Cain
in his Family, an Absolon in the Commonwealth, and an Ishmael in the World: His
Hand against every Man, and every Man's hand against him. There needs not many
words in a matter whereof all Men are convinced: For if every Man do what he
thinks right, as he pleases, and as he is able, no man can be long pleased, or
secure, of his Property, his Liberty, or his Life: Men will grow, without
Religion and Law, more destructive than Beasts without reason; and neither of
these are supposed in this Case, to have any part: Grace here is turned into
Wantonness, and Religion is used only as a Vizard to deceive; Reason is turned
into Craft, and Power abused to Oppression; the Weak become the prey of the
Strong, and the Simple of the Subtle; Strength is the only Law of Justice; and
he that Suffers, is always in the Wrong: And surely there is not a more
miserable Condition in the World, than to live in such a State of Anarchy. The
most cruel Tyranny is more Tolerable, by how much it is better to be a Slave to
one, than every Man. Men would rather choose to open a Passage and let out
their Lives, than to be in such continual Torment about them: They would rather
strip themselves of all Being, if they could, or venture their condition in
another World, than live in this upon such Terms. And yet, with how Pleasing a
Speculation does this Common wealth of Libertinism entertain many Imaginations?
They have nothing but Golden Dreams, they already wallow in Wealth, they swim
in Pleasure, and are Masters of all they can desire: But alas! They consider
not that others have the same fancies and appetites; and while every man grasps
at all, none can hold any thing fast.

And that none may think I have represented things in false colors, let us put
our Eye to the Perspective, and look upon the Israelites by the light of this
Text, and we shall behold them all Chaos, deformity, and confusion, both in
their Religious and Civil Affairs.

In the Story here before us, we find Micah and his Mother busy and zealous
about their Graven and Molten Images, their House of Gods, and their Ephod and
Teraphim, making his Son a Priest, who was not of the Tribe of Levi. For the
Congregation is holy, said Korah, and every man has the Spirit. In the Verse
after the Text, we find a Levite Inveigl'd, to give the more Credit and
Countenance to the Idolatry. Tempted by necessity, as may be conceived by the
Salary this Chaplain was contented with, viz. Ten Shekels of Silver per Annum,
a Suit of Clothes and his Diet. So that he, that was but a Servant to the
Priest in the Divine Appointment, is Consecrated a Priest, by Micha's order;
and by the same Rule, the Priest may become a Bishop. And as Micha here, so we
find a great part of a Tribe Seduced into the same Sin, Chap. XVIII. 19. Thus
the Divine Institution will be despised, and all Order inverted in Religion, if
every man may do what is right in his own Eyes. Every Man will take Honor to
himself, without being called as Aaron, will affect the Pre-eminence, as well
as Diotrephes, or Aerius, will be an Apostle or a Prophet, have a Psalm or a
Hymn, a Way and Mode of Worship by himself; and the unity of Religion shall be
divided and multiplied not according to the Number of our Cities or Families,
but of Persons. Every man will Cry (...), and Esteem it a fine thing to be
Celebrated for an Author and a Setter forth of new and strange Doctrines, and
applaud themselves for their own happy Discoveries, whereof there are no
Footstepts in any of the Traditions or Dotages of the Ancients. There is not
more Pride, in being first in a Fashion, than being singular in an opinion.
Such is the carnality of some minds, That nothing is more delightful to them,
than, as the Scripture Phrases it, to Run a Whoring after their own Inventions.

Nor were the Jews more unhappily led by this Liberty into Apostasy from their
Religion, than into the vilest and most shameful Immoralities; of which the
lewdness of the Benjamites, in all its Circumstances and Consequences, is an
Instance, without a Parallel. And the same Reason is assigned in the conclusion
of the History, as sure there was no King, but every man did that which was
right in his own Eyes. Judge. XXI. 25.

But the evil does not rest here, for their Idolatries and Wickedness is
punished, with Civil Wars among themselves, and Invasion from abroad. The Lust
of the Benjamites, kindled the Rage of the other Tribes into such a Flame, as
almost consumed a Tribe of Israel. Nor was their Miseries only from a Civil
War, but from Foreign Enemies: While they forsook God, who was their Strength,
and every one displeased him, by doing what was pleasing to himself, their
divided house could not stand, but lay open to the Ambition of every powerful
Prince, who thought fit to advance the Glory of his Arms, in their Conquest and
Destruction. And thus they became a Prey to Chushan the Mesopotamion and Eglon
the Moabite, and to the many other Lords, who in their turns ruled over them,
almost to the ruin of their Nation. Had not God sent them frequently Signal
and unhop'd for deliverances.

Having entertained your patience on the two particulars, I proposed to
discourse of: Give me leave to make a few Inferences from what has been said.

I. And First, this shows an absolute necessity of Civil Power, and a due
Execution of Penal Laws, for the well Governing of any People. Since these only
can sufficiently curb and restrain this Maxim of the Libertine, which if
pursued, must necessarily destroy all our most Important Interests of Religion,
of Liberty and Property. And all these are necessary. As good no King, as no
Law; no Law, as no Execution.

In the Case before us, we find the want of Civil Government to be the Reason
of all the Sins and Miseries of the Jewish Nation. They had the best Religion,
then, in the World, and the best Laws for their use. And Phinehas the
High Priest stood before the Altar, Chap. XX. 28. in those days when there was
no King.

But though he was a man famous for his Zeal, as Abraham for his Faith, for it
was Imputed to him for Righteousness, and we cannot imagine he was idle in that
high Employment; yet neither his Courage nor his Piety could stem the Torrent
of Vice and of Idolatry, by the Power purely Spiritual.

Where Men have Faith to believe Eternal Rewards and Punishments, the Weapons
of the Religious Warfare are indeed mighty, and of great Efficacy to the
pulling down of strong holds. But even our Savior could do no mighty Works in
some Places, because of Men's unbelief; nor can the Ecclesiastical Conjurers
work Miracles of Reformation on all men, for the same reason.

But all Men have Sense, though all men have not Faith; and the Athiests fears
Death, that does not fear God; and looks on that as a real Evil, though he
thinks Hell Torments but a painted Fire. The Cure therefore of these Evils, of
Idolatry, of Atheism, Lewdness, and Profaneness; which, we are told in Job,
are Iniquities to be punished by the Judge; is not to be expected from the
Spiritual Sword, unless the Secular Arm assist it, by delivering them over to
Temporal Punishments, as God did to Satan, in the Primitive Discipline, that
they may learn not to blaspheme.

2. The Mischief of this principle, of doing every one what is right in his own
Eyes, shows the unreasonableness of those that contend for an Indefinite
Liberty, either in Religious or Civil Matters under a Stated and Well-settl'd
Government; for it is the first end of Law and Government to bound and limit
such a Liberty. And if Men will not be confined by the Socity in which they
live, they Cancel the Obligations to which they are supposed to have consented,
by entering into it; and so endeavor to Sap and Undermine the Foundation on
which it stands; and consequently expose themselves and others to the same
Inconveniences and Insecurities they were in, when there was no Government. It
is therefore the Interest of Government, and of those that are Protected by it,
jointly to oppose such a Principle as will destroy both. And when a Government
is so Supine and Careless as to suffer Men to speak, Write, or Act, as they
list, it is neither true to it self, nor just to those that depend upon it; but
seems to Conspire with the Enemy to its own Destruction: For as, when there was
No King in Israel, every Man did what was right in his own Eyes; it is as
visible if every man be allowed to do so, there cannot long be a King in
Israel. Men do not put out their Eyes, when they enter into Society; but they
must not walk afterward so much by the Light within, in things Lawful, as by
the light of Authority, in things that are to be done; and the Light of Faith
in the Divine Revelation of the Scriptures, in things that are to be believed.
And as wise Governments will not abridge the liberties of Men, which they have
by the Charter of Nature, or of Christians, which they enjoy, by that of the
Gospel, beyond what is necessary for the Peace or Good Order of the Community;
so neither should men be clamorous for being circumscribed in some few things
in their own Nature perfectly indifferent.

3. If the want of Civil Government be so great an Evil, Then it is both the
Duty and Interest of any People, who are fallen into such a Circumstance,
immediately to apply the proper Remedy, by filling the Vacant Throne by a free
Election, where they have Power so to do; or Peaceable Submission to those, who
have a Right without it. And the Public necessity of affairs, the Salus
Ecclesiae and Salus Populi, does both Require and Justify their doing so, as
well for Gods Honor, as their Countrey's safety.

4. If the want of Civil Government be an occasion of so much wickedness and
mischief, what great reason have these Nations to bless Almighty God, for the
Restraint he put upon the hearts and hands of Men, when these Kingdoms were
left in such a State? Though in some Places the Rabble proceeded to some
Excess, yet how little mischief was done, in comparison of what all reasonably
feared would have come to pass? When the People were left without Government,
and an Army was disbanded, but not disarmed, it could be nothing less than the
incontroulable Dominion which God has over the hearts of men, that Restrained
their Spirits, and chained up their desires, from the utmost Violence, even
from sheathing our Swords in one another Bowels. But on the contrary, the men
whose hands were mighty, found nothing; while the Multitude, apt enough at
other times to run to do evil, now generally stand still to see the Salvation
of God; and God chose (not in the Wind, and in the Fire, but) in a soft still
Voice to speak Peace to his People.

5. When there was no King in England, but the People were left as Sheep
without a Shepherd; and those in Ireland were exposed to the Fury of their
implacable and inveterate Enemies; when the Ship was left to run a Drift among
Rocks and Sands, without a Pilot, What reason have we all to rejoice, and to
praise God, who has committed us to the Care of such a Shepherd, who has put
the Helm into such a hand, as has hitherto so steered the good Ship between
all difficulties, that we may comfortably hope he will at length carry her into
a safe Harbor?

Blessed be God, and blessed be the Name of Their Majesty's, this Days Assembly
opens to us a fair prospect of our being upon the Borders of Better Times than
we have yet seen. We are not, as the Israelites in the Text, without a King,
nor without a Priest, nor without God in the World, as some, in so charging us,
have lied unto God. God has restored our Religion and our Monarchy, our Laws
and our Lawmakers; our Judges, as at the First; and our Counselors, as in the
beginning. I hope we shall not be like them, in the other Part, by doing every
one, That which is right in our own Eyes; seeking our selves, our pleasures,
and our gains from our Quarters, our private Interests either of parties, or
persons, in the prejudice of the common Stake, and to the Disservice of their
Majesty's, who have called, or the People, who have sent us hither.

I hope again we shall not be like them as at other times murmuring at Gods
providence, because our Deliverance is wrought in measure, and keeps not up
with the Vehemence of our desires; or repining at such Miscarriages, as are
inevitably incident to all great Revolutions: Lest our Ingratitude should
become an occasion of our Complaints, and slacken the full Accomplishment of
what we long for, with such impatience. Let us not therefore look only on the
Dark side of the Cloud, on our personal sufferings, and fret our selves because
of the Evil doers, but behold the bright and amazing deliverance which God has
wrought for us, and rather than still be complaining, let us say with good old
Mephibosheth, when he lost half his Estate, by the private Accusation of a
false Informer, Yea, let them take all, since my Lord the King is Returned in
Peace.

And now, what shall we render unto the Lord, for all the benefits he has
bestowed? Since the King is victorious over our Enemies, and we are thereby
restored to all those blessings, of which they had unjustly deprived us; surely
the most just and suitable Acknowledgment we can make, is to serve him, in
every station and Relation, wherein we have received advantage; in our
Religious, and Private, and Legislative Capacities.

1. Let it be right in our Eyes, to serve their Majesty's, in our Religious
stations, by praying sincerely and Earnestly, for them, by whom the House of
Prayer is Restored to us, That the God of Israel would protect the King of
Israel, and establish him, on the holy Hill of Sion, where his Right Hand has
set him. Let us thus support the hands of our Deliverer, while his Armies are
Fighting against Amalek; that being called out of the narrow Scene, where his
progenitors Actions were confined for the Deliverance of Oppressed Provinces,
to assert the Liberties of Europe, against the Great Destroyer, he may ride
Prosperously, because of Truth, till he see the desire of his Soul.

2. Let it be right in our Eyes, to serve them with our Properties, and Private
Interests, to enable them to complete that Deliverance, for which his Majesty
so freely Ventured his Life among us: At least let it appear, that we are even
in our low Estate, to our power, yea and beyond our power, willing of our
selves, to supply the necessities, of which we have been a great occasion, that
our Loyalty and Zeal may provoke many.

3. Let it be right in our Eyes, to serve them in our Legislative capacities,
by whom our old Laws are restored to us, and we to the Authority of making new
ones, without any Challenge of such a Dispensing Power, as might render both
useless. Let us therefore give Consent to, and offer matter for such Laws, as
will secure their Majesty's Government, by promoting the Glory of God, and love
and goodwill in the People, to their Majesty's, and to one another; by
suppressing Idolatry and Vice; that by Righteous Laws, and severe Executions,
and Good Examples, all Immorality and profaneness may be punished, and if
possible, put out of Countenance; that so, some stop may be given to that Flood
of Impiety, That is rolled in upon us, and is become too strong for Pulpit
Reproof, or ordinary Discipline.

It is your Duty, (Most Noble Lords, Most Wise and Worthy Patriots) in this
your day, to consider things that make for peace, and to bear your Testimony
against the crying Sins of this Generation, which call aloud for Reformation,
or for Vengeance. By frequent Rapines, we have almost lost all Sense of
justice: By the commonness of swearing and cursing, all Reverence for God, and
holy things, Because of these things, our Government is weakened, and
Reproached, our Religion dishonored, and the wrath of God comes on the
Children of disobedience. You cannot serve their Majesty's more acceptably, who
are great Examples of Virtue, and scatter iniquity with their eyes, nor settle
their Thrones more securely, which are best established by righteousness, nor
your own peace more durably, than by retrieving the credit of our worship, and
making it a support of Virtue as well as of the Protestant Religion. Then
Righteousness and Peace will kiss each other, Truth will look down from Heaven,
and Glory shall dwell in our Land.

But if after so great a deliverance, we shall again Return, or rather still
continue, in our follies and our Vanities, in our filthiness and intemperance,
in our Opressions and our plunders, esteeming all right in our own eyes,
whereby the Lust of the Flesh, the Lust of the Eye, or the pride of Life, is
nourished and pampered; we vainly trust in Princes, or in Armies, tho never so
brave and fortunate: Our boasting of a true Religion is vain also, while we
hold it in Unrighteousness; nor will it stay long with us upon such
dishonorable terms. God knows how to punish, as well as to deliver: He can
give us up to our own hearts lusts, to bite and devour, and consume one
another, by civil Wars; or he can hiss for our Enemies from abroad, and bring
upon us a Chushan, or an Eglon, or stir up the conquered Philistine, and arm
the Canaanite yet in the Land against us; and the Thorns in our Sides will
prove Skiens and Daggers at our hearts, and Fire come out of the Bramble, and
destroy the Cedars of Lebanon. But I hope better things of you, while I thus
speak. Which God of his infinite Mercy grant for his sake, who speaks better
things: To whom, with the Father and the Holy Ghost, be all Honor and Glory
for ever. Amen.

FINIS.
A Catalogue of some Books lately Printed for Robert Clavel, at the Peacock in
St. Paul's Churchyard.
THE State of the Protestants of Ireland, under the late King James 's
Government; in which their Carriage toward him is justified, and the absolute
Necessity of their endeavoring to be freed from his Government, and of
submitting to their present Majesty's, is demonstrated. The Fourth Edition,
with Additions.

Bid Venerabili Opera quaedam Theologica nunc primum edita necnon Historica
ante a semel edita accesserunt Egberti Archiepiscopi Eborocensis Dialogus de
Ecclesiastica Institutione and Aldhelmi Episcopi Scireburnensis Liber de
Virginitate ex codicae antiquissimo emendatus.

A Defense of Pluralities, or holding Two Benefices with Cure of Souls, as now
practiced in the Church of England.

L. Annaei Flori Rerum Romanorum Epitome, interpretatione, and Notis
illustravit Anna Tanaquilli Fabri Filia, Jussu Christianismi Regis, in usum
Serenissimi Delphini.

De Presbyteratu Dissertatio Quadripartita, Presbyteratus Sacri Origines,
Naturam Titulum, Officia and Ordines, ab ipsis Mundi primordiis usque ad
Catholicae Ecclesiae consummatam Plantationem complectens. In qua Hierarchiae
Episcopalis Jus divinum and Immutabile, ex Auctoritate Scripturarum Canonice
expositarum, and Ecclesiasticae traditionis Suffragiis, breviter quidem, sed
luculenter asseritur.


