CHRIST THE BEST HUSBAND: Or an Invitation of YOUNG WOMEN UNTO CHRIST.

Delivered in a Sermon to YOUNG WOMEN.

By THOMAS VINCENT, Minister sometime of Maudlins Milkstreet, London.

LONDON, Printed for George Calvert and Samuel Sprint, and are to be sold at
the Golden Ball in Duck Lane. 1672.

CHRIST THE BEST HUSBAND:
Psalm. 45. 10, 11. Hearken, (O daughter) and consider, and incline thine ear;
forget also thine own people, and thy fathers house; so shall the King greatly
desire thy beauty; for he is thy Lord, and worship thou him.
THis Psalm is called a Song of Loves, the most high, pure and spiritual, the
most dear, sweet, and delightful Loves; namely, those which are between Christ,
the Beloved, and his Church, which is his Spouse: wherein is set forth, first,
the Lord Jesus Christ, in regard of his Majesty, Power, and Divinity, His
truth, meekness and equity; and then the Spouse is set forth in regard of her
ornaments, companions, attendants, and posterity; and both are set forth in
regard of their loveliness and Beauty. After a Description is given of Christ,
an invitation is made unto his Espousals, and that of the children of men,
called by the name of Daughter; and therefore particularly applicably unto the
Daughters o men; yet not so as excluding the sons of men any more than when God
speaks unto the sons of men, he does exclude the daughters; and with
reference chiefly unto the Daughters I shall now speak unto the words; and from
hence observe this Doctrine, as comprehensive of the words as I can make it.

Doct. That the Lord Jesus Christ, the King of Glory, does invite all the
children of men, particularly the Daughters of men, to be his Spouse; and is
exceedingly desirous of their beauty; who, forgetting their people, and fathers
house, do hearken, consider, and incline to his invitation, and join themselves
to him in this Relation.

In handling of this point, I shall 1. speak concerning Christ's espousing
himself unto the children of men. 2. Show that Christ does invite all the
children of men, and particularly the daughters of men, to be his Spouse. 3.
That such who would be espoused unto Jesus Christ, must hearken, consider, and
incline to his invitation, and forget their own people, and fathers house. 4.
That such as are espoused unto Jesus Christ, are very beautiful. 5. That Jesus
Christ does greatly desire the beauty of such as are espoused unto him. 6. And
lastly, Make some Application.

1. Concerning Christ's espousing himself unto the children of men; Christ does
espouse and betroth people unto himself in this world; the public
solemnization of the marriage is reserved until the last day, when his Spouse
shall be brought to him in white robes, and raiment of perfect righteousness,
more rich and curious than any needle work; and the Marriage Feast will be kept
in his Fathers house in Heaven, where they shall be received into the nearest
and closest embracements of his Love. The espousal between them, and marriage
knot is tied here. There are four things chiefly included in Christ's espousal
with the children of men; 1. Mutual choice. 2. Mutual affection. 3. Mutual
union. 4. Mutual obligation.

1. Mutual choice, besides the eternal choice, which is not only in Christ as
Mediator, but also by Christ as the eternal Son of God; Christ does in time
actually choose some of the children of men, passing by others, without the
least respect to any worthiness, or desirable qualification in them, but
freely, of his mere grace, to make them his Spouse, and to bring them into the
Marriage covenant, and relation to himself; and herein Christ does begin, he
chooses them first, as he tells his Disciples, Ioh. 15. 16. Ye have not
chosen me, but I have chosen you: and then they make choice of him above all to
take him for their Lord and Husband; Christ finds them deformed, defiled,
enslaved, poor, miserable, wretched, very despicable and loathsome by reason of
sin; and he makes choice of them, not because they have any beauty, and
suitable qualifications for this match; but that he may put his beauty and
comeliness upon them, and endow them himself with such qualifications as may
make them meet for his embracements: but in their making choice of Christ, they
are drawn to it by the most attractive and powerful motives of the transcendent
beauty, and superlative excellency which they see in him beyond all persons and
things in the world.

2. In this espousal there is mutual affection, this does accompany the choice;
on Christ's part at first he does bear a love of benevolence unto them whom he
does espouse; and does desire the nearest union and conjunction unto them, and
therefore does make suit to them for their Love: On their part, their hearts
are drawn forth in desires after Christ: None but Christ, none but Christ, is
the language of their hearts, when they are made thoroughly sensible of their
need of him; and however his dowry at first is most desired, yet afterward, as
they get more acquaintance, they are most taken with his person.

3. In this espousal there is mutual Union; and herein most properly does the
espousal lie; in this union Christ and souls are contracted, and the knot is
tied so fast, as no power can untie; which union is by the Spirit, on Christ's
part, and by Faith on their part; by the Spirit Christ does lay hold on them,
and by Faith they lay hold upon Christ; by the Spirit Christ does draw them,
and knit them to himself, and by Faith they come and join themselves unto him,
and so the match is made; Christ becomes theirs, his person, portion, and all
his benefits theirs; and they become Christ's, their persons, their hearts, and
all that they have is resigned up unto him.

4. In this espousal there is mutual obligation: Christ obliges himself to
them to love them, and never leave them, to protect, to provide for them, to
live with them here, and at length to take them to live with him for ever; and
they engage themselves unto him, to be loving, loyal, faithful, obedient, and
with full purpose of heart to stick close to him, as long as they live: this is
implied in the espousal it self.

2. Christ does invite all the children of men, and particularly the Daughters
of men, to be his Spouse; this is that which they are invited unto in the Text.
It is upon this account that Christ does send his Ministers to be his
Ambassadors, to whom he gives Commission in his Name to call the children of
men unto this most near and sweet relation, they do represent his person, and
are to invite and woe in his Name, that people would come and join themselves
unto him. The Apostle Paul tells the Corinthians, how successful his Embassage
was amongst them, upon this account, 2 Cor. 11. 3. I have espoused you unto one
husband, that I may present you as a chaste virgin unto Christ. And when any
Ministers are instrumental in the conversion of any, they do espouse them to
Christ; in conversion, sinners are divorced from sin, and are married unto the
Lord Jesus. The Lord by his Word in the mouth of his Ministers, does make a
general invitation unto all the children of men, and particularly, all the
Daughters of men are invited to be Christ's Spouse; Hearken, O Daughter, and
consider, incline thine ear, etc. Such as are elder are invited, but especially
those that are younger; whether married or unmarried; of higher degree, or of
the meanest quality; even the poorest servants are as welcome to be Christ's
Spouse, as those that are rich; He regards not the rich more than the poor;
He chose a mean Virgin, espoused to a Carpenter, to be his Mother; and he
chooses and calls any such, and those which are lower than such to be his
Spouse.

3. That such who would be espoused unto Jesus Christ, must hearken, consider,
and incline to his invitation, and forget their people and fathers house.

1. Such as would be espoused unto Christ, must Hearken; Hearken, O Daughter.
Some, yea most of the children of men, shut their eyes as fast as they can
against the light of the Word, and they shut their ears as fast as they can
against the calls of the Word, like the deaf Adder, which will not hearken to
the voice of the Charmer, charms he never so wisely; so they will not hearken
to the invitations of Christ by his Ministers, let them invite never so
pathetically; It was by the ear that the temptation to sin was received at
first by man, when he departed from God, and by the ear the invitation to be
Christ's Spouse is first received, whereby any are restored unto Gods favor:
the ear must be first opened to receive Christ's invitation, before the heart
will be opened to receive Jesus Christ in this conjugal relation, Isa. 55. 3.
Hear, and thy soul shall live.

2. Such as would be espoused unto Christ, must not only hearken, but consider
Christ's invitation; Hearken, O daughter, and consider. It is not a slight or
bare hearing of Christ's invitation, which will make up the match between Christ
and the Soul, but there must be a considering, a pondering of it in the mind,
there must be a considering of the proffer it self, what it is, the reality of
the thing, the necessity of the thing, the attainableness of it, the greatness
of it, the freeness of it, the sweetness of it, the advantage of it, the
difference between Christ's invitations, and the Devils temptations, or any of
the worlds proffers, and by such considering and weighing the one with the
other, the Soul will come to understand, and fully be persuaded, that Christ's
invitations are most reasonable and eligible.

3. Such as would be espoused unto Christ, must incline unto Christ's
invitation; Hearken, O daughter, and consider, incline thine ear. I suppose by
the inclining of the ear is not meant the harkening, of which before; but it
includes the inclining of the heart to accept of Christ's invitation; there
must be a consent of the Will, and a ready compliance with Christ's motion, a
closing of the heart with it; this does show it self, when the Soul is not only
sued unto to accept of Christ, but it puts forth desires after Christ, and
sueth to him that it may be accepted into this relation. As David did incline
unto the invitation of the Lord to seek his face, Psalm. 27. 8. When thou
saidest Seek ye my face; my heart said unto thee, Thy face, Lord, will I seek:
So the children of men incline to Christ's invitation to be his Spouse, when
their hearts say, Lord, Let us be thy Spouse, and be thou our beloved.

4. Such as would be espoused unto Jesus Christ, must forget their people, and
fathers house, Hearken, O daughter, and consider, forget thy own people, and
thy fathers house; not as if by espousing themselves unto Christ, they were to
cast off all affections unto natural relations, but they must so forget all
relations, as to be ready to forgo all their favor, where it stands in
competition with Christ; they must be ready to displease any rather than to
displease Christ; and suffer the loss of any thing rather than to lose his
favors; they must forget their own people, and fathers house, that is, they
must forget all their evil customs which they have learned in their fathers
house, and forsake their vain conversation received by tradition from their
fathers, which Christ has redeemed them from, 1 Pet. 1. 18. Some think the
words literally are an invitation of Pharaohs daughter to come out of Egypt,
and forget her people and fathers house there, that she might be espoused unto
King Solomon: and so hereby the Lord in calling upon people to be espoused to
him, would have them come forth from the Egypt of sin, and forget and forsake
all their former sinful courses and conversation: and truly such who are in
Egyptian bondage to sin, have a Father the Devil, and their companions in sin
may be called their own people; these they must forget and forsake, and come
out from amongst; if not in regard of place, at least in regard of course, if
they would be espoused unto the Lord Jesus.

4. That such as are espoused unto the Lord Jesus Christ, are very beautiful; I
don't mean in regard of their bodies, they may have less of external comeliness
than others; and yet in regard of their bodies, (however mean and vile, however
crooked and decrepid some of them now may be) even their bodies shall be formed
and fashioned into an exact beauty, and put on a mavelous comeliness, on the
day when the Nuptials shall be solemnized; I mean the day of Christ's second
appearance, and their resurrection; then their vile bodies shall be made like
to Christ's most glorious body; Philip. 3. 21. their bodies then shall have a
most sparkling beauty and luster, when they are transformed into the likeness
of their Lords most beautiful and glorious body; whereby they will become very
amiable both unto Christ, and one to another. But I now speak of the beauty
which here such have who are espoused unto Christ; they are very beautiful, not
externally, but internally; not in regard of their bodies, but in regard of
their souls; not so much in the eyes of men, as in the eyes of God; as verse
13. of this Psalm: The Kings daughter is all-glorious within: They have a
glorious inside, which is so far glorious as it is gracious; their souls are in
some measure restored unto their primitive beauty; they have the most beautiful
Image of God engraven upon them; and so far as they are like unto God in
knowledge, righteousness, and holiness; so far they are marvellously beautiful.
They are comparatively very beautiful; none in the world besides them have the
least spark of spiritual beauty; such as are not espoused to Christ, are
unrenewed; and such as are unrenewed are exceedingly bespotted and defiled with
sin; they have monstrous natures and hearts; most ugly deformed spirits in the
sight of God. There are indeed some spots in Christ's Spouse, but there is
beauty too; and they are growing on farther and farther toward perfection of
beauty; and hereafter they shall be made perfect in holiness; and here they are
perfect in their Head, they have a covering for their spots; I mean the perfect
righteousness of Christ, through which they are reputed by God as perfectly
beautiful.

5. That the Lord Jesus Christ does exceedingly desire the beauty of such as
are espoused unto him. He greatly desires to see it, and enjoy it in his
fellowship with them. See this desire after his Spouses beauty, Cant. 2. 14. O
my dove, thou art in the clefts of the rock, in the secret places of the
stairs, let me see thy countenance, let me hear thy voice, for sweet is thy
voice, and thy countenance is comely. See farther how he admireth the beauty of
his Spouse, chap. 4. 1. Behold, thou art fair, my love, behold thou art fair!
He calls his Spouse his Love, being the dear object of his love, and he
admireth her loveliness: he repeats it twice, Thou art fair, Thou art fair: and
that with a note of admiration, Behold thou art fair! and again, Behold thou
art fair! and so he goes on in the description of her beauty: and in the 7th
verse he tells her, Thou art all fair, my love, there is no spot in thee.
Through his own comeliness which he had put upon her, he saw nothing but beauty,
and no spot in her; and in the 9th verse we have a wonderful expression of
Christ to his Spouse. Thou have ravished my heart, my Sister, my Spouse, thou
have ravished my heart with one of thine eyes, with one chain of thy neck The
Original word signifies, thou have un-hearted me, or taken away my heart from
me; the Spouse had got away Christ's heart with one of her eyes, with her looks
and glances of love upon him; and he was excedingly taken with the chain of
faith, and other graces linked together, about the neck of her Soul. The Lord
Jesus does marvellously delight in the internal beauty of his people, and he
greatly desires to see and enjoy it, which he does, when they are brought near
into the most intimate communion with him.

The APPLICATION.
Use 1. For Examination.

Does the Lord Jesus Christ, the King of Glory, invite all the children of men,
and particularly the daughters of men, to be his Spouse? and is he so greatly
desirous of the beauty of such as are joined unto him? This then should put all
of you upon the enquiry, whether you are espoused unto Jesus Christ? You have
been called hereunto, have you hearkened? You have had great proffers made to
you, have you considered? You have been invited again and again, and many
arguments have been used with you, to prevail with you to come and join your
selves to the Lord Jesus; but have you inclined? Have you been persuaded? Is
the match indeed made up between Christ and your souls?

If you are espoused unto Christ, then

1. You are disjoined from sin; Is the cursed league broken, which is naturally
between sin and your hearts? Before you come to be espoused unto Christ, you
are as it were espoused and married to sin; sin is your Husband, and you are
tied in its bonds; sin does inhabit with you, and dwell in the embracements of
your dearest love and delight; you care for the things of sin, how you may
please your flesh, and gratify your inordinate desires; and whilst this
husband and beloved of your hearts lives, you are not at liberty to be
espoused and married unto Jesus Christ; and sin lives in the affections,
whilst it does possess the most prevailing liking affections; and so long you
are knit and linked unto sin: examine whether sin has yet received it is deaths
wound in your hearts; whether ever the false mask of sin has been plncked off,
and the odiousness of it has been made manifest unto you; whether your hearts
have been brought to a loathing and detestation of it; and so sin killed in
your affections, and the knot unlosed which has tied your hearts unto it? Do
you indeed hate sin with the greatest and most implacable hatred? Is sin
mortified and subdued as to its reigning power? if sin be dead, you are at
liberty to be espoused, and it is a good evidence that you are espoused unto
Jesus Christ.

2. If you be espoused unto Christ, then you have been drawn to him by the
spirit, Ioh. 6. 44. No man can come unto me, except the Father which has sent
me draw him: and the Father draws by the Spirit. You have had external calls
of the Word to come unto Christ; have you been called effectually, and drawn
powerfully, irresistably, and yet most sweetly by the Spirit, unto Jesus
Christ? Have you had a discovery by the Spirit, not only of your necessity of,
and lost estate without an interest in Christ; but also of Christ's beauty and
transcendent loveliness, His excellency, and great willingness to give
entertainment unto you in this relation? and have you been moved and drawn
hereby unto him?

3. If you be espoused unto Christ, then you have laid hold upon him by faith;
the spirit does draw unto Christ, by working the Grace of Faith, and enabling
persons to believe in him; by Faith Christ is received, Ioh. 1. 12. To as many
as received him, to them gave he power to become the sons of God; even to them
that believe on his name. By believing on Christ's name, persons do receive
Christ in this relation, Faith is the hand of the Soul, which lays hold on
Christ, and by this joining of the hand with Christ, the knot is tied, and the
Soul is united to Christ in the relation of a Spouse; have you this Grace of
Faith wrought in you with power? have you received and applied Christ unto your
selves? have you received him upon his own terms? and do you by Faith draw
quickening and strengthening influences from him?

4. If you be espoused unto Christ, then you do embrace him in the arms of your
dearest love; then you love the Lord Jesus in sincerity, and you love him with
the supremacy of your love; If you love father or mother, houses or lands,
riches or honors, delights or pleasures, or any thing in the world, more than
Christ, you have no true love to Christ, and be sure are not espoused to him;
but if Christ be chiefly beloved, it is an evidence that you are joined in this
relation unto him.

5. If you are espoused unto Christ, you have acquaintance and converse with
Christ, and you like his company best, and you highly value, and diligently
attend upon all those Ordinances which are the means of bringing you and Christ
together; and this is the great thing which you desire and seek after in
Hearing and Prayer, and at the Table of the Lord, that you may have a sight of
your Beloved, and a taste of his Love, and more intimate communion with Him.
And is acquaintance begun with Christ, and farther intimacy defired by you? Are
pure and powerful Ordinances of great esteem with you? Do you give all
diligence to wait upon, and for your Beloved in them?

6. If you are espoused unto Christ, then you endeavor to promote his
interest, and advance his name in the world; then when others seek their own
things, you seek the things of Jesus Christ, and look upon them as your own;
when others labor chiefly to lift up themselves in the esteem of men, you
labor above ill to lift up Christ in men's esteem; you are commending your
beloved above all others beloved, and endeavor to bring others in love with
him, and into the same relation with your selves unto him. Can you show such
evidences as these of your espousals unto Christ? And if beyond these, you have
love tokens to show which you have received from Christ; if he have given you
Soul-refreshing visits, heartravishing siniles, gracious returns to your
Prayers, the white stone, a sight of your name written in his book, the hidden
manna, the fruit of the tree of life, a glympse of glory, an earnest of your
inheritance, a fore-taste of Heaven, un-utterable peace of conscience; a heart
enlarged with love to Him, and filled sometimes with the joys of the Holy
Ghost; such love tokens as these may put it quite out of question whether you
are espoused unto Christ, when all these are the tokens of his conjugal,
especial, and most endeared Love.

Use 2. For reproof of all those that refuse or neglect Christ's invitation of
them, to be his Spouse.

1. This is your great sin, hereby you highly affront Christ, and you
exceedingly offend him: I suppose it would offend and highly displease your
selves, should you make love to an inferior, and have your persons contemned,
and your love slighted by them; Christ has made love, and made suit unto you,
who are infinitely inferior unto him, He calls upon you, and his great
desire of you is, that you would be his Spouse; by your refusal of him, and
neglect of his invitation, you contemn his person, and slight his Love; yea,
you prefer his inferiors before him; even those that are not worthy to be
named with him: and can there be a greater indignity offered? If Christ should
contemn you that are so mean, and slight your Love, as unworthy of any regard,
it would not be so much wonder; It is no great wonder to see a Prince slight
the aspiring conjugal Love of a Beggar; but for you that are beggarly sinners
to slight the person and love of such a Prince, this is a great sin and
provocation.

2. This is your great folly as well as sin, to refuse and neglect the gracious
proffers of being made the Spouse of Christ; hereby you forfeit all that
especial Love of his which you might have, with all the endeared expressions
thereof: by this refusal and neglect you choose rags before robes, dross before
gold; pebbles before jewels; guilt before a pardon; wounds before healing;
defilement before cleansing; deformity before comeliness; trouble before peace;
slavery before liberty; the service of the Devil before the service of Christ;
hereby you choose dishonor before a crown; death before life; Hell before
Heaven; eternal pain and misery before everlasting joy and glory. And need
there a farther evidence of your folly and madness, in refusing and neglecting
of Christ's invitation to be his Spouse?

Use 3. For comfort of all those that have hearkened, considered, and are
inclined and persuaded to be the Spouse of Jesus Christ.

1. This is your wisdom, they are foolish Virgins which refuse, but you are
the wise Virgins, who have accepted of Christ's proffer, and have disposed your
selves unto him; you have made the wisest choice; and however the blind World
may deem you fools, yet you are wise in the esteem of God, and one day will be
so in the esteem of them them that now despise you.

2. This is your glory, you that are espoused unto Jesus Christ, are advanced
unto great dignity and honor; you are of all others in the world most highly
preferred: It is the dignity of Christ to be so near to the Father, and it is
your dignity to be so near unto Christ: It is Christ's honor beyond every
creature, that he is joined in the hypostatical union unto the Father, and it
is your honor that you are joined in this mystical and conjugal union and
relation unto the eternal Son of God. Let not the wise man glory in his
wisdom, nor the mighty man glory in his strength, nor the wealthy man glory in
his riches; but you may glory in the Lord, that you are espoused unto Christ;
glory not in your selves, but in the Lord, who has most freely and graciously
taken you into this relation.

3. This is your safety: If you are espoused unto Christ, you are under the
wing of his especial protection continually, he is by this relation unto you,
engaged to protect and defend you, and that from Sin and Satan, and eternal
ruin, and so long you are safe; yea, he has a special regard for you in times
of danger from men, he has secret chambers of his providence to hide you in
when there are great storms and tempests of trouble about you, and if such
times should overtake you, which are not very unlikely, either he will preserve
you from common desolation, or by it lodge you with himself out of the reach of
all future trouble.

4. This may comfort you at all times, and in all conditions, that you are so
nearly related unto Christ, that he loves you when the world hates you, that
he cares for you, and has promised to provide for you what is needful here,
and at length will receive you to the mansions he has prepared in his Fathers
house, where you shall see, and share in his glory, and take up your habitation
for ever with him.

Use 4. For Exhortation both of those that as yet are not espoused unto Christ,
and of those that are espoused.

1. You that are not as yet espoused unto Christ, I shall direct my speech unto
you, and that to all both men and women, but particularly to you that are young
women, whom especially I am now called to preach unto. It may be novelty and
curiosity has hrought many hither this day, which otherwise would not have
been here; and possibly the Lord may make use of this opportunity, not only to
invite by his Word, but also to persuade by his Spirit, some of you to espouse
your selves unto him; and if any souls may now be brought to a closure with
Jesus Christ, I shall attain my great end, and both you and I shall rejoice
that I hearkened unto that motion and desire which was made to me of preaching
a particular Sermon unto young women, as I have done many particularly unto
young men. Come, Virgins, will you give me leave to be a Suitor unto you, not
in my own name, but in the name of my Lord? May I prevail with you for your
affections, and persuade you to give them unto Christ? May I be instrumental to
join you and Christ together this day? Be not coy, as some of you possibly are
in other Loves: Modesty and the Virgin blush may very well become you when
motions of another kind are made unto you; but here coyness is folly, and
backwardness to accept of this motion is a shame; and you have ten thousand
times more reason to blush at the refusal of Christ for your beloved, than at
the acceptance; when otherwise the Devil and Sin would ravish your Virgin
affections. Never had you a better motion made to you, never was such a match
proffered to you as this, of being matched and espoused unto Jesus Christ.

1. Consider who the Lord Jesus is, whom you are invited to espouse your selves
unto; He is the best Husband; none comparable to Jesus Christ.

1. Do you desire one that is great? He is of the highest dignity: none ever
did or could climb into so high a seat, or attain such excellent Majesty, as
that which Christ is exalted unto; he is exalted above all the Kings of the
Earth, Rev. 19. 16. He has on his vesture, and on his thigh a Name written,
KING OF KINGS, AND LORD OF LORDS. Yea, he is exalted above the Angels in
Heaven, and none have such authority; 1 Pet. 3. 22. Who is gone into Heaven;
Angels, and Authority, and Powers being made subject unto him; He is the
firstborn of every creature; by whom, and for whom, all things were created; He
is before all things, and by him all things do consist; He is the Head of the
Church, the beginning, the first born from the dead, and as over all persons,
so in all things he has the pre-eminence. Col. 1. 15, 16, 17, 18. He is the
brightness of his Fathers glory, the express image of his person, Heb. 1. 3. He
is the glory of Heaven, the darking of eternity, admired by Angels, dreaded by
Devils, adored by Saints. If the meanest Beggar should be matched unto the
greatest earthly Prince that ever lived, it would not be such an advancement
unto her, as for you to be espoused to the Lord Jesus Christ, the King of
glory, whose honor and dignity you will partake of, in, and by this relation.

2. Do you desire one that is rich? None is comparable unto Christ, who is the
heir of all things, Heb. 1. 2. in whom all fullness does dwell, Col. 1. 19. Not
only the fullness of the earth does belong to him, Psalm. 24. 1. but also the
fullness of Heaven is at his dispose, all things being given, and delivered unto
him by the Father, Ioh. 3. 35. Matthew. 11. 26. the riches of grace are at his
dispose, and the riches of glory; in him are hid all treasures, Col. 2. 3. and
the Apostle speaks of the unsearchable riches of Christ, Ephesians. 3. 8. The
riches of Christ are unsearchable, in regard of the worth of them; they are
inestimable, the value of them is past finding out; and they are unsearchable
in regard of the abundance of them; they are inexhanstible; none can draw dry
Christ's Fountain, none can search and find out the bottom of Christ's treasury.
If you be espoused unto Christ, you shall share in his unsearchable riches, you
shall receive of his fullness, grace for grace here, and glory for glory
hereafter; and he will make all needful provisions for your outward man, whilst
your abode is here in this world.

3. Do you desire one that is wise? There is none comparable unto Christ for
wisdom; His knowledge is infinite, and his wisdom is correspondent: Solomon
exceeded all that went before him, or that followed after him, in wisdom; but
he did not so far exceed a man of the meanest wit and shallowest capacity, as
he was exceeded by Jesus Christ; Christ is not only wise, but wisdom, Matthew.
11. 19. the wisdom of God, 1 Cor. 1. 24. Christ is infinitely wise in himself,
and he is the spring of all the true, spiritual, and heavenly wisdom, which is
derived unto any of the children of men, Col. 2. 3. In him are hid all
treasures of wisdom and knowledge. If you be espoused unto Christ, he will
guide and counsel you, and make you wise unto salvation.

4. Do you desire one that is potent, who may defend you against your enemies,
and any kind of injuries and abuses? There is none that can equal Christ in
power; others have some power, but Christ has all power, Matthew. 28. 18. Others
may be potent, but Christ is omnipotent; others have power, Christ is power;
the power of God, 1 Cor. 1. 24. And if you be espoused unto Christ, his
infinite power is engaged in your desence against your enemies; He will subdue
your iniquities, Mic. 7. 19. By that power whereby he is able to subdue all
things, Philip. 3. 21. He will bruise Satan under your feet, Romans 16 20. He
will keep you from the evil of the world, Ioh. 17, 15, He will make you more
than conquerours over all your spiritual enemies, who, without his help, would
not only abuse and injure you, but also ruin and destroy you, Romans 8. 37.

5. Do you desire one that is good? There is none like unto Christ in this
regard; others may have some goodness, but it is imperfect; Christ's goodness is
complete and perfect; He is full of goodness, and in him dwells no evil; He
is good, and he does good; and if you are espoused unto Christ, however bad you
are by nature, he will make you in some measure good like himself.

6. Do you desire one that is beautiful? Christ is fairer than the children of
men, Psalm 43. 2. He is white and ruddy, the chiefest among ten thousand, Cant.
5. 10. His mouth is most sweet, yea, he is altogether lovely, v. 16. His eyes
are most sparkling, his looks and glances of love are most ravishing, his
smiles are most delightful and refreshing unto the Soul; Christ is the most
lovely and amiable person of all others in the world, none so accomplished in
all regard as he is accomplished, and therefore he is most desirable in this
relation; and however unlovely you are in your selves, however deformed and
defiled by sin, yet if you be espoused unto Christ, he will put his comeliness
upon you, he will wash you in a bath made of his own blood, from your
defilements, and beautify you with his own image, and so you shall become
exceeding fair; and as you may have leave to delight your selves in Christ's
beauty, so he will greatly desire and delight in yours, as in the Text;
Hearken, O daughter, and consider, incline thine ear, etc. so shall the King
greatly desire thy beauty.

7. Do you desire one that can love you? None can love you like unto Christ:
His love is incomparable, and his love is incomprehensible; his love passes
all others love; and it passes knowledge too; Ephesians. 3. 19. His love is first,
without any beginning; his love is free, without any motive; his love is great,
without any measure; his love is constant, without any change; and his love is
everlasting, without any end. It was the Love of Christ which brought him down
from Heaven, which veiled his Divinity in a Humane Soul and Body; which put
upon him the form of a servant; which exposed him to contempt, reproach, and
many indignities: It was love which made him subject to hunger, and thirst, and
sorrow, and many humane infirmities, which humbled him unto death, even the
painful and ignominious death of the Cross; and when out of love he had
finished the work of Redemption on earth, as to what was needful by way of
satisfaction; it was his love which carried him back to heaven, where he was
before, that he might make application of what he had purchased, that there he
might make Intercession for those whom he had redeemed, and prepare a place for
them, even glorious mansions with himself, in the house not made with hands,
which is eternal in the Heavens: It is out of Love that he sends such tokens
to his people from Heaven to Earth, which he conveyeth through his Ordinances
by his Spirit unto them; and his love tokens are infinitely beyond all other
love tokens in worth and excellency; surely then none is so desirable as the
Lord Jesus Christ for you to espouse your selves unto. If you be espoused to
Christ, he is yours, all that he is, all that he has; you shall have his
heart, and share in the choicest expressions of his dearest Love. And now put
all together. The Lord Jesus Christ being incomparable in dignity, in riches,
in wisdom, in power, in goodness, in loveliness, and in love; methinks you
should need no other motive to persuade you unto willingness to espouse your
selves unto him.

2. Consider that you are invited unto this relation of a Spouse unto Christ;
Hearken, O daughter, and consider, incline thine ear, etc. In those words the
Lord Jesus does woo you to be his Spouse; we Ministers have a commission from
our Lord to invite you in his name unto this thing, and Christ's invitations
are, 1. Real; 2. General; 3. Frequent; 4. Earnest; 5. Free.

1. Christ's invitations of you to be his Spouse are Real; the thing is real,
that there ir an espousal between Christ and his people; It is no fancy, which
has no ground or foundation, but in the fond mind and imagination of some
fancy full men, as some may deem it to be; for there is a clear foundation for
it in the Scriptures, 2 Cor. 11. 1. I have espoused you unto one Husband, that
I may present you as a chaste Virgin unto Christ. 1 Cor. 6. 17. He that is
joined unto the Lord, is one spirit. And as the thing is real, so you are
really invited unto it; the Lord does not mock and dissemble with you, as some
pretending Lovers, who dissemble love unto Virgins, until they have gained
their affections, and then falsely and basely relinquith them, never really
intending either to espouse or marry them: But the Lord does really intend the
thing, in his invitations of you; He is repulsed by many, unto whom he makes
suit for their affections; but he never did cast off any whose consent and
affections he had gained.

2. Christ's invitations of you to be his Spouse, are General; All of you are
invited, and none of you excepted; none are excluded, but such of you as
exclude your selves; all sorts of persons are invited, not only such who are of
the highest quality, of whom very few do hearken; but also those who are of the
meanest degree in the world: the poor, and the blind, and the lame, and the
most despicable in the eyes of men as they are invited unto the marriage Supper
Luke 14. 21. so upon their coming they are received into the marriage relation
unto Christ. All sorts of sinners are invited, not only those who have kept
their garments from grosser spots, and escaped the greater pollutions which are
in the world through Lust; but also the most vile and abominable sinners, such
who have run with others unto the same excess of riot, and wallowed like swine
in the deepest mire of sin, the most notorious transgressors are invited to be
Christ's Spouse, and shall be as welcome as any unto the embracements of his
Love.

3. Christ's invitations of you to be his Spouse, are Frequent; Some will ask
you once and twice, but if they be denied they will ask no more; especially if
they be of superior quality, and it would be for your advancement to hearken
and consent; but the Lord Jesus Christ does invite not once or twice, but very
frequently; he stretches forth his hand all the day long, and though you have
been a gainsaying people, he does still invite you; He has been a Suitor unto
some of you for many years together, and he is still a suitor; and though he be
so much your superior, and you will be infinitely beholding to him to take you
into this relation; notwithstanding all repulses and unkindnesses, he does
invite you again by me this day, to be his Spouse.

4. Christ's invitations of you to be his Spouse, are Earnest; He is very
importunate with you; He does not tacitly signify his mind, and willingness to
accept of you, which would have been an infinite condescension, and sufficient
encouragement for you to apply your selves unto him; but he does call upon you,
and not only call, but he does call carnestly; yea, he uses many arguments to
persuade you; and he adds entreaties to his invitations; He gives us
Ministers a commission to beseech you that you would be espoused unto him; He
is very loath to take any denial, he is very unwilling to be put off; He knocks
and knocks hard at the door of your hearts, for enrertainment: and as
earnestness and importunity in Prayer does prevail with the Lord for audience
and an answer; so the Lords earnestness and importunity should prevail with you
for acceptance of him in this desirable relation.

5. Christ's invitations of you to be his Spouse, are Free; He does not expect a
portion and dowry with you, as many, yea, most great persons do in their
applications to any upon this account, they expect something answerable to
their degree and estate; but none have any thing answerable unto Christ's
degree, neither does he expect any thing, he has enough for you and him too;
and you must have nothing, if you would be espoused unto him; you must be poor,
and naked, and empty, and he will enrich, and clotha, and fill, and supply you
out of his treasury, with all things needful to qualify you and make you meet
for himself.

3. Consider if you be once espoused unto Christ, you shall never be divorced,
if once joined in this relation unto him, you shall never be separated from
him; neither Men nor Devils shall be able to disjoyn you, and when Death does
break all other conjugal bonds, it shall not break the conjugal bonds between
you and Christ, but bring you unto the most full and everlasting possession of
your beloved.

And what do yon now say, young women? shall I have a grant for my Master, or
be sent away with a repulse and refusal? Methinks by this time ye should begin
to have a mind unto Jesus Christ; You look as if you did desire; you hearken,
as if you would consent; what do you say? shall the match be made up this day
between Christ and your souls? may I be instrumental to join your hands, or
rather your hearts together? may I be instrumental to tie that knot which can
never be untied? Some marry in haste, and repent at leisure; but if you were
once espoused unto Jesus Christ, you would never repent; nothing would grieve
you but that you were joined unto him no sooner; and you would not be disjoined
again for all the world. Shall this be the day of your espousals? Some of you
have stayed a long time, and will you deferr any longer? If you will not now,
it may be Christ will not another time; if you refuse now Christ calls and
inviteth, Christ may refuse when you call and entreat: this may be the last
time of asking, and therefore it is dangerous to refuse: Some of you are very
young, too young for other espousa's, but none of you are too young for this
espousal unto Jesus Christ; in other espousals you must have the consent of
Parents, but in this you are at your own dispose; you may give, and ought to
match your selves to Christ, whether Parents do consent or no.

Qu. But what shall we do that we may be espoused unto Jesus Christ?

Answ. 1. Be sensible of your need of Christ, and this espousal unto him,
without which, you are slaves unto sin and Satan, children of wrath, hated by
Godhere, and in danger of eternal ruin in the other world; and therefore that
there is a necessity of this relation unto Christ, that you may hereby be
interested in his redemption and salvation.

2. Labor for longing desires after this relation unto Christ; he desires that
you would be his Spouse, and do you desire that you may be espoused to him;
desire it chiefly, and desire it earnestly; and for this end consider the
motives which I have spread before you, to excite your desires after Christ.

3. Diligently seek after this relation to Christ, attend upon the Ordinances
which God has appointed to be the means of bringing and joining you and Christ
together: such as hearing the word, prayer, etc. seek after Christ in hearing,
and rest not in the outside of the duty, and cry mightily to God in prayer,
that he would draw you and join you by his spirit unto his Son.

4. Put off your filthy garments, I do not speak of the garments about your
bodies, but of the filthy rags of sin which are about your Souls: you must lay
aside all filthiness and superfluity of naughtiness, all pride, and envy, and
malice, and worldliness, and inordinate affection, and evil concupisence, and
every other defiling lust; these are the old clothes of the old man which must
be put off if you would be espoused unto Christ.

5. Put on the white raiment and clean garments and rich robes which Christ
has provided for you; I mean the attire of grace, the robes of his perfect
righteousness, in these garments you will be beautiful and accepted.

6. Reach forth the hand of faith, and lay hold on him, consent that you will
have him, and receive him upon his own terms, and he is yours for ever.

7. Devote your selves to him body, and soul, and all, to be his for ever; and
then you may say, My Beloved is mine, and I am his; and then happy, happy you
that ever you were born!

2. To you that are espoused unto Jesus Christ:

1. Admire and adore that rich and free grace which has chosen and brought you
into this relation; say, Not unto us, not unto us, but unto thy name be the
praise: Say, O wonderful! wonderful! wonderful Love! that we should be made the
Spouse of Christ! We that had no Beauty! we that had no Dowry! that we who
embraced Dunghils should be taken into the embracements of the Lord! O Infinite
condescending kindness!

2. See that you give reverence unto Christ to whom you are espoused: He is
your Lord, and you must reverence, and stand in awe of him; take heed of pride,
passion, discontent with your condition, murmurings under affliction, and every
other sin which is displeasing to Christ, and unbecoming the reverence which
you owe to him.

3. Be loving and faithful unto Christ, receive not any creature in the world
into the embracements of that dearest love which does belong to your espoused
Husband; love him supremely, and love him ardently, and labor to increase in
love to him daily.

4. Be subject unto Christ, and careful to please him in every thing, be ready
to yield universal obedience unto whatsoever he shall reveal to you to be his
will.

5. Endeavor to mantain daily communion with him in his Ordinance, desire not
ordinances for themselves, but for the sake of Christ; grieve when he
withdraws, and is absent; rejoice when he draws near, and manifests his
presence.

6. Look, and long, and prepare for Christ's second appearance, when the
nuptials between you shall be solemnized, and you taken to live with him for
ever in mansions of everlasting joys.

FINIS.

