AN ACCOUNT Of A CHILD BORN At FVRBICK in Darbyshire, The 19th. of January
1694. With a Top-knot and Roll On its HEAD, of several Colors. With a
Seasonable Caution against PRIDE.
Licensed Febr. the 28th. 1694.

Isa. 13. 11. I will punish the World for their Evil, and the Wicked for their
Iniquity; and I will cause the Arrogance of the Proud t^ cease, and will lay
low the haughtiness of the Terrible.
GOD who works Signs and Wonders in Heaven, and in Earth, that humbled King
Nebuchadnezar for his Pride; and made him confess to the greatness of his
Power, and acknowledge that all the Inhabitants of the Earth are as nothing
before him.

Who does according to his Will in the Army of Heaven and among the Inhabitants
of the Earth; and none can stay his hand, or say to him, What do thou? Whose
Works are Truth, and his Ways Judgment* And those that walk in Pride he is
able to Abase.

This Almighty GOD, in this latter Age, has showed his Signs in Heaven, and in
Earth, and Signally manifested his sore Displeasure against the Crying and
Reigning Sin of Pride, and the manifold Abominations of this Sinful Nation; a
People Laden with Iniquity, the Pride of whose Countenances Testify against
them and the Crown of Pride is on their Heads.

They declare their Sin as Sodom (which was Pride, etc.) they hide it not, Woe
unto their Soul: And unto the Haughty Daughters of England, who walk with
stretched out Necks, wanton Eyes, and high Towering Dresses on their Heads, and
Spots on their Faces, mincing as they go: The Lord can smite them with a Scab,
the Crown of the Head of the proud Daughters of England, if they do not
speedily Repent, and take away the Bravery of their high Dresses, their Chains,
their Rings, their changeable Suits of Apparel, ^^eir Cornets and Commodes,
etc. and instead of a sweet Smell, or costly perfume, cause a Stink; instead of
their fine Stomachers, a girding with Sorrow or Sackcloth; and Burning instead
of Beauty. And thy Men (as many already have) to fall by the Sword, and thy
Mighty in the War. And thy Gates, oh London may yet more lament and mourn, as
when they lay in Ashes; and thy fine and stately Houses become Dissolate, by
the Earths opening her Mouth, and swallowing up many of thine Inhabitants, and
their sumptuous Habitations, as it has in Countries remote, by dreadful
Earthquakes, if thine and Englands Inhabitants do not spe^dily Repent, and turn
from the Evil of their ways, and forsake their abominable Pride and
Ungodliness, the cause of Gods Wrath, and their Misery; and while they have
time seek after him, and to make their Peace with him whom they have so
grievously offended, and so highly provoked: And by a lively, and steadfast
Faith, lay hold of Christ his dear Son, that Dyed for our Sins, and Rose again
for our Justification; and come to learn of him who was a lively Pattern, and
Heavenly Ensample of Humility, being meek and lowly in Heart, and freely
Invites all to come unto him, and to learn of him, that they may find rest and
Peace unto their Souls; a Virtue greatly wanting among many of Englands
Inhabitants, this day, the Lord Incline their Hearts to seek after it.

And now I shall give you a short Relation which I received, and doubt not the
Truth of, Concerning a Child lately Born at Furbeck near Balber-hall in
Darbyshire, on the 19th. of the last Month in this present year 1693/4 with a
perfect Top-knot of great height, with Colors of Red and Black in it, and a
Roll behind its Head. And a Woman present taking it in her Arms beheld it, and
said to some Women that beheld it also; go home and burn your Topknots, for
said she, If I were a Queen I would burn mine. The Child's Fathers Name I
forbear to mention, having not his consent. The Child lived but a Short time,
and was buried on the 20th of the same Month. When it was Dead, the Top-knot
fell upon its face, and its repo^ted it was longer then a Man's hand. And although
I write thus ^autiously, assure thy self Reader, this is no Fiction, nor
Grubstreet Story, forged to get a Penny by, but published on this wise, in good
will, that People may be warned against Pride, and running into such like
foolish and Extravagant Dresses, and to fear God, and seriously consider his
handiwork herein; and whether it does not Evidently bespeak Gods great dislike
of those abominable Dresses, and his high Displeasure against Pride, and such
like Attire; and whether it does not loudly call, and has a speaking Voice in
it to the Haughty Women of our Age, to leave off those Dresses to humble
themselves, forsake their Pride, and amend their Doings, and Weep in secret
Places for their Pride before the Lord; as his Prophet Jeremiah advises, Jer
13. 17. For God can take them away that Rejoice therein, bring Destruction upon
them, cause them to fall, and to be taken in their Pride, therefore, let all
consider, and Repent with all their Hearts, while they have time, (lest they
come under that Woe, the Lord pronounced to the Crown of Pride, which he has
determined shall be trodden under foo^, see Isa. 28.) for their days here are
at most short, their Moments uncertain, their Breath in the Lords hand, that
can withdraw it in the twinkling of an Eye; and if in a dying hour they should
be sensible of the want of Peace with him, and a certain Assurance of Eternal
bliss, what will their Riches, costly Array, and fine Dresses do them good, O
then the time they have misspent in Attiring their Heads and Houses of Clay: And
in Pride, Excess, and Superfluity will be an aggravation of their Grief, and an
increase of their Sorrow, in such a Season. Therefore Repent Repent, and amend
your doings, ye haughty ones, and no longer continue in your Pride and
Wickedness; for the Devil is King over all Children of Pride, see Job 41. 34.
And the Wicked shall be turned into Hell, and all the Nations of them that
forget God, see Psalm. 9. 17. And know that God that suffered this Top-knot and
Roll to be on this Child's Head, can cause the like on your Children. And
consider also you that spot your faces, with Patches, that he can also cause
your Children to be born with such Spots, that you would as gladly cover, as
you put them on.

And therefore, you that have Children born in their perfect Shapes, and right
Features, praise the Lord, and prize his Mercy, for it, and apply your hearts
to his Grace, and learn of it, that you may be taught to live worthy of that,
and all his Mercy, and to deny all ungodliness, and unrighteousness, which is
the cause of Gods Wrath, and your Misery, whilst you continue therein,
therefore come to Christ to take away the Cause, and the Effect will cease; and
you through Faith and Obedience to him, may know Salvation from Sin to your
Immortal Souls: So wishes and Prays your Friend,

G. V.
London Febr. 28th. 1693/4
LONDON, Printed by T. Soul, at the Crooked Billet in Holywell-Lane,
Shoreditch 1694.


