THE CONVERSION OF A SINNER Explained and Applied, FROM

Ezekiel. 33. 11. Turn ye, turn ye, from your evil ways; for why will ye die, O
house of Israel? Part whereof was preached some while since at Saviors
Southwark.

THE Day of Grace, DISCOURSED OF FROM

Luke 19. 41, 42. If thou had known, even thou, at least in this thy day, the
things which belong to thy peace! But now they are hid from thine eyes. By
Nathanael Vincent, Minister of the Gospel.

London, Printed for Thomas Parkburst, at the Golden Bible on London-Brdge,
under the Gate, 1669.

The Dedication. To his Sacred and most Glorious Majesty, the God of Heaven and
Earth, the KING of KINGS, and LORD of LORDS; who is much more above the highest
Potentates and Emperors in the World, than they are above their meanest Slaves!
Almighty Lord!
TO Thee I dedicate my Book, to whom I have devoted my self, all that is good
therein, it is thy own; and if it do any good, to Thee I must ascribe the
praise. The In(...)nt indeed might be ashamed and discouraged, if he did not
know that thou can work as well by weak means as by strong; nay, sometimes
thou make choice of weak on purpose, that flesh may not glory, but the
excellency of the power may be of thee alone.

It was most free and rich Grace, (which Eternity it self will be short enough
to admire and adore) that I my self was pitied, who once lay as much polluted
in my blood as any other; who had run so far in the broad way, and had sinned
my self so near the destruction which is everlasting! But if I am not only made
a Convert, but also made use of to convert others, my obligation will be
hightned, which is infinitely vast already, to show forth thy praise.

It Is the desire of my soul, O Lord! that thy Kingdom may be advanced, and that
the Dominion which sin and Satan have usurped may be overthrown. Since thy yoke
is easy and thy government so sweet, so gracious, why should not thy subjects
also be most numerous? Gird thy sword upon thy thing, Oh, most mighty one! and
ride forth conquering and to conquer; and thy right hand shall teach thee
terrible things. Let thine arrows be sharp, and thy Word pierce like a
two-edged sword; and let the whole world, either by conversion or subversion,
bu^ especially by conversion fall under thee!

Thou art the God of the spirits of all flesh; is there any thing too hard for
thee? When the Devil sinned against thee (and thereby became a Devil) thou
did easily throw him out of heaven, and shackle him in chains of darkness;
and can thou not as easily throw him out of those sinners hearts which he has
possessed and filled, and pull down all his strong holds? And as for sin,
though it be so mighty a thing, that Adam in innocence was overcome by it, that
Angels in Heaven could not stand before it; yet thou art able, and have
promised to subdue it. Oh, show thy power and Grace! Since thy mercy is so
great, why should there be so few partakers of mercy? Since thy Son is so able
to save to the uttermost, why should so small a number be saved by him? Since
the New Jerusalem is so spacious, why should Hell fill so exceeding fast? Oh,
let thy special love be more generally manifested! Let thy healing and thy
saving grace run in a much broader channel! Let thy tents be enlarged, and let
them stretch forth the curtains of thine habitation! Let not so many souls be
the Devils prey, which are of greater value than the world; and which are
capable of loving, and admiring, and glorifying thee for ever! Answer, O my
God, such desires as these, so far ^^ consistent with the secrets of thy
Counsel, and thy Ways and Judgments, which are unsearchable and past finding
out!

Let thy Gospel continue in this Land of England! Let the Sun of righteousness
shine forth in greater strength and glory, and dispel the mists of error, and
chase away the night of Ignorance! Let not the Sea be more full of water, than
this Land of the knowledge of thy glory! As long as there is a Church on earth,
let there be a Church in England! And let the Lamp of thy Word shine clearly
among us, as long as the Sun and the Moon shall shine in the Firmament!

Thou who have the hearts of all in thy own hand, incline some to read these
following Sermons; and let all that read be the better by them. Let them
understand in this their day the things which concern their peace! and obey thy
Call to Turn, before thou come to this Resolution to call and cry no more
after them! Oh, let none grow bl^nder by the light's shining in their eyes! let
none grow harder by the means which were designed to soften them! Let not the
Word of Life prove unto any a deadly savor! Let some souls date their
conversion from their reading this Book; and let those who are converted be
further strengthened by it. Encourage thy servant more and more, by making his
labors more abundantly successful, who has resigned and given up himself to
Thee; and whose greatest H^nour and truest Happiness it is to be,

Thine for ever, NATHANAEL VINCENT.

THE EPISTLE TO THE READER
Reader!
AS soon as thou have looked on, immediately look off again, and look up to
heaven!

How can thou see to read with any profit, unless the Father of lights do
open thine eyes and give thee an understanding heart? He can show thee wonders
in the most commune Truths, which before thou were unacquainted with. Those
doctrines that are most usually preached, as thy Judgment may yet more fully be
informed about them; so I am sure thy affections have need to be stirred up to
bear some more proportionable suitableness unto the weight and concernment of
them.

It has moved my sorrow, and almost my indignation, to see how many Truths,
because often (as it is needful) insisted on, are nauseated by some Professors.
And yet alas these very Truths, though they have often heard them, they do not
know them as they ought to know. As to any heart-affecting and operative
knowledge, these persons who fancy and conceit themselves so very intelligent,
are very grossly ignorant. Their consciences are stupid, and they were never
brought under the power of the Word which is preached to them. Duties, though
plainly and frequently pressed are neglected, and sins which they communly hear
reproved, are yet notwithstanding more communly given way to.

Thou who can not like of a Discourse unless thy fancy be pleased, and thy
itching ear clawed; what just reason have thou to question, whether thy nature
has been indeed renewed? for they who have been born again, desire the sincere
milk of the word (though there be little mixture of what is humane) that they
may grow thereby.

Reader! Art thou grossly ignorant and ungodly? How much then does it concern
thee to use those means which are appointed for the attaining of knowledge?
Since without knowledge thy heart cannot be good; nor thou thy self in a safe
estate. Thou art gene astray; Oh, Turn immediately, lest the next step thou
take, be into the Grave and Hell! It Is but small security not to perceive thy
danger; it is but a pitiful happiness to be ignorant of thy misery, for this
very ignorance increases thy danger, and will make thy misery the more
unavoidable. Sin is such a thing as none ever repented of their parting with;
therefore be persuaded to deny thy former ungodliness and worldly lusts, and to
live soberly, and righteously and godly in this present evil world.

If thou art a Professor, but not a practiser of Religion; consider, it is not a
feigned conversion, but a turning with the whole heart, upon which Life is
promised and assured. If thou have a form of godliness without the power, what
does this prove but that thou have more of the Atheist in thee. Surely thou
think the Lord does not regard, and will not punish, at least to thee he
will be partial. I wonder how thou dare come so often into his presence, so
near his Ark where his jealousy is hottest, and so frequently engage in duties
of his Worship; some sin or vanity all the while keeping thy heart away from
him.

But if thou art indeed converted, Oh ge^ nearer unto God, and turn more and
more like to him. Grace is so excellent a thing, that methinks thou should be
restlesly importunate for a greater measure of it. The more you follow on to
know the Lord, the better you will love him, and the more unwilling you will be
to leave him, and return again to folly.

Conversion is a nail which the Prophets of old were hammering upon
perpetually. Our Lord and his Apostles endeavored to drive this nail home. And
God of late has not only sent his Ministers to ply this business, but has taken
the hammer of judgments to make this nail to enter. Now the stronger the
resistance is, we make, we must expect from this hammer the more strokes. We
have seen lately days of great calamity and affliction, and yet they have in
some sense been also days of grace. Therefore temporal judgments have been
sent, that spiritual mercies might be prized, and eternal judgments might be
prevented. God has had a design of love at the bottom of all his severities.
Let us comply with it; for if we still walk contrary, he has threatened in fury
to chastize us sevenfold more than as yet he has chastized us. And I may well
tremble to think of those judgments which will be seven times worse than the
Plague and Fire. But if we learn wisdom and instruction by his correction, and
turn unto him that has smitten us, we shall find the expressions of his favor
and loving kindness, f^^ greater than ever were the signs of his displeasure.

N. V.

THE Conversion OF A SINNER:
EZEKIEL. 33. 11. latter part. Turn ye, turn ye from your evil ways; for why will
ye die, O house of Israel?
It Is not very easy to discern whether Man discovered greater folly in
departing from God at first, or whether his folly be now more inexcusable in
refusing to return to him. At first he knew by blessed experience how good it
was to be near his Maker, to enjoy the light of his countenance in the state of
innocence; and yet he ventured to go away. Now he feels the effects of his
Apostasy; for sin has loaded him with various miseries, calamities, vexations,
and yet how hardly is he persuaded to come back again? The children of men are
easily induced to yield to Satan, as if 'twere their interest to give
themselves into the hands of a Murderer; but the Lord besides whom there is no
Savior, may call, and call with frequency, with earnestness, yet call in vain;
their hearts are dull, their ears are deaf, they will not hearken to him. It
can never be sufficiently lamented, that sin has made so many madmen in the
world; life and death, blessing and cursing are set before them; yet death is
chosen before life, the most astonishing and intolerable curses are embraced,
when blessings of the highest, and most durable nature, are rejected.

Proh superi! quantum mortalia pect^ra caecae Noctis habent! Hence it is that
the Lord expostulates not only in reference to sin, but in reference to
punishment: He not only says, Why will you venture to transgress; but also,
Why are you so forward to die, O house of Israel?

The Prophet in the beginning of this Chapter, is by the Lord appointed a
Watchman over the house of Israel; he is commanded to lift up his voice, when
he sees the revenging sword drawn forth, and coming to cut the ungodly off for
their ungodliness; and unless he call to the wicked to turn and live, he is
accessory to their death, and their blood will be required at his hand. And
being thus commissioned, he is commanded to stop the mouths of evil doers, who
cavil and reply against their Maker, and charge God foolishly.

A Controversy it seems there was, at whose door the destruction of sinners is
to be laid: The house of Israel very peremptorily and boldly lay the blame on
God; they stick not to say, the way of the Lord is not equal. But the God of
mercy, and of truth, does vindicate himself from that undeserved imputation;
professing, that if sinners were not perversely bent upon their own ruin,
destruction would be escaped. By his life he swears, that the death of the
wicked pleases him not; therefore in the Text his voice is loud and doubled,
Turn ye, turn ye, from your evil ways; and the saddle is set upon the right
horse, men's own Wills are the cause of their own Woe. Why will ye die, O house
of Israel?

The words express a very pathetical and serious call, wherein observe,

1. The persons called, The house of Israel.

2. To what they are called; they are called to Turn.

3. The urgency of this call, which appears in the doubling of it, Turn ye,
turn ye.

4. From what they must turn, from their evil ways.

5. The argument used to prevail, which has abundance of holy rhetoric in it;
Why will ye die?

Without turning death is certain. Satan may say to the posterity, as once to
the Parents, Ye shall not surely die; but this will be sound true, Those shall
^e turned into Hel^, Psalm. 9. 17. who will not turn* to God; thither it is that
evil ways have all a tendency. Several paths there are in the broad way, but
in death, the second death, they all conclude and meet. Therefore the Lord is
brought in, pitying of sinners, and pleading with them.

Why will ye die? Is it because I am speedy in revenging? you know I am slow
to anger; and by experience have found me so, else my wrath had long e're this
broken forth upon you; or is it because I am inexorable, not to be entreated
when once provoked? Why, I have proclaimed myself ready to forgive, and
plenteous in mercy, unto all that call upon him. Or is it because you never
heard of the way and means of recovering life, and flying from the punishment
you have deserved? How often have I sent my Prophets, that you might be brought
to believe, to repent, and to obey? But still your neck is as an iron sinew;
you are resolved to rush on in sin. If you perish, you may thank your selves.
If you are destroyed, it is because you choose destruction.

Three Doctrines the Text affords us.

First, That evil ways are the ways of death.

Secondly, The great reason why men die, and die for ever, is because they will.

Thirdly, The Lord does call and call again upon sinners to turn from their
evil ways and live.

Doct. 1. I begin with the first Doctrine, That evil ways are the ways of
death. As they are morally evil; so evil and destructive to them that walk in
them. Indeed these ways may seem right, but because of this, they are not the
less, but the more pernicious, Prove. 14. 12. There is a way that seems right
unto a man; but the end thereof are the ways of death.

1. These evil ways do many times accelerate and hasten death temporal. That
was the sentence pronounced upon man's fall; Dust thou art, and unto dust thou
shall return. And how often by sin is the execution of that sentence speeded?
We read of some not suffered to live out half their days, Psalm. 55. 23. the
reason is, because they live so wickedly. Those whose carcasses fell in the
wilderness, might have lived to possess the Land of Promise; but they sometimes
murmured, sometimes they commit idolatry, sometimes fornication; and at last,
the oath is sworn they should not enter into Canaan. The intemperate and
unclean, how do they waste their strength? How many diseases do they punish
themselves with? And though so miserably unprepared for judgment, hasten their
departure out of this world to the tribunal of him, who judges righteously?

2. These evil ways; God who is our life is not to be found in: In a spiritual
sense we are dead though alive, while we walk here. The Ephesians are said to
be dead in trespasses and sin, while they walked according to the course of
this world, and had their conversation in the lusts of their flesh, Ephesians. 2. 2,
3. If the life of the soul does consist in being united to God, in being
anim^ted and acted by his Spirit; then iniquity that separates between God and
us, Isa. 59. 2. must needs be granted a deadly thing.

3. These evil ways are the beaten path to hells damnation, to that death
which is everlasting. Never any came to hell but through these ways; and there
is not one that continues to walk in them without conversion, but shall at last
come thither. The enemy upon the pale horse without a second is deadful; but
when Hell follows immediately after him; alas* what hand can be strong? what
heart can be able to endure? This second Death is by one of the Fathers called
(...), The death that is immortal; because the sinner is never put out of his
pain, always tortured, but never quite dispatched; the fire burns still, but
never totally consumes them whom it burns; the worm still gnaws, but is never
satisfied.

VVhither away besotted and blinded soul? whither is it thou art making such
post haste? Is it gain, delight, and happiness which thou have in chase, that
thou seem rather to fly than run toward it? Alas no; it is in the broad way
that thou drivest on so furiously; it is not gain, but loss; it is not pleasure,
but pain; it is not an happiness, but misery; ay, and the extremest misery
which thou art pursuing. Oh stop thy course and go no further! Oh leave this
lower path, Prove. 15. 24. The way of life is above to the wise, that he may
depart from hell b^neath.

You see in what respects evil ways are the ways of death. Now, the
righteousness of God, in punishing those with death that persist in these
ways, will be evident, if these things following are considered.

1. These ways are expressly forbidden by him that is the supreme Lawgiver;
who has power to save, and to destroy; and for so mean a wretch as man is, to
affront and despise, that Majesty and Authority that is so infinitely high
above him, does justly deserve an infinite punishment. Besides, the Lord
profers himself to a sinner, if he will forsake his evil ways and thoughts:
Now if the sinner reject that offer, and prefer not only the empty world, but
the vilest lusts before the blessed God, let reason judge if it be not just,
that he should eternally be separated from him. And this poena damni, loss of
God, is most properly the death spoken of, it is indeed the very Hell of Hell.

2. Sinners are threatened with death; if therefore they will venture upon that
which brings them under the lash of the threatenings, it is but just they should
smart for that presumption: They are forewarned to flee from that wrath which
is to come; but if they take no warning, that wrath will very justly overtake
them. They cannot plead, either that they knew not their Masters will; or that
they were ignorant of the penalty following upon their rebelling against it.
How often have those that enjoy the light of the Gospel, been informed that
it is the will of God they should sorrow and rend their hearts for sin; that
it is the will of God they should believe in his Son; that it is the will of God
even their sanctification, 1 These. 4. Nay, how often have they been foretold of
the many stripes that must be endured by those that continue in wilful
disobedience? It Is not unequal then, since they made the Lord a liar by their
unbelief, that he should vindicate his truth, and cause them to feel those
plagues and torments which thousands of times they were warned of; but had no
faith or fear concerning them.

3. As sinners are threatened because of their evil ways, so they are showed
which is the way of life and peace, and very much pressed to walk in it.
Assisting and strengthening grace is proffered to them; but if neither that glory
and immortality at the and of the way, nor that help and grace which they may
have in the way, are regarded; but the paths of destruction and misery (as they
are called) Romans 3. 16. are preferred; they themselves indeed do wrong their
own souls; but God is righteous in destroying them.

The only use I shall make of this Doctrine, is to caution you against these
evil ways, that are the ways of death. You that have through grace left them,
take heed of declining toward them. It has cost the Saints dear, when they
have stepped aside; their falls have defiled them and broken their bones. And you
that still resolve to walk in these ways, at last open your eyes, and see
whither you are going. Upon the reading these lines, make a stop without delay,
lest sudden death, sudden destruction, sudden damnation come upon you, and
there be no possibility of escaping, 1 These. 5. 3.

1. Let not the profit of these ways blind you. Riches are deceitful, they
appear what they are not, and while we are eagerly pursuing these, we are
gulled and cheated of far truer riches; we miss of that treasure in heaven that
will never fail, Luke 12. 33. Be not deluded by the unrighteous Mammon;
satisfaction, ease, contentment may be promised; but you will be paid in
trouble and vexation. Riches are likened by our Lord to Thorns, partly because
they cho^k the good seed of the Word, and partly because they pierce those that
do at upon them with many sorrows. Take the balances of the sanctuary, and
weigh the gain that you get by walking in your evil ways, with the loss that
you both do and will sustain; and then 'twill be apparent, that Satan's and the
heart's plea of profit is very unreasonable. You gain earth, but you lose
grace; you gain gold, but you lose God; you gain a little of the world, which
you can keep but a very little while, but you lose your souls, and an whole
eternity of glory.

2. Let not the pleasure of these evil ways ensnare you; the pleasures of sin
usually delight only the more brutish part of man; and how much does one that
has a reasonable soul act below himself, in minding those pleasures that are
commune even to the beasts themselves? Solomon had an abundance of them,
Whatever his eyes desired he kept not from them, neither withheld he from his
heart any joy; but he found them so mean, so low, so unsuitable, that in the
midst of them he cries out, All is vanity and vaxation of spirit, Eccles. 2.
10, 11. Pleasures are delightful dreams, but how short are they, how soon does
affliction, death, if not Hell awaken us? They that are lovers of pleasures
more than lovers of God, how inconsiderate are they what they choose, or what
they refuse? Pleasures are the baits which cover sin, and make it swallowed
down with eagerness; they are the fatal potion which stupifie: the soul, and
makes it lie senceless and helpless in extreme danger; they are the finer, and
yet most strong cords, whereby Satan draws men down to the chambers of death;
nay, they are the fuel that heat the burning lake, Rev. 18. 7. By how much she
has glorified her self and lived deliciously, so much torment and sorrow give
her. Oh, how will the voluptuous one day smart for all their pleasures!

3. Let not the multitude of those who walk in these evil ways confirm and
harden you. Lot walked alone in the way of righteousness, though Sod^m was
generally defiled by an ungodly conversation; he would not follow a multitude
to do evil. He that said, Strait is the gate and narrow is the way which
leads unto life, and few there be that find it, Mat. 7. surely never intended
his Disciples should go in the beaten path of the world. Sinner, deceive not
thy self with this, Thou do what others do, and thou shall shift as well as
they. Thou and they will fare alike indeed; that is, be turned into hell for
your wickedness. 'Twill be no comfort there to have companions in thy misery;
but rather among the damned, there will be a torturing grief and indignation at
the sight one of another, to consider what incarnate devils they were to one
another souls, and helped forwards one another condemnation. Upon this score
it might be that the rich man, Luke 16. was so unwilling his brethren should
come to the place of torment, because if damned for those sins which he in his
lifetime had been accessory to; their company with him in Hell would have but
added to his woe. We use to say here, The more, the merrier; but there 'twill
be, The more, the sadder. When God has all his enemies in one place together,
and none of his people mingled with them, then all his wrath will be stirred
up, and all the vials of his fury poured down upon them. I have done with that
first Doctrine, That evil ways are the ways of death.

Doct. 2. The second Doctrine is this: The great reason why men die and die for
ever, is because they will. They will be the servants of sin, though death be
all the wages they shall certainly have for all their toylsom and laborious
service. Sinners will not be purged, Jer. 13. ult. Woe unto thee, O Jerusalem,
will thou not be made clean? when shall it once be? They will not be gathered
under the wing of Christ, though there only be the place of refuge, both from
the rage of Satan, and from the wrath of God, Mat. 23. 37. O Jerusalem!
Jerusalem! thou that killest the Prophets and stonest them that are sent unto
thee, how often would I have gathered thy children together, as an Hen
gathers her brood under her wings, and ye would not? Nay, the wills of many,
who have often slighted the admonitions and calls of Moses and the Prophets,
are so desperately bent to sin, that though themselves should see the flames
and torments it makes others suffer; yet they would not be persuaded to forsake
it, Luke 16. 30, 31. Nay, Father Abraham, but if one went to them from the dead
they will repent; and he said unto him, If they hear not Moses and the
Prophets; neither will they be persuaded, though one rose from the dead.

My work in the opening of this Doctrine, will be first to demonstrate the
truth of it, That men die because they will. Secondly, to evidence that men's
inability to what is good, so often spoken of in Scripture, does not at all
contradict this doctrine.

The Arguments to demonstrate that men's own wills are the great cause of their
death and perdition, are these.

1. One Argument shall be drawn from the natural corruption and depravation of
the will of man. And wherein does this corruption lie, but in the wills
declining from God, the fountain of life and peace, and inclining to what is
evil? Though the sinner (woe unto him) does call that evil good; and imagins
that to be sweet, which will prove as bitter and poisonous as the very gall of
asps unto him. Pe^agians may liken the will of man unto a pure Virgin, which in
the first Apostasy did escape deflouring; but certain it is, both from
Scripture and experience, that in the will, original sin does most of all show
it self. He that does not understand his heart to ^e desperately wicked, Jer.
17. 9. It Is a sign his heart deceives him, and with his heart he is utterly
unacquainted. What unbelief, what pride, what alienation from the life of God,
what enmity against the command, which is holy, just, and good, Romans 7. is
there in the will of a natural man? The will then being so deeply corrupted,
and bearing such sway as indeed it does, must needs hinder conversion to God,
and holiness, which it so much dislikes; and consequently have a great hand in
the perdition of the children of men.

2. Another Argument shall be drawn from the justness of God's reproofs and
anger. Certainly he would not so sharply reprehend them; his anger would not so
smoke against them, because of their stubbornness and wilfulness in their evil
ways, if they had a sincere will, and only wanted power to do that which is
good. When the Lord inflicted judgments upon his ancient people, he speaks of
their obstinacy, their refusing to hearken, and to be reclaimed; and this he
does to vindicate the equity of his severer ways of dealing with them. We
read, 2 King. 17. 13, 14, 18. That the Lord testified against Israel by his
Prophets and Seers, saying, Turn ye from your evil ways, and keep my
commandments. Notwithstanding they would not hear, but hardened their necks
like unto the neck of their fathers, which did not believe in the Lord their
God; now upon this wilfulness followed, and that very justly, God's anger and
their destruction. Therefore the Lord was very angry with the children of
Israel, and removed them out of his sight.

In the second place, I am to prove, That men's inability to do that which is
good, does not thwart this Doctrine, that their sin and misery is to be laid at
their wills door. The Holy Ghost that he might humble the children of men, and
be at down the opinion they have of their own power and righteousness, and make
them use that speech of the Prophet, Isa. 45. 25. Surely in the Lord have I
righteousness and strength, does inculcate this, that man in his sinful and
degenerate state is unable to that which is spiritually good; therefore we are
said to be without strength, Romans 5. 6. We are not sufficient of our selves to
think any thing as of our selves, but our sufficiency is of God, 2 Cor. 3. 5.
We are said to be faint, and to have no might, Isa. 40. 29. And our Lord tells
us plainly, Joh. 15. 5. Without me ye can do nothing. But for all this, though
we want a power to do good, our wills are to be blamed for the evil which is
done by us. It must not be imagined that the Scripture mentions sinners
inability to do good, to put an excuse into their mouths, for their doing of
evil; but to drive them to Christ, who can strengthen them to do all things,
Phil. 4. 13. It Is true, man is unable, but withal he is unwilling to do what
God requires of him, though tending to his own welfare. The reason why he
continues in sin, and is undone by it, is not only because he cannot convert
himself, but also, and that principally, because he is unwilling to be
converted. This will be made further to appear in these particulars.

1. Sinful man imagines himself able to turn from his evil ways; he defers his
repentance, as if he could turn to God at an hours warning: Now that he does
not, what he thinks he can; his own will must be the impediment, and this he
must blame, if so be he perishes.

2. Sinful man will not do what he is really able to perform; one talent he
has, but he will not trade with it; many sins that expose him to wrath and
vengeance, he might abstain from, if he would; but alas! he is voluntarily a
slave to them, and is pleased with this servitude. The Adulterer wilfully goes
to the Harlots house, the unrighteous worldling wilfully gets dishonest gain;
therefore it follows, that these wilfully destroy themselves. A natural man can
do that which is good, as to the matter, though he fail in the manner of doing:
He can pray, hear, read; but he wilfully omits these duties; and so wilfully
subjects himself to the curse that is threatened upon his omission. He will not
do what he really can; and then surely if his power were enlarged, it would not
be used. He that can well spare it, and refuses to give a penny to the poor, we
may conclude, that though he could spare it, he would be unwilling to give a
pound: In like manner a natural man, who will not do what he can to be saved,
which is but little, were his power greater, he would not do more in order to
salvation.

3. Sinful man is sorry that he is able to do so much, he wishes that he were
totally impotent, that so it might serve as an excuse for him. This shows the
wickedness of his will. Further, he will not use the means by which grace and
strength from heaven are conveyed; he will not wait and call on God, he will
not seek unto him for the accomplishing of the promises made in the gracious
Covenant. Nay, he wilfully resists the Spirit when he comes to work upon him;
he had rather be let alone in sin. That Is the language of ungodly ones, Job 21.
14. They say unto God, depart from us, for we desire not the knowledge of thy
ways. The wicked man, though he may cavil that he wants power, yet his want of
will to be turned and live, is that which mainly ruins him. And all those high
thoughts and reasonings against God, as if he were an hard Master, as if his
ways were not equal, at the great day, how will he be ashame^ of them? When
conscience shall fly in his face, and in good sadness reproach him with this;
He was often warned and called upon, but would not turn that he might ^ave life.

The Application follows.
Use 1. Of Information in these particulars.

1. Do men die for ever because they will? Then who art thou, O man, that
chargest God with thy destruction? Surely herein thou chargest God foolishly;
as he delights not in thy sin, so neither in thy death. The malefactor must not
be angry with the Judge for passing a sentence of condemnation upon him, but he
ought to blame himself for doing that for which he deserves to be condemned.
How often has the Lord called but you have refused, how often has he stretched
forth his hand, all the day long, but all the day long you have been
disobedient and gainsaying? Romans 10. ult. How speechless will this make you,
when he comes to judge the world in righteousness?

2. Do men die for ever because they will? Then the death of the wicked is most
just and righteous. It Is but equal that the willing slaves of sin, that would
not become the Lords freemen, should be fettered in chains of darkness. The
offender that refuses a pardon offered, justly, nay, doubly deserves to have
judgment executed, both because of his offense, and because he slights mercy.
The Patient who thrusts away the Physician, who would heal him of a sore
distemper, very well deserves serves to die for it; and the sinner who will not
turn to God, who rejects the Lord Jesus, who is able both to pardon and to heal
him; though he perish and be condemned, yet he is not in the least wronged.

3. Do men die for ever because they will? What a torture will it be to them in
Hell, to think it was their own wilfulness which brought them thither. Such
kind of reflections as these will be as so many poisoned daggers to pierce the
very soul of a damned reprobate. What ailed me to prove a devil to my self!
what ailed me to side with Satan, for the bringing about my own destruction!
what phrenzy was this, to make the whips my self, wherewithal I am to be
lashed! to kindle the flames with my own hands; in which I must dwell and burn
for ever!

Use 2. Shall be of Caution: Take heed of wilful sinning, which is the high
road leading to death. Take heed also lest you content your selves with a
seeming willingness to escape destruction.

1. Let me caution you against wilful sinning. The more of the will is in
transgression, the more of provocation; therefore David is so earnest to be
kept from presumptuous sins which he knew, because presumptuous to be so great,
Psalm. 19. 13. In a Land and time of light, take heed of being wilfully
ignorant: In the midst of helps and encouragements to duty, take heed of sloth,
which is a fault of the will; but be a follower of them who through faith and
patience inherit the promises, Heb. 6. 12. Let no sin be loved, pleaded for,
lived in; let not the pleasing taste make thee venture upon any forbidden
fruit; let not the fine-coloured skin make thee to hug any Serpent in thy
bosom, which will sting thee to death.

2. Let me caution you against that which is only a seeming willingness to turn
from sin, and escape destruction.

1. An idle unindustrious will, is only a seeming will. A lazy wish to be
saved, where there is no serious using of the means of salvation, signifies
nothing, but that you are grossly ignorant and stupid, ignorant of the worth of
salvation, and stupidly unsensible of your own danger.

2. A will for the future is only a seeming will. Most of them who go on in
their evil ways, have a will to leave them hereafter; but this only shows
their present unwillingness. And if you are backward to turn now, you are
likely hereafter to be more averse. When God is further departed from you, when
Satan has built stronger holds in you, when conscience is grown more stupid,
when custom in sin has doubled the strength and vehemence of your natural
inclination to it. Alas! how many millions have died and been taken away in
their iniquities, that were as fully resolved upon repenting hereafter, as any
that are now alive? Take heed of this rock, upon which so many have split, and
been ^ast away for ever. God's will is for the present; he says, To day if you
will hear my voice, harden not your hearts, Heb. 3. 7, 8. But if now when God
is willing to give you life, you are unwilling; he may be hereafter unwilling,
when you would fain have it: When death and destruction come upon you as a
whirlwind, he has threatened that you shall call upon him for life and
salvation, but it shall be far from you; you shall seek him early, but you
shall not find him, if now you hate knowledge, and do not choose the fear of the
Lord, Prove. 1. 28, 29.

3. A will upon a mistake is only a seeming will. Those whom our Lord likens to
the stony ground, heard the word with joy, and were willing to embrace it, but
they dreamt not of the cross and persecution; that made them to fall away. Many
seem willing to be Converts, but they sit not down and count the cost of
conversion: And when once they are informed, that they must deny themselves,
let go all out of their affections presently, and out of their possession too,
when standing in competition with the Lord Jesus; when they are informed, that
a bill of divorce must be given to their Herodias, that they must bid defiance
to every lust, though it plead never so much delight or gain that it may still
be embraced; when they are informed, that they must watch, and pray, and walk
with the greatest care, and fervency, and circumspection, that they must take
the Kingdom of heaven with an holy violence, as it were by storm, else they
will fall short and lose the crown. Oh then they cry out, These are hard
sayings; who can hear them?

Use 3. Of Exhortation. Since men die because they will, Let me persuade you to
consent that your wills may be renewed. Man has not a worse enemy than his own
will, until there be a change wrought in it. And that this change may be
effected, observe these directions.

1. Judge your selves because of your natural perverseness; till sensible of
this you cannot be in a right manner humbled. That thou have sinned so much, so
long, should very much affect and afflict thee before God; but that thou have a
will to sin ten thousand times more, were it not for the restraints of grace;
nay, to sin unto eternity* Oh, what confusion and sorrow should this cause!

2. Study the deceitfulness of the Tempter and the World; then your hearts
will not be so forward to be taken with their baits, and to be ^rawn away from
God. The world is vain and vexing, and Satan is a liar and a murderer, you have
little reason to yield to either.

3. Set before your eyes the blessedness of life eternal, and the misery of
everlasting death, that life may be chosen, and the way to it.

4. Be fervent in prayer, that the Lord according to his promise would give you
a new heart, and work in you to will of his own good pleasure, Ezekiel. 36. 26.
Phil. 2. 13. And if he cause your hearts to desire grace and glory, he will
satisfy those desires he has raised in you; if he work in you to will and to
do, notwithstanding all opposition, you shall work out your own salvation, and
an abundant entrance shall be administered to you, into the everlasting kingdom.
Thus of the second Doctrine. The reason why men die, and die for ever, is
because they will.

Doct. 3. The third Doctrine follows. The Lord does call and call again upon
sinners to turn from their evil ways and live. Turn ye, Turn ye, says God in
the Text. The business of Conversion is not a thing which man first thought of;
nay, he would never think of it, or be persuaded to it, if the Lord did not
call after him, and make that call effectual. We read indeed in Scripture of
sensible and awakened penitents, crying and begging to be turned; but these
cries are but as it were the Eccho's of God's voice and call that went before.
In the handling of the Doctrine, I shall, First, show how God calls upon
sinners to turn to him. Secondly, Why he does it. Thirdly, Explain the nature
of this Conversion or turning. Fourthly, conclude with Application.

In the first place, I am to show, How God calls upon sinners to turn to him.
This he does several ways.

1. He calls upon them from Mount Ebal. That was the Mount from whence the
curses were denounced; he tells them in his Word of the cursedness and woe of
the unconverted's state. He sends the Law as Schoolmaster to teach them a sad
Lesson; that because of their frequent transgressions, they are just upon the
brink of eternal misery; and his design is, that hereby they may be awakened
and stopped in their destructive way, and not flatter themselves with hopes of
peace, though they still walk on after the imagination of their evil heart.

This voice of the Lord by the Law is loud and terrible, uttered on purpose to
rouse and startle them that are dead asleep. When the Law was delivered, There
was a burning with fire, there was blackness, and darkness, and tempest, the
sound of a trumpet, and the voice of words, which voice they that heard,
increated that the word might not be spoken to them any more; and so terrible
was the sight, that Moses said, I exceedingly fear and quake, Heb. 12. 18, 19,
21. And if the manner of the Law's delivery was so dreadful, much more dreadful
will be the manner of the Laws execution upon those by whom it has been
violated? The fire and darkness at Mount Sinai were nothing in comparison with
the fire of Hell, and the blackness of darkness there. Upon the impenitently
wicked the Lord has threatened to rain snares, fire and brimston, and an
horrible tempest, this shall be the portion of their c^p, Psalm. 11. 6. And
truly this lecture of the Law is necessary, that we may attain to a true
knowledge and understanding of sin; and when we have been thus at the foot of
Mount Ebal and Sinai, and have heard that sin is the great hindrance of all
sorts of blessings, and loads us with curses of all sorts, both temporal and
spiritual, and also everlasting; this is the way to cure our unreasonable
doting upon it, and to make us fear and tremble because we have given so much
way to it.

2. God calls upon sinners from Mount Gerizzim, to turn to him; from hence of
old the blessings were ^ounded forth. He not only gives them a sight of wrath,
as nigh at hand, while they continue workers of iniquity; but also he gives
them a view of mercy afar ^ff, which shall be brought near them on condition
their wickedness is forsaken. Upon the unrighteous man's forsaking of his
sinful ways and thoughts, mercy and abundant pardon are promised, Isa. 55. 7.
This call of the Gospel from Mount Gerizzim, is like the still voice after the
strong wind, the fire and the earthquake. How full of encouragement are those
words, Zech. 1. 3. Turn unto me, says the Lord of Hosts, and I will turn unto
you, says the Lord of Hosts. And Hos. 14. 1. O Israel, return unto the Lord
thy God, for thou have fallen by thy iniquity. Thou have destroyed thy self,
but in me is thy help found. I will heal thy backslidings, and will love thee
freely, though thou deservest nothing but my anger and my hatred.

Satan, by tempting us to sin, has taken away our blessing from us, yet we
ought not to despond; for the Lord has more than one blessing. That which the
first Adam forfeited, the second Adam was sent to restore, Act. 3. 26. God
having raised up his Son Jesus, sent him to bless you in turning away every one
of you from his iniquities. The Lord does take sinners up, as it were, into
mout Gerizzim; he shows them his Kingdom, and the glories of it; he tells them
of his store of blessings, of the inestimable benefits which his Son has
purchased, justification, adoption, sanctification, glory; and assures them,
All shall be theirs, if they will but turn indeed. And truly these are other
kind of offers, than Satan ever did, or can possibly make.

3. God calls upon sinners to turn, by the most passionate pleadings and
pressing expostulations. His design in expostulating, is to make them sensible
of their unreasonableness in persuing deceitful vanities, and fulfilling their
defiling lusts, and refusing to convert unto him, who both can sanctify them
from their defilements, and satisfy them with his all sufficiency. He
expostulates the matter with Judah, Isa. 55. 2, 3. Why will you spend your
money, for that which is not bread, and your labor for that which cannot
satisfy? since upon your coming to me, the life of your souls, and the sure
mercies of an everlasting covenant may be obtained.

The Lord pleads with the ungodly by the Ministry of the Word, after this
manner. What! Though you are told of sins deceitful, defiling and damnable
nature; will you still embrace and hold it fast, to my dishonor and your own
destruction? Though you are forewarned of the heat and heaviness of my anger,
will you not flee from it? though you are informed so often how little Hell
will be for your ease, will you needs run thither, and burn there for ever?
though you are told of a Kingdom that cannot be moved, will not you be moved
with desire after it, will you not be persuaded to strive for it? Are grace and
glory of no worth at all? Is not a Savior to be prized by them, who by sin
have enslaved and lost themselves, and are in danger of being lost unto
eternity? Consider these things, and show your selves men, O ye transgressors.
Thus the Lord pleads, that he may prevail with sinners, for their own good.

4. God calls upon sinners to turn, by the examples of others, and by the voice
of the rod upon themselves. The ungodly are very prone to observe bad examples,
that they may imitate them; but it is their duty to take notice when exemplary
punishments are inflicted upon them, that they may be afraid to follow them in
wickedness any longer. When we behold others plagued for the sins which we are
guilty of, the Lord bids us to see the heinousness of our own iniquities, in
the strokes which others have felt before our eyes. And we may justly expect,
that like sins will have like ends, if there be a continuance in provocation.
Examples are purpurposely set before us, that we may not lust* after evil
things, 1 Cor. 10. 6. that we may be admonished to turn out of those paths,
which have led others to ruin.

But especially when the rod does fall upon our own backs, God calls upon us in
a more perceivable and sensible way to turn to him: The design of the rod is to
imbitter sin, both to the flesh and to the conscience; and that it may not any
longer be imagined delightful, which is the procuring cause of every stripe
that is endured. The rod has a voice as well as the Word, which it is our wisdom
to hear: When affliction is laid upon the sinners ^oyns, by it the Lord speaks
such kind of ^anguage, Jer. 2. 17. Have thou not procured ^his unto thy self by
sin? to turn from thine ^niquity is to consult thine own ease; let the ^ain of
the rod (which yet is nothing to the ^ains of Hell) convince thee, that sin is
not ^o be admired for its pleasure; at present thou art only chastized with
whips, but if thou ar^ ^ncorrigible, and sinnest yet more and more, assuredly
at last thou shall be lashed with scor^ions.

5. God calls upon sinners to turn to him, by the internal voice and motions of
his Spirit. The Spirit often suggests concerning the sinful and false way. This
is ^ot the way, and therefore turn out of it; but concerning the way of
holiness, which leads to God. This is the way, therefore turn into it, and
without declining walk i^ it, Isa. 30. 21. All the other Calls will be to
little purpose, unless the Spirit do accompany them. Without his conviction,
the denunciation of curses will not awaken Without his illumination, the
blessing proffered will be undervalued. Without his setting an edge upon them,
the mos^ pathetical expostulations will not have the least efficacy to
persuade; the loude^ word will be no more regarded, than if i^ were a whisper.
Unless the Spirit joy his teaching and instruction, the rod wi^ be mute and
insignificant; nothing wi^ be learned either by personal affliction^ or by
National judgments. It Is dangerous therefore to be heedless of, and resi^ the
holy Ghost, since the efficacy of a^ depends upon him.

There is a twofold Call of the Spirit more commune, and more special.

1. More commune; and so, many a^ called, which never are thoroughly converted.
'Twas the commune work of the Spirit which made Felix tremble; which brought
Agrippa within a step of Christianity, and caused Herod to do many things
Multitudes of unregenerate ones have fe^ the waters stirred, the holy Ghost
moving them to conversion, and readily profering his aid and assistance; and
perhaps for a while they have been led by him: But then some lust or vanity
they refused to let go, which he has bid them to abandon; they would not turn
their spiritual sloth into serious diligence about the concerns of their
immortal souls; and so by disregarding of his motions, slighting of his help,
they have made the Spirit to go away in grief, that came in love to work upon
them.

2. There is a Call of the Spirit, which is more special and efficacious; and
when he thus moves them to turn to God, sinners are not only almost, but
persuaded altogether. Now the Method of the Spirit in working on those who are
indeed made Converts, is much to be observed.

1. Those whom the Spirit calls effectually, he convinces of sin, Joh. 16. 8.
He sets the Law before them, and he himself is the Laws Interpreter; and by his
Commentary on it they are made to see, that the Law forbids not only the
breakings forth of sin at the lips, and in the life, but also the inward
lustings and risings of sin in the heart. And when the Law thus comes, Oh! how
does the offense abound! The Spirit sets their iniquities in order before their
eyes, and holds their eyes waking to behold them. The Book of Conscience is
opened, and how many transgressions are presently beheld there registered? And
if upon dipping into this book, so many abominations do appear, what an
innumerable multitude are down in the book of Gods remembrance? Though sinners
may not consider it, yet God remembers all their wickedness, Hos. 7. 2. This
the soul lays to heart; Innumerable evils compass him about, (as David speaks)
his iniquities take hold upon him, Psalm. 40. 12. when he lies down, they lie
down; when he rises, they rise with him; wherever he goes or is, they
continually dog and haunt him.

If the sinner have been notorious, how hideous and horrid will sin appear to
him, when all pleas and excuses are silenced, when the painted visour is pulled
off, and it is seen by him in its native complexion? drunkenness, uncleanness,
oaths, profane jesting, greediness after the world, will no longer then be made
light of. These and such like, before seemed to have nothing of danger, much of
delight and pleasure; but after conviction, their deceitful and damnable nature
will be as evident as the Sun at noonday.

And though the sinner has been free from the more gross pollutions of the
world; yet enough shall be showed him to cause him to conclude himself a
Wretch, and in a lost estate. What! are all his omissions, or mocking of the
jealous God, by heartless performances, nothing? Is his mispence of time and
regardlessness of eternity, nothing? Is his delighting in creatures and vanity,
and the things of the world, and loving these more than God, and Christ, and
glory, but a small matter? These are heinous sins, which yet the more civilized
are to be charged with.

This conviction of the Spirit is strong and lasting, wears not off till the
sinner is brought quite home. Actual transgressions with their aggravations lie
heavy; and original sin, which is the fountain whence ^ne other flow, is
discovered. And in this ^ountain there is enough to feed ten thou^nd times more
streams than have issued ^rth. David is not only convinced of the ^urder and
adultery he had committed, ^ut is made to trace these sins to the Well^ad, the
original corruption of his na^re, Psalm. 51. 5. and the sight of this, how much
did it tend to his humiliation?

Finally, this conviction is not only of some acts of sin, but of the badness
of the sinners state; he is made to see himself because a child of
disobedience, therefore also a child of wrath. And without cavilling, all is
yielded to and acknowledged; with such evidence is this conviction of the
Spirit.

2. Those whom the Spirit calls effectually, he works fear in them. The spirit
of bondage to fear goes before the spirit of adoption. Of these fears and
terrors there are degrees indeed, yet such a measure is wrought in all toward
whom the Lord has designs of love; as to make them restlests in a natural
estate. Carnal security is one of the first things that is struck at by the
Spirit; he bids the soul awake, and lets him know that while he sleeps in sin;
it is much more hazardous, than if he slept upon the top of a Mast.

Well may the sinner be afraid; wrath armed with irresistible and almighty
power, he has engaged against himself: And who can stand before Gods
indignation? who can abide the fierceness of his anger? Nah. 1. The curses of
the Law have a dreadful sound in the sinners ears; and because threatened,
damnation will not slumber long; the propinquity and neerness of such great
evils raises fear exceedingly. His assent is strong; and in his mind he now
foresees the Lord Jesus revealed with his mighty Angels in flaming fire, ready
to take vengeance on them that know not God and disobey the Gospel, and to
punish them with everlasting destruction, 2 These. 1. 8, 9. And on thinks he
with himself, how terrible will it be, to be of the number of them who shall
call to the rocks and mountains to fall upon them, that they may be hid from
the face of him that sits upon the throne, and from the wrath of the Lamb! This
causes him to make an halt in his wicked course; he dares not still rush into
sin, as the horse rushes into the battle.

3. Those whom the Spirit calls effectually, he raises grief and sorrow in
them, because of their sin and misery. They see what they have done against
God, against themselves; and this makes their spirits troubled. This is that
being weary and heavy laden (which the Scripture speaks of) that is in those
whom Christ calls to come to him, that they may find rest unto their souls,
Mat. 11. 28, 29. There was a voice heard upon the high places, weeping and
supplication of the children of Israel; because they had perverted their way,
and had forgotten the Lord their God; and this went before their closing with
his invitation to return, Jer. 3. 21, 22.

The sinner by the Spirit is made to behold the sadness of his case, the evil
of his sin, how miserably he has been deceived by his lusts and Satan; and so
his own folly in yielding to them. How does he now accuse and condemn himself?
His heart is grieved, he is pricked in his reins, because he has been so
foolish and ignorant, so like a beast before God, Psalm. 73. He wishes a
thousand times, that temptations had been resisted, and that sin had never been
committed. I shall represent the workings of the sinners heart in this
Prosopopoeia. O wretched as I am, What have I been doing all my days! Was this
the end I was made for, to undo my self? Was there no better employment to be
found, than to ad sin to sin, and so to treasure up wrath against the day of
wrath? How much time have I misspent, and what pains have I taken to make my
self miserable! Ah foolish self-destroying wretch! Do thou not see how far
thou art gone in the broad way; how long sin has made a mere slave of thee; and
how bitterly thou have provoked the Lord to anger? Oh that my head were waters,
and my eyes fountains of tears, that I might weep day and night! The damned
will weep and wail for ever, and shall not I mourn and weep that have so highly
deserved to de damnned? Well may I be troubled, and bowed down greatly, and go
mourning all the day long. Thus the sinner grieves and bemoans himself; and
carnal company, sensual pleasures, worldly diversions cannot drive away this
sorrow; none but he who broke the heart, is able to bind up the wounds of it.

4. Those whom the Spirit calls effectually, he causes to despair in
themselves. They are made to perceive, that they have no power to raise
themselves out of those depths of sin and misery which they have plunged
themselves into; and as they are unable to help themselves, so they see that
they are utterly unworthy to be helped. God may justly suffer them to lie where
they are fallen; and should he deal thus, they would fall lower and lower till
fallen past recovery. The sinner may have recourse to his duties, hoping by
these to make amends to God, for what he has done amiss; but he is made to see,
that his best duties have so much sin mingled with them; that were it not for
Christ's righteousness and intercession, they would be a mere abomination. Now
he is beaten off from his own bottom, he has no confidence in the flesh (as the
Apostle speaks) Phil. 3. 3. He can do nothing of himself; he can claim nothing
as his due to be done for him, but he must be beholding to grace for all.

Upon this he cries out of the depths unto the Lord, Psalm. 130. 1. he perceives
himself sinking, and cries, Lord save me, or I perish. I am at the brink of the
bottomless pit, and in I shall fall, unless the hand of mercy catch hold of me.
He begs with Ephraim, Turn thou me, and I shall be turned. And as the evil of
sin is presented to his view, so the goodness of God is in some measure by the
Spirit discovered; and therefore he desires to be converted, not only upon
necessity, because else he would be extremely and eternally miserable; but also
upon choice, because this is the way unto the truest happiness. And these
desires to be turned, are as it were the first breathings of the new creature.
Thus have I showed the manner of the spirits operation in those whom he calls
effectually to turn to God; as also the several other ways how the Lord calls
upon sinners to conversion; most whereof prove ineffectual, because those that
are called are deaf, disobedient, and gainsaying.

My work in the second place, will be to lay down the reasons, Why God does
thus call the children of men to turn from their evil ways and live.

The reasons are such as these.

1. Hereby he shows his gracious nature, that he delights not in the death and
destruction of his creatures. Indeed death will be inflicted on them upon their
obstinate continuance in evil; but the showing mercy and giving life, is the
thing that pleases God; therefore he calls the most obdurate to conversion.

2. The Lord calls us to turn, that hereby he may inform us of our duty. We may
understand from hence that it is our duty to go astray no longer, but to come to
our Fathers house with speed; and by the pressing frequency of the calls, our
obligation to this duty is vastly heightened. And truly the disregarding of our
duty in this particular, and the great engagements to it; our refusing to Turn,
will do us more harm, than all our other sins. All our other sins, upon our
conversion, would be abundantly pardoned; but as long as we continue
unconverted, not one is forgiven, the guilt of all does lie upon us, and we
assuredly do lie under wrath.

3. The Lord calls upon us to Turn, to show that our turning to him will not be
in vain. Though sin has very much abounded, yet there is not only a
possibility, but a certainty upon our returning, of our being graciously
received and embraced. And this is matter of great encouragement unto a soul
who lies under the apprehensions of sin and wrath. Hark what language is spoken
unto Judah! Jer. 3. 1, 5. Behold thou have spoken and done evil things, as thou
could, thou have played the harlot with many lovers; yet return again to me,
says the Lord. This call evidently shows that their transgressions though
multiplied exceeding (if now they would but turn unfeignedly) should not be a
bar to shut against them the door of mercy.

4. The Lord calls upon us to turn, to intimate it is from himself, we must have
power and strength to turn in truth. The precepts and exhortations in
Scripture, to convert, to repent, to believe, to stand fast, and such like, are
not delivered, that from hence we might conclude we have power in our selves,
to do what we are commanded and exhorted to; but they are delivered, that we
might turn these precepts into prayers: For instance, when we hear the command,
to believe, it should make us cry out with the sick childs Father in the
Gospel. Lord, help my unbelief. When we hear the command, to cast away every
transgression; it should make us beg with David, Order my steps in thy word,
and let not any iniquity have the dominion over me. When we hear the command,
to turn; it should make us to use the language of that penitent, Jer. 31. 18.
Turn thou me and I shall be turned; for thou art the Lord my God.

5. The Lord calls upon us to turn, to leave the obstinate without excuse, who
will not turn, who will not come to Christ that they may have life. Of Israel
he says, All the day long have I stretched forth my hand to a disobedient and
gainsaying people, Romans 10. ult. but this their disobedience rendered them
without apology. When the unconverted fall into God's revenging hands, they are
the less to be pitied, they can have nothing to plead; because Gods stretching
forth his hands, by way of invitation, in the Gospel was in vain. These sinners
against their own souls, whose neck is like an iron sinew, who will neither be
terrified by menaces, nor mollified by the expressions of the greatest kindness
and mercy; when they are summoned to the bar, how will they be struck
speechless, having not one word to say, against their own condemnation! They
were called unto grace and glory, but they would not hearken. They were told of
their danger, but they would not seek to prevent it; they were informed of the
ways of sin; and were dehorted from it; nay wooed and entreated with the most
passionate earnestness, not to be cruel to themselves, by giving way to such a
cursed thing; yet they would not consent to be freed from sin, and become the
servants of righteousness. And surely their mouths must needs be stopped; or if
they say any thing, when sentence is passed upon them, it must be, to side with
the justice of God against themselves, to acknowledge the equality of his
ways, the inequality of their own.

6. The Lord calls upon us to turn, that those who are ordained to eternal life
may be effectually wrought upon, and prevailed with to turn indeed. We read
that the Gospel was preached both to the Jews and to the Gentiles, and as many
as were ordained to eternal life believed, Act. 15. 48. And the truth is, it is
much for the sake of the Elect, who are scattered up and down among the
multitude, that the call to turn is so general as it is. Hereby those whom the
Father has given to Christ are brought home; and coming home how welcome are
they? Joh. 6. 37. All that the Father gives me shall come to me; and him that
comes to me, I will in no wise cast out. So much for the reasons why God calls
upon sinners to turn.

In the Third place, I promised to explain the nature of this conversion or
turning. And I find the Apostle does give a notable and full description of it,
Act. 26. 18. where he calls it, A turning from darkness unto light, and from
the power of Satan unto God. Hence we gather that conversion lies in four
things.

1. In being turned from darkness. 2. In being turned unto light. 3. In being
turned from the power of Satan. 4. In being turned unto God.
1. Conversion implies a being turned from darkness. As darkness was upon the
face of the deep, till God said, Let there be light, Genesis 1. 2. So truly,
darkness overspreads the soul of a natural man, till he is enlightened from
above. Believers are delivered from the power of darkness when translated into
the Sons Kingdom, Col. 1. 13. which shows that sometimes they were in darkness
as well as others; and this darkness is said to have a power, a power to hold,
a power to blind, a power to ruin; so that there is a necessity of being
delivered from it. Now there be several kinds of darkness, from which they are
made free.

1. Converts are turned from the darkness of ignorance. No longer are they
contented to be ignorant of the way to salvation, but are made inquisitive what
they must do to ^e saved. They are informed about the doctrine of Christ, and
are made to understand what believing and repenting mean. They know that sin is
to be sorrowed for, as the worst of evils, and that God is the chiefest good;
and that he so loved the world, as to give his only begotten Son, that
whosoever believes in him should not perish but have everlasting life, Joh. 3.
16. They are made to know that Christ is to be received by faith, and that
there is not salvation in any other, and that it is in vain to expect any thing
from him as a Savior, unless there be a consenting to obey him as a Lord.
These and such like truths are no longer hid from them. They are sensible now
of the mischief and danger of ignorance; it is therefore their desire to have it
in a greater measure removed; and they follow on to know the Lord.

2. Converts are turned from the darkness of unbelief. The Spirit does work a
persuasion in their hearts, of the certain truth of whatever God has revealed
in his word. They dare not any longer make the Lord a liar, by not crediting
what he has recorded. They believe, and admire, and acknowledge the Mystery of
God, and of the Father, and of Christ, Col. 2. 2. Heretofore their unbelief did
hide the Gospel from them; and concluded them in a lost estate; they saw not
the Majesty of the Word, they were not taken with the treasures of wisdom and
grace, which are there revealed; neither were they awakened by the terrors,
with which the Word abounds against ungodly ones. But now the vail is taken
away, and they assent to, and are affected with what the Gospel speaks to them.
They believe that God is in Christ reconciling the world unto himself, not
imputing their trespasses to them. And that being justified by his blood, they
shall be saved from wrath through him, Romans 5. 9. They believe that sin is
deadly, and the world a cheat, and that solid and eternal happiness is to be
found in God; therefore they leave a shadow to embrace that which is
substantial.

3. Converts are turned from the darkness of prejudice. Prejudice raises a
strange kind of mist before the eyes, which hinders the light of truth from
shining into the mind. The Jews prejudice against Christ, was one great thing
that blinded them; a principal impediment to their embracing of the Faith.
Satan endeavors to fill the ungodly with these prejudices, and to keep them
up; because by these his Kingdom is very much upheld. Sometimes sinners are
prejudiced against holiness, as if it were a disgrace; whereas it being the
glory of the Divine Nature, certainly it is the greatest honor and perfection
which the rational creature is capable of. Sometimes holiness is looked upon as
needless; and yet the Scripture affirms, that none shall see the Lord without
it. Sometimes the carnal heart rises against holiness, because it imagines,
that nothing of delight and pleasure is consistent with it; whereas indeed by
being converted unto God our joy is not lost, but only changed. The Kingdom of
God is not only righteousness, but also peace and joy in the holy Ghost, Romans
14. 17. whereas the joy before was poor, and low, and brutish, and defiling,
being mixed with many secret grudgings of conscience, and misgivings of heart:
Now upon conversion, the joy is pure, angelical, satisfactory, and an earnest
of those pleasures which will be for evermore, Psalm. 16. ult.

Neither is this unreasonable prejudice only against the ways of holiness, but
also against the publishers of these ways. There was a prejudice against
Elijah, as if he had been a troubler of Israel; against Jeremiah, as if he had
been unfaithful to the State, and a secret friend to the Chaldeans; against the
Apostles, as if they had been intolerable disturbers, that had turned the world
upside-down. And truly the treasure oft-times is disregarded, though of such
inestimable value, because of the vessel in which it is brought.

But when any are turned, the mist of prejudice is immediately scattered. Then
strict doctrine will go down, which before was nauseated, and made the heart to
rise against it; then a servant of Christ will be esteemed and obeyed, that
before was looked upon as the filth and offscouring of the world, 1 Cor. 4. 13.

4. Converts are turned from the works of darkness. These works are cast off,
Romans 13. 12. No known presumptuous sin is allowed of; they perceive the
fruitlessness of their former ways, and therefore now are ashamed of them,
Romans 6. 21. Formerly they went on securely in sin, because they knew not
whither they were going; but now they perceive the tendency of these works of
darkness, even unto blackness of darkness for ever; and so they are made free
from sin; that is, from sins servitude, and become the servants of
righteousness. Sin may plead hard against its being cast away; but its pleas
are all invalid.

The gainful sin does thus plead for it self: I have raised thee from a mean to
an high degree, I have filled thy bag, and furnished thy Table. By me thou have
gotten a fair estate, who else would have been little differing from a
beggar. And what shall I now be cast off having been so beneficial, and yielded
so much advantage? But the Convert has enough to reply to such a plea. Whatever
he has gained unjustly he must restore; and if he had trusted in God, and done
good, he would have fared better; the Mammon of unrighteousness is attended
with a curse. And all the while he thrived in a wicked way, he was destitute of
the true riches; and it is a wonder, by such dishonest gaining of the world, he
lost not his soul long ago. Now therefore he is resolved against sinful gain,
lest e're he is aware; God, and Christ, and his soul be lost beyond recovery.

The pleasing sin also is not without arguments, for its being cherished; I
have pleased thy flesh, and rejoiced thy heart; I have made days and nights to
pass unsensibly away, I have gratified thy senses, and made thy tongue to sing
for joy; I have stupefied and laid that Fury called conscience, when it has
begun to stir and torture thee; I have chased away thy cares, and made thee to
forget thy sorrows. Time was when the very thoughts of me were delightful, and
I was embraced as a darling; and why should I now be banished and killed, as if
I were an enemy? Is affliction of soul, and brokenness of heart, to be
preferred before the sweetness I was wont to afford thee?

But the Converts ear is deaf unto such Syren-melody; one word is enough to
dash and answer all, That the pleasures of sin are but for a season, Heb. 11.
25. but the pains of Hell (which without conversion are sure to follow) will
never have a period, nor be in the least mitigated. The rich man who had lived
jocundly, fared deliciously every day, when he was cast into the flames, begged
but for a drop of water, and 'twas denied him. Therefore the works of darkness
are cast off by the Convert, the pleasure of these works is nothing comparable
to the pain, nor the gain to the loss, which will speedily follow.

2. As this conversion implies a being turned from darkness, so also a being
turned unto light, Ephesians. 5. 8. For ye were sometimes darkness, but now are ye
light in the Lord, walk as children of light. And so 2 Cor. 4. 6. God who
commanded the light to shine out of darkness, has shined into our hearts, to
give the light of the knowledge of the glory of God, in the face of Jesus
Christ. This light has a threefold property, to discover, to direct, to operate.

1. This light discovers: The Apostle tells us, whatever does make manifest is
light. The Convert sees what he never saw before. There may be many toads, and
serpents, and other loathsome and hateful creatures in a dungeon, but till the
light shine in, these are not perceived; the breaking in of light discovers
them: And so in the heart of man many impure and noysom lusts have their abode;
but they are not indeed acknowledged, neither are they any annoyance, till the
light does make them manifest. The Convert sees his sin, his shame; he is
sensible of the plagues of his own heart, and the absolute necessity of a cure.
His interest likewise is discovered to him; and that is in seeking first the
Kingdom of God and his righteousness, in securing his soul, which is of far
greater value than the world, in minding the one thing needful, that good part
which can never be taken away.

2. This light directs. It guides those who are turned into the way of peace
and truth. The Lamp of the Word (the Spirit joining with, and teaching by it)
shows which are the perverse and crooked paths, to the end, that these may be
shunned and avoided; and it also directs into those ways which are pleasing
unto God, and pleasant in themselves; and moreover, so exceeding safe, that
rone ever missed of heaven, that continued to tread in them. We are directed to
believe and to obey; and where faith and obedience are linked together, the
offspring of that conjunction will most certainly be glory, honor, and
immortality.

3. This light operates in a powerful manner. It Is such a light as has heat
along with it. Converts were before told of the evil, the folly of sin; but now
they see this by another light, and their hearts are warmed with indignation
against it. They see sin, so as to be deeply affected; they sorrow for it, and
abhor it. They were before informed of the mercy and alsufficiency, and other
perfections of God; but now they have such a view of his glory in the face of
Christ, as that the fire of love is enkindled, and that love does put them upon
labor. When Caleb had seen the good Land of Promise, he was very eager to go
up at once and possess it, Number. 13. 30. And truly, when this light has made a
discovery of the celestial Canaan, and directed Converts how to get thither:
Oh! what watching, whatpraying, whatresisting, what striving, what storming
will there be?

3. This Conversion implies a being turned from the power of Satan. He is the
Spirit that works and rules in the children of disobedience, Ephesians. 2. 2. and has
possession of them till converted; but then he is cast out, and his strong
holds are thrown down. And oh! considering the Devils hatred, his power, his
subtilty; what mercy is it to have the cords, whereby he led us captive at his
pleasure, broken? Three things are comprehended in being turned from the power
of Satan.

1. Those who are converted are freed from Satan's dominion. His usurped
authority they have wisdom and grace to resist. The promise made to them who
are not under the Law, but under grace, is this, That sin^ shall not have the
dominion over them, Romans 6. 14. And this necessarily implies, that Satan's
dominion shall be destroyed, for it is by the power of sin he holds it. The net
is now broke, and the soul escapes as a bird out of the snare of the Fowler.
The unconverted sinner, what a slave to Satan is he? If the Devil say to him
go, he goes; nay, he runs, though it be to his own ruin. The Devil can but ask
and have. The sinners time and members, nay and his soul too, he can have upon
demand; but the Convert draws nigh to God, and is so strengthened by the grace
of God, that instead of being commanded by Satan, he compels Satan to flee from
him.

2. Those who are converted, lay aside the work of Satan. They are aware how
base and injurious, both to God and their own souls the devils employments are,
and there is a better work than His; namely the work of the Lord, which they
labor in, and in the doing of which they cannot too much abound.

3. Those who are converted, Satan's baits become despicable to them. It Is by
means of these the devil is so powerful. The God of this world does make great
use of this world, to bewitch and ensnare the children of men. Sensual delights
he exceedingly magnifies, sumptuous fare, costly apparel, credit among men,
pleasant recreations, he suggests, How happy will these make you. He tells
sinners of the worth of silver and gold, and often through the burning-glasses
of their eyes, endeavors to set their hearts on fire by beauty. But the
Convert, by the eye of faith, looks higher than these things. He is made to see
the vanity of the creature. He has had impressions of divine displeasure, and
then the world has appeared an empty bubble, and insignificant cipher. His
conscience was wounded, and when wounded, alas! it was Nullis medicabilis
herbis; not to be cured by any or all the things the world could give him.

The Convert has been made to look upward, and there perceives more durable
riches, more lasting pleasures than the world can brag of; and so not the
things which are seen, but the things which are not seen, he is taken with.
Though he is in the world, yet he looks beyond it. Moses having respect to the
recompense of reward, refused to be called the son of Pharoahs daughter, and
slighted the pleasures of sin, and all the treasures which were in Egypt.

4. This Conversion as it implies a being turned from the power of Satan, so a
being turned unto God. Turn to me, says ^^e Lord of Hosts, and I will turn to
you, says the Lord of Hosts, Zech. 1. 3. As it is in Kings Courts; many that
come thither, busy themselves in beholding the curious hangings and the
pictures which are there; but the wise Statesman minds not these; his business
is with the King himself. In like manner, while most of the Creation are taken
up wholly with the beholding, and admiring, and pursuing this, and that, and
the other vanity; the Convert (who shows himself herein to be truly wise)
approaches and has recourse to God, who made these things, and can make him
more happy, than these are able.

Now when the sinner turns to God, he looks upon him under a threefold notion,
As a Lord, as a Father, as his ultimate end.

1. The Convert eyes God as a Lord. He owns his Sovereignty, and submits
himself unto his Scepter. Other Lords indeed in times past have had the
dominion over him, Isa. 26. 13. but now his resolution is fixed and peremptory
to own no other Lord but God alone. His will stoops unto, and complies with the
will of God; when his natural inclination toward any thing is most vehement,
if the Convert be informed, That God by that thing will be displeased; that is
enough to stop the current of his desires. The testimonies of the Lord he takes
as a rule to order his conversation by. And when he hears that God has
commanded him to keep his precepts diligently, his heart presently sends forth
an echo back again unto that command, Oh that my ways were directed, that I
might keep thy Statutes! Psalm. 119. 4, 5. He dares not any longer
presumptuously commit the evil which the Word forbids, nor omit the good which
the Word commands. Failings and infirmities there are, and will be. In many
things (says the Apostle) we offend all. But this evil, that is present with
the Convert, is a burden to him; and the Law of God is approved and consented
to, and delighted in, as holy, just and good. The Convert (which does
distinguish him from an hypocrite) is far from wishing that the Law were less
holy, and that it would allow a liberty to sin; but he wishes that his heart
and life were more holy, and to this Law more and more conformable.

2. The Convert eyes God as a Father, or as willing to become his Father in
Christ Jesus. 'Twas truly said by one of the Ancients, Tam Pater nemo, tam puis
nemo; none such a Father as God, none so full of fatherly affection; he has
sufficient store to supply all the needs of all returning Prodigals; and he is
far more willing to impart of this store, to them which see their need, and
ask, than earthly Parents can be to give bread unto their hungry children, Mat.
7. 11. This is great encouragement to returning. Those Parables of the lost
sheep, the lost silver, and the lost son, were uttered to this end to hearten
sinners to come home to God, Luke 15. The man rejoiced when he had found his
sheep, the woman when she had recovered her piece of silver: That kind father,
though necessity drove his child home, being ready to perish in the far
Country; and though he came in rags, having wasted all his substance in riotous
living; I say, that kind father, as soon as ever he saw his son, ran to him,
had compassion upon him, embraced him, kissed him, clothes him, adorns him,
makes a feast for him; and how glad was he that the lost child was found, that
the dead son was alive again!

Surely, we may conclude, that God is willing to receive those that being
sensible they have sinned, and perverted that which is right, and it has not
profited them, Job 33. 27. do with their whole heart return to him. It Is true,
the Converts sins and unbelieving heart together, do fill him many times with
doubts and fears. He remembers God and is troubled, because he has so bitterly
provoked him; he is afraid to call him Father, and very much doubts of being
received; but then again faith and hope are encouraged by such kind of promises
as that which you read of 2 Cor. 6. 17, 18. Touch not the unclean thing, and I
will receive you, and will be a Father unto you, and ye shall be my sons and
daughters, says the Lord Almighty.

3. The Convert eyes God as his ultimate end; that God may be glorified, that
God may be enjoyed is his design in turning. The sinner is sensible, that while
unconverted, he lived to the dishonor of him that gave him life, and in whose
hand his breath is. Now therefore he has the more zealous desires to walk
worthy of the Lord unto all pleasing, being fruitful in those works, which are
to his praise. Before he sought himself, he sought his own things; he had no
higher aim than to gratify his worldly and fleshly inclinations, with what his
carnal and corrupted mind judged to be suitable; and so himself were but
profited and pleased, he cared not how much the Lord were injured and provoked.
But now he is of another mind, he carries on the same design that Angels do,
that Christ did; namely, to honor and please the God of glory. And not only in
his spiritual actions, does he aim at this, but also in his civil and natural
actions and recreations, which hereby become spiritualized; he seriously minds
that of the Apostle, 1 Cor. 10. 31. Whether therefore ye eat or drink, or what
ever ye do, do all to the glory of God. And now he lives like a creature, like
a son; before he lived like neither, while he lived only to himself.

And by thus glorifying of God, the Convert takes the right course to enjoy
him. He looks upon God as the best portion, and therefore pitches upon him. Let
the men of the world take the things of the world, if they please; let them
pursue after bubbles, let them toil and vex themselves, for that which when
gotten will prove only a further vexation. My soul seek thou only after God; he
alone deserves thy seeking; he alone, when found, can satisfy thee to the
uttermost. That Is now his language.

Nothing short of God will content the Convert; wealth cannot do it, credit,
sensual delights cannot do it; nay, Ordinances themselves are but like empty
breasts, and broken cisterns, unless communion with God be enjoyed in them. He
prays for God, he hears for God, he fasts for God, he comes to the table for
God. Earth is like Hell, when God is absent; and Heaven he judges, would not be
Heaven if God were not always present. Thus have I showed wherein conversion
lies, in being turned from darkness to light, and from the power of Satan to
God.

I shall add a word or two further to manifest through whom it is that sinners
must turn to God, if they would be received. And the truth is, it is through
Christ alone. The Apostle plainly affirms, That through him both Jews and
Gentiles have access by one Spirit unto the Father, Ephesians. 2. 18. And our Lord in
express terms says, Joh. 14. 6. I am the way, the truth and the life; no man
comes unto the Father but by me. It Is impossible that such guilty and polluted
creatures as we have made our selves by sin, should ever be accepted before a
just and holy God, without a Mediator. Hence it follows, there is a necessity
we should look unto Jesus (as the Apostles phrase is) in whom God is
reconciling the world unto himself, 2. Cor. 5. 19. else we should not dare to
approach, but fly away for fear of being (as we deserve to be) consumed.

Now when we look unto Jesus the Mediator, we must look upon him as our
Righteousness, as our Advocate, as our Helper.

1. We must look upon Christ as our Righteousness. This is the Name whereby
that branch that springs from David is called, The Lord our Righteousness, Jer.
24. 6. There is no coming unto God without some righteousness or other. Our own
righteousness is like filthy rags; and because rags, it is not able to cover us;
because filthy rags, it cannot adorn or commend us. Therefore we must look unto
Jesus to be made righteousness to us, that for the sake of his obedience and
sufferings in our stead, our sins may be forgiven, and our persons may be
accepted in the sight of God. The righteousness of Christ, which is imputed to
believers, is so every way perfect and sufficient, that the pure and piercing
eye of God can ^spy not the le^st staw or defect in it. If therefore we are
covered with this, none of our sins will appear against us, or be laid to our
charge. Christ has died, and upon his death God does justify. Who therefore
shall accuse or condemn those that believe?

2. When we turn to God, we must look upon Christ as our Advocate, 1 John 2. 1.
If any man sin, we have an Advocate with the Father Jesus Christ the righteous.
This Advocate, as he suffered to purchase pardon and grace, so he intercedes
that these may be bestowed upon returning sinners, and God his Father hears him
always. We ought to consider, and to be encouraged by considering, what an
High Priest we have at the right hand of God. When the sinner beholds himself,
in himself undone, and comes petitioning for remission of sin, for the healing
of his spiritual plagues, and for the saving of his soul, which seems to be
just upon the borders of damnation. This Advocate will take the sinners
petition, and present it to his Father, and all shall be granted, ay, and
infinitely more than the sinner can desire or conceive.

3. When we turn to God, we must look upon Christ as our Helper. He does
strengthen the feeble knees, else we should not be able to set one step in the
way to life. The Lord Jesus is called the Author of our Faith, Heb. 12. 2. and
by him, believers are said to have access into that grace wherein they stand.
Romans 5. 2. The sinner must be made sensible of his own insufficiency to turn
himself, to set himself at liberty; and upon this, must look unto the Son of
God, to bring his soul out of prison, to make him free indeed from the curse of
the Law, from the bondage of corruption, and to enable to come to God, and
cleave to him.

In the last place follows the Application. Use I. Of Examination.
Since God calls upon sinners again and again to turn, It highly concerns all
to examine, whether this Call has been obeyed? It Is wisdom to bring our grace
to the Touchstone, since there is so much counterfeit grace in the world. As
it is easy and common to mistake in this matter; so there is no mistake more
dangerous, and it will not be long, e're to correct mistakes about conversion will
be impossible. The damned see wherein they did deceive themselves; but alas!
it is now too late to think of turning better; the door of mercy is shut and
barred, and will be barred for ever. I remember Theodoret commenting upon this
Text, observes, that the doubling of the words, Turn ye, turn ye, (...); gives
us to understand the sincerity which is required in conversion. A bare
appearance sets us at a farther distance from God.

Here I shall speak of some changes that have a kind of likeness to conversion,
which yet are to be found in them, that fall short both of grace and glory.

1. Those cannot be said to be indeed converted, Who are only turned to such or
such a Party, or Opinion, about smaller matters in Religion. Suppose thy
Opinion be Orthodox and right, what is that, if thy heart be not right in the
sight of God? Those who please themselves, because they have the name of
Non-conformists, what does this signify, unless they refuse to conform to the
sinful fashions and courses of the world? On the other side, They that boast of
being Sons of the Church, what will that advantage them, if by their swearing,
lying, and hatred of holiness, they show themselves the Sons of Belial?

2. Those are not indeed converted, whose turning is only partial. Saul obeyed
the command of the Lord in part against Amalek; that which was vile and refuse
he destroyed utterly, but delicate Agag, and the best of the spoil he spared, 1 Samuel 15. 9. but this partial obedience is censured as high rebellion, v. 23.
Many will yield to Gods Call in some degree; the sins which they can better
spare, they will consent to the mortification of; but the chief, the darling,
the delicate sin, which they live upon, or live so sweetly with. Oh! That shall
not be touched* Herod was a partial Convert; in sundry respects he yielded
obedience to the Baptist's preaching, but when John would have turned him from
his incest with Herodias, this could not be born, but instead of obeying this
message, he persecutes, and after kills the messenger.

3. Those are not indeed converted, who only turn to God in the time of their
extremity, and after are guilty of revolting. Israel, when Sinai was all in a
fire before their eyes, turned unto God, for fear of being consumed. Then they
cry out, they will hearken and do what ever the Lord should speak to them,
Deuteronomy. 5. 27. But before a few days were expired, they quickly turned out of
the way which God commanded them, and fell into gross idolatry. And again we
read, When God slew them then they sought him, they returned and enquired early
after him; and yet all this while their heart was not right, neither were they
steadfast in his Covenant, Psalm. 78. 34, 37. How many sickbed resolutions have
looked like conversion, which upon the return of health have vanished quite
away? True conversion is a lasting change; there may indeed be falling fits,
and fits of slumber: The wise Virgins slumbred and slept, Mat. 25. though they
were not over wise to do so. But yet true Converts never go so far, as to
change their Lord, and to choose any thing but God for their chiefest happiness.

Reader, beware of being only almost a Convert, as thou would be unwilling,
only to be almost saved, and quite damned.

The question now will be, how may true conversion be discerned from all those
shows, whereby multitudes are deluded? Unto this I answer in these particulars.

1. In true Conversion the heart is turned from the love of every known
iniquity. The strength of sin lies in the love of it, and love to it plainly
argues, that it holds the heart still in possession. That Is the Converts
language, I esteem thy commands concerning all things to be right, and I have
every false way, Psalm. 119. 128. Thy love is that which God does principally
require of thee; if sin, if the world run away with that, how can thou have
the face to say thou art turned? It Is not sufficient to abstain from the
outward act of sin, an hypocritical Pharisee may go so far; but the very soul
must abhor it: Especially the sin that has been most desired, most delighted
in, will be most detested when conversion is sincere. The covetous man when
turned, will most abhor covetousness; the unclean, their filthiness; the proud,
their pride; and the reason is evident, because by these sins God has been most
displeased and dishonored, and they most of all polluted and defiled.

2. In true Conversion, there is a renewing of the whole man. All things are
become new (says the Apostle) 2 Cor. 5. in them that are new creatures; and
old things are passed away. The whole man is sanctified, though not wholly
sanctified; every part is changed, though the change be not perfect. The
understanding is enlightened, the conscience is made tender, and has a great
command; the heart makes choice of God, the desires are after his favor and
fellowship, the members are yielded as instruments of righteousness unto
holiness. The Convert willingly resigns and gives up his whole self, both body
and spirit to the Lord.

3. In true Conversion there is a desire to be turned more and more; there is
an hungring after a greater degree of righteousness. The remainders of flesh
are a burden, and the spirit does lust against them, Gal. 5. 17. The Convert
goes to God, to perfect that which concerns him, to strengthen what he has
wrought for him. Lord! Thou have done much for me, but there is much more still
to do; here (...) many enemies still to slay, many distempers still to heal,
many spots still to wash out, many wrinkles still to smooth. Oh! Thou who have
laid the foundation, rear up the building, and at last bring forth the
Top-stone, that I may cry, Grace, grace, for ever!

4. In true conversion, there is a pure and fervent love to Converts. Love to
the Brethren is a sign of being passed from death to life, 1 John 3. 14. Let
them be mean, poor, of weak parts, let them be vilified and despised by the
world; yet if Saints, they will be esteemed and owned by them that are
sincerely changed. Then our love is right, when the more holy any are, the more
we love them; and the more holy designs they have upon us, the more plainly
they deal with us, for sin which they see in us, still we do the more ardently
affect them. Yea, and we can rejoice in their grace, though because of their
luster we do shine more obscurely.

5. In true Conversion, there is a pity toward the unconverted. Those who are
turned have escaped danger, and they cannot but be moved with others peril. How
can they choose but mourn over their relations and acquaintance, that are
without Christ and God in the world? Oh, what hazard do such run? when they go
to sleep, they know not but they may wake in the midst of flames that are
unquenchable! when they go out of their houses they may be in hell before they
return! They hang over the bottomless pit, by the small thread of their lives;
and a thousand things may happen every day sufficient to break that thread
asunder, and then in they fall without redemption. Oh doleful state of the
ungodly! If thou who art a religious Wife, should wake in the night, and find
thy Husband stone dead by thee, would it not extremely amaze and grieve thee?
Or if thou who art the Master of a family should find all thy children and
servants of a sudden dead before thy eyes; would not thy heart be extremely
affected? And surely if thy Husband, thy Wife, thy Children, thy Servants, are
dead in sins, in danger of being for ever damned, much more reason have thou to
be concerned for them, and to endeavor by advise, and prayers, and tears, to
have them turned and reconciled unto God.

Now Reader, Try thy self by these signs of Conversion; if thou find them in
thy self, thou may rejoice, for these plainly show, that thy name is written
in the Book of Life. But, if any sin be loved, if thy mind, and conscience, and
heart, and life be all defiled; and as thou art unrenewed, so thou have no
desire after renewing grace; if thou delightest in the carnal, and art an hater
of Saints. This shows, to conversion thou art a stranger, and to this hour art
in the gall of bitterness.

Use II. Of Terror.
Whoever thou art, high or low, rich or poor, male or female, that read
these lines, and wast never turned. I am sent to thee from God with heavy
tidings; such, as if thou were not a bruit, a stock, would make thee like
Belshazzar, when upon the view of the handwriting upon the wall, his
countenance was changed, his thoughts troubled him, the joints of his loins
were loosed, and his knees smo^e one against another, Dan. 5. 6. I am to
prophecy not good concerning thee, but evil. I have a roll to deliver thee, but
it is written within and without with lamentation, and mourning and woe. Thou art
perhaps jolly and secure, but this is like the mirth and laughter of a sick man
out of his senses, which argues his distemper to be the sorer. Alas! sinner,
Thou have not reason so much as once to smile while in a state of nature. How
many threatenings are denounced against thee? And suppose thou were surrounded
with Cannons, all ready at once to be discharged at thee, these would be
nothing near so dreadful as the threatenings and curses which the just and
jealous God has uttered. Open thy eyes and look which way thou will, enough may
be perceived to cause thy heart to meditate terror; above, an angry God; below,
a flaming Hell; behind, an innumerable host of sins pursuing thee; before,
Satan and the world leading thee along in the broad way to destruction.

But more particularly, I would have these following Truths laid to heart.

1. Whilst thou art unconverted thou art also unpardoned. Thou stand
indebted many thousand talents, and not so much as one mite of all that debt is
paid. The least transgression does make thee liable to the curse of the Law,
and guess then what an accursed wretch thy many and thy mighty sins have made
thee? Upon thy returning and acknowledging of thy iniquity, God has engaged to
do it away, he will lay the load upon the back of a Mediator; but if thou will
not consent to be turned, thou alone must bear it. Sin is another kind of thing
than thou imaginest. Adams first transgression in eating the forbidden fruit,
which was aggravated because he would have been as God; and he believed the
Serpent, and made God a liar, and which was indeed a rejecting of the whole
Covenant of life made with him: Oh! how did it make himself to smart? and not
only himself, but his whole progeny are the worse for it. And if one sin has
brought a curse upon all the children of men; think, O soul, how thou will be
able to stand under all the sins thou have committed. Sin does make the whole
Creation groan, it makes the damned to lament and to despair, and will be an
intolerable load for ever; sin was found heavy by our Lord, this caused his
Agony, and made his soul exceeding sorrowful even unto death. Nay, God himself
complains, that he is pressed with iniquity, as a Cart is pressed, which is
full of sheaves. And will thou sinner make light of it? Oh! how heavy will thou
one day feel it?

2. Whilst unconverted thou art treasuring up more and more wrath against the
day of wrath. Thy scores are large already, but every day thou runnest on the
score afresh; every day thou make new wounds, though conscience now be so
stupid that it feels nothing. As thy sin abounds, proportionably the vials of
divine indignation grow fuller, which will at last be all emptied upon thy
head. Unnatural cruelty to be a Devil to thy self! to be thy own souls
murderer! Thou art continually setting thy self at a greatter distance from
God, and engaging him more and more against thee, who alone can be a refuge and
salvation to thee. Thou will perceive at last, thou have been thy own foe, and
acted to thy own confusion, Jer. 7. 19. Do they provoke me to anger, says the
Lord, do they not provoke themselves to the confusion of their own faces?

3. Whilst unconverted, thou renderest thy self more and more unmeet for glory
and blessedness. The more impure thou art, the more unfit also to see God. The
abominations which are loved and wrought by thee, do make thee an improper
inhabitant for the new Jerusalem. The inheritance above is an inheritance of
Saints, it is, as an incorruptible, so an undefiled inheritance, 1 Pet. 1. 4.
The company is all holy, and so are the employments. There is not a vain or
sinful word spoken there; nor an impure desire or thought to be found in any
that are above. And what would thou do there among them, unless a change be
wrought in thee.

4. If thou turnest not thou art sure to die: As life is far off, so death is
near. The Psalmist tells us, That God is angry with the wicked every day; and
if he turn not, he has wh^t his sword, he has bent his bow and made it ready,
Psalm. 7. 11, 12. And when the instruments of death are thus* prepared, it is a
sign God will make quick work, and suddenly cut the offender off. Death is
called a King of Terrors; and it well deserves that name, in respect of the
ungodly. Then their good things are all received, and the evils come upon them,
which will never be removed; their torments begin, which will never know an
end. So long as God is God, to have God their enemy; so long as God is happy,
to lie in extremest misery! What tongue can utter, or heart imagine the horror
of this? An angry sin-revenging Lord will lay load upon thee, and yet keep thee
from sinking into nothing; he will uphold thee in thy being, that thou may
be for ever plagued. He will show his mighty power, in holding thee up with one
hand, that he may lash thee with the other, unto all eternity.

Use III. Of Consolation.
You who have obeyed the Call of God to turn, I am commanded to speak peace and
comfort to you, Isa. 40. 1. Comfort ye, comfort ye my people, says your God.
The unconverted are not more accursed than you are blessed. I have several
things to tell you, which are enough to make your hearts leap for joy.

1. God has had thoughts of love toward you before the foundation of the
world was laid. He did predestinate and choose you unto the adoption of
children, Ephesians. 1. long before you were. From everlasting he did design to make
you his Heirs, and jointheirs with Christ unto that Kingdom and Glory, with
which the sufferings of this present time are not worthy to be compared. And
since the love of God toward you is from everlasting, is coeternal with
himself, surely it can never in time be changed.

2. God has justified you freely by his grace, through the redemption of Jesus
Christ, Romans 3. 24. As far as the East is from the West, so far are your
iniquities removed from you, Psalm. 103. 12. and surely that is as far as you can
desire. They are cast into the depth of the Sea; which argues, when they come
to be sought for, they shall not be found; just as those things which are cast
into the depth of the Sea, we despair that ever they should be recovered.
Christ has been wounded for your transgressions, he has been bruised for your
iniquities, Isa. 53. 5. And as the* Imputation of your sins to Christ did cause
him to undergo real sufferings; so, the imputation of his righteousness to you,
will cause a real exemption from that wrath and punishment which by sin you
have justly merited. Be of good cheer Converts, your sins are forgiven, and
consequently the curse of afflictions, and also the sting of death is taken
away.

3. You that are Converts it will not be long e're you are all glorified, Romans 8.
30. Moreover, whom he did predestinate them he also called, and whom he called
them he also justified, and whom he justified them he also glorified. The Lord
has promised, that those who overcome shall sit with him on his Throne. You
shall not only overcome, but be more than conquerors through him that has loved
you. Mansions are already prepared for you, and when you are prepared for those
Mansions, you shall be received into them. Then, neither the fury nor the
favor of the world will be a temptation. Satan's fiery darts will not be able
to reach you, when once you are gotten into the third Heaven. When you are just
entering into the new Jerusalem, you will shake hands both with sin and misery
at the door, and neither of these will be able to follow. Tears will be wiped
away, and all cause of sorrow will be gone; there will be a clear view of God,
without the least cloud; the Sun of righteousness will shine for ever without
any eclipse, there will be entire joy without grief, perfect peace without any
trouble, complete holiness without the least remainder of corruption, a full
blessedness without period*

Use IV. Of Exhortation.
And who would not now become a Convert? Have you any thing to say against a
pardon, or against that glory which has been revealed? Shall it be made a
question, whether pleasures for evermore, or eternal torments are to be
preferred? Oh that you would come to your selves! and then I am sure you would
come to God immediately.

The Arguments to persuade you to Conversion are diverse.

1. If you turn not, you cannot answer the end of your Creation. You must not
think God gave you a being, and sent you into the world, to please your selves,
to satisfy your inordinate and corrupt desires, and to live carelessly and
rebelliously against him; but thus you will do till you are converted. Did the
Lord give you an understanding faculty, and not design that he should be
understood and known by you? Did he give you a memory, and not intend that he
should be remembered? Did he give you an heart to love and to desire, and not
design himself to be the chief object of both? Did he give you affections that
you should give them away to sin and vanity? Oh cross not any longer the end
for which you were made, lest you cause the Lord to repent and be grieved at
the heart he made you, Genesis 6. 6. and so resolve to destroy the workmanship of
his own hands. If you continue obstinate and without understanding, He that
made you will not save you, or have mercy on you; he that formed you will show
you no favor, Isa: 27. 11.

2. Unless you turn, you cannot answer the end of the death of Christ, and the
Redemption wrought thereby. Our Lord died not only to expiate offenses, but
also to purify unto himself a peculiar people, zealous of good works; and that
in the body of his flesh, through death, he might present them holy and
unblameable, Col. 1. 22. Through the eternal Spirit, he offered up himself
without spot to God, that by his blood he might purge our consciences from dead
works, to serve the living God, Heb. 9. 14. From these and and such like places
it evidently follows, that not only our pardon, but our purity was designed by
the Lord Jesus. But how can we be pure, unless we turn to God from sin which
does defile us? Christ knew what a sickness and debasement of our nature sin
is; therefore he himself was slain, that sin might be killed. And will you dare
to live in sin? Hark to the Apostle, 1 Pet. 2. 24. Who his own self bare our
sins in his body on the tree, that we being dead to sins should live unto
righteousness, by whose stripes ye were healed. And as the death of Christ is
an argument to persuade to turn from sin, so from this death virtue and power
is to be derived, whereby sin may be subdued.

3. You are further obliged to turn, because of Gods condescension in giving
you leave to do it. If the gulf had been fixed upon the very first
transgression; if the turning of fallen man had been as impossible, as the
turning of the fallen Angels; the Lord could not have been charged with the
least injustice. But although you have departed; he calls after you. Without
any detriment or prejudice to his justice, he has found out a way to show you
mercy. The Devils were never called to conversion; as soon as ever they had
sinned they were fettered in chains of darkness that shall never be unloosed.
But hark what wisdom says, Prove. 8. 4. Unto you, O men I call, and my vow is
to the sons of man. You have often stopped your ears, Oh that at last you would
hear, that your souls may live. The long deafning of your ears may provoke the
Lord to shut his mouth; and then you will never be converted, never healed.

4. Consider, Who it is that calls upon you to turn; and what is his design in
it. You are undone wretches, who have neither skill, nor will, nor power to
save your selves. And he that calls after you is a God to whom power and mercy
does belong. And his design is to make his power and mercy known in you. His
aim is, to bring you near, that he manifest himself to you, as he does not
manifest himself unto the world; to shield you from danger, to supply your
needs, according to the riches of his glory, to deliver you from every evil
work, and to preserve you to his heavenly Kingdom. And is there any harm in all
this?

5. It Is unreasonable that the world or sin should be an hindrance, and any
longer stave you off from God. Well may you turn from sin, for that deserves
your hatred; well may your hearts turn from idolizing the world and the things
of it, for these deserve your scorn. All things besides God, are either hurtful
or helpless. Nothing more hurtful than sin; and they that have expected help
from the creatures, have found themselves destitute and forlorn in their
extremity.

6. If you turn to God, he will not fail to turn to you. His ear shall be
turned, and be open to your cry; his hand shall be upon you for good; and in
the hollow of his hand you shall be secure; he is greater than all, and none
shall be able to pluck you out of his hands; he will not hide, but turn his
face toward you; he will give peace as well as mercy, he will let you know
that pardon is multiplied, that your love also may be increased. The debtor
loved much, to whom much was forgiven. Finally, the stream of his benefits
shall be turned toward you. The Lord will do you good, and delight in doing
so. Temporal things you shall not want, spiritual blessings shall be showred
down abundantly, and at last you shall ascend, and be admitted into his
immediate presence, where God will turn to you, so as never to withdraw more.
Be not afraid or dismayed whoever turn against you for conversion sake. The
Lord himself is with you, and for you, and he will turn to good what
adversaries do mean for evil.

7. Not only his Word, and Ministers, and Spirit, but also his Providence call
upon you to turn to God. Both his mercies and his judgments do press this
exhortation to conversion. The streams of goodness that continually run toward
you, and which sometimes swell and overflow abundantly, do signify that it is
your wisdom to forsake the broken cisterns, and come to the fountain of living
waters. His mercies speak this language, that it is good to return into, and
obtain an interest in the Father of them. Then these mercies will be in mercy.
Cords of love are cast about you on purpose to draw you unto the God of love
and peace. Oh that you would run to him! The riches of his goodness are
unlocked and discovered, that hereby you may be led unto repentance, Romans 2. 4.

His judgments likewise are inflicted in pursuance of the same design. That is
the voice that is uttered by them; Go return unto the Lord, for he has torn and
he will heal you; he has smitten, and he will bind you up, Hos. 6. 1. The Fire
of London calls upon the Inhabitants of it, and of the whole Land, since they
have not only heard of God by the hearing of the ear, but their eyes have seen
him marching out so dreadfully against them, to abhor themselves, and to repent
in dust and ashes. Those many thousands which were cut off by the plague of
Pestilence, although they are dead, they still speak; and that which they say
is this. Oh you that are alive, return, return unto the Lord your God, for
after death 'twill be too late to do it.

8. Consider, As yet it is not too late to turn to God. Though hitherto stupid,
if now you will awake, though hitherto refractory; if now you will yield your
selves to the Lord, though hitherto you have shut the door to keep in sin, and
to keep out Christ; if now at last you will open at the knock of the Gospel,
and consent that your lusts should be expelled, and the Lord Jesus enter; he is
ready to receive you into grace and favor, and all former denials, affronts,
repulses, shall be forgotten and forgiven. The Scepter is still held forth, the
Lord is not removed from the Mercy-seat; mercy and grace may now be had, if you
will come for it. But if you will not know when you are well offered, and are
resolved not to cease from your stubborn way; an oath may soon be sworn in
wrath, that you shall never enter into Rest; and God may say, He that is filthy,
let him be filthy still; he that is unjust, let him be unjust still; he that is
joined to the profits and pleasures of the world which he makes his idols, let
him alone; he that despises the offer of grace, shall not have another offer;
he that now refuses to be converted shall never be a Convert.

Oh that I could prevail by all these arguments. But lest they should take no
impression, lest they should slip out of your minds, and have no influence upon
your hearts, I shall second them.

With a voice from Hell.

With a voice from Heaven.

With a voice from Christ himself.

1. With a voice from Hell. Imagine therefore, a damned sinner, who has lain
many years in the burning lake, should have leave to come and appear in the
face of this assembly; and a river of tears having first gushed out of his
eyes, and for a while stopped his expressions, he at length should thus speak to
you.

Cursed be the day wherein I was born, and that night wherein it was said there
is a manchild conceived! Let that day be darkness, let not God regard it from
on high, neither let the light shine upon it. Alas, 'twere better never to have
been at all, than to be for ever miserable! How intolerable are the gNawings of
the never dying worm? how hot and unquenchable are those flames, which the
breath of the Lord as a stream of brimstone does kindle?

The world is extremely mistaken in sin. They think it light and pleasant, and
so I thought once, as well as they; but now I find how woefully I was deceived;
I feel sins weight, and taste, yea am drunken with the gall and wormwood of it.
I find that true, which before I was told, but would not believe, that it is a
fearful thing to fall into the hands of the living God. His mighty hands have
taken hold of me, and bound me hand and foot, and thrown me into outer
darkness.

And there I must lie tortured to Eternity! Oh that word does rend my very
heart, kills all hope, sinks and quite overwhelms me in utter desper^ion. If
after millions of millions of ages my torments were to end, I should strengthen
my self under my sorrows; but since after so long a space of time I shall be as
far from releasing, as the first moment I was imprisoned; this is that which
makes my grief to know no bounds, because my misery knows none. Oh what phrenzy
possessed me, that for the sake of a little gain and pleasure, for a short
season, which sin did yield me, I should venture to dwell with devouring fire,
and to inhabit everlasting burnings!

But I must only blame my self; God is severe, but not in the least
unrighteous. He called, but I refused, he stretched forth his hand, but I
disregarded him, I set at naught all his counsel, and would none of his
reproofs; I remember very well, he spoke to me often to turn out of the paths
that lead to destruction and misery; but I would needs go on. I was warned to
fly from the wrath to come, but I would take no warning. I was entreated to be
reconciled, but resolved to continue a rebel. I would not be made clean, though
the Lord waited to be gracions, and frequently said, When will it once be!

And what! Will any of you continue in the same desperate mind that I was of?
Will you still cherish the self-same sins for kind that were my undoing? Behold
the flam^ about my ears, and oh that you could conceive the anguish of my
heart! Be wise, be wise, and accept of mercy and salvation while it is tendered
to you; for if once you come to this place of torment, the Lord will forget to
be gracious, and his mercy will be quite and clean gone for ever.

2. A voice from Heaven. Suppose one of the glorified Saints who has been an
Inhabitant of the heavenly Jerusalem, who has conversed with an innumerable
company of Angels, and has seen God face to face; should for a while leave his
blissful Mansion, and having abundance of joy and glory in his looks, should
utter such kind of language as this before you.

Oh the height, and length, and depth, and breadth of the love of Christ which
passes knowledge! How unsearchable is his goodness, and his mercy past finding
out! Worthy is the Lamb that was slain, to receive power, and riches, and
wisdom, and strength, and honor, and glory, and blessing; for by his blood he
has redeemed me, with millions more, out of every kindred, and tongue, and
people, and Nation! I was called to turn and live, and through rich grace was
enabled to obey the Call; and now I find what a glorious life that is, unto
which sincere and persevering Converts shall at last be brought. This is a life
that is free from sin, and free from suffering, that will never see death, or be
in danger of the grave.

It Is best of all to be near to God. Christ is without all controversy the
best Master, to be subject to him it is to reign, and reign for ever! What ails
the blind and stupid world, that they see no form nor comeliness in this fairest
among ten thousand, the light of whose countenance makes heaven not to need the
light of the Sun, or Moon, or Stars! His beauty is all-surpassing, his grace is
much more precious than gold that perishes; but his glory, it is not lawful, or
possible for me to utter.

And now will any of you any longer slight him? Open your eyes and see
evidently that you are the children of perdition, the sons of death without
him; but through him you may be turned, through him you may be saved, with a
great and everlasting salvation. Surely then you have reason to value him above
all; though the whole world, nay though ten thousand worlds should stand in
competition with him.

3. Hear a voice from Christ himself. Imagine the Lord Jesus appearing with a
light far above the brightness of the Sun. Suppose some of his Angels as his
Harbingers and forerunners, coming before him, and crying, Holy, holy, holy, is
the Lord of H^sts; and at last himself visibly filling this place with his
Majesty and with his glory, and having stricken an awe into you, and wrought in
you an admiration of his excellency and greatness, suppose him thus speaking
and pleading with you.

Look unto me and be ye saved all ye ends of the earth, I am your Redeemer, and
there is none else; you have destroyed your selves, but in me, and me alone,
you may find help; unless I make you free, sin will still reign in you, and if
it reign, it will also ruin; unless I bind the strong man armed, he will keep
you bound, and lead you captive at his pleasure; unless I turn, and bring you
near to God, you will run farther and farther away from him, till at last there
be no possibility of returning. How long ye simple souls will ye love
simplicity, and fools hate knowledge? Turn ye at my reproof; behold I will pour
out my spirit upon you, I will make known my words unto you.

Former contempts I will pass by, if now at last you will receive me. I will
free you from the guilt, and from the power of sin, I will pacify my Fathers
anger, though by breaking his Laws, and despising me his Son, you have never so
much incensed him. Though by nature captives, I will make you Kings and
Priests; though by sin traitors and enemies, I will make you Sons, and heirs of
God, and coheirs with my self, who am the Heir of all things. You shall in no
case be miserable, if all that fullness which dwells in me can satisfy and make
you happy.

And after all this, my brethren, will you be fond of sin and ruin? Oh hear
the voice of the Son of God, who is not willing you should perish.

How shall I do to work upon you? Methinks I could be willing that these words
should be my last, upon condition they might be powerful and effectual to the
converting, and healing, and saving all that are within the sound of them.
Methinks I could be willing to expire here, and be carried dead out of the
Pulpit, upon condition all you might hear, so as to turn from your evil ways
and live. Most of those thousands which are before me are unknown to me: But
this I know, that you all have souls, and that every soul is worth a world. Oh
that you all would consult your souls interest and safety!

But lest it should be in vain, if I only speak to you, I shall direct my words
unto him who is Lord over all.

And oh that he who works, and none can let ^r hinder, would work a through
saving change in you! Oh that he would pity those among you, who are unto your
selves cruel! Oh that he would awaken the souls, that are not only asleep, but
dead! and break the hearts which have made themselves as an Adamant stone! Oh
that he would convince you of your sin and misery, and effectually turn you
from the one, that you may be for ever freed from the other!

To these Petitions let every heart say, Amen!

Use V. Of Direction.
I would believe by this time, that you are willing to hearken unto, and
likewise follow some directions, how to become sincere Converts. Directions how
to get ease when you are in pain; how to recover health, when you are sick; or
an ^^tate which you have lost, I am confident would be heeded. And are not
directions from the infallible word of truth, how to be turned and saved, of
far greater consequence?

The Directions are these which follow.
1. Think upon, and with a serious spirit consider your ways. This
Consideration had great influence upon the Psalmist, Psalm. 119. 59. I thought
on my ways, and turned my feet unto thy testimonies. I made haste and delayed
not, etc. That injunction is doubled, Hag. 1. 5. And again, v. 7. Thus says
the Lord of hosts, Consider your ways. And that passage, Ezekiel. 18. 14. is to
be observed. Now lo, if he beget a Son that sees all his fathers sins which he
has done, and considers and does not such like, etc. If sinners would but
consider what they do, when they do evil, it would be a means to make them
cease to do evil, and learn to do well. Consider the misery and danger of being
at a distance from God. The ways which naturally you walk in, do lead you away
from him; and the Scripture says, Those that are far from God shall perish, he
will destroy all them that go a whoring from him, Psalm. 73. 27. Think of these
things so long, till you find your hearts affected, so as to conclude it height
of madness to lie secure in an unconverted state. Let this thought take deep
impression. All the while thou persistest in thy evil ways, thou for sakest
the Lord, and forsakest thy own mercies, and art traveling apace to the
regions of eternal woe and darkness.

2. Study the vanity of former excuses. I know the natural man's mouth is very
full of them, but it is very easy to answer them.

Sin, thou say, is rivited in thy very nature.

Therefore thou had need to cry to heaven, that thy nature may be changed,
and to be made a new creature.

But sin is the commune practice.

Therefore thy danger is the greater, and thou should be the more careful,
lest thou be overwhelmed in that r^in that will be so general.

But my lusts are both profitable and pleasant, and why then should I abandon
them?

Consider soul whether the damned who have lost their souls and eternal
blessedness, and suffer the vengeance of eternal fire, have any reason to boast
of gain or pleasure?

But men will deride and scorn me, if I become a Convert.

They that do so are besides themselves, and sober people use not to be
concerned at the laughter of such as are out of their wits. Oh contemn their
contempt, despise the shame they cost upon you; shortly they themselves will
wish, that instead of scorning at, they had been imitators of you.

But to turn unto and follow God is very hard, and the difficulty is a very
great discouragement.

The work is hard indeed, but the strength and assistance is great, which shall
be afforded. The Lord will work all your works in you and for you, Isa. 26. 12.
He commands nothing, but what he is ready to help you to perform himself.

But if I am a Convert, I shall never live a pleasant hour; my tears will be my
meat and drink, and my sorrows my perpetual companions.

Oh gross mistake! and unreasonable prejudice against the ways of holiness! If
godliness be so melancholy a business; why does the Scripture tell us of peace
which passes all understanding, and joys that are unspeakable and full of
glory? Why is David so often singing, so often harping, if mirth and Religion
were (...), altogether inconsistent.

Oh but if I turn, I shall be exposed to suffering.

Well, suppose thou art, the sufferings of this present time are not worthy to
be compared with the present grace and consolation, which will attend thy
trials, much less with the glory that shall be revealed.

Study the vanity of all such excuses.

3. Save your selves from the untoward generation you live among. This was the
advice the Apostle gave to them that had been awakened and pricked in their
heart, Act. 2. 40. You must shake hands with your former brethren in iniquity,
else they will be a great temptation and snare to you. Carnal company are
incarnate devils, who endeavor to draw as many as they can to Hell along with
them. Therefore the wisest of men does use so many words of caution, Prove. 4.
14, 15. Enter not into the path of the wicked, and go not in the way of evil
men; avoid it, pass not by it, turn from it and pass away. Though you are not
bound to be morose and uncivil toward the ungodly, take heed of being
delightfully familiar. Many a conviction and good resolution has cooled and
vanished, by our lighting into the society of the wicked. Suck not in any
prejudices from them against true piety; and when they presume to prate against
prayer, hearing, fasting, professing, when they quarrel against the Lord's day,
and censure the Lord's people; look upon all this, but as the ravings of such
as are in a spiritual sense distracted.

4. Despise not Prophecyings. The Ministry of the Word is ordained on purpose
to work faith, and to turn sinners unto God; and therefore let not drowsiness,
distraction, cares, or pleasures, or lusts, or the deceitfulness of riches
choke this Word, and hinder it from prospering to this end whereunto it is
appointed. When Ezekiel prophesied over the dead and dry bones, they presently
revived, and a valley of dead bones became a living Army. And who knows while
thou art prophesied over, by the Ministry of the Gospel, but of a sudden thou
may be made alive, who wast dead in trespasses. Let powerful preaching be
prized and frequented by you: Certainly the word has a converting power when
it is set home, Psalm. 19. 7. The Law of the Lord is perfect, converting the
soul; the testimony of the Lord is sure, making wise the simple.

5. Quench not the Spirit, 1 These. 5. 19. His conviction you must not stifle,
but improve. The Spirit of the Lord sometimes approaches very near unto a
drunkard, a swearer, a covetous worldling, an unclean person, and tells them,
the way they take it is perverse before him, that there is but a step between
them and death, between them and damnation; and therefore moves them to
humiliation, and to reformation. He informs them they had better leave their
sins, than be undone for their sake. Now such convictions might be heightened
into Conversion, if they were but closed with, and improved. But thousands
resist the holy Ghost; they had rather be permitted to sin without disturbance,
than to have the waters troubled, though upon stepping in, they might be
healed, what ever their spiritual malady and plague be. Do thou find the
Spirit near thee; Oh heed his checks, comply with all his motions, and beg that
thou may not be put off with commune operations; but that a saving work may
be wrought in thee!

6. Lay hold upon and plead the Lords own Covenant. In this Covenant he has
engaged to give you a new heart, to cleanse you from your filthiness and your
idols; to put his Spirit within you, and cause you to walk in his Statutes;
that is, in one word to convert you, Ezekiel. 36. 25, 26, 27. Be earnest that
these promises may be accomplished. Resolve to take no nay, the Lord will be
pleased with your importunity, in a matter which it is so much for his own
honor to grant you. You cannot turn your selves, but he can as easily do this
work, as leave it undone. One word of life and power will raise you. And since
he says, Turn ye, turn ye from your evil ways, for why will ye die, O house
of Israel; presently make this Text into a prayer. Turn us, turn us from our
evil ways, for why should we die, O thou God of Israel!

FINIS.

