A WARNING GIVEN TO Secure Sinners, TO Prepare for Judgment, TO Flee from Wrath
to Come, AND Turn from All Sin; BUT Especially the Sin which does most easily
beset them.

By NATHANAEL VINCENT, M. A. Minister of the Gospel.

Ezekiel. 33. 7. O Son of Man, I have set thee a Watchman unto the house of
Israel, therefore thou shall hear the Word at my Mouth, and warn them from Me.
LICENSED,

March 17th. 1688.


LONDON, Printed by J. Astwood for Tho. Parkhurst at the Bible and three
Crowns, at the lower end of Cheap Side, near Mercers-Chappel. 1688.

THE Epistle to the READER.
Reader!
WHen I Preached these following Sermons, I had not the least thought of
Publishing them: They were taken from my Mouth by a dexterous and nimble hand
that wrote almost every Word I uttered: I was very much solicited to Print
them; and the Notes being written out fair, and brought to me, I have looked
them over, and now they are presented to thee, with a sincere Design that they
may be beneficial to thee, and not without Hope they will be so. The Subjects
here handled are awakening; and in this secure Age, what need is there of
startling Sermons! At this day in England, there is work enough for many a
Boanerges, for ten thousand Sons of Thunder.

The guilt and defilement of Sin, proves it to be Man's greatest Enemy; but
because it stupifies and hardens those that have been guilty of it, it is
likely the more effectually to destroy them; for the Disease not being felt,
the Remedy is neglected. A spiritual Lethargy is the general Distemper, most
continue fast asleep in Sin, till Hell wakes them, but then it is too late.
Though Christ has the Key of Hell, that Savior releases none that once are
thrown into it. Miserable World, because it lies in Wickedness! more miserable,
because it apprehends not how miserable its Wickedness has made it! because it
fears not, it endeavors not to escape Eternal Misery!

Oh dreadful Day of God that is coming! when all Apostate Angels that are now in
Chains of Darkness, shall be brought forth and judged, and dealt with as the
Enemtes of God and Man: These Principalities and Powers will be overpowr'd, and
utterly unable to avoid the severity of their Righteous and Almighty Judge: How
much evil have they done, and still they are doing more! of what Woe and
Torment are they capable!

And all those of the Children of Men who have been led Captive by Satan at his
Pleasure, that have resolved rather to be destroyed themselves, than that the
works of the Devil should be destroyed in them, it is just that they should, but
how sad will it be for them, to share in Torment with him! Sin will have a very
bad end; all that are gone into another World, are sensible of it, though few
in this World perceive it. When the Servants of Sin have received their Wages,
which is Death; then they will know to their sorrow, what kind of Master they
have served, and what Pains they foolishly took for that Misery, which they
should have taken Pains to have prevented.

Reader!

Be wise, believe and fear, and take the Watchman's Warning: The Sword in the
Hand of the living Eternal God will give a dreadful and a deadly Blow; to fall
under his Vengeance will be fearful; and thy Blood lying upon thy own Head, it
will lie very heavy, and upon this will follow everlasting heavines and
anguish. Oh fear the Wrath to come before it is come, and fly from Sin, nnd come
to God by Jesus Christ, a Savior both from Sin and Wrath, and a Savior to the
uttermost. Better Counsel than this cannot be taken by thy self, or given by
any to thee.

N. V.

ROMANS XIV. 10. latter part. -- We shall all stand before the Judgment Seat of
Christ.
I Have been lately Discoursing concerning Conversion: The Digression I make
this day, is subservient to my great Design, which is the Conversion and
Salvation of this Assembly: It infinitely concerns you all to turn to God, for
quickly you will have a Summons to come unto his Bar, and how soon that Summons
may be given, who can tell? Those that least think on it, and least care to be
provided and ready for it, perhaps may have it soonest; and if the Converts
themselves, as the Scripture tells us, are scarcely saved; Oh where shall the
Unconverted and the Sinner appear? I wish that I may Preach and you may Hear,
as those who do really believe we shall all stand before the Judgment seat of
Christ.

The Apostle in these words speaks enough, one would think, to startle the most
stupid Conscience, to make the most secure, like Felix to tremble; to awaken
even those that are dead in Sins and Trespasses. Let me tell you, the Devils
themselves are none of them Atheists and Infidels, they all believe this Text,
and the thoughts of Judgment make them tremble; therefore if any Sinner remains
fearless and unsensible, he does in this respect out sin the very Apostate
Angels.

There are three things observable in the Words.

1. Here is a Judgment Seat, the most glorious that ever was, the last that
ever will be; from this Tribunal there can be no Appeal unto any other, the
Sentence whether of Absolution or Condemnation that will here be passed, will
never be reversed, but stand firm unto Eternity.

2. You are told who is to be the Judge, he is the Lord Jesus Christ. We read
of a twofold Appearing of Christ, his first and his second Appearing: He came
at first in the form of a Servant, he was to be made Sin, and he was made Sin
and a Curse for us: He gave himself for us, that he might redeem us from all
Iniquity; and if he had given other and less than himself, it would not have
satisfied. The Churches Sins could be done away by no lower a Priest, than
Christ the greatest and highest of all; and the Priest was sain himself to be,
and that a most voluntary Sacrifice. He appeared at first to put away sin by
the Sacrifice of himself; but when he comes the second time, to Judge the
World, he will appear after another kind of manner: From the beginning of the
World, there has not been such a sight as there will be at the end of it. The
Lord Jesus will come with a Power which none can withstand, with great Glory,
which will fill the Saints with Joy; for they shall appear in glory with him,
but will be exceedingly amazing and confounding to all those who were the
Enemies of his Kingdom.

3. Here are the Persons that are to stand before this Judge; if you ask, Who
are they? I Answer by another Question, Who, or where are the Persons that
shall be exempted? All from the beginning of the World to the end of it, All
from the first Man that was made, unto the last of his Posterity that shall be
born, must stand before Christ the Lord, that from his Mouth they may receive
their final and eternal Doom. There is a great difference between standing
before the Judgment Seat, and standing in Judgment; the former implies being
made to appear at the Tribunal, the latter implies being Acquitted there. The
Psalmist tells us, That the ungodly shall not stand in the Judgment, nor
Sinners in the Congregation of the Righteous, Psalm. 1. 5. yet all of these
shall be forced to appear at the Bar of God, there they shall stand trembling,
expecting the terrible Sentence of Condemnation: And Oh what a hideous Outcry
will the whole multitude of Wicked and Reprobate Ones make, when without hope
of Mercy they are adjudged to endless Misery!

Doct. The Doctrine I raise from the Words is this, All shall be Judged by
Christ at the great Day: As certainly as you are all here, so certainly at that
day you shall appear at his Judgment Seat. Death is not more certain, nay, it is
not so certain as Judgment. The Apostle tells us that, all shall not Dye, for
some shall be Changed; but even these that are changed, though they escape the
Grave, they shall stand at the Tribunal, and give account of themselves unto
God. This Doctrine concerning Judgment, was Preached early in the World; we
find 'twas Published before the Flood of Noah, as you may see, Jude v. 14, 15.
where you have the sum of a Sermon, but a very terrible one, Preached by
Enoch the seventh from Adam; Behold the Lord comes with ten thousands of his
Saints, to execute Judgment upon all; and to convince all that are ungodly
among them, of all their ungodly deeds which they have ungodly committed, and
of all the hard speeches which ungodly Sinners have spoken against him. Under
the Mosaical Dispensation, the Children of Israel heard the same Doctrine: That
great Prince and Preacher Solomon, thus concludes his Book of Ecclesiastes,
having displayed the Creatures Vanity, having taught Man his Interest and Duty,
To fear God, and to keep his commandments; he closes with these words, Chap.
12. ult. God will bring every work into Judgment, with every secret thing,
whether it be good, or whether it be evil: And how plainly does the Apostle
Paul speak to the same purpose, 2 Cor. 5. 10, 11. For we must all appear before
the Judgment Seat of Christ, that every one may receive the things done in his
body, according to that he has done, whether it be good or bad; knowing
therefore the terror of the Lord, we persuade Men.

In the handling of this Doctrine, this is the Method I shall observe.

First, I shall Discourse concerning Him that is to be the Judge.

Secondly, I shall speak concerning the Persons that are to be judged.

Thirdly, Concerning the things that shall be brought into Judgment.

Fourthly, I shall demonstrate the Certainty of this Judgmont*

And then in the last Place make Application.

In the first Place I am to Discourse concerning the Judge, and the Text
plainly tells us, that the Judge is Christ: The Father I grant, is said to
judge, 1 Pet. 1. 17. If ye call on the Father, who without respect of persons
judges according to every man's work, pass the time of your sojourning here in
fear: Yet it is said in another place, The Father judges no man, but has
committed all judgment to the Son, Joh. 5. 22. How shall these Scriptures be
reconciled? The reconciliation is easy, thus; the Father judges, because the
Authority of Judging belongs to him, because he does Consent unto the Sons
Judgment, and has ordained him to Judge the World in Righteousness; the truth
is, the Father Judges all, but it is mediately by Jesus Christ: And yet in
another sense the Father judges not, because Christ the Son, the second Person
in the Godhead alone, was incarnate and manifested in the Flesh, and He alone
will visibly Judge the World at the great approaching Day.

These four things may be observed concerning Christ the Judge.

He is a Savior to the uttermost.

He is the Only Savior.

He is Lord of all.

And as such a Lord, he will come with a most glorious Attendance.

1. Christ the Judge is a Savior to the uttermost, and really at the
Judgment-day he will complete the Churches Salvation; he began it here in this
World, and still is carrying it on; but the last day will be the day, in which
he will put his last Hand to this Work, and make it perfect, Heb. 9. 28. Christ
was once offered up to bear the sins of many, and unto them that look for him
shall he appear the second time, without sin to Salvation; then Salvation shall
be consummate, the whole of it shall be wrought, nothing of Sin or the sad
effects of it shall remain, nothing that shall cause the least frown in the
Face of God to eternity: Death will be swallowed up in Victory, the whole Man
will be glorious and immortal; Christ will then have completed his whole
Design upon all his Saints and Members, he will have made them as holy and
happy as he did intend to make them, he will indeed present his Church a
glorious Church, not having spot or wrinkle, or any such thing; but it shall be
all holy, and its Beauty without the least blemish, Ephesians. 5. 27.

2. Christ the Judge is the Only Savior, therefore those that are Condemned by
Him, it is in vain for them to expect Salvation from any other: Christ is the
only Foundation-stone on which all that build shall stand; other Builders are
foolish, and build upon the sand, and what they build will fall, and great will
be the fall of it. They that are not intersted in the Lord Jesus by Faith, that
are not Justified by his Blood, who besides can save them from Wrath? those
whose Iniquities are not done away by his offering up of himself without spot
to God, there can be found no other Sacrifice for their sins, but a certain
fearful looking for of Judgment, and fiery indignation that shall devour the
Adversaries: And how dreadful will it be to be Sentenced to Death and
Damnation, by the only Author of Salvation and Life! they that by his Mouth
shall be doomed to eternal Destruction, that Destruction will be made ten
thousand times the sorer by eternal Desperation: Alas, what Hope can be left,
when the Lamb of God, who alone can take away Sin, shall be so full of Wrath,
as for ever reject and cast away the Sinner?

3. Christ the Judge is Lord of all; this is a truth that the Tongue of an
Angel did Proclaim, Luke 2. 11. a truth that every Tongue should confess, Phil.
2. 11. that every Heart ought to believe, and which the most unbelieving and
obstinate at last shall be made to know. Christ has on his Vesture, and on his
Thigh, this Name written, King of Kings, and Lord of Lords, Rev. 19. 16. He has
all Power in his hand, things in Heaven, and Earth, and under the Earth are
subject to him: Those that are wise do willingly how before him, and they who
will not bow, he can easily break and dash them to pieces. A mighty Lord Christ
is, at whose Command Death shall deliver again all that for so many years he
had imprisoned in the Grave; he has indeed the Key of Death and Hell too, Rev.
1. 18. both are under his Power; at his Command also the Heavens shall pass
away with a great noise, the Elements shall melt with fervent heat, the Earth
also and the works therein shall be burnt up: There is no dealing with this
Judge by way of resistance; it concerns us all to be diligent, that we may be
found of him in peace, without spot and blameless, 2 Pet. 3. 10, 14.

4. Christ the Judge will come with a most glorious Attendance: How awakening
to the World will the Voice of the Archangel and the Trump of God be! Christ
will appear with a light far above the brightness of the Sun, not a Member of
his but shall shine like that glorious Luminary, Mat. 13. 43. Then shall the
righteous shine as the Sun in the Kingdom of their Father: And what a spectacle
will all the Saints together be, as so many millions of Suns shining at Once,
and their Lord in the height of Glory at the head of them! He will be revealed
also with his mighty Angels; these excellent Spirits at his Command, ministered
unto his Members on Earth, and they will wait upon the Head at the day of his
appearing and his Kingdom. There is much Work for the Angels to do at the
Worlds end, they are compared to Reapers that are safely to gather the Wheat,
and to bind the Tares in bundles for the fire, Mat. 13. 41, 42. The Son of Man
shall send forth his Angels, and they shall gather out of his Kingdom all
things that offend, and them which do iniquity, and shall cast them into a
furnace of fire; there shall be weeping and gnashing of teeth. The greatest
Train of Nobility and Courtiers that attend at the Coronation of the highest
Emperor on Earth, are but a poor show to an innumerable Company of Angels; for
all in Heaven will be with Christ at Judgment, to do him honor who is indeed
the Head of all Principality and Power. Thus of the Judge.

In the second Place I am to speak of the Persons that are to be judged: The
Text takes in All therefore none shall be exempted, and none in a vain and
foolish imagination should exempt themselves: It will be a general Assize, at
which all the Sons and Daughters of Adam shall appear.

1. The highest and greatest of Men will be brought to Judgment: Death makes
bold with them as well as others, and enters the stateliest Palaces, the
strongest Forts, as well as the Cottages of the meanest. The Rulers and
Conquerors of the World, that caused Terror in the land of the living, yet they
are made to bear the shame of their Weakness and Mortality; they are brought
down to the Pit, their Swords are laid under their Heads, their Hands being
able to hold them no longer, Ezekiel. 32. 27. And if Death is not afraid to seize
them, surely Christ will not be afraid to Judge them. This mighty Lord regards
not the persons of Princes, nor the rich more than the poor; Job 34. 19. I have
said ye are Gods, speaking to the great Ones of the World, but ye shall dye
like Men, Psalm. 82. 7. Princes are greater Worms, other Men are lesser, but all
must call Corruption Father; and when they come to stand before Christ's bar,
foregoing earthly Dignity will be insignificant, all must stand upon even
ground: And truly those great Ones of the World that have abused their Power,
and by a bad example drawn many to Sin and to Hell after them, their greatness
will but Increase their Account and Misery.

2. As the greatest, so the Meanest must be brought to Judgment, though there
is never so vast a multitude; God takes notice of them all now, and none of
them must think to ofcape in a crowd then: The Apostle speaks plainly of
Individuals, Romans 14. 12. So then every one of us shall give account of himself
to God: Those that live most private and retired, are under Gods continual
Inspection; they that are of the lowest rank and quality, whom, there are that
disdain so much as to look upon, yet God sees them. The Sun shines upon a
Molehill as well as upon a Mountain, upon a Shrub as well as upon a Cedar,
upon a Fly as well as upon an Emperor; and truly the All-seeing Eye of God
beholds the low as well as the high, and there is not any one of them all, but
shall be made to render an account of all his doings.

3. Righteous Ones must stand before Christ's Judgment Seat: All his Members
must appear before Him their Head, but shall be dealt with after a different
manner from others; Grace and Love makes a difference now, but how highly
magnified will the Grace of Christ be in the difference it makes at that Day?
to find Mercy of the Lord in that day, which the Apostle Prays Onesiphorus
might find, 2 Timothy 1. 18. when the greatest part of the World shall with a
strong hand, the Ear being deaf to all their cries, be turned into everlasting
fire; this is great Mercy indeed, great as the Heaven is high above the Earth.
The Righteous shall appear, but they shall be set at their Lords right hand, to
show his peculiar Favor to them, and they shall joyfully own what that Hand
has done for them. Christ's Appearing will be glorious, and so will be the
appearing of his Saints; then 'twill be understood what it is to be a Saint,
Col. 3. 4. When Christ who is our life shall appear, than shall ye also appear
with him in Glory.

A Question is here started by some, Whether the Sins of the Righteous shall be
then made known? The Scripture plainly tells us, That when the Sins of such
come to be sought for, there shall be none, and that they shall not be found;
none of them shall be imputed or laid to their charge, none shall be so
discovered in Judgment, as to rise up in Judgment against them, to Condemn
them: But since there will such a light shine at that day that will make all
things manifest, both good and evil, suppose the Iniquities of the Righteous
should be made known to the whole Creation, such will be their Purity, such
will be their Blessedness and Joy, that there will not be the least room for
shame or sorrow at the discovery: But when all the Sins that have been Forgiven
and Purged, shall be revealed, others as well as themselves will be filled with
Wonder at the Blood of Jesus, and the powerful Grace of God.

4. As the Righteous, so the Wicked must stand before Christ's Bar; they would
fain not come thither, but there is an irresistible Power to force them. The
Malefactor who is Condemned for Murder, Rape, or Treason, would fain decline
the Judges View, he is Self-condemned, and therefore fears the Judges Sentence;
but the Jailer, the Officers compel him to the Bar, where Judgment is given
against him to take away his Life. Wicked Men will be horribly afraid to make
their Appearance before the Lord Jesus, whose Salvation they have flighted,
whose King^om and Government they would by no means submit unto; they will wish
that their Bodies might sleep eternally in their Graves, and never have such a
Resurrection which will be only to Damnation; they will wish rather to be
turned into Nothing, than to be turned into Hell; they will call to the Rocks
and the Mountains to fall upon them, to hide them from the Face of him that
sits upon the Throne, and from the Wrath of the Lamb, Rev. 6. 16. But will
they, nill they, they must appear at his Seat, and see him Eye to Eye, though
his Eye will be as a flame of Fire to terrify them: That just Indignation that
sparkles from Christ's looks, how will it amaze them! Rev. 1. 7. Behold he
comes with Clouds, and every eye shall see him, and all the kindreds of the
earth shall wail because of him, even so Amen; the thing is certain.

5. They that never heard Christ's Gospel shall be brought to Judgment: He is to
Judge the Church, and the whole World in Righteousness. The State of those that
are without the Gospel, is set forth as very sad in Scripture; they are said to
be without Christ, being aliens from the Commonwealth of Israel, and strangers
to the Covenants of Promise, having no hope, and without God in the World, Ephesians.
2. 12. Yet it seems to me an unwarrantable boldness, to pronounce them all
lost; since for ought we know, God may help some of them to be faithful in that
little he has given them; but however, be it, or be it not so, their Case is so
dangerous, that we should be concerned very much for them at present, and Pray
that God would make known his saving health among them. The Apostle tells us,
what will be the Rule of Christ's proceedings with the Heathen, that never
heard of the glad-tydings of Salvation; they shall be judged according to the
Law and Light of Nature, Romans 2. 12. As many as have sinned without Law, shall
also perish without Law, and as many as have sinned in the Law, shall be judged
by the Law; for not the hearers of the Law are just before God, but the doers
of the Law shall be justified.

6. They that have enjoyed the Gospel, and the means of Grace, shall be brought
to Judgment; and of all persons that are to be judged, these have largest
account to give; and the most Talents to answer for. A poor Heathen, he has but
one Talent, the dim Light of nature; but thou that enjoyest the Gospel, have
two, if not five Talents to improve: And where much is given, will not much
also be required; you that hear Christ Preached, had need to look to it, that
you sincerely obey him now; and that you may stand before him at last; for if
you fall in Judgment, you will fall very low. Damnation will be great and
extraordinary, where great Salvation has been neglected, Heb. 2. 3. Our Lord
Jesus plainly intimates, that there are degrees of Torment in the place of
future punishment; there is a blacker Darkness, and a Darkness not quite so
dima: there is a cooler and an hotter Hell. Who are those that shall be thrown
into the hottest Hell of all? Truly those who heard the Gospel, and were called
to repent and believe; but would do neither, Mat. 11. 21, 22, 23, 24. Woe unto
thee Chorazin, woe unto thee Bethsaida, for if the mighty works that were done
in you, had been done in Tire and Sidon, they would have Repented long ago in
Sackcloth and Aslies: but I say to you, it shall be more tolerable for Tire
and Sidon in the day of Judgment, than for you. And thou Capernaum, that art
exalted unto Heaven, shall be cast down to Hell; for if the mighty works which
have been done in thee, had been done in Sodom, it would have remained to this
day. But I say to you, it shall be more tolerable for the Land of Sodom in the
Day of Judgment, than for Thee.

In the third place, I am to speak of the things which will be brought into
Judgment, and that both with respect to the Righteous, and with respect to the
Wicked.

I begin with the Righteous; and concerning these you must know,

1. Their Sincerity at the day of Judgment, will be made apparent. All the
Sincerity that has been on Earth, will then be owned and approved; every one
shall have an Euge, a Commendation, that has been a good and faithful Servant,
Mat. 25. 21, 23. The Apostle prays for the Philippians, Chapter 1. 10. that they
might be Sincere, and without offense till the day of Christ. Sincerity will
signify much in that Day: None will pass for sincere, but those that are so.
Not one that has been sincere, but shall be accepted and rewarded. Faithful
ones may now possibly he loaded with Reproaches from without; and with Censures
from within the Church; but at the great Day, all will be wiped off, 1 Cor. 4.
5. Judge nothing before the time, until the Lord do come, who both will bring
to light the hidden things of darkness, and make manifest the Counsels of the
Hearts, and then shall every Man have praise of God. How many that have been
highly esteemed among Men, will be discovered then to have been unsound at
Heart; and that the World and Self did act and rule them; tho their Tongues did
speak for God, and tho they made a Splendid Profession, that they were his
Servants. And how many that have been hardly thought of by Men, will Christ at
that day confess before his Father and the Angels? their Censurers at the same
time being ashamed and confounded.

2. There will Cognizance be taken of all the good works of the Righteous.
These will follow them into another World, Rev. 14. 13. The Apostle, that he
might encourage Believers unto diligence, tells them, Heb. 6. 10. God is not
unrighteous to forget your Work and Labor of love, which ye have showed
toward his Name. Good works are rewardable, tho they are not Meritorious:
there is no proportion between the work and the reward, but the reward
infinitely exceeds, for God himself is the reward of the Saints, and All in all
that are in Heaven. There is no intrinsic worth in good works to deserve
Heaven; but God has promised Heaven and eternal Life, and is Righteous in
bestowing it; but still it must be acknowledged his free Gift, and given
through Jesus Christ. Indeed, Mat. 25. 35, 40. mention is made only of works of
Charity and Mercy. I was an Hungered, and ye gave me Meat, Thirsty and ye gave
me Drink, I was a Stranger, and ye took me in. I was Naked, and ye clothed me;
Sick, and ye visited me. I was in Prison, and ye came to me. From hence you are
to learn how acceptable such works as these are; and you should be stirred up
to abound in them; but other works are not excluded; for afterward our Lord
does only mention the mercilesness, and uncharitable Omissions of the wicked;
and yet it is plain from other Scriptures, that their other Sins will be
punished; their not knowing God, their disobedience to the Gospel of Christ, 2 Thessalonians. 1. 8.

3. The Sentence which will be past upon them, will be a Sentence of
Absolution: they shall be absolved and acquitted openly before Men and Angels.
All their Sins will be forgotten, and buried; there will be an eternal
deliverance from the Curse. With what Admiration, Joy and Triumph will they
hear, Come ye blessed of my Father, inherit the Kingdom prepared for you, from
the Foundation of the World! Mat. 25. 34. What a Kingdom is that, that never
shall be moved! What a Crown is that, that is incorruptible! What gladness will
fill their Hearts, when the Crown of Life is put upon their Heads! The Sentence
being pronounced, presently 'twill be done according to this Sentence;
possession will be taken of the glorious Inheritance, they shall enter into
life Eternal, Mat. 25. 46. Thus of the Righteous.

I am to speak also concerning the Wicked; and as to these, you must understand,

1. All the works of wicked men will be brought into Judgment. All their sinful
Deeds will follow them to the Bar of God! they will rise with them, and against
them at that Day: when a Sinner shall appear, and all his Drunkenness, his
Whoredoms, his unjust and cheating Actions, all his evil Deeds of every fort,
shall surround and appear with him, before the Holy and Righteous Judge! How
will he be amazed at the sight of all his Transgressions! How will he tremble
to hear how loud they cry for Vengeance upon him! Not a deed of Darkness, but
then will be brought to light, to his greater confusion!

2. Not only the Works of the Wicked, but their very Words shall all be
accounted for. The Judge himself speaks this very plainly, Mat. 12. 36. But I
say unto you, that every idle word that men shall speak, they shall give an
account thereof in the day of Judgment. By idle words may be meant words
useless and unprofitable to the Speakers and to the Hearers; or idle and vain,
according to the Hebrew use, may signify, false, deceitful, lying. God does
hear all words at present, Psalm. 139. 4. There is not a word in my Tongue, but
lo, O Lord, thou know it altogether. And words which very much declare what
most abounds in the Heart, must be answeerd for at last. And if unprofitable
talk will then be condemned, how sad will be the Case of all obscene and filthy
Speakers! of all egregious Liars! of all injurious Slanderers and Back-biters!
of all Blasphemers, cursing cursed Swearers! of all whose impious Tongues have
made bold with the Blood and Wounds of God their Judge, and instead of serious
praying, have most presumptuously called upon, and dared God to Damn them!

3. As the works and words, so the Thoughts of wicked men shall be brought into
Judgment. Thoughts are Sins, and need forgiveness; and ought to be repented of.
Memorable is that which Simon Peter says to Simon Magus, Act. 8. 22. Repent
therefore of this thy wickedness, and pray God, if perhaps the thought of thy
Heart may be forgiven thee. If these are not repented of and pardoned, alas,
these also must be charged upon Sinners; vastly to the increasing of their
punishment. How innumerable are the Thousands of thousands, the Millions of
Millions of vain and wicked thoughts, desires and lustings that have lodged in
the Hearts of the ungodly! The heart searcher sees every one of them; and will
make them know at the last day, that he remembers all. Proud and Self-conceited
Thoughts, and touring imaginations; impure and lascivious Thoughts, and inward
boiling of Concupiscence; insatiable Covetousness, and eager projects for
filthy gain; the stirrings of Envy, Malice, Anger and Revenge; the Judge will
take notice of all; for he knows what is in Man, Joh. 2. 25. It will be a large
Bill of Indictment, where Deeds, Words and Thoughts are all written down from
first to last, and not so much as one forgotten. The opening of the Book of
Gods remembrance where all are recorded, will be very amazing.

4. The Sentence that will be past upon the wicked, will be unconceivably full
of horror, Mat. 25. 41. Then shall he say to them on the Left Hand, Depart
from me ye Cursed into everlasting Fire, prepared for the Devil and his Angels.
For Him, who is the way to come to God, to say Depart! to God, to say Depart!
to depart from Christ, the Sinners only Hope and Savior! to depart with a
Curse! to depart into Fire, the Extremity of Torment! to depart into
everlasting Fire! to be tormented without any intermission or end! to be for
ever in such evil and hateful Company, as Devils and damned Angels! this is
woeful beyond all utterance! And this Sentence as soon as passed, will be put in
Execution. Now indeed, such is the patience of God, Sentence against an evil
work is not speedily Executed; and therefore such is their Malignity and
Ingratitude, the Heart of the Sons of men is fully set in them to do Evil,
Eccles. 8. 11. But at the great day, as soon as the wicked are Sentenced, they
will be sent, and forced to go away into everlasting Punishment, Mat. 25. ult.
the words (...), everlasting Punishment or Torment, are remarkable; for here it
is necessarily implied, that the wicked shall certainly be to Eternity, that
they may be Punished and Tormented to Eternity; and they shall be sensible
(else it would not be Torment) of the Punishment they undergo. By eternal
Destruction, you are not to understand eternal Annihilation, or being turned
for ever into Nothing: for if a wicked Man should altogether cease to be, he
must needs also cease to be punished. For it is no more a Punishment to be
nothing to Eternity, than it can be called a Punishment to have been nothing
from Eternity. Wicked men must be for ever, and alas they must bear for ever
the Lord's Vengeance and Indignation. I speak thus terribly, not without bowels
of Compassion toward you. I would fain fright you by telling you of Wrath, and
the Vengeance of eternal Fire, that you may never, never feel it.

In the Fourth place, I am to demonstrate the certainty of this Judgment. If
Faith concerning it were but more strong; what an Influence would it have upon
the Hearts and Lives of them that do believe it! The Arguments to prove a
future Judgment are these.

1. Are there not fears of this Judgment impress't even upon natural
Conscience? What Is the reason, that when Men commit the most secret wickedness,
that is very unlikely to be known; there is notwithstanding a dread upon their
Spirits? The true reason is, Conscience tells them there is a God, that sees
what Man does not see, and that he will judge and punish the wickedness of
which Man takes no notice. This Doctrine of a Judgment to come, of future
Rewards and punishments, is written in the heart of Man by Nature, and he is
fain to offer great violence to his own Soul, before he can wear off what is
written there; and tho a Sinner become ordinarily very Stupid and Atheistical;
yet the thoughts and fears of Judgment, will sometimes, in spite of him return
upon him. The Apostle speaks of Conscience bearing witness, and Thoughts
accusing and excusing; and then presently speaks of the Day when God shall
judge the Secrets of Men by Jesus Christ, Romans 2. 15, 16. Conscience judges at
present, and hints a future judgment.

2. There is not such a Discrimination made in this World, between the
Righteous and the Wicked, as is suitable to the difference that Grace has made
between them: Therefore there is a Day coming, when there will be such a
Discrimination. Solomon tells us, that in the course of Divine Providence at
present, no Man can know either Love or Hatred by all that is before him. All
things fall alike to all; there is one Event to the Righteous and to the
Wicked, to the good, to the clean, and to the unclean; to him that Sacrifices,
and him that Sacrifices not; as is the good, so is the sinner; and he that
Swears, as he that fears an Oath, Eccles. 9. 1, 2. Nay, often times the
worst of men have in this present Life the best on it. We read, Luke 16. of a
wicked Rich Man receiving his good things, clothed in Purple and fine Linen,
and faring Sumptuously every day. A poor Man ready to starve for Hunger, was
laid at this Rich Man's Gate, his Body was full of sores, and yet this Man's
Soul was sanctified with Grace; a good Man he was, though here he received evil
things; since thus it is now, there is a day coming when 'twill be otherwise.
Job having spoken of the Prosperity of the Wicked in this World, strongly
argues that in the next World there will be a dreadful after-reckoning, Job.
21. 30. The Wicked is reserved to the day of destruction, they shall be brought
forth to the day of Wrath: This is the day I am speaking of, a day of the
revelation of the righteous Judgment of God, Romans 2. 5. Who then will render to
every man according to his works to them that by patient continuance in well
doing seek for glory, and honor, and immortality, eternal life; but to them
that are contentious, and do not obey the truth, but obey unrighteousness,
indignation and wrath, tribulation and anguish upon every soul of man that does
evil, of the Jew first, and also of the Gentile, v. 6, 7, 8, 9.

3. Christ has Promised his Church that he will come again to Judgment, and
has raised her hopes and expectations of his coming, Rev. 3. 11. Behold I come
quickly, hold that fast which thou have, that no man take thy Crown: Heb. 10.
36. For yet a little while, and he that shall come, will come, and will not
tarry. He thus speaks to his Disciples, Let not your hearts be troubled, ye
believe in God, believe also in me; I am indeed about to leave you, but I go to
prepare a place for you; and assure your selves, I will come again, and receive
you to my self, that where I am, there may be also, Joh. 14. 1, -- 5. Christ is
the Amen, the true and faithful Witness, he will certainly be the Judge. The
Church will assuredly see him at last upon the great White Throne; and her self
safe and triumphant at his right hand. When he comes, how will he be glorified
in his Saints, and how will he be admired by all Believers in that Day! 2 These.
1. 10.

4. There are several things that are hastening Christ's coming to Judgment: The
World grows old in Wickedness, and all the Sins of the World have tongues to
cry for the appearing of a Judge, to pay their deserved Wages; the World grows
riper and riper for Vengeance, dryer and dryer for that Fire that is to burn
it. The Church of Christ is also hastening Christ's Appearing, with their
incessant Cries, Come Lord Jesus, Come quickly, Rev. 22. 20. The Spirit and the
Bride say, Come; not only unto Sinners to come to Christ, but unto Christ
himself to appear, that he may put an end both to Sin and Suffering: That Is the
longing and language of the Spouse, Cant. 8. 14. Make haste, my Beloved, and be
like a Roe, or a young Heart upon the mountains of spices: And this is not the
Voice only of the Church on Earth, but they in Heaven wish for, and entreat the
same thing; How long, Lord, holy and true! is heard from the Souls under the
Altar, Rev. 6. 10.

In the last Place I come to the Application: I begin with Inferences from the
Doctrine.

1. If there will be a Day of Judgment, hence I infer, that there is a present
Providence: Will the Lord judge all at last? surely he observes all now. The
Lord Jesus would have all the Churches, to know as well, that he searches the
Reins and Heart, as that he will render to every man according to his Works,
Rev. 2. 23. Whether thy Eye be upon God or no, his Eye is never off from thee;
it is indeed in every place, beholding the evil and the good: What a foolish
Creature have thou reason to call thy self? who considerest not in thy heart
that God remembers all thy Wickedness, Hos. 7. 2. and Gods remembrance at last
will rub up thine; and what thou now forgettest, will sadly be recalled to thy
Mind.

2. Shall all be Judged? hence I infer the Love of God to the Righteous, and
his hatred of Iniquity: Not one righteous Man, but shall be acquitted and
received by the Judge; not a righteous action, or sincere intention, but shall
be rewarded: It will be found at the last day, that a Widows Mite given with a
Charitable spirit, and according to the ability, was a great deal in Gods
Treasury; and that a Cup of cold Water given to a Disciple, in the Name of a
Disciple, was well taken, and shall not go unrewarded, Mat. 10. 42. And there
has not been, there is not a Wicked Man on Earth, but his Sin that has been
hunting and pursuing to overthrow him, will then find him out, Psalm. 11. 5, 6.
because the Lords Soul hates the workers of Iniquity; therefore upon the wicked
he will rain snares, fire and brimstone, and an horrible tempest, this shall be
the portion of their Cup: By fire, and brimstone, and tempest, understand a
sudden, grievous, surprising and intolerable Punishment; and by snares
understand, that they in Hell shall never be able to extricate themselves out
of that Misery into which their Wickedness has brought them.

3. If all shall be Judged, hence I infer the truth of the Doctrine of the
Resurrection: The whole Man has sum'd, the whole Man shall be judged and
punished for sin: Believers are sanctified both in Soul and Body, therefore in
Body and Soul they shall be gloryfied. The dead shall rise again, all that are
in the Graves shall hear the Voice of Christ, and shall come forth; they that
have done good to the resurrection of Life, they that have done evil to the
resurrection of Damnation, Joh. 5. 28, 29. The Grave is only a prison for a
time, not a Body that is there that shall lie there always; the same Body that
was employed in the unfruitful works of darkness, shall be raised by the Power
of the righteous Judge, to share in the demerited Punishment: And the same Body
of the Saints, the Members of which were used as Instruments of Righteousness
unto Holiness, by Virtue of its Union with Christ, shall rise again, and be
made like unto Christ's glorious body, according to the working whereby he is
able to subdue all things to himself, Phil. 3. 21. It is not another Body: I
grant that qualities are altered, but the substance is the same, therefore the
Apostle does not stick to say (...), (...); This corruptible shall put on
incorruption, this mortal shall put on immortality; so when this corruptible
shall have put on incorruption, and this mortal shall have put on immortality,
then shall be brought to pass the saying that is written, Death is swallowed up
in Victory, 1 Cor. 15. 53, 54.

4. Will there be a Judgment, it is wonderful there should be so much security
in them that hear of it: Really the very mentioning of Christ's Tribunal, before
which all must stand, should make all Criminals to tremble. If a Man were
seized for a Crime that is capital, deserving Death by the Law of God and Man,
and being in Bolts and Fetters in Newgate, he should be secure and unconcerned,
though the Sessious were at hand, you would conclude him to be very stupid and
inconsiderate. What, Sinner, secure! and shortly to be Judged! O Drunkard!
Whoremonger! Swearer! Sabbath-breaker! Covetous Worldling! what, secure! and
speedily to appear at the Judgment Seat of Christ, who has said, That they that
do such things, shall not inherit the Kingdom of God! Sin is folly, security in
Sin is the folly of that folly: Take heed of Security, it is not I only, but
Christ himself also that gives you this necessary caution, Luk; 21. 34, 35, 36.
And take heed to your selves, lest at any time your hearts be overcharged with
surfeiting and drunkeness, and the cares of this life, and so that day come
upon you unawares; for as a share shall it come on all them that dwell on the
face of the whole earth: Watch ye therefore, and Pray always, that ye may be
accounted worthy to escape all those things that shall come to pass, and to
stand before the Son of Man.

USE II. By way of Counsel. Two words of Counsel I would give this Congregation.

The one is, more firmly to believe a Judgment, and more frequently to think of
it.

The other is, Be sure in time to prepare for eternal Judgment.

1. More firmly believe, more frequently think of Judgment: You have reason to
believe it, for the Judge is ordained, and though neither Men nor Angels know
the day, yet the day is appointed, Act. 17. 30, 31. The time of this ignorance
God winked at, but now commands all men every where to repent, because he has
appointed a day in which he will judge the World in righteousness, by that Man
whom he has ordained, whereof he has given assurance unto all, in that he
has raised him from the dead. The stronger your assent is unto this, the more
serious and often will be your Consideration of it.

To think of Judgment is proper for a Saint, that he may be encouraged to fight
the good fight of Faith, and persevere in well doing to the end.

To think of Judgment is proper for a Wicked Man, to awaken him, and to make
him with fear and trembling to work out his Salvation.

It Is proper for an Hypocrite to think of Judgment, because then all Masks and
Vizours will be pulled off, all shows will be at an end, and naked Truth will
appear at that day: The Graves will be opened, and do ye think the whited
painted Sepulchers will remain shut? Oh! then all the concealed Pride, and
Filthiness, and Selfishness, and Sensuality, and Injustice, and earthliness of
Professors, will with all their aggravations be brought to light before Men and
Angels: Oh, how many demure and serious Countenances, that have been a covering
to naughty Hearts, will then be filled with Confusion!

It Is proper for the Old to think of Judgment; they have one foot in the Grave
already, and quickly the whole body must drop into it, and the Spirit must
return to God who gave it. You also that are Young should think of Judgment;
have the youngest of yoa any assurance of your Lives? Infants, Children,
Youths, do not many of them dye and step into Eternity? and as you see them
leave the World, so certainly they appear before God, and one way or other have
their Doom.

Solomon tells you, that Childhood and Youth are Vanity: Would you that are
Young be serious? the Meditation of Judgment would conduce much to it, Eccles.
11. 9. Rejoice, O young Man, in thy Youth, and let thy heart cheer thee in the
days of thy Youth, and walk in the ways of thy heart, and in the sight of
thine eyes: He says, Rejoice, but speaks Ironically, and means the quite
contrary; thoa have no reason at all to rejoice, whilst thou walk that are
seen, and whilst thou walk in those evil ways which thy Heart naturally does
like: Then the Wise man speaks seriously, But know thou, that for all these
things God will bring thee to Judgment.

If you ask me, What are the Benefits that will accrue by a firm Belief, and
frequent Meditation of Judgment? I thus Answer to this momentous Question.

1. This will be a great Preservative against Temptation: Look beyond the
present advantage and delight that Sin boasts of, and see as far as the
Judgment Seat, this is the way to silence the Tempter, and to avoid his share:
Would the Liar dare to speak falily, if he considered, that all Liars shall be
adjudged to the lake that burns with fire and brimstone, which is the second
death? Rev. 21. 8. Would the Unclean Person dare to desile himself, and run to
the Harlots house, if he did but believe and consider that it boremangers and
Adulterers God will judge? Improve Christ's Cross, and think of Christ's
Tribunal, and this will cool and kill Corruptions, and take away the force of
your Temptations.

2. The Belief and Meditation of Judgment will cause you to use this World as
not abusing it, to make a good improvement of it. You that have this World in
great abundance, and have the clearest and largest Estates; do you think you
are Proprietors of what you have? Do you think it is given or only lent you for
a time? You are only Stewards entrusted with that which is Gods and not yours,
and are accountable at the last day for all you have received. What sad
accounts will most give up of their Stewardship; when they must be no longer
Stewards! Imprimis, So much daily for Eating and Drinking to Self, and not to
the Glory of God. Item, So much for brave Apparel, that Pride might be
maintained and gratified. Item, So much for making provision for the Flesh, to
fulfill the Lusts thereof. Item, So much for costly and vast Past-times; a great
deal of Wealth, and much more precious Time being wasted together. But unto
good uses, to maintain a Godly and laborious Ministry of the Gospel, to the
poor and needy, given very little or nothing. With what an Eye do you think
that the Judge will look upon such accounts as these? Think of Judgment, that
you may holily improve the unrighteous Mammon, and Christ may say you have been
Faithful Stewards, even of worldly things.

3. The Belief and Meditation of Judgment, will make you exceeding diligent,
that you may be found of your Judge in peace, without spot and blameless. With
what Seriousness and Fervency will he come to the Throne of Grace, that has the
Judgment Seat also in his Eye? How will he hear and practice, that remembers he
must be called to an account, how he has done both? He will take care to be
ready whenever his Lord calls, and that whenever his Lord comes. he may
find him doing the Work he set him about, and so doing it as He commands.

2. The other word of Counsel is this, Be sure in time to prepare for Eternal
Judgment: Do this seriously, do it presently, and as your main business. That
you may prepare indeed,

1. Be Accusers and Judges of your selves; take notice of your Sins, with
Grief, with Hatred, and holy Indignation! accuse your selves of them before
God, with self-loathing and self-abhorrency. Look down by Faith into the lowest
hell, and see the terrible but righteous Severity, that is shown there against
obstinate workers of Iniquity; then look up to God, and judge your selves in
his sight, acknowledging that you have deserved one of the hottest places in
that Lake of Fire. Acknowledge he would be clear in the sorest judgment he
should pronounce upon you, and that He would be justified, tho you should be
damned eternally, Psalm. 51. 4. This judging of your selves, is the way to
prevent Condemnation with the World, 1 Cor. 11. 31, 32.

2. If you would be prepared for Judgment, believe in Jesus, that you may the
justified before God at present. Receive Christ, who is offered in the Gospel;
rely upon his Obedience and Sufferings for justification of life. And being
justified by Faith, you shall have Peace with God through our Lord Jesus
Christ, Romans ^5. 1. Being justified by his Blood, you shall be Saved from wrath
through him, Romans 5. 9. What does ponere obicem, put a Bar before Hell Gate,
and hinder us from falling into that place of Woe? The Cross of Christ, that is
the Bar; you are to place your Confidence in Christ Crucified: If justified by
him now, he will ratify the justification at the last day, and you shall not
be condemned then, Romans 8. 33, 34. Who shall lay any thing to the charge of
Gods Elect? It is God that justifies. Who is he that Condemns? It is Christ
that dyed, yea, rather that is risen again; who is at the Right Hand of God,
and makes Intercession for us.

3. Would you be prepared for Judgment; Repent and be converted; let your minds
be changed, and turn to God with your whole Heart. This is the way indeed to
stand before him, Acts 3. 19. Repent and be converted, that your Sins may be
blotted out, when the times of refreshing shall come from the presence of the
Lord. The Apostle looks as far as the last day. Blotting out of Sins, is
Christ's absolving and acqutting them from all Trespasses. The time of
refreshing, is that great day of complete and glorious Redemption, when all
that are Christ's shall lift up their Heads with Joy: Repent and be converts in
Truth, if you would have that a day of refreshing, and not of confusion. Walk
after the Flesh no longer, but after the Spirit; then you need not be afraid of
Condemnation, your being guided by his Spirit, will show you are in Christ, and
safe in Him, Romans 8. 1. There is therefore now no Condemnation to them that are
in Christ Jesus, who walk not after the Flesh, but after the Spirit; to be
carnally minded is Death, but to be Spiritually minded, is life and peace.

USE III. Of Terror to the ungodly, the Hypocrites and the Unbelievers; Christ
will judge them all, and they may tremble to think what kind of judgment they
shall have: what sharp and piercing words are those, which declare beforehand
what will be their Doom, Mat. 23. 33. Ye Serpents, ye Generation of Vipers, how
can ye escape the Damndtion of Hell? That I may, if it be possible, awaken
such, I would lay before them these terrifying considerations.

1. When they appear at Christ's Bar, all their secret wickedness will be made
known. How many will then be found what they were not in the least suspected!
Thy secret wantonness, and Self-pollutions; thy secret injustice and
desrauding; thy secret abominations, of all kinds, will then be as visible to
every Eye, as if written in Capital Letters with the brightest Sunbeam. And
what sname and confusion will cover the wicked Man's Face! they that are
impudent, and cannot boush now; how will they be confounded then! The truth is,
as the Prophet Daniel speaks; They will rise to shame and everlasting contempt,
Dan. 12. 2.

2. At the day of Judgment it will be too late, and in vain for the wicked to
pray and cry for Mercy; they will find the Lord eternally removed from the
Throne of Grace, and to their Terror behold him on the Judgment Seat. If the
Ungodly roar out, then, Lord pity! Lord pardon! Lord, send us not away into
that flaming Furnace that me see before us! it will be altogether in vain: but
it is not in vain to cry thus now. Oh, seek the Lord while he may be found, and
call ye upon him whilst he he is near, Isa. 55. 6.

3. It will add to the Terror of the Wicked, That the Sentence of Condemnation
is pronounced by the Only Savior: The merciful and faithful High Priest, that
now is so forward to make Reconciliation for Sin, that is so ready to give rest
to them that labor and are heavy laden. The Man Christ Jesus will have no pity
at all, no compassion toward the Reprobate Children of Men; but deal with them
as with the Apostate Angels, whose Nature be never took upon him. The only
Peacemaker will himself be so incensed, and full of Wrath, as not to be
entreated, not to be appeased. The Sentence of Eternal Death, and enduring
everlasting Burnings, will be confounding; but 'twill add to the Confusion,
that a Redeemer does pronounce it.

4. After the Judge has passed the Sentence, Conscience will pronounce it over
again, and will be a Judge to the Wicked, always condemning them. Conscience
will be filled with unspeakable remorse; it will continually be upbraiding them
with their madness and folly in keeping their Sins, and losing their Souls; and
will ever be telling them, that the Lords ways toward them are equal, but
their own ways according to which they are Judged, have been unequal, and full
of Iniquity, Ezekiel. 18. 29, 30. The Conscience of Sinners will side with their
Judge against them. It will tell the most wretched among the Damned, that they
cannot complain of God, or of the least injury he has done them; all that they
suffer, they suffer justly; and what they suffer, they have brought upon
themselves. The horrible and perpetual remorse of Conscience, will prove that
the Worm never dies, that does torment them.

5. When Sinners come to be condemned at the last day, how many things will
rise up in judgment against them? (pray mind this, and minding tremble, and
trembling turn to God this very instant.) Thousands of Mercies will come, and
as it were plead thus: Lord! we have been all abused, we never met with any
thing but abuses, and never could lead these men to Repentance! The Rods of
Affliction will have a Voice against them too. Lord! we have stricken Sinners
often, we have made them Bleed and Groan, and smart exceedingly for their
Iniquities; but could never make them leave off Sinning against Thee, and
against their own Souls! How many Sermons will rise up in judgment against
them; because they either slept them away; or if they were awake, they suffered
them to slip out of their Memories, and never applied them to their Hearts! And
as for us, the Ministers of the Gospel, our Testimony against them will be true
and terrible Lord! we lifted up our Voices like Trumpets; we gave them the
Watchmans Warning, we told them of the Sword that was coming, and that if they
turned not from Sin, it would surely slay them: we wooed them to come to Jesus,
that under his Wing they might be secure; but nothing would prevail; their Ears
were deaf, their Hearts they hardened, they would not be converted and made
clean, they would rush on in Sin still, they would needs Dye, and there was no
helping it! The Condemnation must needs be dreadful, when so many things rise
up against them that are condemned!

USE IV. Of Consolation to the Saints. I must speak to them in another strain.
Lift up your Heads, and let your Hearts be filled with Joy; all ye believing,
repenting, humble, holy, heavenly-minded Ones! for the Day of your Redemption
draws nigh, with an earnest expectation wait for it, and Triumph at the
Thoughts of your great and everlasting Jubilee. You will indeed behold the
greatest part of mankind turned into Hell; but what Joy will it be to find your
selves for ever safe and fully blessed! A dark Shadow sets off a beautiful
Picture. The sight of the Rich man in Hell Flames, must needs make Lazarus to
find a greater sweetness in Abraham's Bosom!

Two Grounds of Consolation I shall propound to you, and so conclude.

1. He is to be your Judge, that is your Husband and your Head. The very same
whom you now find interceding for you in Prayer; whom you see walking in the
midst of the Golden Candlesticks, and blessing his Ordinances to you. The very
same whom you have found pitying, and healing your Wounds with his own Blood;
succouring you in your Temptations, and telling you that you are the Beloved of
his Soul! And since he is to Judge you, be comforted. He will behold you with
an aspect, that is highly favorable! His own Spouse, whom he has ransomed with
his own Life, Christ will not turn into devouring Fire! He will not take the
Members of his own Body, and throw them into everlasting Burnings! Having
Redeemed them by his Blood, having renewed and Sanctified them by his Spirit;
having raised them up at the great day; certainly he will receive them to
himself, and they shall be ever with the Lord, 1 These. 4. 17, 18. wherefore be
comforted with these words.

2. You that are true Believers, whose Faith purifies your Hearts and works by
Love; know that there is a Crown designed for you. The Diadems that Monarchs
have upon their Heads; the Triple Crown of Him at Rome, is but a Trifle to the
Crown of life. This Crown is purchased, it is promised, it is prepared; and
shortly you shall put it on, and never put it off more. How Splendid, how
Bright, how Sparkling, will that Crown be! It Is called a Crown of Life, for
Death shall be no more. A Crown of Glory, for the Saints shall be more than
Conquerours, and Triumphant over all Enemies, and be advanced to the highest
Honor and State, whereof they are capable. Finally, it is called a Crown of
Righteousness; it is a Righteous thing with God, to bestow it through Christ
Jesus, and perfect Righteousness and Purity will be a great part of the
happiness of Saints in Glory. This Crown the Apostle saw to his great
encouragement, and he would have all other Believers comforted with the same
sight, 2 Timothy 4. 7, 8. I have fought a good Fight, I have finished my Course, I
have kept the Faith; henceforth there is laid up for me a Crown of
Righteousness, which the Lord the Righteous Judge shall give me at that Day,
and not to me only, but unto all them also that love his appearing.

MAT. 11. 23. Form. Part. And thou Capernaum, which art exalted unto Heaven,
shall be brought down to Hell!
Our Lord Jesus is called the Lamb of God who takes away the Sins of the World:
But in this Lamb there is Wrath, and that Wrath is very terrible. Oh the weight
of the Mediators Vengeance! This Wrath is threatened against the impenitent and
unbelievers, who refuse to be Saved from their Sins, resolving to live, tho
they Dye in them. The Light of the Gospel being neglected, highly aggravates
the Works of Darkness; makes them more inexcusable, and a greater provocation.
None shall fare worse at the Day of Judgment, than those that have had the
longest and the clearest day of Grace; but would not know in that their day,
the things which belonged to their Peace. Thou Capernaum which are exalted unto
Heaven, shall be brought down to Hell.

These words which I have read, do speak Christ's sorrow and his displeasure,
wherein you may take notice,

1. Of the Persons with whom he is displeased, Thou Capernaum; the City is put
for the Inhabitants of it.

2. Here is the Reason of Christ's displeasure; they did not understand the
great privilege of being Exalted unto Heaven; they did not improve the
advantage they had of getting thither.

3. Here is a Punishment threatened, a sore evil; and that is no less than Hell
it self.

4. Here is the manner specified of their going to Hell; thou shall be brought
down to Hell, with a strong Hand, with great Wrath, and in one of the hottest
and lowest Places there thou shall lie for ever.

There are two Doctrines which I raise from the Words.

First, Those that hear the Gospel, are exalted unto Heaven: Happy you, if you
understand your Privilege which at this day you enjoy.

Secondly, They who will not turn to God at the Gospel-call, shall certainly be
turned into Hell: Thou Capernaum, who art exalted unto Heaven, shall be brought
down to Hell; and if Christ says it shall be so, most certainly it will be so.
The first of these I shall but just touch upon, for it is the second that I
principally purpose to Prosecute.

Doct. 1. The first Doctrine is this; They that hear the Gospel, are exalted
unto Heaven. The Gospel is an heavenly Calling, Heb. 3. 1. it comes from
Heaven, and says to those that hear it, Come up hither.

1. Life and Immortality is brought to light by the Gospel, 2 Timothy 1. 10. Here
you have a Map of those happy Regions of Light, and Love, and Joy; where there
is nothing present that is burdensome, where there is nothing wanting that is
desirable.

2. The Gospel plainly chalks out the way that leads to Life: Christ is the
way, the truth, and the life, Joh. 14. 6. the true way to life indeed: We have
liberty to enter into the holiest of all, by the blood of Jesus: had it not
been for his undertaking, and performance of what he undertook, there had been
a flaming Sword at Heavens gate, and no fallen Man could ever have entered
there. And as Christ, in whom we are to believe, is the way, so is also
Holiness: Christ by his Blood has purchased the heavenly Inheritance, and has
bought the Saints themselves that are to be the Inheritors; and it is by his
sanctifying Spirit, by true Holiness, that they are made meet for that
Inheritance. The pure in Heart, and such will be likewise pure in Life, are the
blessed Ones that shall see God, Mat. 5. 8. and who besides are desirous or fit
to see the Lord?

3. Heaven in the Gospel is offered; it is seriously, freely offered unto All;
it is offered to the meanest Persons, it is offered to the greatest Sinners, and
that without Money, without Price: It Is indeed too good, too great a thing for
Man to purchase by any thing that he can give or do. Those have very low
thoughts of Heaven, and very high thoughts of their own Works, that think they
can do enough to merit Heaven. Eternal Life is the free Gift of God, not
deserved by Man; and it is given through Christ, Romans 6. 23. Had not Christ
procured it, fallen Men would all have been as certainly excluded as the fallen
Angels.

Briefly to Apply this.

1. Be thankful for the Gospel, which makes the richest discovery that ever was
made in this World; the East, the West Indies cannot show any thing comparable
to a blessed Immortality; the Jewels from the one, the Gold from the other, are
contemptible, when Heaven is named. The Gospel tells you where is the true, the
tried Gold, and of the Pearl which is of greatest price; and concerning a
Treasure in Heaven, which neither moth nor rust does corrupt, nor can thieves
break through and steal, Mat. 6. 20.

2. Let the Kingdom of Heaven suffer Violence, and do you use an holy force to
take it; here you will meet with great opposition; Heaven is that which
occasions the envy of Hell, because of its real and eternal Excellency, and
does very well deserve your labor. Let the Treasure in Heaven cause your
Hearts to be there, strive to enter in at the strait gate, hate every false
way, because it leads from Heaven, and toward Destruction; let the Hopes of a
Crown of glory make you willing to bear the Cross; look upon Sloth as most
absurd, when no less than Heaven will be given to them who show their diligence
in full assurance of hope unto the end: Press still forward toward the mark;
you cannot run too fast for such a Prize.

But I shall stay on this no longer: It Is the second Doctrine that more largely
I shall insist on.

Doct. 2. And that is this, Those that will not turn to God at the Call of the
Gospel, shall certainly be turned into Hell; 2 These. 1. 8, 9. They that know
not God, and that obey not the Gospel of our Lord Jesus Christ, shall be
punished with everlasting destruction from the presence of the Lord, and from
the glory of his power.

In the handling of this Doctrine, I shall,

1. Discourse concerning Hell, what it is, that you may the better understand
it; and understanding be afraid of it.

2. I shall prove the Certainty of the Doctrine, that Sinners who will not turn
to God, shall most surely be turned into Hell.

3. I shall Vindicate the Righteousness of God, in thus dealing with, and
eternally Punishing them that will not turn to him.

4. I shall conclude with the Uses and Application.

In the first Place I am to Discourse concerning Hell, and to show you what it
is. In Hell

There is a Deprivation of good.

There is an Infliction of evil, pain and torment.

There is an Eternity of both.

1. In Hell there is a Deprivation of good: All the temporal losses that have
been sustained by all the Children of Men in this World, are not comparable to
the Poena Damni, Punishment of loss, which one Sinner in Hell shall undergo:
Several things those in Hell are deprived of.

1. They are deprived of all that Love, and Grace, and Mercy that is in God:
The Psalmist that knew by experience the excellency of God's Lovingkindness,
affirms it is better than Life, Psalm. 63. 3. His Mercys are tender, and a
multitude, and sure to the Vessels of Mercy. How were those filled with
admiration, and with a sense of their obligation, Who in times past were not a
People, but were made the People of God; who had not obtained Mercy, but after
did obtain Mercy, 1 Pet. 2. 10. But alas, tho God be Love it self, 1 John 4. 8.
he has no Love for them that are in Hell, they lie under his Wrath and Hatred,
and both are unalterably sixth upon them: Though the Lord does delight in
showing Mercy, yet his Bowels do not at all stir or move toward the Damned;
though they lie in extremest Woe, and are continually weeping and wailing, yet
their Tears draw not forth his Compassions: He has cast them off for ever, and
will be favorable no more; he has forgotten to be gracious, and in implacable,
but righteous Anger, has shut up his tender Mercies.

2. They that are in Hell, are deprived of the beatifical Vision of God: The
door of Heaven they found shut against them, when they said, Lord, Lord, open
to us! and 'twill never be opened: They shall never be suffered to see him face
to face, but be always excluded from his Presence. What Happiness is there in
seeing God! how transforming and satisfying is this sight! Psalm. 17. ult. As
for me, I shall behold thy face in righteousness, I shall be satisfied when I
awake with thy likeness: But the Damned are not, never shall be admitted to
such a View; they are banished that glorious Presence, where there is fullness
of joy, and where there are pleasures for evermore: God has fixed a great gulf
between himself and them, and through that it is impossible for them to pass,
Luke 16. 26.

3. They in Hell are deprived of all hopes by a Mediator: Our Lord tells us,
That he came not into the World to condemn the World, but that the World
through him might be saved; and has given a large Commission to Preach the
Gospel, to offer that Grace and Salvation whereof he is the Author, to every
Creature, Mark 16. 15. The Lord Jesus now encourages all to come to him, that
they may have rest to their Souls, and life through his Name; and them that
come to him, he will in no wise cast out, Joh. 6. 37. and when they refuse to
come, he expresses great sorrow; he wept over Jerusalem, because she knew not
the time of her gracious Visitation. But when Sinners have finn'd away the day
of Grace, and ended all their days on Earth, and by their final Impenitency
brought themselves to Hell; then the same Chains are clapped on them, in which
the Reprobate Angels ly fettered, and Christ will no more save them than these.
Oh dreadful! to lose all hope in Jesus, never to be called to come to him more:
Astonishingly scarful! to be in a place where the glad tidings of the Gospel
are never heard, where the Spirit never strives, and where the Redeemer never
stretches forth an hand to save!

4. They in Hell are deprived of the glory of the new Jerusalem: It Is a mighty
loss, to lose such a weighty thing as a far more exceeding and eternal weight
of Glory, 2 Cor. 4. 17. Suppose a Rich Man, worth Millions, should break, and
not be worth a Farthing; suppose all the Kings and Emperors breathing, should
lose their Crowns in one day, this would be but a petty Loss, compared with the
loss of a Crown of Life: In Heaven there is such a Crown, and the Damned might
have had it, if they had but valued it; but alas! that Crown they must never
wear: In Heaven there is a Kingdom, where they in Hell must never reign: When
they see what they have lost, and how foolishly, wilfully, and for the sake of
what poor thing they lost it, how will they be filled with Hearttearing
vexation, and be quite overwhelmed with sorrow, Luke 13. 28. There shall be
weeping and gnashing of teeth; when ye shall see Abraham, and Isaac, and Jacob,
and all the Prophets, in the Kingdom of Heaven, and you your selves thrust out.

2. As in Hell there is a Deprivation of good, so there is an Infliction of
evil, pain and torment.

1. There is in Hell great torment in the Conscience: A wounded Conscience in
this World has been found intolerable. Spira, he signifies that Racks, Gibbets,
Flames of Martyrdom, were nothing to what he felt, and in a Pang of Despair
attempts Self-murthering; but being hindered, he breaks out into Blasphemy, I
wish I were above God, for I know he will not have Mercy on me: here was Hells
language in his Mouth, and much of Hell-torment in his Heart. Judas his
Conscience was wounded, could he bear it? No, he becomes his own Executioner,
with his own hand ends his Life, and sends his Soul to his appointed place: And
yet the torment of Conscience in this World, is but the Preoeludium, the
beginning of sorrows. Every Conscience in Hell will be thoroughly awake, and
keep it self for ever waking; it will be exactly sensible; not a Sin that has
been Committed all the lifetime, but will have made a Wound in the Conscience;
and not Wound but will be intolerably smarting, without hope of any ease.
Conscience will be in a perpetual Agony, in this Agony 'twill rage, and raging
it will reproach the Damned: It will tell them of their presumptuous sinning,
of their rejecting Christ, their neglecting great Salvation, and how all its
checking of them was in vain: And now it is incurably wounded, it can never be
quiet, but they shall always find it a tormented, a tormenting Fury within them.

2. There is in Hell, not only torment in the Conscience, but also torment in
the Mind and Heart: What rueful thoughts will posses their Minds! whatever they
think of will be torturing; a pleasing, a delightful thought can never enter
into them more: If they think of Sin, it will be bitter to consider how they
have been deceived and ruined by it: If they think of their present Misery, and
the remedliness of it, and that themselves had the greatest hand in bringing
themselves into it, these thoughts like daggers, must needs pierce their Souls:
If they think of God, Oh how will they be troubled! how will his Justice,
Jealousy, Fury, Holiness, Truth, irresistible Power, and Vnchangablen^ss
terrify them! Thoughts on Earth were their Sins, and Thoughts in Hell will be
their Racks and Sorrows; their Hearts will always be brim full of Grief. Shame
and Confusicn of face will add to their Misery, when all their wickedness shall
be known to all, which will make the justness of their Punishment. evident. And
how will they be tormented with Anger at the very heart, and Indignation
against themselves! because, though the Devil was their great Enemy yet they
themselves were far greater Enemies to themselves than he.

3. There will in Hell be torment in Sinners M^mories: I wish that none of you
that hear me thi^ day, may in that place of Woe, remember the Warning now given
you, to your Confusion, because you would not take it; hark what was said, Lu^
16. 25. Son, remember thou in thy lifetime received thy good things, and
Lazarus evil things; but now (...) is comforted, and thou art tormented: Really
the remembrance of what he had, what he was, and what he did on Earth, was in
Holl very tormenting to this wretched Rich Man. The Damned there, will remember
their delicious Fare, and how sensual and brutish they were in pleasing of
their Appetites; they will remember the time they spent in Adorning of
themselves, taking much Pains to dress and trick the Carcass, but no Pains at
all to purge the Heart; they will remember their Feasts, their Mirth, their
carnal Jollity, which quite stupefied their Hearts, and banished all thoughts
and care about another World and Eternity; they will remember all the Mercies
they enjoyed, which they did nothing but abuse to their own harm, as well as to
the dishonor of that God who gave them.

Above all, they will remember what Pains were taken to have prevented their
Destruction: The Lord was unwilling they should Perish, but Death was that
which themselves preferred before Life. Oh how long did Christ come, Sabbath
after Sabbath, and knock at the door, but they would not open! How often did
the Spirit strive with them, to stop them in Hells road, and to turn them into
the way of Peace, but they were stiff-necked, and always resisted the Holy
Ghost. They will remember their Preachers Pains and Prayers, and labor and
travel of Soul; how they lifted up their Voices, to awaken them out of their
Sin and Security; how they entreated them to be reconciled to God, and to turn
into the fate and blessed Paths of Righteousness; but they were Deaf and
obstinate, nothing would prevail with them, and the remembrance of all this
will be bitter, bitter, bitter to them.

4. In Hell there will be torment in the Body and the Members of it, and such
as no body ever felt, or was capable of bearing here on Earth: The Stone, the
Cholick and the Strangury, the greatest Torture that ever the hand of Man
inflicted, are no more comparable to the Pains of Hell, than the smallest Prick
of a Pin is to a Dagger that strikes quite through, and gives the Heart a
deadly Wound. The Senses of the Damned shall have that which will be
exceedingly afflicting: What woeful Spectacles will their Eyes behold! What
dismal Noyses will fill their Ears! how fierce and unquenchable are the Flames
that they shall feel! all their parts shall be in pain, not so much as one
free: The whole Body was defiled, and at Sins service, all the Members were
yielded as instruments of Unrighteousness; it is but righteous that all should
be Punished. Why are the Bodies of the Wicked raised at the last day? surely
that they may bear their part in the Condemnation, which the whole Man by Sin
has deserved. This Resurrection is certain, but it is a dreadful Resurrection,
which is a Resurrection to Damnation, Joh. 5. 29.

In these Torments you may well suppose that Death will be wished for, and that
the Damned would rejoice if they could find a Grave; but alas, after the
Resurrection, the first Death is no more. The Damned in a sad sense do put on
Incorruption and Immortality, they can never dye and cease to feel their Pains;
they must always live a Life ten thousand times worse than Death, and there is
no remedy. O you Wicked Men! where is your true Love to your Bodies, that you
seem to be so tender of? I beseech you mind your Souls, and love your Bodies
better, than by Sin to expose them to the Vengeance of eternal Fire. You see
how in Hell there is a Deprivation of good, an Instiction of evil, pain and
torment: I add,

3. In Hell there is an Eternity of both, the deprivation will be without Hope
of Restitution; and the Torment will be without any end, without the least
Mitigation. Eternity is an amazing word; the thing it self much more amazing!
Who can see to the end of Eternity! who can see half way into Eternity! Time is
continually passing; but Eternity never in the least spends: it is not capable
of any diminution; after myriads of Ages, it is still as bulky and whole as
ever. If Hell were Ten thousand times hotter than it is, yet were it but a
Temporal Punishment, and at last to end, 'twould be Nothing in comparison. But
since those that are thrown into it, must lie in it for ever, Hells Eternity is
the very Hell of Hell. In Eternity, whether of Joy or Woe, there is tota simul
and perfecta possessio, the whole of it perfectly possessed at once. Hell is
not parcel'd out unto the Damned, but they continually feel the whole of it.
This is terrible; there is not the least part of the punishment, that ever they
are exempted from undergoing: out it is much more terrible, that their Suffering
must be always, and never have a Conclusion.

Divines have stretched their Wits to represent Eternity, that apprehensions of
it might be more suitable and affecting, but were never able to reach it. We
can no more comprehend Eternity, than a Nut-shell can contain the whole Ocean.
Suppose that all this World were filled with Sand, from the Earths Center
round, and up to the highest Heaven; and once in a Thousand Years, one single
Sand should be taken away: How sad would it be to lie in Torment, till the
whole vnst heap were gone! But after so many Millions and Millions of Years,
for the Damned to be every whit as far from the End of their Misery, as they
were the very first moment they began to feel it; here all words fall short,
and I must conclude in Astonishment! Do not think that these are frightful
things invented by Us to scare you into better manners. When we warn and tell
you of the Eternity of Hells punishment, we speak the certain Truth of the
Eternal God.

In the second place, I am to prove the Doctrine; That they who will not turn
to God, shall most certainly be turned into Hell. The Arguments to prove this,
are these.

1. The first shall be drawn from the Wrath of God. This is revealed from
Heaven against all ungodliness and unrighteouness of Men, Romans 1. 18. They that
are called to turn, and yet refuse, that Wrath abides upon them still; unbelief
and impenitency binds, as it were all their Sins fast upon them, and they must
needs remain under Wrath also, Joh. 3. ult. He that believes not the Son,
shall not see life, but the Wrath of God abides on him. Nay, Wrath instead of
being appeased, is increased, by contemning the Gospel-offer of Gods favor and
mercy in Christ. And where will unpacified Wrath at length issue? See Deuteronomy. 32.
22. A Fire is kindled in mine Anger, and it shall burn to the lowest Hell.

2. A second Argument shall be drawn from the Truth of God. He has threatened
Hell for the punishment of unconverted Sinners, Psalm. 9. 17. The Wicked shall
be turned into Hell, and all the Nations that forget God: Let there be never so
many of them, Hell has room enough to hold them, and their multitude will not
be any Security. The Truth of God is engaged to make good all his promises to
the Faithful, and also all his threatenings to the Wicked A man must believe the
Promises in order to the accomplishment of them: But tho the Threatenings are
dis-believed, they will be fulfilled; and the greater the unbelief, the more
certainly and sorely will they overtake, and lay hold on the Unbeliever.

The Lord is to be credited when he speaks, because he is a God that cannot
Lie; but when he adds his Oath to his word, what he says is the more firmly to
be assented to. His Covenant of Grace is confirmed by an Oath, and when he
could Swear by no greater, he Swore by himself. And his Oath also confirms his
Threatenings of Wrath, Heb. 3. 18, 19. And to whom Swear he that they should not
enter into his Rest, but to them that believed not? So we see that they could
not enter in because of Unbelief.

3. Another Argument to prove, that unconverted Sinners shall be turned into
Hell, shall be drawn from their present Impunity. Escaping now scot-free, we
may conclude the greater certainty of a future reckoning. They that will not
turn to God, we see that many of them are in Health, at ease, enjoy peace and
plenty, and Sentence against their evil works being not now executed, and they
hereupon being fully set to do Evil; it is reasonable to believe there will be,
and it is very Righteous there should be a terrible Sentence of Condemnation,
and that Sentence put in Execution upon them in the other World.

4. They that will not turn to God at the Gospel call, shall be turned into
Hell, for they slight the only Savior. Christ calls himself a Door; so he has
been, from the beginning of the World; so he will be to the End of it. There is
no Door through which Hell can be escaped, but this. Unconverted Sinners will
not come to Him that they may have Life, Joh. 5. 42 therefore they are
unavoidably Siezed by eternal Death. Corruptible things, as Silver and Gold,
they know how to value, but the precious Blood of Christ is not prized, and not
being Sprinkled with the Blood of Christ our Passover, who was Sacrificed for
us; the Destroyer has power over them, and they fall into eternal Predition.

In the third place, I am to vindicate the Righteousness of God in thus dealing
with, and eternally punishing them that will not turn to Him: And here,

1. Let the Majesty and greatness of God be considered, against whom all Sin is
committed. How much greater a Crime is it to strike a Prince upon the Throne,
than to strike a Peasant! How much is Sin gratned, being committed against the
Highest Majesty of all, who is infinitely Superior to all other Powers, Psalm.
104. 1. O Lord, my God, thou art very great, thou art Clothed with Honor and
with Majesty! Psalm. 145. Great is the Lord, and greatly to be praised, and his
greatness is unsearchable. Sin is a Transgression of a Law, enacted by the King
of Heaven; and is indeed a disowning of his Sovereign Authority, as if he had
no right to rule the Sinner. Think of the infinite distance between the God who
is offended, and Man that is the Offender, and how much Sin offends; for it
disowns his Government, and strikes at his very Being; for the Sinner wishes
there were no God to be subject to. I say, think of all this, and you will
perceive that Sin deserves everlasting Punishment. The carnal Mind thinks Hell
too much for a Sinner to feel, because it measures God by it self, and thinks
too little of the Glorious Jehovah.

2. Sinners can never by all that they suffer themselves, satisfy for their
Iniquities; therefore their punishment in Hell is justly endless: No mere
Creature can make satisfaction for Sin. If Christ the Mediator, had not been
over all God blessed for ever, by his Death and all his Sufferings, he would
never have made Peace. His Godhead put a real and infinite value upon the
price he paid, and made it sufficient for our Redemption. The Damned in Hell
cannot satisfy the Justice of God for their Transgressions; therefore they
justly are kept eternal Prisoners there. It is above five Thousand Years ago,
that the Evil Angels were cast down to Hell; by the punishment they have
undergone, have they made any Satisfaction for their offenses? No, no, still
they have continued in their Enmity, and deserved more punishment. And from
Satan's utter alienation from God and all goodness, we may infer, that Hell is
not a place to mend any; but Sin is hight'ned; those that were had on Earth,
become worse in Hell, and are unalterably confirmed in Evil.

3. The punishment of Sin in Hell is justly Eternal, because Sin is insatiable.
Suppose a Sinner could live in this World to Eternity, there is corruption
enough in his Nature, to make him an Offender of God unto Eternity. If he were
an everlasting Liver upon Earth, he would be an everlasting Transgressour. If
the Carnal Heart would but speak out, that would be its Language: I would
desire no other, no greater happiness, than that I might live here for ever,
that I might Sin here for ever. This insatiable Nature of Sin, this inclination
and desire of the Sinner, is known to the Heart-searcher; therefore the
punishment he inflicts is very Righteous, tho it is everlasting.

4. For the Vindication of the Righteousness of God, take notice what has been
offered unto Sinners, and rejected. Christ is offered; his justifying
Righteousness, his unsearchable Riches; all his Fullness; all the Benefits which
he has purchased at so dear a Price, and yet the offer is made light of. How
much is contemned, when Christ is Contemned! and how much of Sin is there in
the Contempt! The blessed God in the Glorious Gospel, does call to Sinners to
turn to him; and what does he offer? His own all-sufficient-self. I my self am
yours, if you will turn to me, and become sincerely mine. I will be a God to
you, all my attributes shall be for you: I will be your Shield, and your
exceeding great Reward, and your Portion for ever! Now for a Sinner to turn a
Deaf Ear to all this, is such a Sin, as does deserve the Eternal loss of what
is offered; and the feeling of everlasting Wrath is just, since such infinite
and everlasting Goodness has been despised. I might also add, that the Sinner
is told of this Eternal Punishment beforehand; therefore if his Lusts are so
dear, that he will venture to be Damned, rather than part with them, when those
Lusts that War against his Soul have quite undone him, and brought him down to
Hell indeed, he cannot charge God with Injustice; but he must blame himself,
because when warned of Hell and Wrath, he would not fear and Flee from it.

I come now to the Applacation. I begin with some Inferences, that may be drawn
from the Doctrine.

1. If Sinners that will not turn, shall be brought down to Hell; certainly Sin
is another kind of thing than is commonly imagined. Oh Sin! how much art thou
mistaken! Thou art very little understood on Earth! In Heaven thou art better
understood by Saints, and full glad they are they are quite rid of thee! In
Hell thou art better understood by Sinners, and they must Groan for ever under
the weight of thee! O all of you, Study Hell more, if you would know Sin more
fully. Gods severity toward Man for Sin, argues it a very vast Evil. I am
persuaded, that all the Men upon Earth, that all the Saints and Angels in
Heaven, since they cannot comprehend the greatness and goodness of God, neither
can they comprehend all the Evil that is in Sin: And if God alone does fully
understand how Evil Sin is, he alone is the competent Judge what Punishment is
due to it. O exceeding sinful Sin! Romans 7. 13. thou can not be called by so
bad a Name, as thy own is!

2. Learn from hence the Misery of unconverted Sinners. Are there none
unconverted here? I wish there were not. Are there not many unconverted in this
place? I fear there are. Seriously consider in what state you are. You walk
upon the Brink of Hell; you Eat and Drink upon the Brink of Hell; in your
Shops, at the Exchange, you are still upon the Brink of Hell, when you lie down
at Night, you Sleep upon the Brink of Hell. Oh what Hearts are yours, that you
can Sleep securely! Is such a perilous State to be rested in? In such danger,
and depths of Misery, how should you cry to the Lord for mercy, Psalm. 130. 1.
David's words are proper for a Sinner to make use of, Psalm. 51. 1. Have mercy
upon me, O Lord, according to thy loving kindness, and according to the
multitude of thy tender mercies, blot out my Transgressions.

3. Hence I infer, That they who refuse to turn to God, are certainly besides
themselves, else the broken Cisterns would not draw them away from the Fountain
of living Waters; and a little gain and pleasure, would not make them venture
to lie in Flames unquenchable. God says, Turn ye, turn ye! Will you turn, or
will ye not? If you will, you shall live; if you will not, where are your Wits?
You are out of them in the worst Sense of all. The Lord now says, Turn, if ye
will not hear and obey, at last he will say Depart, and that word you must
obey, and be forced away from him into everlasting Burnings.

4. Shall Sinners be turned into Hell; then their Prosperity is not to be
envied or admired. It has been a Custom in some places, to grant to condemned
Malefactors, a Liberty to enjoy their Pleasures and Delights a few days before
their Execution; but alas, what did these signify to them that were to dye a
few days after? A fit Representation of the condition of the Wicked! They are
perhaps gaudily Clothed, and daintily Fed, and have more than Heart could
wish: But this prosperity is very short; they stand in slippery Places, and
quickly fall; they are brought to Destruction as in a moment, and utterly
consumed with Terrors, Psalm. 73. 18, 19. The ungodly do very much need our
pity; but nothing that they have is worth our Envy.

5. Hence I infer the happiness of sincere Converts. Many temporal Evils may
be their exercise at present; but Hells eternal Torments they shall never feel,
Romans 8. 1. There is no Condemnation to them that are in Christ Jesus, who walk
not after the Flesh, but after the Spirit. Whatever the Times are; in Eternity,
and to Eternity, it will be well with them. If Hell were Ransack't all over,
you might find Professors, Preachers, Princes, Nobles there; you might find
worldly Wise, and worldly wealthy a greatmany, but not one true Convert among
the whole Number. Converts are reconciled to God by the Blood of Christ, and
are safe and happy. Hell is a dreadful place, and has a very wide Door; but who
has the Key of it? The Key is not in Satan's, but in Christ's keeping, Rev. 1.
18. I am he that lives, and was dead, and behold I am alive for evermore,
Amen, and have the Keys of Hell and of Death. He will open the Door of Death,
that Converts Bodies may come out of the Grave; he will keep the door of Hell
fast shut, that Converts shall never be thrown in thither.

USE 11. Of Exhortation. That you would all consider more seriously, and
believe more heartily this Doctrine of Hell. Often think of the loss sustained,
and of the Torment felt there. It was the Advice of Chrysostom, (...): Let us
not fly the remembrance of Hell Torment, that we may never be Tormented there.
The believing consideration of Hells punishment, will have many good Effects.

1. Hereby the deceitfulness of Sin will be discovered. The deceitfulness of
Sin hardens you, Heb. 3. 13. Exhort one another daily, while it is called to
day, lest any of you be hardened through the deceitfulness of Sin. Sin pretends
to consult your ease, your safety, your satisfaction, your gain, your pleasure:
Think seriously of Hell, and all these will be found vain pretenses. Oh how
very false a thing is Sin! First you must prove Hell desirable, before you can
prove that Sin is worthy to be loved and served.

2. The Remembrance of Hell, will be a great Preservative against the Tempter.
Evil Angels are great Enemies to the good Word of God; especally they are
displeased at Sermons concerning Chrst and Hell; they are unwilling that Men
should know the Destruction Sin has brought them in danger of; unwilling they
should hear of a Savior and Deliverer. Think of Hell whenever you find the
Devil tempting. He endeavors to hide Hell from your Eyes, that he may lead you
secure thither. Satan tells the Intemperate Man, that makes himself a Beast by
excessive Drinking; that this is the way to Exhilerate and cheer his Spirits, a
Remedy against care and sorrow, and a means to make him merry. But he would not
have the Drunkard think of Hell, nor of the dreadful Cup of Gods indignation
without mixture, that will be put into his hand at the last day. Satan tells
the defrauding, over reaching Knave, that he will be a great Gainer by his
Subtlety; but he hides Hell from him, where none of his Gain remains, and where
eternal happiness, and an immortal Soul are lost for ever. Satan tells the
filthy Wretch, of the pleasures to be found in the embraces of the
well-favoured Harlot; but this he conceals; that going to her House, his Feet
go down to Death, and his Steps will soon take hold on Hell. It would be Wisdom
in you, and in all, to see how Sin and Hell are joined together. It would make
the Tempter lose his labor; if you would ever remember, that in Tempting you
to Sin, he does in effect only persuade to be willing for even to be destroyed.

3. The serious consideration of Hell, will quicken you to cry for Mercy. upon
the Sight of Hells misery, how desirable will Mercy be in your Eyes! You will
pray for this with all Prayer. God will find you in the Congregation, in the
Family, and in the Closet, making your servent Supplications; and Mercy will be
your great Suit. God delights in showing Mercy, Mic. 7. 18. The thoughts of
Hell will make you see how much you need it, and such fail not to obtain it.

4. The Remembrance of Hell will contribute much to your stedfastness in
Religion; 'twill fortisie and arm you against the fear of Man: how little is it
that the greatest Man, that the most of Men can do to you? to fall into the
hands of mortal Men, that can but kill the body, is no great matter; but to
fall into the hands of the living God, is fearful, Heb. 10. 31. Hark what our
Lord says, Luke 12. 4, 5. I say unto you my friends, be not afraid of them that
kill the body, and after that have no more that they can do; but I will
forewarn you whom you shall fear; fear him who after he has killed, has power
to cast into Hell; yea, I say unto you, fear him: Yes, he is indeed worthy to
be feared! It was a saying of one, Omnia supplicia, graviorum suppliciorum
vincuntur formi^ine; all Punishments are overcome by the fear of greater
Punishments. When thou art called forth to bear Testimony to Christ and to his
Truth, before a sinful and an adulterous generation; though thou see Wracks
and Wheels, though thou see Flames and Furnaces of scalding Lead, be not
affrighted at the matter; the Grace and Comfort of the Spirit of Christ shall
be sufficient to carry thee through these Pains; and these are nothing,
compared with the Vengeance of eternal fire, which will be inflicted upon those
that draw back unto perdition.

USE III. Of Direction: How this whole Congregation may escape the Damnation of
Hell. I hope every Eye is broad awake; and should not every Ear be open, and
every Heart exceedingly attentive, when Directions concerning this are given?
The Directions are these:

1. If you would escape Hell, think of Hell, the effect of Sin, so long, 'till
you utterly fall out with Sin the Cause: Sin is the only way that leads to
Hell, shun that way and you are safe: Depart from evil, and though possibly you
may become a Prey in this World, ye Satan shall not make a Pery of you. If Sin
had never entered into the World, none in the World would have been turned into
Hell; if neither Men nor Angels had sinned against God, there would have been
no such thing as Hell in being. Oh! View the Flames that are so furious, and
that will last for ever, and then consider Sin was that which kindled them, and
the demerit of Sin is so infinitely great, that it hinders them from being ever
quenched: Does thy Pride expose thee to Damnation? never be Proud more: Will
thy Earthly-mindedness bring thee to Hell? Oh cease thy loving the World, and
the things that are in the World! 1 John 2. 15. Will any Sin that rules in
thee, and that thou art willingly subject to, reign unto Death, and ruin thee
for ever? Oh be unwilling that any Sin should reign any longer; and if Sin be
out of thy Will, it is out of the Throne: Cry with David, Psalm. 119. 133. Order
my steps in thy Word, and let no Iniquity have the dominion over me. Weary you
must be of Sins dominion, as well as fear Hells Damnation: You must not think
to go to Heaven, and carry your beloved Lusts along with you thither; if you
are resolved to hold fast these, you and they will go to Hell together.

2. If you would escape Hell, take notice how the door of Hope is open to the
very worst of you: Those that are gone far in Hells road, and are within a step
of the burning Lake, it is possible for them to be catched as firebrands out of
the burning. The door is open to day, I advise you to enter presently; I cannot
assure you 'twill stand open 'till tomorrow; While it is called to day, harden
not your hearts, Heb. 3. 8. Though you are fallen by your Iniquities, yet if
you will Now return to the Lord, there is hope for the very worst of you; past
Sins shall all be buried, if there be a present Conversion. Redemption is
plenteous, and that should abundantly encourage all to Hope and Turn, Psalm.
130. 7, 8. Let I srael hope in the Lord, for with the Lord there is mercy, and
with him there is plenteous redemption, and he shall redeem Israel from all his
iniquities.

3. If you would escape Hell, you must be sure to look unto Jesus: Lord Jesus!
Turn every Eye to thee, and cause every Heart to open and receive thee! Those
that were stung with the fiery Serpents, lived notwithstanding, if they looked
unto the brazen Serpent: Those that are in danger of Hell, and have very well
deserved it, shall be delivered from it, if by Faith they look to Christ, Isa.
45. 22. Look unto me, and be ye saved, all ye ends of the Earth: Look unto him
for Pardon, look unto him for Converting, Cleansing and Renewing Grace; look
unto him to be the Author of true Faith in you, and having been the Author, to
be the Finisher of your Faith also, Heb. 12. 2. Christ was for saken, that you
might graciously be received by the Lord: He was Condemned to dye, and suffered
Death upon the Cross, that you might be delivered from eternal Death and
Condemnation; that this was his design is plain, Joh. 3. 16. God so loved the
World, that he gave his only begotten Son, that whosoever believes in him,
should escape Hell, and be brought safe to Heaven; should not perish, but have
everlasting life.

HEB. 12. Part of v. 1. -- And the Sin that does so easily beset us.
IN the foregoing Chapter, the Apostle discourses concerning Faith, which is
the substance of things hoped for, the evidence of things not seen: He declares
at large the wonderful and glorious effects that this Faith produced in the
Saints under the Old Testament: By Faith these Believers denied themselves; by
Faith they Conquered the whole World, not fearing its siercest Persecutions;
despising all its Wealth, all its Pleasures, all its Glory, and confessed they
were strangers and sojourners on the Earth: By Faith they saw Him that is
invisible, and looked for a City that that has foundations, whose builder and
maker is God.

Now in this Verse where my Text lies, the Apostle applies unto those believing
Hebrews to whom he writes, what he had spoken concerning their faithful
Forefathers: These are called a Cloud of Witnesses: Witnesses they were,
concerning what? truly concerning the Vanity of all things that are seen, that
are but temporal: Witnesses concerning the excellency of those things that are
not seen, which are eternal. They are styled a Cloud, because of the greatness
of their Number; and perhaps there may be some allusion to the Cloud in the
Wilderness, that guided Israel into Canaan: For though our Lord Jesus was
typisied by that Cloud, and he is the unerring Pattern and Example whom we are
bound to follow; yet in Scripture we are advised also to follow the footsteps
of the Flock; and in this very Epistle, to be followers of them who through
Faith and Patience inher it the Promises.

The Course of a Christian in this World is compared to a Race; this Race must
be run, that the Prize at the end of it may be obtained; and that we may run it
the better, we are removere prohibens, to remove Impediments, to lay aside
every Weight, and the Sin that does so easily beset us.

In the Words I have read, there are three things observable.

1. Here is an Inimation of a Danger, and that is from Sin: Sin and Danger are
inseparable; how can it choose but be prejudicial to him that is guilty of it!
you may as well imagine Hell to be without Pain, as Sin to be without Peril.

2. The greatest danger is from the Sin that does most easily beset us; it is
called by the Holy Ghost, (...), the Sin that hangs faltest about us: Some by
this understand Original Sin, the depravation and Corruption of Nature; some
understand the carnal and ensnaring Fear of Man: The Apostle arms the Hebrw
Saints against this, and would have them courageous, and if called to it,
resist even to blood, slriving against sin. But by the Sin that does most
easily beset us, we may understand any sin that does so: Yet when we take
notice of the Master-sin, which is most apt to prevail, we should by all means
trace it to its Original, and take notice of the corrupt Fountain from which
this strong and filthy Stream proceeds.

3. Here is the way how to be secured from Danger, by laying aside every
weight, and especially the greatest and the heaviest Clogg of all, the Sin that
does most easily beset us. Cast away every transgression, so iniquity shall not
be your ruin; but especially that which naturally you love best and more than
all, because this, this, is most of all pernicious and destructive.

Doct. The Doctrine which I raise from the words is this. Though all sin is to
be cast away, the Master-sin especially is to be abandoned.

In the handling of this Doctrine I shall,

1. Prove that all Sin is to be cast away.

2. I shall show you how the Master sin may be known.

3. Produce the Reasons, why this in a special manis to be forsaken.

And then in the last place make Application.

In the first place I am to prove that every sin should be cast away; and the
Argument to convince you of this, is in the Verse where my Text lies. Every Sin
is a weight, and a most unreasonable thing it is, that Men should be fond of
that which is burdensome and grievous. The weightiness of Sin, I shall
demonstrate in these particulars.

1. Sin is a weight to a softened and sensible soul; though a stupid
Transgressor feels Sin no more than a stone does a Mountain, that lies upon it;
yet when once the Heart of Stone is turned into a Heart of Flesh, Sin presently
becomes very burdensome. He that has a new Heart and a new Spirit given him,
will have new and other apprehensions of Sin, he will look upon Sin with
sorrow, and himself with self-abhorrency, Ezekiel. 36. 26, 31. A new Heart will I
give you, a new Spirit will I put within you. Then shall ye remember your evil
ways and your doings that have not been good, and shall loath your selves in
your own sight for your iniquities and your abominations. David could not make
light of sin, when once convinced of its evil by the Spirit; he grieves because
he had offended God; he fears his wrath that he had deserved; and earnestly
implores compassion and favor. His Sin lay very hard upon him, Psalm. 38. 4, 6.
Mine iniquities are gone over my head, as an heavy burden, they are too heavy
for me; I am troubled, I am bowed down greatly, I go mourning all the day long.

2. Sin is a weight unto the damned in Hell: that it is so, I know; but how
weighty, I cannot express, no mind on Earth is able to conceive. Sin is the
weight which has sunk all the Souls that are there into that place of Woe; and
because sin will ly upon them for ever, they shall never be able to rise up
under it. In Hell there is a full, a general, an everlasting Conviction, that
sin is heavy. If we could discourse with the rich Man, who as the Gospel tells
us is in Hell, and ask him, whether his Gluttony, Pride, contempt of God,
hatred of Holiness, are light or weighty? Oh! what would that Tongue that cried
out for a drop of Water, answer to such a question? Surely none in Hell can
make light of sin which brought them thither.

3. Sin is a weight which burdens the whole Creation. Hard-hearted Man groans
not under it, when the whole Creation besides does. The Creatures were made
subject to vanity, not willingly, but by reason of him who has subjected the
same in hope, Romans 8. 20. and v. 22. We know that the whole Creation groaneth
and travelleth in pain together even until now. And all these traveling pains,
they are the effects of Sin. Solomon in the Book of Ecclesiastes, uses several
very significant expressions: Vanity of Vanities, all is vaniny; and all things
are full of labor; Man cannot utter it. And again, there are many things that
increase vanity. When Sin entered into the World it made a sad alteration in it,
well may the Creatures groan under it; and though their pains are terrible,
pains of travel; yet because such pains, they are hopeful, and will issae in a
restoration, which will certainly be, for God has said it. He has told us thus
much, that the Creature shall be delivered from the Bondage of Corruption, into
the glorious liberty of the Children of God, Romans 8. 21. But the manner of this
Restoration, he has not told us: Gods silence should repress inqutsitive
Curiosity.

4. Sin was found a Weight by Jesus the Mediator. He undertook (and 'twas well
for us he did) to bear this Burden, and no Shoulders but his could have born
it; but when he bore it, how did he groan under it! This put him into an Agony,
this made him Sweat, and Sweat drops of Blood. This made him cry out, my Soul
is excceeding sorrowful, even unto Death: And, My God, my God, why have thou
forsaken me? Oh! blessed Savior, what extorted such cries as these from Thee?
Oh! Sinner, It was thy Sin, and the Sins of all others whom I save, that lay so
hard upon Me, Isa. 53. 6. All we like Sheep, says the Prophet, have gone
astray, we have turned every one to his own way, and the Lord has laid upon
him the Iniquity of us all. if the Man Christ Jesus had not been the Eternal
Son of God, he could never have born such an heavy Load, as all the Sins of his
whole Church laid upon him at once all together.

5. God himself complains of Sin as a weighty thing, which He is very weary of,
Isa. 43. 24. Thou have made me to serve with thy Sins, and have wearied me with
thine Iniquities. And, Amos 2. 13. Behold I am pressed under you, as a Cart is
pressed that is full of Sheaves. Sin is a Burden to the Almighty, tho he be so
rich and abundant in Forbearance and Long-suffering. Nay, Sin will make Duties
to be a Burden to Him, Isa. 1. 13, 14. Bring no more vain Oblations, your
Sabbaths and calling of Assemblies, I cannot away with, it is Iniquity even the
Solemn Meeting. Your new Moons, and your appointed Feasts, my Soul hates; they
are a Trouble to me, I am weary to bear them. And it is observable, when the
Lord comes to a Resolution to punish Sinners, because of their Transgressions,
He speaks as One about to ease himself of a Load Isa. 1. 24. Therefore thus
says the Lord, the Lord of Hosts, the mighty one of Israel: Ah! I will ease me
of my Adversaries, and avenge me of my Enemies. If Sin be thus a Weight, I
advise all to be weary, and beg to be eased of it. He is a senseless Fool
indeed, who makes a Mock of Sin, and still goes on to add unto his own Burden.

In the second place. I shall show you how the Master Sin may be known: And
here I would premise these three things:

1. All Sin that is allowed of, may truly be said to Reign, where it is allowed.
A Man that wilfully continues in the Commission of any Sin, is certainly the
Servant of it, whatever it be. It Is the Misery of the unregenerate, that they
have, tot Dominos quot vitia, so many Lusts, so many Lords.

2. There is in many Persons a particular Sin, which does prevail more than any
other. In the Natural Body there are all the Humors, yet One commonly is
Predominant, and the Denomination is from that. Thus it is in the Body of Sin;
tho there is a Mass of all Corruption; yet there may be some special
Corruption, that has the greatest strength and prevalency. This in Scripture is
called, the sweet Sin, in which the greatest delight is taken, compared to a
sweet Morsel under the Tongue, Job 20. 12, 13. Tho wickedness is sweet in his
Mouth, tho he hide it under his Tongue, tho he spare it and forsake it not; yet
at last it proves extremely bitter, deadly as the very Gall of Asps within him.

3. There are some in whom several Sins are so Predominant, that it is hard to
determine which is most Master. Some have so hot an Anger, and so hot and
furious a Lust, that you cannot so easily judge, which of these is hottest.
Nay, in some, Sins that seem very contrary one to another, yet in several
respects they will both prevail. Many a Man is liberal and profuse, as to his
Ornaments and Clothing; he spends freely in the Sumptuous furnishing of his
Table; Hand and Purse are open, if he be in Riotous Company. Yet if you ask
this Man but for a lutle, to a good use: Tell him that the Members of Christ
are many of them very needy; and that he who gives to the Poor, lends unto the
Lord; here he is strangely Covetous and close Fisled. These things premised, I
shall discover the Master Sin.

1. That is a Master Sin, unto which the Constitution does most strongly
incline. They that are of a Sanguine Complexion, are inclined to
Lasciviousness, Voluptuousness, and an aerie frothiness of Spirit, which a
great hinderance unto serious Impressions. In the Choleric Passion and Anger
are apt to prevail, and to hurry them to revengeful words and Actions; not
considering what injury they do to others, and how much more to themselves. The
Melancholic are prone to Envy, Malice, Discontent: The Phlegmatic. unto
Stupidity, Carelessness and Sloth. Now Satan takes notice of the Complexion,
sails with the Stream of it, and suits his Bait to it; and hereby has very
great advantage. Tho no sin has the Dominion in Believers; for they are not
under the Law, but under Grace, Romans 6. 14. yet the Complexion Sin is apt
sometimes to master even them also; therefore they had need to be watchful
against it, and to take great care and pains to mortify it. The Apostle Paul
observes his own Constitution, and makes conscience of keeping under his Body
that his Temperament might not be his Temptation, 1 Cor. 9. ult. I keep under
my bring it into subjection, lest by any means, when I have Preached unto
others, I my self should be a castaway.

2. That is a Master-sin, unto which your Callings and Conditions make you most
liable. They that trade in the World, how apt are they through the Corruption
of their own Hearts, to defraud and overreach; to get immoderate and dishonest
gain: hence that strict Prohibition, 1 These. 4. 6. Let no man go beyond or
defraud his Brother in any matter, knowing that the Lord is the Avenger of all
such, as we also have forewarned you, and testified. How apt are they, to
venture upon the Sin of Lying and Equivocation, for advantage, and they teach
and command their Servants and Children to follow their pernicious Examples; as
if Earthly gain were so considerable, that it is no great matter how many Souls
are lost for the sake of it. They that are Rich in this World, are prone to be
high-minded, and to trust in uncertain Riches, 1 Timothy 6. 17. to withhold the
Hire from the poor Laborers; to live in wantonness and pleasure, Jam. 5. 1, 2,
3. to be full and deny God, and say, Who is the Lord? They that are poor in the
World, are prone to Steal; (all unjust dealing, is Stealing, an unjust action
makes a Man a Thief in Gods account) and to take the Name of God in vain, Prove.
30. 9.

3. That is a Master-sin, which the Sinner is most unwilling should be brought
to light, and cannot bear to be reproved for. We read, Joh. 3. 20. Every one
that does Evil, hates the Light, neither comes to the Light, lest his Deeds
should be reproved; but of all others, he cannot endure to be reproved for the
Sin that easily besets him, and that he loves most. He tramples the Pearl of
reproof under his Feet, and is read to turn again, and rend the reprover. John
the Baptist was a burning and a shining Light. Herod the King heard him, some
of his Exhortaions and Doctrines went down with Herod, and produced a partial
Reformation. At length the Baptist comes home, and strikes at the Master Sin,
tells Herod of his Herodias, and that it was not lawful for him to have his
Brothers Wife. This was not to be born, the King counted the Prophet too bold
to meddle with his beloved Lust. He hears him no longer, he suffers him to
Preach to others no longer. He first puts him into Prison, and afterward puts
him to Death, and thus was this burning and shining Light extinguished, Mar. 6.
17,-27.

4. The Master Sin, Conscience when awakened by distress, is very apt to accuse
the Sinner of, and furiously to fly in his face for. Conscience though it
sleeps in a Calm, usually awakes in a Storm; when Deaththreatning Affliction
lies hard upon the Sinner, and he looks beyond Death unto Judgment, and into
Eternity; then Conscience speaks plainly; rebukes boldly, and especially the
Master-Sin makes it very clamorous. Envy was a Sin Predominant in Joseph's
Brethren, they could not bear the thoughts of his future advancement; they sold
him a Slave, to prevent his being exalted over them, as was presignified by his
Dreams. Many years after, God calls for a Famine upon the Land; down go these
Brethren into Egypt to buy Food, there Joseph seizes them, deals hardly with
them, and they are in great Distress. Conscience now awakes, with great terror
flies in their Faces; and their envy and cruel dealing with Joseph their
Brother, comes to remembrance with great anguish and trouble, Genesis 42. 21, 22.
They said one to another, We are verily guilty concerning our Brother; in that
we saw the anguish of his Soul, when he besought us and we would not hear;
therefore is this distress come upon us, therefore behold also is his blood
required. Conscience does Comment upon Affliction, and has its terrible
glosses. These blows are given thee for thy secret filthiness, for thy
intemperance, for thy injustice, for thy earthlimindedness, for thy doing the
Work of God Heartlesly and negligently! Observe what Conscience now says, for
the Master Sin it takes special notice of.

5. That is a Master Sin, which when the Sinner is almost persuaded to be a
Convert, hinders him from being a Convert altogether. That Jacob might have
Corn, he was contented that ten of his Sons should go and fetched it; but how
loath was he to let Benjamin go! When a Sinner is convinced of the necessity of
Conversion, he may consent to part with two or three or ten Sins; but that
which is most beloved, he huggs still, that Sin and he must never part. When
the Sold is ready to be espoused to Christ. This Sin stands up and forbids the
Banes. We read of a young man in the Gospel, soberly inclined; he saw the
necessity of eternal Life and the value of it; he comes to Jesus, and says,
Good Master, What shall I do that I may inherit eternal Life? Our Lord tells
him of the commands, the young man is glad of this, for as to the letter of the
second-Table-precepts; he had been a strict observer of them all from his Youth
up. At length our Lord, who knew Love to the World was his Master Sin; bids him
to go and sell all that he had on Earth, and follow him, and he should have a
more enduring and better Treasure in Heaven. But his Love to the World hindered
his Believing and Conversion, he goes away very sorrowful, for he was very
rich, Mat. 19. 21, 22. His Riches were very unreasonably and excessively loved,
he cleaves to Mammon, and leaves the only Savior!

6. That is a Master Sin, which pretends most highly to consult the Sinners
safety, gain, and pleasure. To be safe, to be advantaged, and delighted, are
things very taking to Humane Nature; pretenses this way are prevalent, but all
Sins pretenses are vain. When our Lord commands that the right eye should be
plucked out, the right hand cut off; the meaning is not, that Christianity binds
us cruelly to dismember our selves: Indeed the abuse of our members is severely
forbidden, but our members themselves are not to be parted with, but employed
after an holy manner. That therefore which our Lord intends is this, either,
that we should be as without an eye, to behold vanity and tempting Objects; as
without an hand to work that which is evil. Or, that though Sin be naturally as
dear to us as our right eye; as seemingly necessary as our right hand; yet we
must part with it, and not spare it to the hazard ruin of our selves for ever,
Mat. 5. 29, 30. I might also add, that Sinners are apt above all to wish, that
the Master Sin were no Sin at all. And because the Law forbids it, they hate
the Law; and the motions of their wicked Hearts toward it are more strong and
violent. And here is a notable difference between an unsanctified, and a
sanctified Heart. The unsanctified Heart wishes that the Law were less Holy,
that Sins were no Sins; but the Heart that is sanctified, does not desire the
Law were less strict and pure, but that it self were more pure, and more
conformed unto a Law that is so good and excellent; it does not desire a
Liberty to commit Sin, but that all the remaining Justings of the Flesh that
way, were more thoroughly mortified.

In the third place, I am to produce the Reasons why this Master Sin ought
especially to be abandoned.

1. Because, this is Gods Principal Enemy. All Sin is against him, but this is
a special Provocation in the the eyes of his Holiness and Glory. The Apostle
tells us that Love is the greatest Grace; and Christ himself says, that Love is
the first and great Commandment: The Master Sin, which is most beloved, which
takes away the affection of the Heart, which God chiefly requires; must needs
provoke Him unto great Jealousy. This is the Presumptuous Sin, it is greatly
offensive, for deservedly it is called the great Transgression, Psalm. 19. 13.

2. The Master Sin should be abandoned, because in a special manner it
separates between God, and the Soul that is guilty of it. Sin has many bad
effects, but a worse cannot be named than this, Isa. 59. 2. Your iniquities have
separated between you and your God, and your sins have hid his face from you
that he will not hear. Let the Saints in Heaven speak what it is to see the Face
of God! Oh the evil that is in Sin, which causes the Face of God to be hid from
the Sinner! Every Sin may be compared to a cloud; but the Sin which does most
easily beset us, is the blackest, the darkest cloud of all, which does most
totally deprive us of the Light of Gods Countenance.

3. If the Master-Sin be not abandoned, no other Sin whatsoever, can be truly
repented of. A man may indeed abstain from some Sins, but he does not abstain
from them, as Sins, and because they are displeasing to God; because contrary
to his will, and because they hinder Communion with God; if he did, then
certainly he would keep himself from the beloved Sin, which is principally
hateful to God, and the grand obstruction of fellowship with Him.

4. The Master Sin should be abandoned, because this is so great a grief unto
the Holy Spirit of God. How often does he tell the false Professor of his
lying Tongue! and the unjust Professor of his unrighteous dealing! The good
Spirit vouchsafes to strive with very wicked men, and moves them to hate the
Sin which they unreasonably Love to their own ruin. But if Sin be loved still,
the Spirit is grieved and vexed. And is it safe to grieve and vex the
Sanctifier, the Comforter? No. Read what follows upon vexing the Spirit, Isa.
63. 10. But they rebelled, and vexed his Holy Spirit, therefore he was turned
to be their Enemy, and he fought against them.

5. The Master Sin should be abandoned, because it is this chiefly that keeps
the Lord Jesus our of the Throne. Why do so many say in their Hearts, we will
not have Christ to Reign over us? The reason is, because they are resolved
their fleshly and their wordly Lusts shall rule there still. And if Christ rule
not, it is in vain to expect he will save, for he is the Author of Eternal
Salvation unto them that obey him, Heb. 5. 9. Nay, as he will not save them
that will not be subject to him, so he has threatened to slay them. As for those
mine Enemies, that would not I should reign over them, bring them forth, and
slay them before me, Luke 19. 27.

I come in the last place to the Application, and the Uses are these three.

USE I. By way of Examination: Try your selves, whether you are willing to
abandon the Sin that does so easily beset you: and for you your help in this
matter, I would ask you,

1. Are you willing to have this Sin, whatever it be, discovered? Are you
willing that God should signify to you, what it is in you that most of all
displeases him? Job professes that he covered not his Transgression, as Adam,
by hiding his Iniquity in his Bosom, Job. 31. 33. He that hides Sin, loves it;
he that pleads for Sin, is a Servant, a Slave to it. The defense of Sin, is
worse than the Offense it self. Can you come to God, and say, Lord! I open my
Heart to Thee. Search, Ransack here; Let no sin lie concealed! Let not so much
as one be spared, but especially discover the Master-sin, which is my greatest
Enemy, as well as thine.

2. Are you willing to hear all the Evil the Word does speak against the
Master-sin? If so, this would argue that it is no longer loved. It Is a Sign of
malice toward our Neighbor, if we are glad to hear all the Evil that is
spoken of him, and all the Reproach that is cast upon him. It Is a Sign of
hatred to Sin, when we like to have it discovered, when we like that its
deceitful and damnable Nature should be represented, and the falsness,
foulness, and filthiness of it should be laid open and naked. Sin is so great
an Evil, that there cannot be too much Evil spoken of it; it is so great an
Enemy, that you can never too faithfully and plainly be warned against it.

3. Do you apprehend your greatest danger to be from your Master Sin? and
therefore continually endeavor the Mortification of it? The King of Syria give
this Commission to his Army, Fight neither against small nor great, save only
with the King of Israel. What? were all besides to be spared? No certainly,
many Israel. fell in the battle: But there was a principal design to take at
least, if not to cut off the King of Israel. All Sin deserves thy hatred, no
Sin is so small an Enemy as that thou may safely spare it. But the Master
Sin is the chief foe, therefore its destruction should chiefly be designed.
That Man that is an Enemy to his Master Sin desires it may be still weakened by
all means. Oh! faith he, that every Mercy may help to kill it! leading me to
Repentance for it! That every stroke of the Roa may help to strike it more
dead! that every Sermon may give this Sin a blow! that by every Prayer I may
obtain more strength against it! That every time I come to the Table of the
Lord, this Sin may be in a greater measure Crucified!

USE II Of Exhortation. And of this there are two Branches.

I shall speak to Sinners, that are under the full Power of their Master Sin.

Then I shall speak to Saints, in whom there are too great remainder of it.

1. I am to speak to Sinners who are under the full Power of their Master Sin.
It is storied concerning Agrippina the Mother of Nero Coesar, that it was told
her by an Oracle, that her Son should be Emperor of Rome, but afterward
should kill his own Mother. Agrippina replies, Occidat, mode imperet! Let him
kill me, so he does but reion. O it is the Language of all presumptuous Sinners
concerning their Master Lusts, Let them but reign, no matter though they are
our Damnation and Destruction! But what do you see in Sin, or in its Wages,
that any of you should be thus fond of its Service? What good reason can be
given, why Sin should have one slave in this whole Congregation? or in the
whole World? I earnestly exhort you to lay aside every weight, but especially
the Sin that does most easily beset you. Arguments to persuade are these.

1. Consider, the Master Sin is the strongest hold of Satan. While Sin keeps up
its Dominion, Satan holds fast his Possession. This Sin is your most deadly
disease, and the strongest Cord, in which the Devil binds you and leads you
Captive at his Pleasure.

2. The Master Sin is the great hindrance of the efficacy of the means of
Grace. This makes the Preachers pains, lost labor; this makes Mercies and
Afflictions to be lost upon you; this makes you to lose all the duties you
perform.

3. This Master Sin is not without its Train. A great Person, especially a
Crowned Head, is not without a great many that attend him! A Master Sin has a
great Attendance: Many lusts are subservient to this Main one, that the greater
and more plentiful Provision may be made for the fulfilling it. How great is
thy danger who have many Enemies lodging in thee, and lording it over thee!

4. Suppose, this Master Sin were alone, this were enough to ruin thee. If a
Pistol is discharged at the Heart, and a small Bullet enter there; it kills as
certainly as if there were a thousand Cannons discharged at a man at once. One
Sin suffered to rule in thy Heart is sufficient were there no more, effectually
and eternally to ruin thee.

5. The Master Sin wars against thy Soul most dangerously, and wounds most
deeply. And after it has ruined thee, Oh with what anguish will it be re^lected
on in the lowest Hell! This will be there thy heaviest load! Thou will remem^er
how deaf thou were to all Counsel to cast it away, and how great thy madness
was, in taking most pleasure in that, which proves the cauie of the greatest,
even everlasting Sorrow and Vexation. Oh be so wise, as to change your old
Master, Sin; and let Christ become your Lord.

2. I am to speak to Saints, in whom there are too great remainders of the Sin
that was once their Master. I exhort you more effectually and thoroughly to
mortify it. Pray consider,

1. If this Sin does frequently prevail, it will keep you very low in Grace.
Faith will be weak, Hope will be dampt, Love will be cool; and the whole inward
Man will woefully languish.

2. As you will be weak in Grace, so will be low in Comfort. When Temptations
are yielded to, Conscience will be disquieted, Peace will be disturbed; Thy
Pride, thy Passion, thy carnal Affections prevailing, will make thy Heart too
much like the troubled Sea when it cannot rest, whose waters cast forth mire
and dirt, Isa. 57. 20.

3. The Prevalency of this easily besetting Sin, will binder you from being so
serviceable to your great and gracious Lord. It will make his work to be
neglected; and when done, to be done too negligently: sorry Servants you will
be, and very sorry your services will be. The more sanctified you are, the
fitter you are for your Masters use, 2 Timothy 2, 21. but Sin makes you unmeet,
and more unable and unwilling to serve him.

4. This Sin will make you to shine less in your lives; 'twil fully your
Conversations, and hinder you from adorning the Gospel. Oh keep unspotted, and
walk exactly as in the day; that you may be blameless and harmless the Children
o God without rebuke, in the midst of a crooked and perverse Nation, and that
you may shine as Lights in the World, Phil. 2. 15.

5. This Sin may cause you to set in a Cloud. It may fill you with doubts when
you are dying, and that will be very dreadful. You may be terribly frighted
with the fears of Hell, when you are just at Heavens gate. Be therefore
upright, keep your selves from the iniquity that does most easily beset you;
that you may be more useful in your lives, have the stronger and more lively
hope in Death; and that your End when it comes may be more perfect Peace.

USE III. Of Direction: How the Sin which does most easily beset you, may be
laid aside.

1. Pray for a clean Heart, Psalm. 51. 10. David having been overcome by a
strong Corruption, and done a Deed that was very foul, cries for a purer Heart,
a more right and constant Spirit; he knew that to purge the Fountain, was the
way to have the streams clean: Go unto God for a new Heart, which he has
promised, and will give to all who prize and desire such an Heart. Strike at
the root of in the Heart, then the branches, and t^^^ top branch, the
Master-sin will wither.

2. Seriously lay to Heart, how much he Sin that naturally is most beloved,
does deserve your hatred: Hated Sin is so weak, that it can ruin none; it is
the love of Sin that gives it power, and as it were puts a Sword into its hand
slay you.

3. Resist the very first stirrings of this Sin in you: I believe if, David
as soon as ever he beheld from his Palace the beauteous Bathsheba, had presently
turned away his eyes, and had fallen upon his knees, and gone to Prayer, he had
overcome the Temptation. Sin is more weak at the beginning: Our Lords Counsel
is, Watch and Pray, that ye enter not into temptation, Mat. 26. 41.

4. If you would abandon the Maste^-sin, Pray much for the contrary Grace: Is
Pride thy Master-sin? Pray much for Humility; Is Pass^^n thy Master-sin? Pray
much for P^tience, and for the Meekness and Gentleness of Christ: Is Love to
the World thy Master-sin? Pray that thou may rise with Christ, and love, and
mind a better World; better Honors, better Pleasures, a more lasting Wealth
than this World can yield.

5. Let the Word of God, which does ^^rbid and threaten this Master-sin, be
carefully hid in your Heart: This Word may be in thy Mouth, thou may talk of
it; it may be in thy Mind, thou may have a national Knowledge of it: Nay, ^t
may go further, and be in thy Conscience, and be thought of in the very act of
Sin. But if it will be in thy Heart, if thy Will and Affections are taken with
it, then it will be an effectual Preservative against Iniquity, Psalm. 119. 11.
Thy Word have I hid in my Heart, that I might not sin against thee.

6. Improve the Death of our Lord Jesus: Bring the Sin which does so easily
beset you to the Cross of Christ. No Sin truly dyis but upon Christ's Cross, Gal
5. 24. They that are Christ's, have Crucified the flesh with the affections and
lusts; these are never Mortified but by being Crucified. How can the old Adam
dye, but upon the Cross of the second Adam? Romans 6. 6. Knowing this, that our
old man is Crucified with him, that the body of sin might be destroyed, that
henceforth we should not serve sin.

7. Call in the Spirits aid: He can make the Word sharp as a two-edged Sword to
pierce the Heart, and to slay the strongest Sin there: He glorifies Christ, and
can draw you to him, and enable you by Faith to derive Grace from him,
suffic^ent to help you against the most powerful Corruptions: He can kill the
Sin that is hardest to be slain; he can mortify all the dee^s of he body. Romans
8. 13. the strongest members on the Earth, Col 3. 5. and he can seal you unto
the day of Redemption.

FINIS.

