A Funeral SERMON: Occasioned by the death of Mr. GEORGE BAKER. First Preached
And then Published, at the earnest desire of his Relations. By Nathanael
Vincent M. A. Minister of the Gospel.

LONDON. Printed for Thomas Parkhurst at the Three Bibles and Crown at the
lower end of Cheapside, 1679.

A Funeral Sermon.
1 Pet. 1. 17. latter part. Pass the time of your Sojourning here in Fear.
THE Persons to whom this Epistle was written, are styled Strangers; and
Strangers they were, both in regard of their present Dispersion, being
scattered up and down the Kingdoms of the Gentiles; and also in regard of their
Spiritual Condition, being Pilgrims and Sojourners in the World. The Apostle in
this Chapter does both comfort them with the hope of what they were to enjoy
hereafter, and counsel them how they should carry themselves during their abode
here.

First, He comforts them with the hope of what they were to enjoy hereafter. He
tells them that being begotten again to a lively Hope by the Resurrection of
Christ from the dead; they were the Heirs of God, to an Inheritance,
incorruptible, undefiled, and that will never fade away, reserved in Heaven for
them; and assures them that they shall be kept by the Power of God through
faith unto salvation. Notwithstanding therefore all their trials and
temptations which were apt to occasion heaviness, they had reason to rejoice
with joy unspeakable and full of Glory.

Secondly, He Counsels them how they ought to carry themselves during their
abode here. They must not fashion themselves according to the former lusts in
their ignorance. As He that called them is Holy, so must they be Holy in all
manner of Conversation. They must call on the Father giving themselves to
prayer. They must never be unmindful of the day of Judgment which will be
strict, without respect of persons, and according to every man's work, and they
must be sure to pass the time of their sojourning here in fear.

In the words we have

I. A Direction how to pass our Time, and that is in Fear. II. The Reason,
which is twofold. 1. It Is a time of Sojourning, not of any long continuance. 2.
It Is a time of sojourning here in the World, which is a place full of Sin, and
Snares, and Enemies; and therefore the greater fear and care is requisite.

I raise from the Text three Doctrines.

First, While we are here in this world, Time is afforded us. Secondly, A
Christians Time, is but a time of Sojourning. Thirdly, Our time of sojourning
is to be past in Fear.
Doct. I. I begin with the first of these. While we are here in this world Time
is afforded us.

In the handling of this Doctrine, I shall first tell you how the Scripture
describes that Time which is afforded, and then inform you, to what end it is
afforded; and then make some Application.

In the first place I am to give you a Description of Time.

1. The time that is afforded us is very short. 1 Cor. 7. 29. But this Isay
Brethren the time is short. The life of him that lived longest that we read of,
reaching almost to a Thousand years; what was it, if compared with Eternity?
But alas now our days are much shorter then the days of those who lived quickly
after Adam had lost his Immortality. It Is a startling question, what is your
life? Jam. 4. 14. intimating, that life is not to be reckoned upon as durable:
so far from that, that it is a vapor that appears for a little while and then
vanishes away.

Holy Job does ransack both earth and Sea and air for simi-Litudes, to get
forth the brevity of humane life. The Post that rides in great have on earth;
the Ship in the Sea under Sail, that has both Wind and Tide; the Eagle in the
air, especially when hungry and flying toward a prey; all these are very
swift. And yet notwithstanding Job says, his Days were swifter. Job 9. 25, 26.

2dly. This time that is afforded us is Day time. Death is called Night; and
life, Day, which goes before, John 9. 4. I must work the works of him that sent
me while it is day, the night comes when no man can work. The shining light of
the Sun makes the natural day. And the time we have is truly termed a day in a
Spiritual sense, because the Sun of Righteousness is risen, and the light of
the Gospel shines so clearly. How plainly and fully in this our day are the
things of our peace made known to us.

The day of grace did break about four thousand years before the Son of God was
actually manifested in the flesh. Some Revelation of the Second Adam, was made
unto the first Adam; and still it grew lighter, and lighter, till at length the
Word was made flesh, and his glory was beheld, the glory as of the only
begotten of the Father full of grace and truth. Joh. 1. 14. Under the new
Testament dispensation there is a fuller discovery of the only true God and
Jesus Christ whom he has sent, the mystery of Redemption and Salvation is made
plain that was hid from ages and generations. There was a vail upon the face of
Moses to signify the laws obscurity: But now in Christ the vail is taken away,
and with open face, (if we wilfully shut not our own eyes.) we may behold the
glory of the Lord, and be changed into the same Image. 2 Cor. 3. 17, 18.

And as there is a light which shines during this day, so it is designed for
working, not the unfruitful works of darkness but the work of God and
Righteousness. Why stand ye here all the day idle? Mat. 20. 6. Idleness in the
Marketplace, and in the day time, is inexcusable; especially since the calls
are so loud to come and labor in the Vineyard. It Is unreasonable to be
sleeping, to be sinning, when we should be praying, watching, and working out
our own Salvation.

3ly. The time that is afforded us is an accepted time. 2 Cor. 6. 2. Behold now
is the accepted time (...), here may be an allusion unto the year of Jubilee
which was very acceptable and welcome, because the servants then went out free,
and the inheritances returned to them from whom they had been alienated.
Liberty now is proclaimed in the Gospel unto the Captives Christ has abolished
death, and has brought to light life and immortality, which though lost by
sin, may yet be recovered by those who by patient continuance in well doing
seek for it. Romans 2. 7.

Nune sunt molissima fandi Tempora. Now is the time to pray: the Lord looks
down from Heaven upon the Children of men to see if there be any that do
understand and see God, Psalm. 14. 2. And he is very near to them who call upon
him in truth. Now he will regard cries, now he will bottle tears, but when this
accepted time is gone, cries in Hell will be loud, and tears will be shed to
Eternity, but no merey or compassion will be shown. Well may this present time
be called an accepted time, for while this lasts Christ may be accepted by the
Sinner, and the Sinner returning with his whole heart will be accepted and
received by the Father.

1. Christ may be accepted by the Sinner. He is seriously and generally
offered, the Gospel is to be preached to every creature, All this day long he
stretches forth his hand even to them that are disobedient and gainsaying. Romans
10. ult. The Fountain in the Gospel is an open Fountain, all that thirst are
invited to come Rev. 22. 17. The Spirit and the Bride say come, and let him
that hears say come, and let him that is athirst come, and whosoever will,
let him drink of the waters of life freely. And as the thirsty may come for
Satisfaction, so the defiled may come for Sanctification. Christ is now
preached, Christ is now tendered; and to as many as receive him, he will be
made Wisdom and Righteousness and Sanctification and Redemption.

2. During this accepted time, the sinner returning will be accepted and
received by the Father. Prodigals though they come home in Rags, and urged by
Necessity, being ready to perish in the far Country; yet shall not find the
door shut against them. The Father exceedingly rejoiced, when his Riotous Son,
first came to himself, and then came home. Luke 15. 32. It was meet that we
should make merry and be glad, for this thy Brother was dead and is alive
again, he was lost and he is found. The greatness of Guilt, the most abominable
Defilements shall not be an impediment unto a sinners reception if he confesses
his Wickedness, and looks to Jesus, and consents to be cleansed as well as
pardoned. Isa. 55. 7. Let the wicked forsake his way, and the unrighteous man
his thoughts; let him be willing to be made Holy in his Conversation, and pure
in his very Heart also; and let him return to the Lord and he will have mercy
upon him; and to our God and he will abundantly Pardon.

4. The Time that is afforded us, is a time of Salvation. 2 Cor. 6. 2. Behold
now is the day of Salvation, therefore receive not the Grace of God in vain;
the tidings of salvation should be very welcome to lost sinners, nothing more
suitable, nothing more needful unto such then salvation; and the more sad it is
to be lost and to perish to Eternity, the more should that Everlasting
salvation, which the Gospel does reveal, be valued. Now is the only time to
repent and believe, and receive the only Savior, who delivers from sin and
wrath to come; if once any dye in their sins, there is no coming unto Christ
to make peace afterward. We read in Scripture of a middle wall of partition,
and of a gulf fixed: the middle wall of partition, that sin has made between
God and the sinner, though it be high and great, yet upon Faith and Repentance
it will be broken down. Ezra acknowledges that their Iniquities were increased
over their heads, and their Trespass was grown up to the Heavens. Ezra 9. and
yet they were pardoned. But hereafter a gulf will be fixed, and fixed
Eternally, and then salvation will be impossible, Luke 16. 26. And besides
this, there is a great gulf fixed between us and you, so that they who would
pass from hence to you cannot, neither can they pass to us that would come
from thence.

5. The Time that is afforded us is the last time, 1 John 2. 18. Little
Children it is the last time. Oh be not so spiritually childish as to play and
sin it all away: In the Original it runs thus, (...). It is the last hour; to
show how quickly it will be at a perpetual end, so as no more is to be
expected: Shortly the Oath will be swore, that there shall be time no longer.
Rev. 10. 6. If you prodigally lavish out your present time of Life and Grace,
you will indeed have an Eternity to lament your Folly and Madness in; but you
shall never be turned into the World again, nor trusted with a season and means
of Grace and Salvation any more. And since it is the last time, we should
conclude, that we have none to spare for sin, and that we have none to spend in
vain.

In the Second place, I am to inform you to what end Time is afforded us in
this World.

1. That we may seek the Lord. He looks down from Heaven to see if any do
understand and seek God, Psalm. 14. 2. And surely all that do understand God or
themselves, will seek him with their whole Heart. Now he is near and may be
found, this is great encouragement to seek: Isa. 55. 6. Seek the Lord while he
may be found, and call upon him while he is near. Psalm. 105. 4. Seek the Lord
and his strength, seek his face evermore. Time is given us to seek his favor,
to turn to him in whom our health and happiness lies. What is there in this
world that deserves our pursuit? Methinks when we are eager after wealth and
pleasures, we are just like Children running after Feathers and Bubbles blown up
in the air, But if we seek the Lord, we shall find that he is good, nay that he
is Best. Communion with him will cause the fullest joy: they shall have
abundant cause to praise the Lord that seek him and their hearts shall live for
ever. Psalm. 22. 26.

2dly. Time is given us that we may obtain liberty by Jesus Christ. And if he
make us free we shall be free indeed. He can deliver us from condemnation, and
from the guilt of sin which makes us liable thereunto. He can redeem us from
the curse of the law, and rescue us out of the hand of Satan who is compared to
a strong man armed, and who leads all impenitent Sinners captive at his
pleasure. He can redeem us from the bondage of Corruption, which is worse than
the bondage in Egypt or Babylon. And now is the time to obtain redemption. The
price is already paid, all that we have to do is to come to Christ, to receive
him, and to resign our selves to him that the redemption which he has purchased
may be applied.

3dly. Time is given us, that we may seek an inheritance in another world, that
we may seek for Glory and Honor and Immortality. A Kingdom is revealed to us,
on purpose that we may be violent and take it by force. In a short time how
many Kingdoms did Alexander the Great Conquer. But a better and more Glorious
and Lasting Kingdom should be in our Eye. And it should be our great design,
that our time may end in a blessed Eternity.

4thly. Time is given us, that by Grace and Holiness we may be made meet for
Glory. Grace does not indeed merit Heaven, but it makes us meet to be admitted
thither. When we are delivered from the Power of darkness, and translated into
the Kingdom of the Son of God; when we walk worthy of the Lord unto all
pleasing: being fruitful in every good work and increase in the knowledge of
God; then we are making meet to be partakers of the inheritance of the Saints
in light. Col. 1. 10, 11, 12, 13.

Now follows the Application.

Use. I. Is time afforded us? Let us be thankful, for it is a talent of great
value. Oh how much may be gained in time? So much as may cause praises and
rejoicing to Eternity. Peace may be now made with God. Sanctifying grace may be
now wrought: and a title unto and assurance of Glory may be now obtained. The
triumphant Saints, what improvement did they make of time when they were in the
world, and what bright Crowns do they now wear.

God has dealt otherwise with Man then he did with the Apostate Angels, no
time at all between their Sin and Punishment. He spared not the Angels that
sinned, but immediately cast them down to Hell and delivered them into chains
and darkness to be reserved unto the Judgment of the great day. 2 Pet. 2. 4.
There was no door of hope opened to them, no offer of grace, no reprieve
granted; no time or season of mercy allowed them, but they fell like lightning
suddenly, remarkably, and by such a force that they could not withstand, and
that from the highest Heaven to the lowest Hell. The Devil envies sinful man
his time, and would fain steal it from him, therefore Man should be the more
thankful for it, and be the better Husband of it.

Use. II. If time be afforded us here in this world, then we should be the more
vigilant least it be stolen away from us. A great many theives of time there
are which we should watch against. The works of darkness require time to do
them in. Ungodly company how much time do they consume! Impertinent and corrupt
communication, causes hours to pass away unsensibly which can never be
recalled. Sinful thoughts, unruly passions, wicked projects, worldly cares
speculative filthiness and uncleanness, ambitious and covetous designs; oh
what insatiable cormorants are all these of precious time. Most lose both time
and souls by such things as these; therefore Watch and Pray that your time may
be better employed; then to be wasted all of it, so contrary unto the end for
which it was vouchsafed, namely unto Gods dishonor and your own destruction.

Use. III. If time only be afforded here in this world; then surely we have
enough to do with it.

The Favor of God is to be entreated.

The Nature is to be changed, innumerable lusts are to be mortified.

Satan is to be resisted who is subtle, powerful, and unwearied in his assaults,

The World is to be Conquered:

Self is to be denied and overcome;

The Heart is to be watched and kept with all diligence because so Treacherous
and Deceitful.

Many Ordinances are to be engaged in, and in every ordinance we should be
sincere and spiritual,

The Commands of God are exceeding broad, and yet we must have respect unto
them all.

Every Relation calls for Duty, and every Duty should be filled with Grace;

We have Souls that are of great worth and in great danger, to save;

We have Hell to escape, Heaven to secure, and Eternity to provide for. Surely
Here Is work enough to do. Hippocrates of old complained in the beginning of his
Aphorisms (...), that Art was long but Life was short but much more to the
purpose may it be said, that a Christians work is long and great, but his time
is short to do it in. Where is loytering then? it is excluded. Surely foolish
as well as cursed is he that wastes his time, and neglects to do his main work,
or does it negligently.

Doct. 2. The second Doctrine follows, which is this. A Christians time is a
time of Sojourning. David looked upon himself as no other then a Sojourner, and
confesses that all his Fathers were so before him. Psalm. 39. 12. Hear my prayer
O Lord, give ear unto my cry, hold not thy peace at my tears, for I am a
stranger with thee, and a sojourner as all my Fathers were.

A Christians time may well be called a time of Sojourning;
For while he is in this World,
He is absent from his own Country.
His heart is upon his Country.
He is going toward his Country.
And it will not be long ere he be arrived safe in his Country.
1. While the Christian lives here, he is absent from his Country. The time of
Sojourning is in the Original, (...). Now they are said (...) to sojourn; who
are Strangers in another country, and are not yet come to their desired home.
Christians are not of this World, but in regard of their new Nature they are
born (...) from above Joh. 3. 3. Christ speaks thus concerning his Disciples,
They are not of the World even as I am not of the World. Sanctify them through
thy truth, thy word is truth, Joh. 17. 16, 17.

The Christian before his Conversion is a stranger to God and a forreigner; but
as soon as ever he is regenerated, he is chosen out of the World, and becomes a
stranger in it, and is made a Fellow-citizen with the Saints, and of the
household of God. Ephesians. 2. 19. In regard of his new Birth he is of Heavenly
extraction, God is his Father, the Heavenly Jerusalem his Mother, his
Inheritance and Mansion is above, and while at home in the body he is absent
from the Lord and from his Mansion; and can never be at rest, till he has left
the body, and is present with the Lord in those Mansions which he is gone to
prepare.

2. While the Christian lives in this World, his Heart is upon his Country. His
Treasure is there, no wonder if his heart be there also. Mat. 6. 21. There are
many indeed who walk as Enemies to the cross of Christ, whose end is
Destruction, whose God is their Belly, whose glory is in their shame, and who
mind earthly things. But the sincere Christian, his Conversation is in Heaven.
Phil. 3. 18, 19, 20. His Faith is the substance of things hoped for, and the
evidence of things not seen, and by the eye of Faith he looks within the Vail,
and rejoices in hope of the Glory of God. He sees his Salvation approaching
nearer and nearer every day; under all his heaviness he comforts himself with
that joy which is set before him, and he patiently labors, and is unwearied
though he abounds in the work of the Lord, knowing that his labor will not be
in vain, for all his pains will be fully and for ever recompensed by that rest
that remains for the People of God. Heb. 4. 9.

3. The Christian is continually going toward his Country. This World is the
Inn where he lodges, the way where he passes, but his face is toward Zion.
Just like our Lord who though he passed through a Village of the Samaritanes,
yet set his face steadfastly toward Jerusalem. Luke 9. 51, 52, 53. All the good
actions of a Christian are steps toward Heaven; all the holy Duties which he
performs seriously, do mightily advance him in his way thither: his holy and
heavenly Meditations, Desires, and Affections, do strangely speed him toward
home. The Christian grows in Grace, and so becomes riper for Glory; he adds to
his faith virtue, and to virtue knowledge, and to knowledge temperance, and to
temperance patience, and to patience godliness, etc. and these things being in
him and abounding, an abundant entrance is administered to him into the
everlasting Kingdom. 2 Pet. 1.

4. It will not be long ere the Christian be arrived safe in his Country. Hark
to the Apostle, Heb. 10. 37. Yet a little while, and he that shall come will
come and will not tarry. This Earthly house of Believers Tabernacle, cannot
stand long, and as soon as ever it is dissolved, they have a building of God, an
house not made with hands, Eternal in the Heavens. 2 Cor. 5. 1. The Believers
time of Warfare is short, and then he is discharged; but his Triumph will be
Eternal. He has a short cut to a long, nay an Eternal, but a Blessed home.

Application.
Use I. Of Reproof to the Ungodly, whose time is as short as the time of
Believers, and yet they live as if they were to live here always. How many
Covetous and Voluptuous Ones are there, who are so eager after Wealth and
Pleasures, that they could hardly be more earnest, suppose their Wealth and
Pleasures could be enjoyed to Eternity. It was a just complaint of Seneca, lib.
de Brevitate vitae. cap. 4. Tanquam semper victuri vivitis, nunquam vobis
fragilitas vestra succurrit, non observatis quantum temporis transierit, velut
ex pleno and abundanti perditis. Omnia tanquam mortales timetis; omnia tanquam
immortalis concupiscitis. You live as if you were to live always, you make no
good use of your own frailty, you observe not how much time is past already;
but still lose more as out of a full Stock, and as if all would never be done;
and your desires are eager after Earthly things, as if your selves were
Immortal, and were never to be parted from them. Let those who profess
Christianity blush and mend, when they hear an Heathen talk at such a rate. Let
sinners learn the art of Holy Arithmetic, and so number their days as to
apply their hearts unto Wisdom. Satan is the great Cheat, who endeavors to
make you lose your time; he has cheated you of much already, if he gets all, he
will get you and all; for after Death their is no getting out of his snare.

Use II. Since wicked men are to live but a short time, as well as Believers,
surely their good things cannot be enjoyed long. The Rich man in the Gospel,
was clothed in Purple and fine linen, and fared sumptuously every day while he
lived. But death stripped him of his gay clothing, took him away from his
well-spread Table; and 'twas said to him, Son, remember thou in thy lifetime,
no longer than Lifetime, receivedst thy good things, and Lazarus evil things;
but now he is Comforted, and thou art tormented. Luke 16. 25. 'Twas true in
general, that Zophar spoke, though he made a wrong Application of it to Job who
was more righteous then himself. Job. 20. 4, 5. Know thou not this of old,
since man was placed upon Earth, that the Triumphing of the wicked is short,
and the joy of the Hypocrite but for a moment? How should it terrify wicked
men to consider, that their pleasures can be but for a season, but their pains
and torment will be endless. Their Honor is fading but their Contempt and
Shame will be everlasting. Dan. 12. 2. their gains are inconsiderable and will
quickly be gone, but their loss will be of no less then of their Souls and
Heaven, and can never be repaired.

Use. III. Since a Christians time is a time of sojourning; it may comfort him,
that as himself is not, so neither can his troubles be very long lived.
Afflictions are therefore the lighter because they are but for a moment 2 Cor.
4. 17. Now Believers are in their minority and consequently under the
Discipline of the Rod, but after Death they will be perfect, and then
correction will be needless. Now they are assaulted with Satan's Temptations he
is liberal of his fiery darts, and they have much ado with the Shield of Faith
and the Armor of God to defend themselves, but within a little while they
shall be quite out of his reach; and a man may as easily with an Arrow shoot
and hit the Sun in the Firmament, as the Devil with any Dart, hit a Saint in
the third Heaven. Now Believers groan because of a body of sin, and death that
they carry about with them; but when they put of their earthly Tabernacle, this
body of sin shall be put off for ever: and through the natural body shall be
raised a spiritual one, yet the body of sin shall never have resurrection.
Within a little while, God shall wipe away all tears from his Peoples Eyes,
which implies, that both sin and suffering which are the causes of sorrow will
be at an end. The Believer when he dies he dies in the Lord, and Christ who has
the Key of Hell, keeps that shut against him: as for Purgatory he did before
believe, and he now finds to be a mere fiction, for the spirit says that from
thenceforth they rest from their labors, and their works follow them. Rev. 14.
13.

Use. IV. Of Counsel unto all. Since your time is but as a time of sojourning,
let my advice, in these Scripture-particulars, be acceptable.

1. You that have Wives be as though you had none. 1 Cor. 7. 29. and by a
parity of reason you that have Husbands be as though ye had none, and you that
have Children be as if you had them not. Sit loose from your very Relations.
Love them indeed you ought; and especially to their souls express your love;
but remember your happiness does not lie in the enjoyment of them, but in the
enjoyment of God, who loves infinitely better then the tenderest relations can,
and who lives infinitely longer.

2. You that weep be as though you wept not. 1 Cor. 7. 30. let not your tears
run waste, If you spend them upon sin, God has a bottle to put them in, but if
you mourn immoderately, for losses, crosses and afflictions, as common water
they are spilt upon the Ground. That which you so lament the loss of, be it
Friend, Estate, or any other outward comfort it could not have been enjoyed
long, because Life it self is but a time of sojourning. How vain are those
things we are so fond of while we have them, and when by their being taken away
they further discover their vanity; why should our eyes be so full of tears,
and our hearts ready to break with sorrow at parting.

3. You that rejoice be as though ye rejoiced not. The absence of the creature
should not cast you down, the presence of the creature should not lift you up.
'Twas observed concerning an Heathen that being banished by an ungrateful
Country, and afterward recalled, he went and came back with the same
countenance, neither was his sorrow excessive when he went, nor his joy when he
returned, but there was an unchanged evenness in his spirit, though there was
so great a change in his condition. It was a notable saying of Seneca, Res
severa est gaudium. Joy is a very serious thing, therefore it is unreasonable to
rejoice in a thing of naught. Worldly joy is madness, and carnal mirth what
does it? If you rejoice barely because you prosper in the world and increase in
Riches, and have sensual delights at command; of how little a matter makes
fools merry. Many that are despairing in Hell, were once thus merry as well as
you. Oh let your joy be turned into a right Channel, Rejoice in God, and his
great goodness, rejoice and work righteousness; rejoice in Christ Jesus, here is
no danger of excess, though joy be unspeakable and full of Glory. 1 Pet. 1. 8.

4. You that buy, be as though you possessed not. Why should your hearts be
glued to an estate? why should you stick fast in the thick clay? Riches are not
for ever neither does a Crown endure to every Generation. You brought nothing
into this world, and it is certain you can carry nothing out. 1. Tim. 6. 7. You
present substance is not enduring, and therefore though you have it in your
hands, let it not get into your heart. David Cautions If Riches increase, set
not your hearts upon them. Psalm. 62. 10. they are uncertain Riches at the best.
That is a Scripture which should wean the heart from an estate, and draw it
unto God. Psalm 39. 6, 7. Surely every man walks in a vain show, surely they
are disquieted in vain, he heepeth up Riches and knows not who shall gather
them. And now Lord what wait I for? my hope is in thee.

5. You that use this world should take heed of abusing it for the fashion of
this world passes away. 1 Cor. 7. 31. Licitus perimus omnes. Take heed of
perishing by the abuse of those things the use of which is lawful. It is said
concerning the Old World before the Flood came, and concerning Sodom and
Gomorrha before there overthrow by Fire and Brimstone; they eat they drank,
they bought they sold, they planted they builded, they married and were given
in marriage. Luke 17. 26. -- 30. None of these things were in themselves
unlawful, but they were to eager after them, their hearts were so set upon
them, that God and Duty and Heaven were neglected, and they grew secure in
their Earthliness and Wickedness; and then followed sudden and signal ruin and
destruction.

6. Since your time is short and but a time of sojourning; by your serious
diligence, declare plainly that you seek a better Country than is to be found
on earth. By your pains and striving convince a careless world, tha^ Heaven
does not deserve to be neglected. Imitate those worthy and believing Strangers
and Pilgrims of old, whom the Apostle speaks of. Heb. 11. 14, 15, 16. For they
that say such things declare plainly, that they seek a Country, and truly if
they had been mindful of that Country from whence they came out, they might
have had opportunity to have returned; but now they desire a better Country,
that is an Heavenly; wherefore God is not ashamed to be called their God; for
he has prepared for them a City. Be not slothful but followers of them who
through faith and patience inherit the promises. A Crown, an Eternal
Inheritance, a Kingdom is before you. Be not weary in well doing, Fight the
good Fight of Faith, lay hold on Eternal life, hold fast, and hold out unto the
end that no man take your crown from you. Rev. 3. 11.

Doct. 3. I come unto the third and last Doctrine which is this our time of
sojourning is to be past in fear. Fear is a grace of so great necessity and
usefulness, that sometimes it is put for the whole of Religion. Job. 28. 28.
Unto man he says behold, the fear of the Lord that is Wisdom. Religion is the
truest wisdom in the World, and to depart from evil is understanding. As
nothing can be done acceptably without faith, so nothing can be done seriously
without fear. We must feed our selves in fear, we must worship in fear, and
pass our time in fear. In the handling of this Doctrine, I shall first speak
concerning this fear, and secondly give you good reasons, why our time is to be
past in fear, and then conclude with the Uses.

In the first place I am to speak concerning this fear. And

1. Fear may relate unto God. We ought to sanctify him in our hearts by making
him our fear, and by making him our dread. It Is excellent counsel of Solomon.
Prove. 23. 17, Be thou in the fear of the Lord all the day long. We should set
God always before us, and stand in awe of him perpetually, this would make us
to walk exactly, and look better to our ways and hearts. At all times, believe
that you are observed by an allseeing eye; believe that God is all powerful as
well as allseeing and that he is infinitely pure and holy and righteous, as
well as powerful, so that he can take no pleasure in wickedness, but hates all
the workers of iniquity. Remember that God is Testis. Judex and Vindex, a
witness of all that is done at present. He will judge the world in
righteousness; and he will take vengeance on them that know not God, and who
disobey the Gospel. Nay let his very goodness stir up fear in you, lest you
miss of that goodness; and least slighted goodness end in the sorest and
greatest severity. Let that Prophecy be accomplished in you, Hos. 3. 5. They
shall fear the Lord and his goodness in the latter days.

2. Fear may relate unto Satan. We ought to be jealous and afraid, lest that
evil One rob us of this Treasure of Precious Time. He had never any time of
Mercy granted to him, therefore he envies ours; and endeavors to hinder our
Repentance, though we have space to Repent in. We that have such an Adversary
to deal with, who has so many Wiles and Devices to bring about our ruin, and
who if he can but make us trifle out our present time, will compass his end,
which is our Eternal Destruction; it certainly concens us to have our eyes in
our heads, to be sober and vigilant, and to resist him being steadfast in the
Faith; and there should be a continual fear, lest we be beguiled through his
subtlety. 1 Pet. 5. 8, 9. 2 Cor. 11. 3.

3. Fear, may relate unto this World. The World is so suitable unto the senses
and fancies of men, that it is the great Engine which the Prince of the Power of
the Air uses to batter Souls with: with this bait he catches them. By the World
and the things of the World, he draws them away from God, and intices them into
the way which leads to Hell. When he Tempted the Captain of our Salvation, he
hoped that all the Kingdoms of the World and all the Glory of them, would be
looked upon as a considerable offer. Mat. 4. And though our Lord disdained the
World, and commanded the God of it to get behind him, yet the offer of the
World is taking with the most, and therefore our fear and jealousy should be
raised. The World is apt to seize upon our time and thoughts and love. And
truly many give the World their whole time, they slight Spiritual things as
imaginary, (which yet are most real) and pursue after the World all their days,
and though in old Age they have one foot as it were in the Grave, yet their
covetousness after it, does not abate but is rather augmented. When we are
prone to lavish out our time upon the World, that Scripture should check us, 1
John 2. 15, 17. Love not the world neither the things that are in the world, if
any man love the world the love of the Father is not in him. The world passes
away and the lusts thereof but he that does the will of God abides for ever.

4. Fear may relate unto our selves. Our spirits are treacherous, therefore we
should fear lest they deal deceitfully with God and with us. Our Souls are of
great worth, therefore we should fear continually while we are in this World,
lest any wrong be done to them, and especially lest they be lost and miscarry
for ever. If we are sensible of the worth of our own Souls, and fear their
being injured; surely we shall be sensible of the worth of time too, and take
care that it be improved to the Souls advantage.

5. Fear may relate unto our Time. We should fear lest it be all gone before
our great work is done. Oh how fast does it post away! Our glass has been
running ever since we were born, and it is nearer and nearer being out every,
moment, and when once it is out the glass will be taken down, and never turned
or set up any more. Time is painted with wings, and is bald behind; should we
not fear, and catch Time by the forelock? The Countryman that saw the River
run so fast concluded unreasonably that the water would quickly be all gone,
then he might go over dryshod. But when we behold time running away it is
reasonable to conclude, 'twill quickly be all gone, and therefore should fear
dallying and delaying as to that great business, for which our time was given
us. Time is hastening to an end, oh let us fear, and hasten our escape, from
the windy Storm and Tempest. Let us hasten to the Lord Jesus that we may be
reconciled, healed, and saved, let us make have and not delay to keep Gods
commandments, Psalm. 119. 60. It is called to day, and to day may be the last
call, and therefore harden not your hearts any longer, Heb. 3. 7, 8.

In the second place I am to give you the Reasons why our Time should be past
in fear.

1. This fear will make us watchful, and to stand upon our guard, and thus to
do is for our Interest, considering we are militant, are engaged in a war with
enemies which are powerful and unwearied, and exceeding watchful to take all
advantages against us. The great Captain gives this Word Watch, unto all the
Saints and Soldiers, Mar. 13. ult. What I say unto you I say unto all Watch.

2. This fear should make us Pray. And to how good an account does that Time
turn which is spent in the duty of prayer. The Devil dreads Prayer, God is
delighted with it, and how is the soul both pleased and profited. He that gives
himself to prayer gives himself unto God, and what will God deny to such an one?

3. This fear will make Time to be redeemed, former negligence will be
lamented, and diligence for the future doubled.

4. This fear will cause us to work out our own Salvation, and to depend on God
to work in us both to will and to do, and then we shall will sincerely, then we
shall work to purpose, Phil. 2. 12, 13.

Use I. Of reproof to wicked men, who instead of passing their Time in fear,
are most sottishly and securely prodigal of it. If an house be lost by fire, if
a ship be lost by Sea, if an Estate be lost by fraud, or if an husband, wife,
or child, be lost by death, how passionately are these losses talked. off But
the loss of Time who laments? Secure souls look upon this loss as not worth
taking notice of. Consider O transgressors, and show your selves men. Is it
reasonable for you to squander away your Time still, who have not one sin
pardoned, who have not set one step in heavens way, who have not done the least
work for God, and who have not made any the least provision for Eternity!

Use II. It serves to inform us of the wisdom as well as happeness of those who
fear always, Prove. 28. 14. Happy is the man that fears always, but he that
hardneth his heart shall fall into mischief. They are indeed the fools who were
not afraid that sin and the world should have their time, and Hell and the
Devil their Souls; but they are truly wise that fear God, and employ their time
in keeping his commandments, for this is the whole of man.

Use III. Of Exhortation, Let me persuade all to pass the time of your
sojourning here in fear. Let the time past of your life suffice to have made
provision for the flesh to fulfill the lusts of it, and be prevailed with to
live the rest of your time in the flesh, not to the lusts of men but unto the
will of God, 1 Pet. 4. 2, 3.

I. Consider when you are tempted fearlessly to mispend time, what
apprehensions others have of time.

1. Some perhaps are upon a sick bed, their consciences awakened, and in a
raging manner reproaching them with their folly in counting time no more
precious; they are upon the brink of despair, and ready to conclude, that the
day of grace is past, and the mercy of the Lord clean gone for ever. Oh mihi
praeteritos referat si Jupiter annos! they wish they had their days to live
over again, that God and Christ; their souls and heaven might have more of
their time and pains and labor.

2. How many serious Christians may be upon their knees, when thou art tri^ling
thy time away, they are spending theirs in prayer and supplication, with strong
crying and tears they lament their sin, they wrestle earnestly for pardon and
grace; oh with what violence do they cry to be delivered from the bondage of
corruption, and from eternal condemnation; they do not put the evil day far
from them, but take care to use all the time well before it comes, that it may
not come upon them as a snare at unawares, Luke 21. 34, 35, 36.

3. When tempted to trifle time away, think with your selves, how many millions
in Hell are bewailing the loss of time. Oh with what anguish do they reflect
upon their misspent days, and weeks, and months, and years! Could we ask the
Sodomites, in whom abundance of idleness was found, what they think of time
now? surely they would answer what Solomon says concerning wisdom. That the
merchandise of Time is better then the merchandise of silver, and the gain
thereof then fine gold, that Time is more precious then rubies, and that all
the things thou can desire are not to be compared to it.

4. Those that in glory are reaping the fruits of serious diligence, what
thoughts have they of Time! they don't at all repent they spent their lives
different from the common custom of the world, the yare far from grudging their
pains and labor for a moment, who have received the recompense of reward, even
a far more exceeding and eternal weight of Glory. Thus think what apprehensions
others have of time.

II. Remember you are upon your good behavior, and if you still mispend your
time it may be shortened. The Lord will not endure to have his Talents still
abused; the slothful servant that is not a good husband, and much more he that
is an ill husband, shall have his Talent taken away from him. The parable of
the figtree that was fruitless though planted in the vineyard is remarkable.
The Lord of the Vineyard after three years expectation of fruit in vain, says
cut it down why cumbreth it the ground. The dresser of the vineyard interceds
for one year longer, but if no fruit then be found, it must be cut down and
made fuel for the fire without remedy, Luke 13. 6, 7, 8, 9.

3 Let death be seriously thought of. That enemy upon the pale horse has been
upon its way toward you ever since you were born, and every day it comes still
nearer. What man is he that lives that shall not see death? Psalm. 89. 48. And
should not you pass your time in holy fear, who are hastening to the grave?

And here let me speak to the Relations of the party deceased, whose will I
understand it was that a Sermon should be Preached, and after Printed, I
suppose for his Relations Spiritual benefit. I was a stranger to him, and
therefore may justly be excused if I enlarge not in his commendation. The dead
as they do not understand, so neither do they need our praises. That which will
be profitable to the living to take notice of, is this, That he dyed young. In
the very prime of his youth, after he had been about half a year an husband, he
was taken away. What age or condition, or place can be named in which we may be
secure from Death? Oh reckon not upon long life, for then you will live
carelessly, but prepare to follow your deceased friend. He found it hard as he
said, to repent and believe, do you pray hard that repentance and faith may be
given you. What apprehensions had he of the worth of Time and Christ when he
was stepping into Eternity? Oh let both Christ and Time be precious to you now.

4. Believe a judgment to come, and that it will be without respect of
persons, this is mentioned as a motive in the verse where my text lies. God
will call you to a severe account shortly for all the Time he has given you in
this world; fear to be found evil and slothful servants, for the doom of such
will be dreadful, Matthew. 25. 30. Cast ye the unprofitable servant into outer
darkness, there shall be weeping and gnashing of teeth. God will judge you
according to your works: Oh fear to employ your Time in the unfruitful works of
darkness. The righteous themselves will scarcely be saved, not without great
difficulty, though none of them shall miss of Salvation. Certainly all should
be awakened, with fear and trembling, to work, and to improve the time of their
sojourning, when they read 1 Pet. 4. 17, 18. What shall the end be of them that
obey not the gospel of God. And if the righteous scarcely be saved, where shall
the ungodly and the sinner appear?

FINIS.
Books Published by Mr. Nath. Vincent, and Sold by Tho. Parkhurst at his shop
in Cheapside, and S. B. at the Bible on London Bridge under the Gate.
COnversion of a Sinner and Day of Grace. Covert from the Storm. Worthy
Walking. The Spirit of Prayer, with Directions for Praying. Heaven or Hell upon
Earth, or, A Discourse concerning Conscience. The Little Child's Catechism,
whereunto is added several short Histories which may Please and Profit them;
with Directions how to Pray. A Sermon at Mr. Janewaies Funeral. A Sermon at Mr.
Cawtons Funeral.
Books lately Printed.
A hundred select Sermons of Tho. Horton, D. D. late of St. Hellens, London.
Doctrine of Providence by John Collins, D. D. Narrative of the Plott by Dr.
Oats. Protestants Answer to that Question, Where was your Church before
Luther? By Tho. Doolittle. Popery no Friend to Peace, an Enemy to Government
and men's Souls. Which is the Church, by Rich. Baxter. An Exposition on the
first five Chapters of the Revelations, By Charles Phelps. A Treatise of Grace
and Temptation, by Tho. Froysell. An Exposition of the Creed, Ten Commandments
and Lords Prayer (according to the Articles and Homilies of the Church of
England) by Tho. Adams. Mr. Lies Exposition of the Assemblies Cathechism.
Principles of Christian Religion, with particular Application to each Head; by
Tho. Gouge. A Glimps of Eternity, to Awaken Sinners and Comfort Saints, by
Abraham Caley. Fair Warning to England to take heed of Popery, or the Fiery
Jesuit.

