A RELATION OF THE Great Success THE KING OF PORTUGAL'S Army had upon the
Spaniards, the 29th of May ( Engl. style) 1663.

By Authority.

LONDON, Printed by Alice Warren, for William Garret, 1663.

A Copy of a LETTER Which the Conde de Ville Flor General of the Portugues Army
wrote to his Majesty of Portugal, giving him an account of the Success in the
Battle, immediately after the gaining it.
BY a Letter of this instant, I gave account no your Majesty how the Enemy rose
from their Camp, retiring themselves, and I endeavored to follow them, with an
intent to give them Battle, putting my self before them: I directed my march to
Estremos, where I overtook them the 8th current; the Enemy had possessed a
much higher Post, which is called the Canal, a League from the Town: I resolved
to set upon them, gaining the Post which they possessed; and disposing my self
to this, I gave the command of the Vangard to Alphonso Turtoda de Mendoza, who
was also assisted by the General of the Artillery, Dn. Luis de Meses, and the
second line to the Conde de la Torre; in the right wing of which, he was
assisted by the General of the Horse, Denis de Mello de Castro, accompanied
with the Maestro de campo General, Pedro Jacques de Megellanez; and the
Leiutenant Generals, Dn. Juan de Silva, Dn. Manoel de Atayde, and Luis de
Acosta, and the Commissaries General Juan de Ocrato, Mattias de Acunia, and
Duarte Fernandez Lobo. In the left wing of the Horse, the General of it, Ma^^el
Freire de Andrada, with his Leiutenant General, Dn. Martin de Ribera, and the
Commissaries General Gomes Freire, and Dn Antonio Maldonado. And drawing from
the first line of the Vangard the Regiment of the Maestro de Camp Juan Turtado
de Mendosa, and a Regiment of English (who in the whole occasion did wonders)
supported by some squadrons of Horse, I commanded to attaque the Posts of the
Enemy, keeping the men in the same order of Battle. The Enemy easily extended
their Posts, and resolved to possess others higher and harder to come to; and
because when the first were taken, it was very hot, and the men much wearied
with their March, it appeared convenient not to go forward, without taking some
rest, so I made a halt; and seeing that the Enemy began to retire at the same
time, I resolved that the Generals of the Horse Denis de Mello, and Manoel
Freire should set upon the Reregard, which was in a plain, and that the lines
of the Army should march in favor of the Horse, and do that which the occasion
should suggest to them. The General of Horse Denis de Mello ordered the attaque
with all the Horse, leaving only on the left wing five Squadrons to the
disposition of the Commissary General Matitas de Acunia, the Ground being very
rough, and the Enemies Horse making a stand on the other side. Marching so
toward the Enemy* there began a fight of much dispute, receiving and giving of
each side very hot charges. Our Word was Our Lady of the Conception, who
assisted us in all parts; for at the same time that the Generals of the Horse
assaulted the Enemy by the left wing, Alphonso Tuntado de Mendosa with the
first line of the Vangard, accompanied with the General of the Artillery Dn
Luis de Mendeses, got up by the most difficult part of the Mountain, to assault
the Regiments of Foot that were upon it, and with obstinate charges, drove them
off from both the heights. After which came forward the Conde de la Torre with
the five Battaillons; that were under the Commissary Mattias de Acunia, and all
of them driving at the dislodging the Enemy, did, (as was to be hoped of such
persons) The Superior and Inferior Officers doing wonders never seen before;
and in the same manner the Soldiers, who with admirable constancy persevered
in the uttermost danger, till they had got the better. In all that the Foot
did, the Maestro de Campo General, the Conte de Shomberg did assist with great
application and care, disposing of what was necessaire with the Sergeant Major
di Battaglia Juan de Silva de Sosa, and with the Lieutenaut Generals Ant.
Tavares de Pina, Pedro Cravero de Campos, and Fernand Martines de Saicas (who
died upon the place) applying present remedies to all that was necessary.

Our small number of Horse fought obstinately with great numbers of the
Enemies, which the General Denis de Mello endeavored to break with much valor
and address, under the protection, of a Reserve which was commanded by the
Lieutenant General Dn. Manoel de Atoide, who with the Commissary Juan de Acrato
did wonders, by the firmness with which he stood, with a great loss of men on
both sides, as could not but be in so hot an occasion. In fine, after many
hours of continued fighting, the Lines advancing, and now there being no more
Foot to help them, but the Regiment of the Maestro de Camp Bernardo de Miranda
Henriques, whom I kept for the last remedy, our Horse being in great danger,
and much shattered by the many wounded, after so many hours fight, and some
Soldiers having retired themselves weary of it, I sent to succor them by the
said Regiment, who with the Sergeant Major De Battaglia, Diego Gomes de
Figuiredo, whom I had kept by me to apply the succor where there was most need
of it; so that arriving and beginning to give the charge, the Enemy quickly
began to be undeceived, after to retire themselves, and presently to fly,
extending themselves by that part of the Campaign (as I had done in the rest)
which they had possessed with their Foot and Artillery, with which the Victory
presently declared it self on your Majesty's side, our Officers and Soldiers
having performed in this occasion most valiant actions, and never seen before.

Here came off hurt on our side, the General Manoel Freire de Andrada, after he
had killed many Castilians, the Mrs. de Campo Simon de Sosa, Manoel de Sosa de
Castro, Diego de Suares de Almeira was killed.

All the Soldiers, and some Officers which were made Prisoners at the
Surrender of Euora, and which the Enemy was carrying away in their Army, got
their liberty. The loss of the Enemy is such, as your Majesty may see by the
list of the Prisoners of greatest account, which goes along with this. The
number is incredible, which for the brevitie of this time, I cannot yet know;
and besides the loss of their Men and Horse, there were gained also 3000.
Carts, 8000. Beasts laden with Munition, 12 pieces of Canon, and 2 other
Pieces, 16000 Oxen, 13 Coaches, many Ovens of Bread; Dn Juan's Standard, his
Secretaria, and all the Furniture of his Chamber, so that he, and the D. de. Sn
German, hardly escaped with their persons.

Your Majesty ought to command that thanks be given to all the Officers of the
Army, for their valor showed in this occasion, which was greater than can be
represented to your Majesty, or that ordinarily happens; and let not your
Majesty think this expression an hyperbole, for it is a pure truth, for having
overcome an Army, with it is total rout, disposed into Posts, which were every
one a Fortification. Of which Victory I give your Majesty the Parabien, at
whose feet I hope to see quickly the Monarchy of Castille surrendered up.

El Conde de Villa Flor.

The List of the Prisoners of Note which have hitherto been discovered.
THe Marquis de Eliche Conde Duque de St. Lucar. The Maestre de Campo Dn. Juan
Henriques. The Maestre de Campo Conde Fiasco. The Maestre de Camp Dn. Angelo
de Gusman, Son to the Duke de Medina de las Torres. The Coronel Conde de Bull.
The Maestre de Campo Don Esteuan de Angulo. The Maestre de Campo Conde de
Escalante. The Coronel Conde de Ferezit. Phelippe de Laguet, Captain of Horse.
The General Gaspe^ Martines. The Conde Ludovico Trosqui, Captain of the Guards.
Don Antonio Montenegro, Commissary General of the Horse. Don Juan de Novales,
Commissary General of the Forces of Milan. The Commissary General Valador. Don
Garcia Sarmiento, Captain of Horse, and Secretary to the Duke de St. German.
The Sergeant Major Don Felippe Roxe Don Alvaro de Guinones. Don Francisco de
Escouar, Captain of the Regiment of Portugal Don Thomas Puccino. Don Angelo
Carafa. Don Ascanio Dodino. Don Gustaccio Gramaccio. Don Alvaro Montilo. Don
Algelo Cosinano.
13. Captains of Foot. 9. More reformed. 15. Engines. 8. More Reformed. 20.
Sergeants. 7. Quartermasters. 3000. Common Soldiers. 2500. More, hurt. And
there are many more, but for the have with which the Courior parts, they cannot
be specified; and of the other particulars, there will be a more ample Relation.

FINIS.

