THE Day of Grace, In which the Chief of SINNERS MAY BE Turned and healed.

By Nathanael Vincent.

2 Cor. 6. 2. Behold, now is the accepted time; Behold, now is the day of
salvation. LONDON, Printed for Tho. Parkhurst at the Golden Bible on
London Bridge, next the Gate. 1669.

To the Reader.
It Is not at all improper to add a Treatise of the Day of Grace, to a Discourse
concerning Conversion. This is the only time wherein he that turns will be
accepted: Oh therefore receive not the Grace of God in vain. Though the sinner
by his iniquity is removed far away from God, the Gulf notwithstanding is not
yet fixed. We are cast out by Nature in a far Country indeed, but this Country
is not Hell, though just upon the borders of Hell: a return is possible unto
our Fathers house; and upon our return how joyfully shall we be embraced!

One principal reason why Time is so exceeding precious, is, because it
contains the Day of Grace. This present time, though so very short, is of
greater value then an whole Eternity hereafter; for then mercy will be out of
reach, and Reprobates unalterably concluded in sin, and under the heavy load of
divine vengeance and indignation. This is the Day of thy gracious visitation:
Waste it not away in doing nothing, or which is worse, in doing wickedly; for
there is another day a coming, which will be a day of darkness and of
gloominess, a day of distress and destruction, if Grace and Salvation be
neglected.

N. V.

The Day of Grace.
Luke 19. 41, 42. And when he was come near, he beheld the City, and wept over
it, saying, If thou had known, even thou, at least in this thy day, the
things which belong unto thy peace! but now they are hid from thine eyes.
THe time was now approaching in which our Lord was to make his Soul an
offering for sin, and to testify his love to his Sheep, by laying down his
life, to redeem theirs from death, which by going astray they had deserved. And
Jerusalem is appointed the Stage, on which Christ was to act the greatest part,
both of sorrow and affection. Well might he cry out, Behold ye that pass by;
Was ever Grief, and Was ever Love like Mine? Unto Jerusalem he comes most
willingly, though he soresaw the Cross and shame. The Head was forward to
suffer himself, that hereby the sufferings of the Members might be prevented.
And according as it was foretold by the Prophet, his approach is not with
outward pomp and splendor; but he is meek and lowly, riding upon an Asses
Foal. Thus he that thought it not robbery to be equal with God, made himself of
no reputation, and humbled himself to this end, that we might be raised and
exalted.

When he was just at the descent of the Mount of Olives, the whole multitude of
the disciples began to rejoice, and to praise God with a loud voice, for all
the mighty works which they had seen, v. 37. They cry Hosanna to the Son of
David, and bless the King that comes in the name of the Lord, saying, Peace in
heaven and glory in the highest, v. 38. Even through the darkest cloud of
Christ's Humiliation, some beams and rays of this Sun of Righteousness, of this
Lord of glory, did break forth. The Pharisees are offended at the Disciples
acclamations, and desire Jesus to rebuke them, v. 39. Unto which unreasonable
request of theirs he makes this reply, That if these should hold their peace,
the stones would immediately cry out, v. 40. As if he had said, My Person, my
Doctrine, my Actions, my Wonders are so evident, that they who are not as
stupid as the stoues themselves must needs be convinced.

At last he comes within view of Jerusalem, and the sight of this faithless,
ungrateful and obstinate City, where so many Prophets had been killed, and
which now it self was so near to desolation, raises a sorrow in his sacred
breast, so that in the midst of his Disciples triumph he bursts out into tears,
saying, If thou had known, even thou, at least in this thy day, the things
which belong to thy peace! but now they are hid from thine eyes.

Which words express how our Lord was affected toward Jerusalems Inhabitants.
His commiseration is very great, and it is joined with a kind of exprobration or
upbraiding of them: he pitties their sad estate, and upbraids their ignorance,
and folly, in not minding the things which would have conduced to their peace
and welfare.

The text may be thus divided.

1. Our Savior mourns: When he came near, he beheld, and wept. 2. The persons
over whom: The City of Jerusalem. 3. The causes why, and they are these,
1. They know not, no not they who had so much means of knowledge, the things
that belonged to their peace.

2. They improved not, but neglected Their day of visitation.

3. This neglect and ignorance of theirs being wilful, was punished with a
greater degree of blindness, Now they are hid from thine ^yes, and that was a
judgment most deplorable.

Beloved, I am to speak-of the Day of Grade I wish you may all know the things
which concern your peace, else Jerusalems punishment may be also yours; the day
may be gone, the lights of the Sanctuary may be put out, and the things of your
peace may be hid from your eyes.

I shall illustrate the words of the Text by this ensuing Commentary upon them.

And when he was come near, he beheld the City. The nearness of a miserable
object does affect the sight and heart. And as with his eyes he saw the City,
so by the eyes of Prophecy he saw the City besieged, the enemy casting a
trench about it, and keeping it in on every side; he foresaw how it would be
laid even with the ground by Roman Armies, and not so much as one stone left
upon another.

And he wept over it. These tears showed the truth of his humane nature, and
how (iniquity excepted) he was in all things made like unto his brethren. Our
Lord could hunger, and groan, and weep, and dye, but sin indeed he could not,
Heb. 4. 15. It was the desire of Christ to execute the office which his Father
had put him in, which was to be a Gatherer and a Savior of the lost Sheep of
the house of Israel: But when he perceived those Sheep transformed into Wolves,
ready to devour their own Shepherd, peremptorily resolved to perish, and to
refuse the salvation which he brought them, it is no wonder if he did not hold
his tears.

Saying, If thou had known, even thou. There is a mixture of grief and
indignation in Christ, at the ignorance and perverseness of miserable Jerusalem;
and this made his speech to be abrupt and imperfect. Calvin translates (...), O
si cognovisses! Our Lord wishes that they had known what so highly and nearly
concerned them. But it is plainly implied that they knew not: and this is that
of which the Prophet long ago complained, Isa. 1. 3. The Ox knows his owner,
and the Ass his Masters crib, but Israel does not know, my people do not
consider. (...), eve^ thou; this is very emphatical. As if Christ should have
said, O thou Jerusalem, who have enjoyed so many means and mercies, and have
slighted and abused them all, notwithstanding all former folly and unkindness
to God, to thy self, I wish that even thou, would at last have opened thy
eyes and ears, and become wise unto thy own salvation.

At least in this thy day. That was a day of special visitation. God who at
sundry times and in diverse manners spoke in time past unto the Fathers by the
Prophets, in that day spoke unto them by his Son. And although many Messengers
and Servant^ which were sent, had been despised and persecuted to the death by
them, yet at least the Son should have been reverenced. This was their day, a
time in which they might have been accepted, a day in which salvation was brought
near to them.

The things which belong unto thy peace! Peace (according to the Hebrew phrase)
does imply all the parts of happ^ness, the principal whereof does certainly lie
in being reconciled to, and enjoying God. But the way of peace and
reconciliation, namely, Justification by faith in Jesus, they knew not. An
humbled Messiah, who was to make men's peace by the blood of his cross, Col. 1.
20. they hid their faces from, and esteemed him not: Being puffed up with their
own righteousness and external privileges and prerogatives, they would not
submit unto the righteousness of faith which is revealed in the Gospel.

But now they are hid from thy eyes. Christ here sets forth the spiritual
judgment which they lay under, and likewise removes the scandal and offense
which his infirm Disciples might be apt to take, because Jerusalem did reject
him. They had long refused to look unto the Lord, that they might be saved; and
now God sends them the spirit of slumber, eyes that they should not see, and
ears that they should not hear, and hearts that they should never understand.
This is a very sore and yet usual punishment, when men receive the grace of God
in vain, and are resolved to walk contrary to the light which shines about them.

The Text does yield several points of Doctrine.

First, Jesus Christ is exceeding full of pity and compassion. His weeping here
over Jerusalem, shows how kindly affectioned he was toward them, and is
toward others in misery.

Secondly, The Lord does grant unto sinners a day of grace, in which pardon and
life are proffered to them, and may be obtained by them. If thou had known in
this thy day.

Thirdly, To know in this day of grace the things which belong to our peace, is
our great happiness and wisdom. If Jerusalem had been so wise, her ruin would
have been prevented.

Fourthly, When sinners will not see, they are smitten many times with
spiritual blindness, and the things of their peace are in a way of judgment hid
from them.

Fifthly, Souls being thus left under darkness, their state is wretched and
deplorable. Our Lord with tears laments this sad condition of Jerusalem.

Doct. 1. The first Doctrine is this, That Jesus Christ is exceeding full of
pity and compassion. The tears which he shed prove this; and if tears will not
satisfy, a little after you may behold him shedding of his blood.

This compassion of Christ extends it self to them that perish, as well as unto
those he saves.

To them that perish his compassion is seen in four things.

1. In causing the Light whereby he is discovered to shine upon them. It Is a
mercy that the lost are told of a Savior, that they are informed how sin has
caused their misery, and Christ is sufficient to cure it. Nay herein (...).
Tender mercy appears, that the Dayspring from on high does visit them that sit
in darkness, which can guide their feet into the way of peace, Luke 1. 78, 79.
They need not say, Who shall ascend into heaven, to understand the means of
fallen man's recovery? The word is nigh, which can give a sufficient
information. 'Twas the great advantage of the Jews, that to them were committed
the Oracles of God, Romans 3. 1, 2. But now those Oracles are pronounced more
fully and plainly; and to enjoy them is the privilege of such, as in a Land of
light have their lot given them. It was great mercy toward Capernaum, that she
was lifted up to Heaven, that such words were spoken, that such works were done
in her; and because she improved not the mercy, how does our Lord upbraid her?

2. Christ's compassion toward them that perish is seen, in calling and
inviting them to come to him: The Marriage Feast is prepared, and the servants
are sent into the highways, to invite all to come, and partake of it, Matthew.
22. Wisdom cries without, she utters her voice in the streets, she cries in
the chief places of concourse; How long ye simple ones will ye love simplicity?
and scorners delight in scorning, and fools hate knowledge? turn ye at my
reproof, etc. Prove. 1. 20, 21, 22. And Prove. 9. 2, 3, 4, 5, 6. we read, Wisdom
has killed her beasts, she has mingled her wine, and furnished her table, she
has sent forth her maidens, she cries upon the highest places of the City;
Whosoever is simple let him turn in hither; as for him that wants understanding,
she says unto him, come eat of my bread, and drink of my wine which I have
mingled; forsake the foolish and live, and go in the way of understanding. Thus
sinners are called after, and though dogs, yet the same bread which is prepared
for the children is proffered to them; the same inestimable benefits of Christ,
as pardon, peace, grace, glory, are tendered to them, which believers have
accepted of; with the same eye salve their eyes shall be anointed; with the
same tried gold they shall be enriched; with the same white raiment all their
nakedness shall be covered, if they will but come and close with Jesus.

3. Christ's compassion toward them that perish is seen, in waiting long that
he may be gracious; he knocks at the door, and he stands knocking there, Rev. 3
20. He stands till his head is filled with dew, and his locks with the drops of
the night. He sees how Satan has admission at his pleasure, and unto Mammon at
first approach the door is set wide open to receive him, but against Christ
it is locked and bolted; and yet his love and patience overcomes these
indignities, and he waits still to see, if at last sinners will consult their
own good, and entertain him. Christ by his Spirit strives long, checking them
from sin, moving them to duty, demonstrating the reasonableness of conversion
and obedience, the danger of continuance in their provocations. Christ does not
go away at the first repulse, nor curse the Fig Tree for the first years
unfruitfulness, but he digs about it and dungs it, and expects a great while,
before that sentence be pronounced, Cut it down, why cumbereth it the ground?

4. Christ's compassion toward them that perish, is seen, in wishing, when for
their obstinacy they are given over to themselves, that they would have
hearkened and ^beyed. Thus he weeps and wishes, that Jerusalem had known what
they were ^gnorant of. And Israel, when for their ^eafness unto, and refusing
of God, they ^ere given up to their own hearts lusts, and suffered to walk
after their own ^ounsels, the Lord wishes, O that my people had hearkened unto
me, and Israel had ^alked in my ways! Psalm. 81. 11, 12, 13. Those that perish
will have no reason to ^omplain of Christ, but of themselves; he wanted not
pity, but to themselves they were unmerciful.

But in the second place; the compassion of our Lord is manifested, and that
principally to them that are saved; they are called Vessels of mercy.

1. Christ receives those he saves, though they come home in rags: The
beggarliness of the Prodigal did not hinder his Father from running to him, and
embracing him. Their emptiness of worth does not stir up his hatred, but his
pity. Christ has enough, and to spare for them. Sinners should not keep off
from Christ, because they cannot bring any grace of their own to commend them:
He can put comeliness upon those, who by sin are never so much deformed. When
we come to our Lord we are overspread with a leprosy, (iniquity is fitly
called by that name) and all our righteousness is as filthy rags; now what
mercy is it, that he takes away our filthy garments, and puts upon us the robe
o^ his own righteousness, and from tha^ worst sort of leprosy does make u^
clean?

2. Christ makes reconciliation for the sins of those who are saved by him. And
considering what woe and misery sin unpardoned exposes the children of men to,
it is an act of mercy to make an atonement for it. Heb. 2. 17. Wherefore in all
thlngs it behoved him to be made like unto his brethren, that he might be a
merciful and faithful High Priest, in things pertaining to God, to make
reconciliation for the sins of the people. That load of guilt and wrath, which
else would sink them into the lowest Hell, the Lord Jesus takes off from the
Heirs of salvation.

3. Christ heals the wounds which their spiritual enemies have made. The good
Samaritan had compassion upon the man that fell among thieves, Luke 10. Our
Lord finds us in a worse case; what wounds have our lusts and Satan made in our
spirits? and truly they are incurable by any but this Physician. When the fiery
Serpents had stung the Israelites, they looked unto the Brazen Serpent, and
looking, they were healed presently. That Brazen Serpent typified Jesus Christ;
and although Conscience be never so much sting, yet He can expel the poison,
and assuage the pain and anguish, and make the Conscience first pure, and after
peaceable.

4. Christ gives rest unto them that labor, and are heavy laden, Matthew. 11.
28. Many are the burdens of believers, but he commands them to cast all their
burdens upon him, and he promises to sustain them. The curse of the Law is a
burden, but Christ redeems them from the curse of the Law, being himself made
a curse for them, Gal. 3. 13. They groan under the dominion of sin, the bondage
of corruption, but the Son of God pulls down sins dominion, and makes them free
indeed. Their poverty and emptiness causes them to sigh and complain; but
Christ Jesus unlocks his unsearchable riches, which are superabundantly
sufficient to replenish them. And he that commands the rich in this world, to
be ready to distribute, to be willing to communicate, surely himself will in no
wise be a Niggard of his spiritual Treasures.

5. Christ succors those he saves, in their temptation. In the hour of
temptation they very much need his pity and aid, and they have both. Dido, in
Virgil, spoke thus to the Trojans, who were cast upon her Coasts,

Non ignara mali miseris succurrere disco, I that have endured misery my self,
know how t^ compassionate and succor the miserable. Our Lord himself, he had
experience of temptations, and he will relieve those that are assaulted as he
was. Hark to the Apostle, Heb. 2. 18. For in that he himself has suffered,
being tempted, he knows how to succor them that are tempted. He knows that
believers enemies are above their match; that sin, and the world, and the God
of it would be too hard for them; therefore his own Power does rest upon them,
which brings them out of the field more then Conquerours.

The Application follows.

USE 1. If our Lord be so compassionate, hereby Faith may be marveliously
encouraged. How safely and gladly may a Soul venture it self in the hands of
such an one? Those are unacquainted with his Bowels, that entertain hard
thoughts concerning him. Why art thou cast down, O desponding spirit? Why art
thou so much disquieted? Why do thou credit the unreasonable suggestions of
the Wicked one? Though he be the Father of lies, yet a greater lie he never
tells, then when he does persuade thee, that Christ is unwilling to receive
them, that see their need of him, and long after him.

1. If he weep over the obstinate, do ye think he will be hard-hearted to the
penitent? If he stretch forth his hands all the day long to the disobedient and
gainsaying, will not his Arms be open to embrace the obedient and complying? If
he goes into the far Country to seek thee, when he has inclined thy heart to
come home, will he shut the door against thee?

2. Consider for the encouragement of faith, That t^^se compassions of Christ
do far transcend and exceed all human mercies. A Mothers bowels do yern,
especially toward her sucking Infant; and yet even these are Marble compared
with the bowels of Christ. Hark how Zion is reproved for her hard surmises,
Isai. 49. 14, 15. But Zion has said, The Lord has forsaken me, and my Lord
has forgotten me. Can a woman forget her sucking child, that she should not
have compassion on the son of her womb? Yea, they may forget, yet will not I
forget thee. How unwilling is a Mother to bring forth Children for the
Murderer? And much more unwilling is this Savior, that any Soul, which is
desirous to be sanctified and saved, should become the Devils prey.

3. Consider, His compassions are joined with such a fullness, that there is
nothing miserable sinners need, but out of this fullness they may have abundant
supply. Our Lord has power as well as pity, why then should we not trust in
him, and go to him at all times, since his power shows him so able, and his
pity proves him so willing to relieve and save?

USE II. Since Christ is so compassionate, surely it is unreasonable to quarrel
at, and refuse to submit unto his yoke: The yoke of such a merciful one, must
needs be granted an easy yoke, and his burden a light burden. Matthew. 11. 30.
The Kingdom of Heaven is like unto a Marriage. And as the Wives subjection unto
a tender and indulgent Husband is sweet and pleasant, so, and much more
pleasant is the Believers subjection unto Christ. Ungodly ones are strangely
prejudiced against the Scepter and Government of Jesus; but indeed it is without
cause; they say, We will not have this Lord to reign over us. It Is a mercy to
be translated into his Kingdom, for then you are freed from other Lords, which
are so imperious, so cruel, and will reward with death all the service which
you do for them. All the precepts of Christ are for your profit, and he forbids
you nothing, but what he sees will h^rm you.

Methinks at the reading of this; the most stubborn should yield and say We
stood out against the Lord of life, but 'twas upon a mistake; we did not think
his service was so near a kin to freedom; we once imagined his commands
grievous, therefore we cast them behind our backs; but now we are resolved to
obey no other, since they are to be esteemed above gold, nay, the finest gold,
and are sweeter then the honey and the honeycomb.

USE III. Since our Lord is so merciful, let me persuade you to the imitation
of him; put on, as the elect of God, bowels of mercies. Among the company of
blessed ones, the merciful are numbered, for they shall obtain mercy, Matthew. 5.
7. Your own souls, and the souls of others should be the special objects of
your pity. Let your own souls be wept over, because guilty of so much sin, and
because by such prodigious defilements rendered so much unlike unto an holy
God. 'Twas a saying of a Father, Flebam merituram Didonem, me mortuum non
flebam. I wept when I read the story of Dido about to kill her self, but my own
condition, though quite dead in sin, I bewailed not. Look into your selves, and
you may behold matter enough for mourning, fresh guilt and stains added to what
were before; here be liberal of your sorrow, where it is so very well deserved.
The souls of others too should have a share in your compassion; Oh weep over
kindred, neighbors, that still are ignorant, aliens, enemies, and wish, and
pray, that they may know the things which belong to their peace, before they
are hid from their eyes!

Thus of the first Doctrine.

Doct. 2. The second follows, That the Lord does grant unto sinners a Day of
Grace, in which pardon and life are proffered to them, and may be obtained by
them. If thou had known in this thy day. This day we read of, Heb. 3. 7, 8.
Wherefore, as the Holy Ghost says, To day, if ye will hear his voice harden
not your hearts. Now Gods voice is heard, and that heart is both wicked and
foolish, which hardens it self. See also 2 Cor. 6. 1, 2. We then, as workers
together with him, beseech you, that ye receive not the grace of God in vain:
for he says, I have heard thee in a time accepted, in the day of salvation
have I succored thee, Behold, now is the accepted time; behold, now is the day
of salvation. Those words (I have heard thee in a time accepted, in the day of
salvation have I succored thee) are spoken by God the Father unto Christ his
Son. Christ himself had (in some sense) a Day of Grace, in which the Father was
well pleased with him; in which the Sacrifice, which he offered up once for the
sins of all, was accepted; in which his strong cries for himself, that he might
be carried through the difficult work of Man's Redemption, were heard; and
accordingly he was succored, and enabled to work out a complete salvation for
the children of men. And hence it comes to pass, that unto them also a day of
grace is granted, in which they may be accepted, and salvation is brought near
them, that they may lay hold upon it.

My work in the handling of this truth will be: First, to show upon what
account the Season of Grace is called a Day. Secondly, to declare what are the
privileges of this Day of Grace. Thirdly, to lay down the properties of it.
Fourthly, I shall give some reasons why such a day is granted. And then
conclude with the Application.

First, Upon what account the Season of Grace is called a Day.

1. The Season of Grace is called a Day, in regard of the light that then
shines. The Sun of Righteousness is risen, and this Day is made by that Suns
shining. Light from the Gospel springs up unto them, which else would have sat
in darkness, and in the region and shadow of death, Matthew. 4. 16. By this light
things are discovered which were hid from Ages and Generations. Gods eternal
counsel to glorify his Grace in the pardon, adoption, cleansing and saving of
men that have all sinned, and thereby come short of his glory, is by this light
made manifest.

The light of Nature is but weak and dim, and cannot make it day; it gives such
a discovery both of God and sin, as is sufficient to leave those that sin
against God without excuse, Romans 1. 20. But the way how enemies may be
reconciled it cannot show. Nay, because the first Covenant ran thus, Do this
and live, the light of Nature does strongly incline us to put a confidence in
our own works, then which nothing is more contrary to the Gospel of the Grace
of God.

But though the Light of Nature be apt to lead out of the way, as well as
imperfect, the Light of the Gospel is sufficient. All that are now in glory
made use of this Guide in their passage through the world. David, Psalm. 19.
does make a comparison between the Light of Nature, and that of the Word: From
the Heavens, Firmament, Sun, and Moon, and other Creatures, something of the
Glory of God may be discovered: but then after he adds, The Law of the Lord is
perfect; as if he had said, From the Word shines forth a greater light, then
from the Sun, and Moon, and Stars; a light, which guides infallibly to the
Light that is everlasting. And this Light is one thing, which makes the Day the
text speaks of.

2. The Season of Grace is called a Day, in that it is designed for working.
When the day comes, though the beasts gather themselves, and lay them down in
their dens, yet man arises and goes forth to his work and labor till the
evening, Psalm. 104. 22, 23. In like manner, this day of the Gospel; though
they, who are brutish, lay them down in the bed of ease, and fall asleep in
carnal security, yet such as have the understanding of men, will go forth unto
their work and labor; and surely they who have lusts to mortify, a world to
overcome, a devil to resist, and souls to save, have work enough to do. Why
stand ye here all the day idle? (says our Lord in the Parable) Matthew. 20. 6.
Spiritual sloth is now unseasonable and unreasonable. Now is the time, and the
only time, for working; Whatever therefore our hand finds to do, we^ should do
it with our whole might. The Painter gave a good reason, why in his Piece he
was so accurate, In Immortalitatem pingo, I paint for immortality; intimating,
that the picture he made, was to continue in view after he was dead and gone:
So we should say, In Aeternitatem operamur, Our days work is for Eternity,
therefore we dare not trifle. The Church is likened unto a Vineyard, and every
one should be a labourer.

3. The Season of Grace is called a Day, in regard of the brevity and shortness
of its continuance; It cannot exceed the term of natural life, and how short
that is experience shows, and the Scripture to affect us, does express by
several notable similitudes: Says the Apostle, What is your life? It is even a
vapor, that appears for a little while, and then vanishes away, Jam. 4. 14.
And Job 9. 25, 26. Now my days are swifter then a post, they flee away, and
see no good; they are passed away as the ships of desire, as the Eagle that
hastes to the prey. How fast does the Post ride? how swiftly does the Ship
sail? what haste does the hungry Eagle make to the prey? Such speed, O man, O
woman, thou art making toward another world. The Day of Grace shortens as thy
life shortens; reflect upon the opportunities thou have lost with grief,
condemn thy folly, and be so wise as now to redeem time, by doubled care and
diligence.

And as this Day of Grace cannot exceed the bounds of life, so it may come to a
period before. Long resisting of the Spirit, and standing out against the means
of Grace, the Lord may, and often does punish, by resolving, his Spirit shall
strive no longer, and that to the working of Grace, the means shall never be
made effectual: The accepted time is not (...), but (...), not an Age, but a
Day, and much of this day is gone already. Now as the Traveller being
straightened, as to time, makes the greater speed, so should we in our Christian
race; we should lay aside the clogs of the world, and the weights of sin, that
we may run with the greater freedom and patience, Hebr. 12. 1.

We may observe great difference in the days of the year; very long they are
in the midst of Summer, in comparison with what they are in the depth of
Winter. And verily such an inequality there is between the day of grace, which
some have, and which others do enjoy. And what know thou, O secure soul, who
reckonest upon a long season yet to come, but that thy day of grace may prove
as it were a winters day, having not half so many hours, as to others are
allotted! Rouse up thy self therefore, and loose no more of that time which is
so exceeding short at longest, and may be so much shorter then thou imaginest.

4. The Season of Grace is called a Day, with relation to the night that is
coming; and when the night is come, thy main work cannot be done, if then it be
undone; and if it be undone, thou thy self art undone for ever. I must work the
work of him that sent me while it is day (says Christ) the night comes, when
no man can work, John 9. 4. When the day of the righteous concludes, they rest
from their labor, and their works follow them; and though the night of death
overspreads their earthly tabernacle, yet their spirits are made perfect, and
it is an everlasting day of glory with them. And on the other side, when the day
of the wicked comes to a period, either they are left under invincible
blindness, and deadness, and obduration; and how can they work then, unless the
works of darkness? or else death finishes both the day of life and grace
together, and then 'twill be too late to think of working, for they will be
bound hand and foot, and thrown into outer darkness. When you hear of a day of
grace, withal remember, that the night and darknes^ are hastening; and if so,
for you to delay that great business, for which this day i^ afforded, shows the
worst and most pernicious imprudence. Let me speak to you in the words of our
Lord, John 12* 35. Yet a little while is the light wit^ you; walk while ye have
the light, le^^ darkness come upon you; for he that walks in darkness knows
not whither he goes*

In the second place, I am to declare the privileges of the Day of Grace*
These are Privileges of inestimable value: the loss of these, and of the hopes
that ever they will be again enjoyed, is one thing which makes Hell so sad ^
place. A time of trade and thriving in the world, a time of peace, and plenty,
and outward prosperity, though to be prayed for and prized, yet it is nothing
near so much to be prized as the accepted time, as the day of salvation.

The privileges of the Day of Grace are these following.

1. One is the enjoyment of the Word of God. Because of this Israel of old was
looked upon as priviledg'd above the whole earth besides, Psalm. 147. 10, 20. He
shows his Word unto Jacob, his Statutes and his Judgments to the children of
Israel; he has not dealt so with any nation; and as for his Judgments they
have not known them. The Saints in Scripture, whose eyes were more fully open,
and whose judgments were more clear, to apprehend the worth of things, what an
estimate do they put upon the Word of God! What was David's judgment concerning
it? He says, Psalm. 119. 103. How sweet are thy words unto my taste! ^ea,
sweeter then honey to my mouth: And ver. 72. The law of thy mouth is better
unto me then thousands of gold and silver. Indeed this whole Psalm may be
called a Psalm of praise, that is to say, of the Word of God; and David's
judgment is not to be undervalued, who is called, a man after Gods own heart.
Holy Job esteemed this Word at an high rate, when he made that profession, it
was va^ued more then his necessary food, Job 23. 12. Hence comes that Wisdom,
which the Topaz of Aethiopia cannot equal, and the price whereof is above
Rubies.

Now in the Day of Grace this Word is vouchsafed; you both have it to search
into it your selves, and you have it opened and applied by the ministry of the
Gospel.

1. You may search into it your selves. How many thousands under Antichristian
bondage, enjoy not this privilege, to have the Scriptures in a known tongue?
The Word is the Souls food: Cruel Papists! who deny the soul bread. The Word is
the Key, which unlocks the Treasures both of Grace and Glory: Cruel Papists!
who take away the Key of knowledge, enter not themselves, and hinder those that
would. The Word is the Souls weapon, whereby the Wicked one is is overcome:
Cruel Papists! who took this weapon out of its hand, and so betrayed it into
the hands of Satan. Though the command of Christ be express, to search the
Scriptures, Jeh. 5. 39. Though the Apostle Paul says, Let the Word dwell in
you richly, Colos. 3. 16. Though Timothy from his childhood wa^ admitted to,
and made acquainted with the Scriptures, which made him wise t^ salvation, 2 Timothy 3. 15. Though Chrysostom (with whom the other Fathers generally as to this
particular, agree) does tell us, Hom. 9. in Epist. ad Col. (...), That all
evils are caused by the Scriptures ignorance: Yet unto how many, under Popery,
are the Scriptures denied?

It was thus in this our Land not many scores of years ago, Romish darkness as
thick here as in other places: But now the Bushel is taken off from the Lamp of
the Word, all may be enlightened and directed by it, which foolishly shut not
their eyes against it. You have the Word in your houses, in your hands; oh that
it were in more heads and hearts! You may daily have recourse to this Word, for
counsel, for quickening, and comfort; and if you will but give up your selves to
it, that Promise shall assuredly be fulfilled, Prove. 6. 22. When thou go it
shall lead thee, when thou sleep it shall keep thee, when thou awakest it
shall talk with thee. As the Word does guide and guard them that entertain it,
so it talks with them, it tells them of such things, as draw forth their
desires, inflame their love, put them upon labor, and fill them with
unspeakable joy.

2. You have this Word opened and applied by the ministry of the Gospel.
Ministers are yet with you, and that is a great privilege, for with them Christ
has promised to be always to the end of the world, Matthew. 28. ult. It Is their
business to divide the Word, and to give to every one his portion. They foresee
the storm, and warn the wicked to turn and fly unto a place of refuge, they
encourage those who have true (though but weak) grace, and show how those
Promises and Comforts, which they hear of, belong to them, though they are so
apt to thrust them away from themselves. Ministers, they do both bind and
loose, they bind the impenitent and unbelieving sinner under the curse, under
wrath, and he is bound in Heaven; for the sentence that the Gospel passes upon
him, is in Heaven ratified. But if the impenitent soul is broken, mourns for
sin, loathes it, leaves it; if the unbelieving sinner, which before rejected
Christ, receives him, then Ministers have commission to loose him, whom before
they bound, and he is loosed in Heaven; whom the Word declares justified, to be
sure the God of Heaven has acquitted. And truly Ministers bind with this
design, that afterward they may loose; they denounce threats, that, sinners
being awakened and contrite, they may apply the Promises.

These Ambassadors of Christ, come and entreat you to be reconciled unto God,
and as they inform you upon what articles he will be at peace with you, so they
use many arguments to work upon your consciences and affections; they will not
let you alone in your vanity, but Sabbath after Sabbath cry to you, and tell
you, that when you rush into sin you rush into a battle, and it is against that
great God, who must needs be too hard for you: Who ever fought with him, and
got any thing but blows, wounds and death? Who ever hardened himself against him
and prospered? Job 9. 4. They are ever commending Jesus Christ to you, and
declaring how able, and how willing he is to save you, and how certain you are
to be damned without him. And is it not a privilege to be thus importuned for
your own good? to have blessedness and life in a manner obtruded and forced
upon you? Now Messengers of Peace are sent in this Day of Grace; now glad
tidings are brought, that God is willing to be reconciled; but when once you
come to the Region of darkness below, such tidings will never come to your ears
more.

The greatness of this privilege, to enjoy the Word, will further appear, if
the admirable effects of the Word of God are duly considered.

1. The Word of God does make the simple wise, Psalm. 119. 130. The entrance of
thy words gives light, it gives understanding to the simple. Those, whom
Satan before befooled, putting them off with husks instead of what is solid and
satisfying, are by the Word made too wise for this subtle Serpent: Now they are
undeceived, and perceive how little fruit they have had of their evil works,
therefore they are ashamed of them, and of their own folly, in giving way to
them. The Word discovers the pearl of price to them, and makes them wise
Merchants, they sell all to purchase it: This wisdom which the Word infuses, is
not of this world, nor of the Princes of this world, which come to naught, 1
Cor. 2. 6. The great ones of the earth may be prudent, in choosing and ordering
the means, for the attaining of the end which they aim at, but in the choice of
their end, they discover the greatest simplicity. All that greatness and glory,
which they design, and themselves also, will come to naught; Death will
certainly and speedily contract all their honor and power, and cover it with
those two words, Hic jacet, Here it all lies buried. But the wisdom, which the
Word imparts, makes us to look higher, at a better and more enduring substance,
at an inheritance which never fades away: And the Word shows, how by
sanctification we may be prepared for that inheritance; and those who are made
meet to be so, shall at length be made partakers of it. While the Day of Grace
lasts, thou may be made wise to salvation; but if this be not improved, in
the greatness of thy folly thou shall go astray, and dye without instruction,
Prove. 5. 23.

2. This Word does raise the dead to life. That Voice, Arise ye dead and come
to Jesus, must needs be powerful, since upon it follows the first Resurrection;
John 5. 25. Verily, verily, I say unto you, the hour is coming, and now is,
when the dead shall hear the voice of the Son of God, and they that hear shall
live. At the hearing of this Word of God, the Conscience, which was before
stupid, is startled; the heart, that was all of stone, becomes a heart of
flesh, it is tender and sensible, it feels the weight of sin and of the curse,
and longs to be freed from both, though before it mattered neither. A new
principle of grace is put into the Soul, whereby it is inclined toward God,
and acts for him. The Lord is breathed after, and there is a desire to please
him now, as there was formerly to please the flesh, by fulfilling the lusts of
it. O dismal state to lie dead in sin! to be senseless and unconcerned under
such a load! But that is a life indeed, to be alive to God. And while this day
of salvation continues, thou may be questioned; but if this be lost, the
second death will be thy portion, and then Life will be eternally far from
thee.

3. This Word does cleanse those defilements, which nothing in the world can do
away. The Word of God is compared to fire, and to an hammer, as an hammer it
breaks the rocky heart, and then as fire it melts the heart, and from its dross
does purify it: John 15. 3. Now are ye clean, through the Word which I have
spoken to you. In the Word, as in a glass, we may behold the abominable
filthiness, and vile ingratitude, that is in sin; and also the beauty of
holiness is presented to our eye; no wonder then, if the former be abhorred,
the latter desired. Besides, the Word holds forth a Promise from the Lord
himself, to make the sinner clean, and that from all filthiness both of the
flesh and spirit, Ezekiel. 36. 25. 2 Cor. 7. 1. The Day of Grace is a day of
healing; now thou may be purged and cured of thy spiritual plagues; but if
this season be neglected, thou will dye of them.

5. This Word does afford such peace and joy, as the creatures cannot yield.
Corn, and Wine, and Oil, cannot yield such true comfort. Hark to David, Psalm.
119. 111. Thy testimonies have I taken as an heritage for ever, for they are
the rejoicing of my heart. In sensual mirth the heart is sad, misgives, and is
unsatisfied; but the Word makes the very heart joyful. In the Word, we may see
at present the reconciled face of God, the frowns and other signs of anger
gone, and it speaks plainly of fuller manifestations, and infinitely greater
pleasures, which are reserved for hereafter; and the lively hopes of these,
which are so near, as well as sure and glorious, may well make the heart to
leap for joy.

5. This Word is able to build up those who are converted, and to bring them
safe unto their Country: It Is a means to increase the grace, which it is a means
to work: As it is the incorruptible seed, whereby we are regenerated and
begotten again, so it is the milk wherewith we grow and thrive in holiness.
Act. 20. 32. I commend you to God, and to the word of his grace, which is able
to build you up, and to give you an inheritance among all them that are
sanctified. I might add, That even those whom the Word does not savingly
change, yet it prevails upon many times a great way, it brings them near to the
Kingdom, and it is their own fault that they miss of it.

And seeing the Word of God has such effects, that the enjoyment of it is a
great privilege, is without controversy.

2. Another privilege of the Day of Grace, is the presence of the Spirit. The
Word, and all other Ordinances, without the Spirit, are but like the carcass
without the soul. He makes the Word quick and powerful, and sharper then a
two-edged Sword, which also would be found but a dead and inefficacious letter.
It Is observed concerning the hotter Climates, that when the Sun is up, and
begins to shine, and scorch more vehemently, there is also a wind arises to fan
and cool the dwellers there, else those Regions would be uninhabitable. In like
manner, where the Sun of the Gospel shines, there is the wind of the Spirit;
and these his gales, how refreshing, how powerful are they? The acc^sses of the
Spirit are much to be observed and esteemed; without his concurrence, no
advantage will be reaped by all the means of grace we use.

If the several operations of the Spirit are considered, 'twill be very evident
what a privilege of the Day of Grace this is, to enjoy his presence.

1. It Is the work of the Spirit to convince. Though the secure ones of the
world had rather be let alone to sleep on, and cannot endure to be jogged by
conviction; yet these convictions are great mercies. What the Spirit does
convince the world of, our Lord informs us, John 16. 8. And when he is come, he
will reprove or convince the world of sin, of righteousness and of judgment: of
sin, because they believe not on me, of righteousness, because I go to the
Father, and ye see me no more; of judgment, because the Prince of this world is
judged. The Spirit convinces men of sin; he shows the evil in it, and the
danger of it, and among other sins, that grand one of unbelief, that is to say,
their rejecting Christ so long, and slighting and refusing the remedy he
proffers, is in a special manner set home upon their hearts to their affliction
and humbling. He convinces likewise of righteousness as well as of sin. He
discovers the righteousness of Christ, whereby all sin may be covered; and this
righteousness appears to be complete and accepted, because Christ is gone to
his Father. Christ undertook by his sufferings to satisfy for our offenses;
and if the satisfaction had not been full, he would never have been rid of the
curse, which, sin being imputed to him, was laid upon him; neither would his
righteous Father have suffered him to have sit down in the Throne with him. But
now since he is gone to his Father, and set down in the Throne, we may
conclude, he has paid the utmost farthing of our debt; and through him the
Father is ready to show grace and favor to us. And if the conviction and sight
of sin cast down, the discovery of this righteousness may again revive. It Is a
happiness to see our scores, since we are showed a way how to have them all
crossed; were it not for the sight of the one, we should never mind the other.

Again, the Spirit does convince of Judgment. By Judgment we may understand,
the condemnation of the impenitent and unbelieving, who, though they are
convinced of sin, continue in sin; and though Christ be proffered, still refuse
to embrace him. The Prince of this world is judged, and condemned; and shall
these, who sin against a remedy (which the Devil never did) escape? No
certainly, God, who spared not the Angels which sinned, but cast them down to
hell, knows how to reserve the unjust unto the day of judgment to be punished,
2 Pet. 2 4, 9. Or else by Judgment we may understand, the Government and
Kingdom of Jesus Christ. All power is given to him, and Judgment committed into
his hand. Satan, the Prince of this world, is already cast out and overcome.
And if he has spoiled principalities and powers, certainly all his foes will
be made his footstool. Well then, it highly concerns all to submit unto the
Scepter of Christ, since else they will be dashed in pieces by him. And in this
Day of Grace, Christ is ready to pass by former rebellions, if you now will
become obedient to him

2. It Is the work of the Spirit to renew. It Is a difficult matter to change an
heart that is so unconceivably wicked as man's is; and yet the Spirit does
effect this change; he shows his mighty power, in causing a vehement love to be
turned into a perfect hatred. Sin, which was loved better then the soul, better
then salvation, the heart by the Spirit is turned against it, and how earnest
are the cries that it may not reign, no, nor live any longer! And Holiness,
against which there was a very strong, though unreasonable antipathy, is now
hungered and thirsted after; there is a tide which runs upwards, contrary to the
former stream which ran downward. The Lord has those affections, which before
sin and the world commanded. The desert is become as Sharon, and in the ruins
which corruption has made, there is a Temple for the Spirit of God to dwell
in. The Day of Grace is the only time to be made new creatures in. Now thy
earthly heart may be made heavenly, thy impure heart cleansed, thy mind, which
was vain, carnal, enmity against God, may be made serious, and to approve, and
subject it self to the Law of God.

3. It Is the work of the Spirit to guide. They who are the children of God, are
lead by him, and it is in the way everlasting that he leads them; they are
directed into such a path, as will certainly bring them to the everlasting
enjoyment of the Eternal God. Neither does he only guide, but strengthen; the
Spirit puts might into their inner man, and makes them to hold on their way,
till they come to the blessed end of it. We have all like sheep gone astray, we
have turned every one to his own way, Isa. 53. 6. But in this Day of Grace, the
Spirit is near, to chalk out a path, in which we cannot miss of happiness, and
to help us over all the stumbling blocks, and difficulties, which are cast in
our way. The Spirit does also comfort as well as strengthen: He sheds abroad
the sense of the love o^ God into the heart; and such a joy issues from this
sense of love, that tribulation cannot turn into sorrow.

4. Many of them that perish, have experience, while this Day of Grace
continues, of the Spirits workings. The Spirit does use a kind of holy
violence, to hinder them from pulling down vengeance upon themselves. Thus he
did strive with the old world in the day of their visitation. 1 Pet. 3. 18, 19,
20. Christ was quickened by the Spirit, by which also he went and preached unto
the spirits in prison, which sometime were disobedient, when once the long
suffering of God waited in the days of Noah. This place is wrested, and may
seem difficult, but the meaning is plainly this, That Christ was raised from
the dead by the power of the Holy Ghost, by which Holy Ghost, accompanying the
ministry of the ancient Patriarks, he preached unto the impenitent sinners of
the old world, whose spirits are now imprisoned in hell, because ^n their life
time they were disobedient ^o the Spirits voice, all the while the ^ong
suffering of God did wait upon them. Thus the Spirit likewise did ^trive with
the children of Israel, but ^hey rebelled, and vexed the holy Spirit of God,
Isai 63. 10. It Is not an unusual thing, for the Spirit to enlighten and a^aken
the Conscience, to clap chains and ^etters upon corruption, for a while, that
^^ breaks not forth as formerly, to con^^rain unto a frequent performance of
duty. But the Soul hankers after its beloved lusts and vanities, grows weary of
the Spirits restraint, grudges the time and pains which duty takes up, and
wishes that the Spirit would go away, and accordingly the Holy Ghost departs
from him. However this is true, that the Spirit works much, and would more,
were he not resisted. That Is the second privilege of the Day of Grace, the
presence of the Spirit.

3. Another privilege of the Day of Grace, is liberty to come to the Throne of
Grace. All flesh is now invited to the Hearer of Prayers, and their prayers
shall be regarded, if they no longer regard iniquity.

1. The Lord now is near, and may b^ found, Isai. 55. 6. His merciful nature
inclines him to come to the help of them that need it. As he is near to give
the^ that grace which they cry for, so to giv^ them grace to cry after a right
manner* We cannot so much as come that w^ may be helped, unless we are helped
t^ come. The Lord is within hearing o^ all that call; who ever sought him
seri^usly, and sought in vain? He is so nea^ as to hear our very whispered
supplications, and to take notice of the inward groanings of our spirits, Psalm.
38. 9. Lord, all my desire is before thee, and my groaning is not hid from thee.

But some may object, Does not the Scripture say, that the Lord and his
salvation are far from the wicked? and therefore wicked ones have no
encouragement to come to him.

Well, But if the wicked man does cry, that he may be renewed, and that his
wickedness, both as to the guilt and practice, may be put far away from him,
then the Lord will draw near immediately.

2. God is not only in this day of grace willing to be found, but he seeks
after us. John 4. 23. The true worshippers shall worship the Father in spirit
and in truth, for the Father seeks such to worship him. Fervent prayer is
delightful music in his ears, Cant. 2. 14. O my Dove, that art in the clefts
of the rocks, in the secret places of the stairs; let me see thy coun^enance,
let me hear thy voice, for sweet is thy voice, and thy countenance is comely.
The Lord is pleased to see us gather about him, and to hear us cry for this,
and that, and the other mercy, since his mercies are so great a multitude, that
he has enough and enough for all. Nay, the Lord himself does seek to us, and
beseech us to be reconciled, 2 Cor. 5. 20. And if he entreat us to accept of
mercy, shall not we speed in our entreaties for the obtaining of it?

3. The promise which God has made may now be pleaded. This is the time to lay
hold upon his Covenant. Lord! thou have promised to blot out iniquity as a
cloud; oh when shall this cloud be scattered, that I may walk in the light of
thy countenance! Thou have promised a new heart; when shall this heart of mine
be changed! when shall it burn with love to thee, and indignation against sin,
which does offend thee! Lord! Thou have promised to take away the heart of
stone, and to transform the adamant into flesh; oh why am I so hard and stupid!
why, since I have sinned so much, should I sorrow so little! Again, Thou have
promised to make me clean; Lord, when, oh when, will it once be! Thus may we
urge the Promises, and he that made them will give us cause to adore his
faithfulness.

The worst of men, the chief of sinners, may urge the promise of a new heart,
and of washing from filthiness, as long as they seek unto the God of Israel to
do this for them, Ezekiel. 36. 37. and are so far wrought upon, as to desire to be
sanctified; the whole Covenant shall be made good to them, if their unbelief of
Gods power and truth be not an hinderance.

4. Now in this Day of Grace the great High Priest stands ready to intercede
for us. Never any sincerely begged for pardon and for grace, but Christ prayed
that Prayer over again, and a gracious return was made to it. The Spirit also
is ready to help infirmities, to fill our hearts with such desires as shall be
surely satisfied; and truly we have to do with a God, who of the best things,
which are most needful, most desirable, is always most liberal. Now are the
mollia fandi tempora, the times to speak and speed; but when this gracious
season is gone, ah then the loudest cries will be in vain; God will hear,
Christ will intercede, the Spirit help no more.

4. Another privilege of the Day of Grace is this, That now the way is open to
the Kingdom. As you may come to the Throne of Grace, so it is possible to get
into the Throne of Glory, Rev. 3. 21. To him that overcomes will I grant to
sit with me in my Throne, even as I overcame, and am set down with my Father in
his Throne. Our Lord does stand, as it were, with a Crown of Life in his hand,
and says, Believe in me, and continue faithful to the death, and this Crown
shall be put upon your heads. The Kingdom is offered, and the sure way to the
Kingdom is revealed. Life and Immortality are brought to light by the Gospel,
that is, such a blessed and glorious life, as will never by death have a
period; and if you cease to do evil, learn to do well, and patiently continue
in well-doing, this eternal life shall assuredly be given you.

The foolish Virgins had a Day o^ Grace as well as the wise: The Bridegroom
came, and the door was open; i^ they had been ready, they might have entered;
but having lost the opportunity, they knocked at last, but it was too late the
door was shut, and they were sent away with, I know you not, Matthew. 25. We read
of a Ladder that reached from earth to heaven; now there is a possibility of
climbing up thither: But there is no Ladder that reaches from hell to heaven:
If this present day of salvation be lost, salvation it self also will be lost
for ever.

5. Another privilege of the Day of Grace is this, That during this season the
state of the wicked is not unalterable. It Is true, the Holy Ghost expressly
says, that impenitent and unbelieving ones are condemned already, Joh. 3. 18.
Sentence of condemnation is past, but it may be repealed, if they at last are
brought to mourn for their rejecting of a Savior, and with their hearts
believe in the Name of the only begotten Son of God; the consequent of this
faith will be freedom from condemnation, Romans 8. 1. There is therefore now no
condemnation to them that are in Christ Jesus, who walk not after the flesh,
but after the Spirit. There was condemnation heretofore to them as well as to
others, but now there is none, for they are in Christ, and show it, by
renouncing the lusts and works of the flesh, and giving themselves up to the
Spirits guidance.

They whom sin has set at a great distance from Christ, are called to come to
him; and while this Day of Grace lasts, that word holds good, I will in no wise
cast out. But when this day is done, then 'twill be, I will in no wise receive.
The Lamb himself then will be full of wrath, and that is dreadful. The Lamb can
pacify the anger of God, but who can appease the Lambs anger? When the only
Reconciler is himself irreconcilable; when the only Intercessour is
inexorable; when the only Savior punishes with everlasting destruction, what
hope of help remains then?

But as yet it is possible for Rebels to obtain a pardon, and to be made
children. Though thou have sinned thy self near to hell, yet thou have not
sinned thy self into hell. Though sin has abounded, if thou art brought by the
entering of the Law, to a sense how thy offenses have abounded, Grace will much
more abound, Romans 5. 20. The Lord has turned and changed as bad as the worst
of you, and that which has been done may be done again, since his hand is as
mighty to save, and his Grace as free as ever.

I have done with the privileges of this Day of Grace. In the third place
follow the properties of it, which are these.

1. This Day of Grace is uncertain, as to its duration, it is more uncertain
then the day of life, for that may end before this does: Nay, the Day of Grace
may be past, while the very means of Grace continue. The acceptable time was
passed with the Jews, when the Prophet was sent to preach among them. Hark what
a sad Commission he had, Isa. 6. 9, 10. Go make the heart of this people fat,
make their ears heavy, and shut their eyes, lest they see with their eyes, and
hear with their ears, and understand with their hearts, and convert, and be
healed. It Is dreadful when the Word shall make the ear more deaf, and the Light
the eye more blind, and awakening means the heart more gross and stupid.

The Sons of Eli had outstood their day, and yet after this their Father
admonishes them, and endeavors to reclaim them. They were lascivious, and made
themselves vile; and Eli said, It Is no good report I hear of you, my sons, ye
make the Lords people to transgress: If one man sin against another, the Judge
shall judge him; but if a man sin against the Lord, who shall entreat for him?
Notwithstanding they hearkened not unto the voice of their Father, because the
Lord would slay them. When Drunkards, Sorcerers, Liars, Whoremongers,
Worldlings, are reproved often, and will not hearken, who knows but the season
of mercy may be ended, and the Lord intends to slay them, to damn them: And if
at the hearing of this they are unconcerned, there is greater cause to fear
(though we cannot absolutely conclude) that it is so indeed.

The day of grace is uncertain: the means of grace may be before you are aware
removed. The golden Candlestick does not stand so fast in any place, as that
it is impossible it should be took away. Tremble at that threatening uttered to
the Church of Ephesus, Rev. 2. 5. I will come unto thee quickly, and remove thy
candlestick out of his place, except thou repent. And although Ordinances
remain, a blessing may be withheld from them. Thou do not know but every
call may be the last time of asking, and Christ may for ever after hold his
peace; and therefore presently give consent to be espoused to him; thou do
not know, but that every motion of the Spirit may have his last striving with
thee, and if thou still resistest, the Spirit may take his leave, and say,
Foolish Soul, go on in sin, go on to hell, I will not strive any more to hinder
thee.

2. This Day of Grace is exceeding precious: This is the very flower and cream
of time. What Is the reason the Psalmist begs, the Lord would teach him to
number his days aright? Psalm. 90. 12. What Is the reason one Apostle exhorts,
See then that ye walk circumspectly, not as fools, but as wise, redeeming the
time? Ephesians. 5. 15, 16. and another advises, Pass the time of your sojourning
here in fear, 1 Pet. 1. 17. Surely these holy men saw more in time, then most
in the world are aware of; they were sensible, the present time contains the
Day of Grace; and that eternal Glory must now be got, or lost for ever. If
there were no hope at all of being reconciled unto God, of obtaining mercy, and
finding grace, alas our time would be of no value! But we may without
prejudice to truth affirm, that time is more precious then gold; for now only
Christ, who is so precious, is to be received; now only the Soul, which is so
precious, is to be secured.

The Apostle calls this the accepted time, and the day of salvation: If now we
come the Lord will accept us, and give his Son, himself, and freely all things
to us; and Salvation, which since we are lost we so much need, shall not be
denied. This Salvation is called Salvation of the Soul, Heb. 10. 39. The better
part, the Jewel which the Destroyer principally aims at, and designs to make
his prey, is secured. This salvation also is affirmed to be great, everlasting,
and salvation to the uttermost. From the greatest evils the heirs of salvation
are delivered, everlastingly delivered, and that good work which is begun in
them, shall be perfected to the uttermost, and all of them shall stand in
Glory, as so many Monuments of Power, and Mercy, and Grace, unto Eternity. And
is not the Day of Grace precious, since a day of such salvation?

3. This Day of Grace is a Day of Power, Psalm. 110. 3. Thy people shall be
willing in the day of thy power. The Arm of the Lord is now revealed, in making
the report of the Gospel to be believed; the same power is exerted in raising a
sinner to the life of faith, that was shown in raising up Jesus our Lord from
the dead. Strong holds are pulled down, reasonings against Religion, as if it
were either absurd, or intollerably burthensom, are silenced. Those lusts,
which before bare all the sway, have a deadly wound, which shall not be healed
again. Sins dominion is overthrown, and the world is overcome, it is now under
foot, which used to have its seat in the very heart. Thus believers find this
day a day of power. They are powerfully drawn to Jesus Christ, and as
powerfully upheld and supported by him.

And of this power the ungodly are not without some taste and experience.
Mighty convictions and restraints for a while they have, but by degrees they
grow stupid, and get loose again, and then fulfill their fleshly and their
worldly lusts with the greater eagerness; just as water being damned up, when
that restraint is taken away, does run with greater strength and speed for
having been restrained.

4. This Day of Grace it is but one when this is gone, another is not to be
expected. In Nature there is a vicissitude of day and night, even at midnight
'twill not be many hours before the morning and the light return, Soles
occidere and redire possunt; but the night which follows after the Day of Grace
is everlasting. The abused light of the Gospel will be followed with that which
is called, (...), The blackness of darkness for ever. Life indeed will return
again at the general resurrection, but another season of mercy will not be
vouchsafed. The Day of Grace is like the Dove, which Noah sent the third time
out of the Ark, when once it is flown away, 'twill return no more. What mean the
careless world to sport, and play, and sin away this golden season? Every
moment that slips by you is irrevocable; and it is but a little while, and the
whole stock will be spent of this accepted time: Oh improve some of it, at
least, before it be all gone.

If after death you were certain to be sent into the world again, and to hear
the joyful sound of the Gospel again, and that the Lord again would try you,
and wait that he might be gracious, then present carelessness were not
altogether so much without apology. But since immediately upon your
dissolution, you must go to your long, your eternal home, either of weal or woe,
oh let Eternity, which is just at the door, be provided for, before this your
day be ended.

Thus you have the Properties of the Day of Grace. In the fourth place I am to
lay down the Reasons, why such a Day of Grace is granted. Several reasons of
this may be assigned.

1. One shall be drawn from the Son's Incarnation, and taking our nature on
him. Hence it comes to pass, that unto man such kindness is expressed. The
Apostle says, Verily, he took not on him the nature of Angels, but he took on
him the seed of Abraham, Heb. 2. 16. He was made in the likeness of men,
therefore mankind is the dearer to him. There is a difference put between
apostate Angels and fallen men; I speak even of those, that through their own
wickedness and folly miss of salvation. The reprobate Angels never had a remedy
provided, nor a Day of Grace afforded; Christ assumed not their nature, but as
soon as ever they had sinned, they fell, like lightning, suddenly, in the
twinkling of an eye, from Heaven to Hell. But man was not thus dealt with; even
those whom the Apostle calls Vessels of wrath fitted to destruction, are yet
endured with much longsuffering, Romans 9. 22. Their salvation is in it self
really possible, I say, in it self, though all things considered, there is an
impossibility of any other event, then the destruction of sinners continuing in
their rebellions; and this real possibility of salvation will make them cast
the whole blame of their perdition on themselves, that the day of salvation was
trifled away, and the salvation of that day was neglected.

This matter may be made more obvious and plain by a similitude. The Apostle
Paul, Acts 27. admonishes the Centurion, who was to conduct him to Rome, that
the voyage they were about to make, would be with much damage and hurt, not
only of the lading and ship, but also of their lives. Who can deny, that the
tarrying in the Haven where they were, and where they might have been in
safeguard, was in it self really possible? and they could not reasonably lay
the blame of their shipwreck on Gods decree and determination, but upon their
own rashness. In like manner sinners are admonished, that if they go on in
wickedness 'twill be to their hurt and eternal damage, not only of their lives,
but also of their souls. Who can deny, that the abstaining from such and such
sins is really possible? therefore Gods decree is not to be blamed (which
brings no coaction upon the will of man) but man's own perverseness, if he is
wracked, and miscarries to eternity.

We read of the kindness and love of God our Savior toward man appearing,
Tit. 3. 4. The Son of God was manifested in the flesh of man; and upon this
score it is that light comes into the world, and shines even upon those dark
souls that are unwilling to comprehend it, and salvation is proffered also unto
them that refuse to embrace it.

2. A Day of Grace is granted, that the power of God may be known. His power is
much spoken of in the Gospel, and believers feel the wonderful effects of that
power. We are informed of a twofold Creation, the first and the second, the old
and the new: In the first Creation, the power of God was glorious indeed, i^
making the world out of nothing; but here, as there was nothing to help, so
there was nothing to resist this power o^ God: But in the new Creation, in
making new creatures, there is a great opposition and resistance met withal,
and how glorious is the power of God that overcomes it? What wonders are
wrought in this day of Grace by the hand of the Lord? He not only says, Let
there be light, where darkness is, but where darkness is loved: He not only
says, Arise, to them that are dead, but to them that are unwilling to be
raised. Indisposition and opposition likewise are to be found in sinners, when
the Lord first comes to work upon them. The Bullock cannot endure the yoke,
though hereby its life is lengthened; for the beast that works not is fatted
immediately for the slaughter. A sinner is likened to a bullock unaccustomed to
the yoke, Jer. 31. 18. he discovers a great reluctance and unwillingness to
yield; now in turning such an one (with whose corruption and lusts Satan joins,
to hinder conversion) the power of God is the more to be admired.

3. A Day of Grace is granted for the manifestation of divine goodness and
mercy. The Lord is said to delight in mercy, Mic. 7. 18. therefore he allows a
day, in which mercy may be had, and now it is to be obtained or never. It is
not small mercy that raises the sons of men out of those depths of misery into
which they are fallen: Great is thy mercy toward me, says the Psalmist; and
the greatness of it is demonstrated, for thou have redeemed my soul out of the
lowest hell. And if the unworthiness of man be duly considered, the freeness of
this mercy is to be admired, as much as the abundance of it. Mercy is free, as
well as plenteous; it is expressed not only above desert, but without desert,
nay contrary to desert; therefore according to that ancient Fathers phrase,
it is Omni modo gratuita, free every way. Hence it is, that Saints have used
that as an argument to obtain mercy, which o^^ would have thought should have
quite discouraged them from entertaining any hopes of it, namely, the greatness
of sin. Psalm. 25. 11. For thy Name sake pardon my iniquity, for it is great; as
if he had said, Lord, I know it is thy design in this day of grace to manifest
and to magnify thy mercy; and the greatness of my sin will serve to set thy
mercy higher; the richness and freeness of it will be the more wondered at,
because shown to a gross transgressour. Mercy, nay, (...), abundant mercy is
expressed in justifying the ungodly, in quickening the dead, and begetting them
again to a lively hope, 1 Pet. 1. 3. And this is the only season; if it be not
now laid hold on, it will be clean gone for ever.

4. A Day of Grace is granted, that the Lords long-suffering and forbearance
may be wondered at. He is an eyewitness of all the wickedness that is done
against him; he hates all the sin he sees, and can easily take vengeance upon
the committers of it; he stands not in the least need of any of them, and yet
he spares them, and that a great while: Oh how great is the stock of his
patience? Lord! what is man that thou do forbear him so long, since thou
can so easily crush him! How comes it to pass, that thou do call after him
to benefit him, since thou can not be benefited by him! and notwithstanding
many provocations art unwilling he should perish! Oh wonderful patience, that
will leave the abusers of it without any the least apology; and that will be
matter of everlasting marvel to those, who hereby are lead unto repentance!

5. A Day of Grace is granted, that the righteousness of the Lord in those
severities, which are showed upon the impenitent and unbelieving, may be the
more evident and undeniable. He will be justified when he speaks, though never
so amazing a sentence be uttered by him; he will be clear when he is judged:
Sinners who had a day of Grace and lost it, an acknowledgment will be extorted
from them, that they are justly punished, with the loss of endless blessedness,
which they frequently heard of, and as often slighted.

When God shall thus plead with the Impenitent at his Bar; Did not I give you a
day as well as others? Did not I call, and you refuse? Did not I stretch forth
my hand, and you disregarded me? Did not I give you counsels, and reproofs, and
you set them all at naught? And thereupon shall bid them depart away, never to
see his face more: How will all the Saints and Angels approve of the Sentence,
and cry, Righteous art thou, O Lord, because thou have thus judged! and the
impenitent will not have one syllable to say against it.

Now I descend to the Application: And I shall begin with some Consectaries,
that may be drawn from the Doctrine.

1. In this Day of Grace, to sleep is very improper. Let us not sleep, as do
others, (says the Apostle) but let us watch, and be sober; for they that sleep
sleep in the night, and they that be drunken are drunken in the night; but let
us who are of the day be sober, putting on the breast plate of faith and love,
1 These. 5. 6, 7, 8. How long will thou sleep, O sluggish Conscience? when will thou awake? shall nothing force thine eyes open? The enemies of our salvation
are far from sleeping, they ply their business to bring about our ruin, and
shall not we awake for our own security? How can we watch unless we are awake?
and if we are not vigilant, how certain are we to be devoured by the roaring
Lion? Awake thou that sleep, and arise from the dead, and Christ shall give
thee light; and light being given to see withal, see that thou walk
circumspectly. The Sun of Righteousness is up, and shining, therefore we should
be up and doing. Sloth in this midday of the Gospel is unsuitable as well as
dangerous; the Apostle therefore cautions against it, Heb. 6. 12. That ye be
not slothful, but followers of them, who through faith and patience inherit the
promises.

The Lethurgy of the Conscience is a sore malady; when the sinners heart is
ever and anon ready to drop asleep, notwithstanding all the means which are
used to rouse it. But though threatenings, though judgments will not awaken
some, that are seized upon by the spirit of slumber, yet I Will tell you what
will do it, The sight of an angry sin-revenging Judge upon the Tribunal; the
seeing and feeling of the torments of Hell, will awaken them that are most fast
asleep in sin: What will thou sleep upon the pits brink? Usually sinners fear
least, when because of the nearness of evil they have most reason to be afraid.

2. How much besides themselves are they, whose whole employment is the works
of darkness in this day time. The Apostle exhorts us, to cast off the works of
darkness, and to put on the armor of light, Romans 13. 12. Light is a kind of
armor, for the light making a discovery of sins deceitfulness, the heart is
hereby armed against temptation; but because most do love their evil deeds,
therefore they hate the ^ight which does discover and repr^ve them. Alas, that
such bad work, as the service of Satan and diverse lusts is, should have so many
hands to it! The works of wickedness are rightly termed the works of darkness;
the actors of them fly the light, for when they are seen they cause shame; and
from God, who is light, they hinder us: allowance of these, and fellowship with
him are inconsistent; moreover, unto outer darkness these works have a most
certain tendency.

Now shall a Day of Grace be consumed in sins drudgery? This was given as a day
of salvation, and shall we in it work out our own condemnation? Shall it be
spent in making sure of Hell, and treasuring up wrath against the day of wrath?
When the Lord does grant us a day to make our peace, shall we give this day to
Satan, and do nothing, but by wicked works more alienate our selves, and make
the wall of separation higher? If the season that was allotted for the
obtaining of mercy be abused, only to the aggravating of sin, and augmenting of
misery, this will argue you guilty of such a folly and madness, as must be
confessed beyond hyperbole.

3. What cause is there of thankfulness for such a Day of Grace? The
Israelitish servants prized the year of Jubilee, and much more should we this,
(...), acceptable year of the Lord. Liberty and freedom from our spiritual
bondage is now offered, and may be obtained, if you will not let sin and Satan
boar your ears, as it were; if you say not, as most do, We love these masters,
and we will not leave them. The greatness of our obligation to thankfulness for
this Day of Grace, will be further evident, if these things are weighed.

1. The light does shine more clearly in this our day, then it did of old. The
ancient Jewish Church enjoyed but the dawning, or at most, the early morning of
this Day of Grace, but we the noontide of it; many shadows of good things to
come they had, whereby those things were obscurely represented; but we have
under the Gospel the substance exhibited, and the shadows are flown away.
Moses, the great Prophet of the Jews, had a vail upon his face, to signify
that his was a more dark dispensation; but we all, says the Apostle, with open
face, beholding, as in a glass, the glory of God, are ebanged into the same
image, from glory to glory, even as by the Spirit of the Lord, 2 Cor. 3. 18.
Christ is now more fully discovered, his sweet offices more explained, and his
precious benefits more gloriously displayed.

2. We ought to be thankful that this our day has so long lasted. The Lord
long ago might have given us up to a reprobate mind, nay, fettered us in chains
of darkness, because of our hating knowledge, and holding the truth in
unrighteousness. It Is a wonder, that having sinned so much against the light,
we have not sinned the light away. I read, that at Joshua's request, the Sun
stood still in the Firmament, and hasted not to go down for an whole day, Josh.
10. 13. And have not we had experience of the like miracle of Grace? Has not
the Sun of Righteousness stopped his course, not hasting to go down? How long
has Christ stood waiting? and still he stands proffering both light and life,
and light and life shall be given to them that understand the value of such
offers.

3. Especially we have cause to praise, if this Day of Grace has been
effectual, and we have been made the children of light, and of the day. Most
even in this Day of Grace, are blinded by the God of this world; the Gospel is
to them an hidden Gospel; but if the Lord, who commanded the light to shine out
of darkness, has shined into our hearts, and has called us out of darkness
into his marvelloas light, sure we have abundant reason to show forth his
praises, 1 Pet. 2. 9. If he had not enlightened our eyes; we should have slept
the deep of death as well as others. Was there not a time, when we did not see
either our sin, or our extreme danger? Was there not a time when we were as
unsensible of the worth of souls, and of our need of Jesus, as the most
careless ones? Oh wonderful love, that he has made the difference, and
distinguished us from others! that has illuminated and converted us, when
others are suffered still to run on blindfold toward ruin!

4. Since such a day of Grace is granted, the special seasons of it should be
improved: The whole is precious, but some seasons are more golden, and to be
esteemed at an higher rate.

1. The Season of Youth. This is the fittest time to sow the seed of Grace,
that it may bring forth the fruit of life and glory. The journey toward the
new Jerusalem is long, the distance which sin has set us at from our Creator
is great, therefore to be setting forth betimes is a great part of wisdom: The
Lord does take it well, when in our youthful days we make choice of him.
Samuel, Obadiah, Josiah, Timothy, have a commendation given them, that they
knew, and loved, and feared God betimes; that they abstained from, and despised
those lusts and vanities, with which youth most commonly is ensnared and
defiled. The time of youth is a time of strength, vigor and activity; then you
will either do much for God, or much against him. In the service of such a
Master as the Lord is, how well will your strength be employed? Activeness will
here become you. Early remembrance of God will prevent abundance of sin, which
might cause bitterness many years after. Thou writest bitter things against me,
says Job, and causest me to possess the iniquities of my youth, Job 15. 26.
and it will have great influence to your stedfastness with God all your days.

Quo semel est imbuta, recens, servabit Testa diu. (odorem

Horat. Epist 2. ad Lollium.

The cask retains the scent of that a long time after, which was first put into
it, when 'twas new. And in like manner, if youthful years are seasoned with
grace, the gray hairs will be found in the way of righteousness: Prove. 12. 6.
Train up a child in the way he should go, and when he is old he will not depart
from it. Add also, that in the time of youth sin is more easily plucked up,
because it has not taken such deep root. Age and custom will make evil, like
the spots of the Leopard, and the blackness of the Aethiopians, which no water
can wash away. Augustine in his Confessions, l. 8. c. 5. does make this
acknowledgment, Ex voluntate perversa facta est libido, and dum servitur
libidini facta est consuetudo, and dum consuetudini non resistitur, facta est
necessitas. From a perverse corrupted will flow evil desires, while evil
desires are fulfilled, sin ripens into custom, while custom is not resisted,
there follows a kind of necessity and unalterableness in simming. Oh therefore
withstand sin betimes, use the same policy in reference to your lusts, which
the Egyptians would have used toward Israel; they feared lest the Israelites,
when grown, might be too hard for them, therefore they endeavored in their
weak infancy to destroy them. To see young faces set toward Sion, the way
thither being diligently enquired after; to behold children turn Soldiers in
the spiritual warfare, fighting under Christ's Ensign, making the Tempter flee
from them, taking Heaven by storm and violence; what a brave sight is it!

2. The Season of Health is another season to be improved. Then the body is a
more fit instrument to serve the soul in the Lords service. The time of
sickness is most commonly a time of spending; therefore in health you should be
treasuring up good store of Grace. Now you may attend upon the public
Ordinances, you may come to Gods House, and sit down at his Table; but sickness
will deprive you of such opportunities. Now you should be laboring for Grace,
and trying your grace, that you may not be deceived with what is but
counterfeit. You should be so wise, as to foresee the evil day of affliction
and infirmity a coming, and beg beforehand for such a measure of faith as may
make you stand, such a measure of patience and submission, that there may not
be the least repining thought against God; but whatever your trials are, that
you may not faint, but acquiesce in the wisdom and grace of him, by whom you
are chastized. Beg also beforehand for a sense of his Love, and when you see
the rod in your Fathers hand, none of the stripes will be intolerable. Let
health be thus improved: And to persuade you, consider, that what you do in the
day of health will be more upon choice, and not upon force, and consequently
your sincerity will be the more evident; whereas if you are forced to seek the
Lord by his smiting of you, whether your hearts are right, may be suspected.

3. The Season of spiritual Plenty should also be with care and diligence
improved. When heavenly Manna falls so thick about your habitations, shall none
at all be gathered? When so much seed is sown, shall the Fowls of the Air be
suffered to take all away? or if you do receive this seed, shall it be choked
by the world, and bring forth no fruit to perfection? Let every one in this
Assembly think thus with himself, How many scores of Sermons have been preached
to me? how many warnings have I had? how many reproofs have been given me? how
often have I been exhorted to obedience? how many prayers have I joined in? But
what fruit have I to show of all? What grace have I gotten? what lust have I
got the mastery over? Where Is the faith, the love, the zeal, the holiness and
humility, which might have been attained if these means of grace had been, as
they ought to have been, improved?

Ordinances in abundance are now enjoyed: shall they be but prices in the hands
of fools? Where the Lord gives so much, to be sure he will require the more. Oh
lament your passed non-proficiency, and for the future let your whole heart be
in every duty; be most earnestly desirous to get something from God every time
you draw near to him You neglect your own interest, when you do his work
negligently. Ordinances are the pipes through which grace is conveyed to
thirsty souls; there is never a duty you engage in, wherein this truth should
not be considered and believed. In this duty God can give me that which is of
greater worth then the whole world; and hereupon you would not in Ordinances
themselves, but obtain the benefit of them.

4. The Lords day is another special Season of the Day of Grace; let it not be
profaned, but husbanded to the best advantage. They who keep holy the Sabbath
day, and find the Lord owning that sanctification of his day, by sanctifying,
and quickening, and refreshing their hearts upon it; as they are clearly
convinced, so they are glad the Sabbath i^ moral, they would not it should be
otherwise. It Is but reasonable they should give the Lord one day in seven; and
no day is so much their own, so much for their spiritual, which is the truest
gain, as this which they give to him: It may not only be called the Lords day,
but the Souls day likewise. Worldly thoughts, and pleasures, and employments,
which on other days are allowed, be now forbidden, that the Soul with greater
intension may be respected, and provision made for it. Now Gods mouth is open,
he speaks to us; his ear is open, we may speak to him; and if we hear and obey
his voice, he will not fail to hear and grant our requests. The privilege of
enjoying Sabbaths, one of our English Poets does no less piously then
ingeniously set ^orth.

O day most calm, most bright,
The fruit of this, the next worlds bud;
The endorsment of supreme delight,
Writ by a friend, and with his blood;
The couch of time, cares balm and bay;
The week were dark, but for thy light,
Thy torch does show the way.
Man had straight forward gone
To endless death; but thou do pull,
And turn us round to look on one,
Whom, if we were not very dull,
We could not choose but look on still;
Since there is no place so alone,
The which he does not fill.
Sabbaths the Pillars are
On which Heavens Palace arched lies;
The other days fill up the spare
And hollow room with vanities:
They are the fruitful beds and border^
In Gods rich Garden; that is bare
Which parts their ranks and orders.
Thou art a day of mirth;
And where the week days trail ^^ ground,
Thy flight is higher, as thy birth;
O let me take thee at the bound,
Leaping with thee from seven to seven
Till that we both being tossed from earth
Fly hand in hand to heaven.
Herbert. Temple, p. 66. 67, 68.
5. The feasting day is another season Grace. When we are brought into the
banqueting house, and the banner over ^^ is love, Cant. 2. 4. Who that Table
i^ spread, where Christ is the Feast as we^ as the Inviter to it, there it is
that believers may arrive unto such a nick of communion with the Lord that is
nearest o^ kin to that fellowship, which perfected Spirits, which see him face
to face, have with him. Oh what a relish has tha^ flesh, which is meat
indeed, that blood, which is drink indeed! John 6. When we behold how Christ
has suffered the curse for us, and upon this our faith concludes, from
suffering it we shall be exempted; how may our hearts rejoice? At this Table
Christ's Fullness is the entertainment. He beholds none with a grudging look,
with an evil eye; the more hungry we are, the more welcome, and sure not to be
sent away empty. Oh why will any feed on husks, and despise this bread of God,
which gives light unto the world!

Thus you see what are the special Seasons of the Day of Grace, which not to
lay hold upon, is to be false to your selves, and regardless of your chief
advantage.

USE. II. Of Caution. There are three evils which I must warn you to beware of.
First, Presume not upon the lasting of this Day of Grace. Secondly, Don't
rashly conclude the Day of Grace is passed. Thirdly, Take heed of being
strengthened, and emboldened by the general practice to idle it all away.

1. Presume not upon the lasting of this Day of Grace, Presumption is a sin as
common as unreasonable. How many thousands are now despairing in Hell, because
of the vain hopes, and false confidences, which here on earth they entertained?
It Is an ordinary delusion, for the ungodly to imagine, that either they have
believed and repented already, or that there will be time enough several years
hence to do it: and after they have deferred their main work long, they are apt
to defer it longer: Tanquam semper victuri vivunt, Sen. They live as if they
were to live always, and as if the Day of Grace were not a day, but a kind of
eternity. It Is a notable passage of Gregory, Hom. 12. in Evang If every one
knew (says he) when he were to go out of this present world, then he might
more reasonably allot this part of his time for pleasure, and that for
repentance, Sed qui poenitentiae veniam spopondit, peccanti crastinum non
promisit. But he that promise^ pardon to them who repent of sin, has not
engaged to give another day to them that go on in sin. Let two things here be
laid to heart.

1. Presumption is the way to make the Day of Grace altogether unavailable. Men
will not seriously mind eternity, while they think they have time enough before
them. Thou who reckonest upon many Sabbaths yet to come, and upon many Sermons
yet to be heard, the present Sabbaths are lost, and the present Sermons are
little heeded, less practiced, and thou thy self least of all profited.

2. Presumption is the way to shorten this Day of Grace, and to hasten the
everlasting nights approach. The evil servant that said in his heart, My Lord
delayeth his coming, is threatened, The Lord of that servant will come in a day
that he looks not for him, and in an hour that he is not aware of, much
sooner then he was aware, and cut him asunder, and appoint him his portion with
the hypocrites, where there shall be weeping and gnashing of teeth, Matthew. 24.
48, 49, 50, 51. The rich man in the Gospel presumed upon many years, but he had
not many hours of his time remaining; God called him Fool, and said, This night
thy soul shall be required of thee. If an earthly Master bid his servant go and
work to day, and he answer, he will set about his work a week, or a month
hence; how can the Master choose but be provoked? he justly turns that servant
out of doors, allowing him no longer time to tarry. The Lord, in like manner,
bids the Sons of men to work to day, If they answer, Many years hence it is time
enough; How can he choose but be incensed, and his displeasure may cause the
season of mercy to end suddenly.

Now that I may further strike at and startle this presumption, I shall propose
and answer one Case of Conscience. When have sinners cause to fear that the Day
of Grace is growing toward evening, and ready to conclude with them?

To this I answer.

1. One sign that the Day of Grace is near an end, is long and unbewail'd
unfruitfulness: When they who have lived under the means of Grace, are either
empty Vines, or bring forth fruit unto themselves: when the Lord has come, not
three years only, but ten, twenty, thirty years together, seeking fruit, but
has found none; and (which is worst of all) their barrenness is not their
burden; It Is to be feared, that the axe will speedily be laid to the root,
that they will quickly be cut down, and be made fuel for that fire that is
unquenchable. You have a notable Parable of a Vineyard planted in a very
fruitful hill, Isa. 5. 'Twas fenced, the stones were gathered out; but when
grapes were expected, behold nothing but leaves, and wild grapes, ver. 4. But
upon this God resolves to take away the hedge, and his vineyard shall be eaten
up, to break the wall, and it shall be trodden down; he resolves to lay it
waste, it shall not be pruned nor dug, there shall come up briars and
thorns, and the clouds are commanded to rain no rain upon it, ver. 5, 6. You
that have been long unfruitful, and this has never troubled you, how soon may
the clouds be commanded to rain no rain upon you? how soon may the influences
of heaven be altogether withheld from you? how soon may barrenness be your
punishment, which is your sin, the Lord in judgment resolving, that never fruit
shall grow upon you?

2. Another sign that the Day of Grace is near an end, is great security. The
old world were thus secure, when the Lord resolved the Holy Ghost should not
much longer strive with them. Great security was the forerunner of the Jews
rejection. They would not believe their sins were so heinous, or that God was
so much displeased with them; they would not believe the Messiah, who told them
of their maladies, and proffered to cure them. And the Apostle tells us,
because of unbelief they were broken off, Romans 11. 20. And such security will
go before the end of the world, when the Day of Grace shall conclude with all,
and when time it self shall be no longer: How far are secure souls from being
in a secure state? When they cry peace and safety, how suddenly may trouble and
destruction come upon them, which they shall not escape? 1 These. 5. 3.

3. Another sign that the Day of Grace is near an end, is unlamented
indifferency, whether or no it do continue. If you are of an indifferent
spirit, whether you enjoy the light, or it be put out in obscurity; whether you
hear the publishers of glad tidings, or whether their mouths be stopped; there
is reason to be afraid the Lord is about to divest you of those privileges,
which you know not how to value. If you look upon spiritual darkness, as no
plague, which is infinitely worse then that of Egypt; if you esteem the famine
of the Word (which is worse then a famine of bread, or a thirst of water, Amos
8. 11.) no such great judgment, as long as from temporal judgments you are
exempted, this is a most wretched temper of soul; and the Lord must needs be
angry, when the greatest mercies and favors are slighted; and what punishment
more probable or equal then to be deprived of them?

4. Another sign that the Day of Grace is near an end, is contradicting and
persecuting of the Lords Messengers. We read, Matthew. 22. of a Marriage feast
prepared, servants are sent forth to invite many to the Marriage; some, who
were invited, took those servants and intreatthem spightfully. Could the King,
which made this Supper bear this? No, he was wrath, and did destroy these
persecutors, and none of them were permitted to partake of those good things he
had provided, and once proffered to them. That is a dreadful text, 2 Chronicles. 36.
16. But they mocked the Messengers of God, and despised his words, and misused
his Prophets, until the wrath of the Lord arose against his people, and there
was no remedy. The Apostles Barnabas and Paul preached the Gospel, the
multitude flock to hear them; when the Jews saw the multitudes, they were
filled with envy, and spoke against the Apostles doctrine; but the Apostles
seeing them reject 'the Gospel, and them, in such a way, make this reply, It
was needful that the Word of God should be first spoken unto you, but since you
put it from you, you shall not be troubled with it, lo, we turn to the
Gentiles, Acts 13. 45, 46. and then to the Gentiles did the light arise and
shine forth, and the Jews were left under darkness.

Another sign the Day of Grace is near an end, if not quite ended, is obstinacy
in some opinions, which are damnable. When fundamental truths are denied, when
all means used to reclaim and turn the erroneous, through prejudi^e, do but
confirm and harden them, how near to desperate is their case? When the Lord
sends strong delusions to any, and they believe a lie, oh it is to be feared he
intends their ruin, and that their judgment will not linger, will not flumber
long: 2 These. 2. 11, 12. And for this cause God shall send them strong
delusion, that they should believe a lie, that they all might be damned, who
believed not the truth, but had pleasure in unrighteousness. Error may
extinguish the light of the Gospel, and cause the Ordinances of God to be
slighted, the Word to be cast aside, and the Spirit to depart, and leave
sinners to the seduction of Satan, and the imagination of their dark and
foolish hearts. Let me therefore speak to you in the words of the Apostle, 2
Pet. 3. 17. Ye therefore, beloved, seeing ye know these things before, beware
lest ye also being lead away with the error of the wicked, fall from your own
stedfastness.

6. Another fatal sign, that the Day of Grace is near its period, is an habit
of backsliding. Hark how the Lord upbraids his people with this; and after,
they are told of their desperate state; Jer. 8. 4, 5. Thus says the Lord,
shall they fall and not arise? shall they turn away, and not return? why is
this people of Jerusalem slidden back with a perpetual backsliding? And then it
follows, ver. 20, 21, 22 The Harvest is past, the Summer is ended, and we are
not saved. For the hurt of the daughter of my people I am black, astonishment
has taken hold upon me. Is there no balm in Gilead? is there no Physician
there? why then is not the health of the daughter of my people recovered? There
are many Professors, who sometimes look Sion-ward, and have some common work
upon them, but after do draw back, and by often doing so contract such a
scaredness, that they make light of doing so. They do possibly under some
awakenings confess their sins, but quickly return to the commission of them
again; they are convinced it is their duty, and yet they will not be persuaded
to do the work of the Lord vigorously, they are convinced of such and such
sins, and yet they will not be dissuaded from following after them. They may
have a form of godliness, but they will not be brought under the power of
godliness, nor give their consent to be sincerely and thoroughly sanctified.
Diverse motions and proffers of assistance they have had from the Spirit, but
all in vain, they are bent upon backsliding. Surely then they have just ground
to fear, that sentence is ready to be, if not already pronounced, Ezekiel. 24. 13.
Because I have purged thee, and thou wast not purged, thou shall not be purged
from thy filthiness any more, till I have caused my fury to rest upon thee.

Thus concerning the Signs when the Day of Grace is declining and drawing
toward night. Presumptuous soul, if thou find in thy self any of these
signs, oh startle exceedingly at the discovery, and before the last hour of the
day be ended, enter into, and labor to purpose in the Lords Vineyard.

2. A second word of Caution is this, Don't rashly conclude the Day of Grace is
passed, and that the Sun is already set upon you. This is an extreme contrary
to that of presumptuous ones, which tempted and troubled spirits are very prone
to run into. They are ready to takeup Jobs complaint, only with some sad
variations, Oh that I were as in months past, as in the days when God would
have preserved me! when his candle shined upon my head, and by his light I
might have been delivered from the power of darkness! The Almighty was then
with me; he called upon me to turn, and was ready upon my turning to hear my
calling to him. But now I cry, and he does not hear me; I stand up, and he
regards me not: I have so bitterly provoked him to leave me, that I am afraid
he is now gone for ever.

Three things are here to be considered.

1. No man can certainly conclude concerning another, that his day is passed.
If we consult the Scripture, we shall find those that have gone far in
wickedness at last reclaimed; therefore we should not despair of the worst.
Indeed the pride and stubbornness of the ungodly makes us fear that all our
labor will be in vain, yet we speak still, and exhort and reprove with all
long-suffering, 2 Timothy 4. 2. because with God all things are possible; and
those sheep that are gone much astray, seemingly past reach, he can lay hold
of, and bring home again to the fold.

2. No man ought to draw such a sad conclusion in reference to himself, that
the season of mercy is quite expired. Though our election may be made sure, yet
reprobation is not presently to be discovered: Though upon thy comparing thy
heart and life with the Word of God, thou may know of a certainty thou have
no grace; yet thou have no warrant to say, thou never shall have any: As filthy
as thou have been washed; as unholy as thou have been sanctified; as guilty as
thou have been justified in the Name of the Lord Jesus, and by the Spirit of
our God, 1 Cor. 6. 11.

3. When Satan pesters you with thoughts, that there is no help remaining, but
the acceptable time is all slipped away, rather hope the contrary; for Satan is a
liar; and because he is so busy about you, it is a sign that he is afraid of
loosing you; if he knew certainly that your day of visitation were gone, he
would be sure of you, and so he would be quiet, and not as he does, molest and
trouble ^ou.

But for the further relief of those, who are apt to discourage themselves, and
to damp their own endeavors after grace, by thinking the day is ended, and
it is now too late, I shall do two things. First, Lay down some probable signs.
Secondly, Some certain signs of this Day of Grace's continuance.

The probable signs of its continuance are these.

1. When the heart is inclined to sit under powerful means, who knows but by
the word of faith which you attend upon, the grace of faith may be wrought in
you.

2. When ever and anon the heart i^ stirred, and conscience awakened by the
Spirit, and the Lord does not let yo^ alone in your iniquities, nor suffer you
t^ sleep quietly and undisturbedly the sleep of death.

3. When those false grounds of hope which you have built upon, are more and
more discovered; when you are mad^ to perceive the vanity of confidence i^ your
selves, or in your own righteousness; and that it is not enough to b^ somewhat
better then the worst are; an^ that the name of Christians signifies no thing,
unless you depart from iniquity, 2 Timothy 2. 19. Who knows, but that being beaten
off from insufficient bottoms, you may at length be settled upon the right
foundation, Jesus Christ.

4. When there is a great fear least the Day of Grace should be past, it is to
be hoped that it is not past. Jerusalem in the text was far from any such fear.
Usually souls are left senseless, when the Lord leaves them. Of the old world,
and of Sodom it is said, They eat, they drank, they bought, they sold, they
planted, they builded, they married and were given in marriage, and minded
nothing else but things of this nature, though the flood was so near the one,
and fire ready to consume the other.

5. When sinners are inquisitive what they shall do to be saved, it is probable
at least, that the day of salvation is not terminated, but salvation is near,
and may be obtained, if the terms on which it is proffered are not quarreled at,
but submitted to as good and equal.

In the second place follow the certain signs that the Day of Grace is not yet
concluded.

1. This day is not passed when the Soul is for peace with God upon any
conditions. If this be the yielding frame and temper of thy heart, certainly
thou do not only know, but also art willing to do the things which belong
unto thy peace. If this be thy language, Lord! Does a right eye offend thee? it
shall be plucked out: does a right hand offend thee? it shall be cut off: Those
sins that seem most sweet and necessary, as long as thou hate them, that is
sufficient to discommend them, I am resolved to love them no longer! Thou have
no reason to give up all for lost: No, no, being thus made willing to cast away
every transgression, iniquity shall not be thy ruin, as you may see Ezekiel. 18.
30.

2. This Day of Grace is not passed, when the sinner sets open the door of his
heart; that Christ the Lord may enter. That promise is most sure, If any man
hear my voice and open the door, I will come into him, and sup with him, and he
shall sup with me, Rev. 3. 20. Christ complains of the Jews, that They would
not come to him that they might have life; but if any are made willing to come,
the waters of life are open, and none that desire shall be denied them, Rev.
22. 17. Let him that is a thirst come, and whoever will, let him drink of the
waters of life freely. Do thou know Christ? Art thou acquainted with his
Kingdom as well as his Priesthood? and art thou willing to have his Kingdom set
up in thy heart, and thy very thoughts and affections brought into obedience
and captivity? Art thou willing thus to receive him? Certainly thou shall be
received by him, and have power to become a child of God, Joh. 1. 12.

3. This Day of Grace is not passed, if Grace be desired above all things in
the world. If the edge of thy appetite toward the things that perish is
turned, if the pearl of price be indeed of price in thy esteem; if that be thy
will and desire, which is the will of God, even thy sanctification; surely the
Spirit is so far from having left thee, that he is in thee: It Is he who raises
this hunger and thirst after righteousness, which as it shall be satisfied, so
it argues thy estate blessed, Ma^th. 5. 6.

5. This Day of Grace is not passed, when the heart is grieved for the mispence
of so much of this day, and is willing to live the rest of it to the will of
God, 1 Pet. 4. 2. If you judge that the time past of your life does suffice,
nay, more then suffice, to have been foolish and disobedient to God, and to
have obeyed and served diverse lusts and pleasures, and if you resolve to
dedicate the remainder of your lives in the flesh to the Lord, that he may
dispose of it, certainly the Lord will accept both of your time and you: Though
you come in late, so it be but presently, into the Vineyard, you shall receive
a penny; and diligence in your Masters work will be rewarded with your Masters
joy.

3. A third word of Caution is this, Take heed of being strengthened and
emboldned by the general practice to idle this Day of Grace away. We read
concerning Laish, That the people dwelt careless, after the manner of the
Zidonians, quiet and secure, Judge. 18. 7. And truly this is the manner of most
in the world, careful possibly they are about many things, but as to the main
thing utterly careless: Their ti^e is of little, and their souls of less value
in their judgments. But that the humor and custom of the world may not be
followed, let these considerations be pondered by you.

1. The most in the world are blind. As Moses speaks, they are void of counsel,
neither have they any understanding in them; they are not wise to consider
their latter end, Deuteronomy. 32. 28, 29. nor the worth of that gracious season, in
which alone preparation can be made for it. And shall we write after the
Coppies which a company of fools set us? Shall we follow the blind, that
quickly will fall into the ditch, and have not eyes to see their danger?

2. The most are unbelieving; a froward generation, children, in whom there is
no faith, and from this root of infidelity does spring their prodigallity of
the day of Grace. Did they indeed believe that death will not make an end of
them, but that after this is finished, another life will follow, either of the
greatest joy, or of as great sorrow; and that joy or sorrow in the next world
will be their lot, according as the present season is, or is not improved;
certainly they would be more sparing of that which is so precious. Oh the
secret paganism that is in the hearts of multitudes! they live as if Eternity
were a fiction, and Hell a fable; but will it be thought a fable, when they
feel the tortures of it? And what shall we tread in the steps of such Infidels?
No, we are to follow, not the unbelief, but the faith of others, Heb. 13. 7.
Whose faith follow, considering the end of the^r conversation.

3. Are not many, who are such spendthrifts of this Day of Grace,
self-condemned? How often does Conscience reproach them for their spiritual
sloth? and it is very unreasonable to go in that way, which they themselves do
frequently condemn themselves for: Idleness is is a sin which leaves behind it
a great deal of regret and dissatisfaction in the heart; it is common for the
slothful to hear a voice behind them, saying, Time is a treasure that ought not
to be thus foolishly, and to no purpose, wasted.

USE III. Of Exhortation. Let me persuade all to a serious improvement of this
day of their gracious visitation. The Arguments to prevail are these,

1. This day is continually passing: Your glass is running every moment,
whether you sleep or wake, are in company or alone, are vain or serious, do
pray or sin, it never stands still: And when once your glass is run, 'twill
never be turned again, but taken down immediately. Your days are but an
hand-breadth; and whether of this hand-breadth there be an inch remaining, is a
question. Time is not unfitly pictured with wings, because it flies so fast
away; and bald behind, because you cannot catch hold of it to pull it back. The
best part of this day is usually at first; if we seek unto the Almighty
betimes, Job 8. 5. we are the more sure to find him; and this should engage you
to a more speedy trading with this precious talent.

2. You all must be reckoned with, how you have husbanded this gracious season.
Oh what a case will the slothful soul be in, when death gives him a summons;
and he hears that word, Render an account of thy stewardship, for thou may be
no longer steward. Conscience must needs very much amaze the sinner, when it
shall before the Judge bring in such Indictments as these against him. So much
of this day of savation was spent in immoderate recreations: So much in carnal
and ungodly company: So much in eager pursuing after the deceitful riches and
pleasures of this world: So much in making provision for the flesh, that the
vile and base lusts of it might be fulfilled: So much in proud and towering
imaginations: So much in amorous and filthy musings: So much in vain and rotten
communication: So much in Taverns, and Alehouses, and in the Harlots
habitations: So much in tricking and adorning the body: And Christ and the soul
were all the mean while neglected and forgotten. Often ask thy self this
question; Do I spend my Day of Grace after such a manner, as I may account for
it at last with comfort? Such thoughts would make you serious.

3. Let the diligence of the earthly minded, in improving the worlds day, shame
you out of your idleness in this day of salvation. If the greedy tradesman
hears of an excellent b^rg^m, what madness does he count it to neglect the
season wherein he may have it? He that is covetous of preferment, it is no
sooner offered then accepted: Oh, say such, We must catch occasion by the
fore-lock, we may never have the like again. Alas! that men should be so wise
in trifles, and such fools in the greatest matters! Now is the time of
preferment; you may be advanced to the dignity of Children, and Heirs of God:
Now is the time to grow rich toward God, to lay up such a treasure, 'that will
never fail, that none can take away from you.

4. Let the apprehensions which others have of this Day of Grace be considered
by you. Here I shall bring several Speakers upon the Stage, delivering what
their judgments and thoughts are.

1. Hearken to the awakened Soul, whose eyes are newly forced open by the
Spirit: Surely I am more brutish then any; I have not the understanding of a
man: Many years I have lived, and as many I have lust, in sin and folly: A
treasure I have been entrusted with, but I have been cheated of it by a
deceitful heart, a deceitful world, and a subtle Serpent: I remember
opportunities have followed thick one upon another, of getting grace, but none
were laid hold upon: There was nothing I slighted more, then that which least
of all deserved my slighting: Oh that my past days could be again recalled,
they should be spent after another fashion: But instead of that, what cause
have I to fear, that the Lord may allow no more time, since that which he has
allowed has been so unprofitably consumed?

2. Hearken to the serious Christian: How great a work have I to do, and how
short a time to do it in? How vast is eternity, which depends upon this moment?
Lord! the world is not worth my time and pains in comparison of thy self, and
that Grace and Glory which thou have revealed. Now is the time to fly from the
vengeance of eternal fire, and to gain the life that is ^verlasting; and to
escape the one, and gain the other, shall be my life's main business.

3. Hearken to a rouzed sinner just going out of the world: Oh! my head does
ache, my heart is sick, my eyes are dim, my breath is short, a general trembling
seises on me, and all do show, that this earthly house of my tabernacle is upon
the point of being dissolved: And must I now be forced away? O my soul, to what
place art thou removing? Hark! I hear a dreadful sound within; Conscience
speaks language full of horror. Alas! Is the sentence now past, Cut down the
tree that brought forth none but evil fruit? Must I go presently to the Bar of
God, who have nothing but provoked him all my days? May I not be spared a few
years, or months, or weeks longer? Oh call time again; I never saw thy worth
till now: If I might be again recovered and restored, oh how often would I
pray, and how earnestly would I cry for mercy and grace? how carefully would I
hear and practice? But this I should have done before, it is now too late to
think -- and there he stops, his thread is cut asunder, his soul flies away,
and leaves his body a clod of earth.

And now Brethren, are your hearts still mastered? It Is to be hoped concerning
the worst in this Congregation, that their day is not quite gone; but who knows
whether this may not be the last hour; and if now you will not, your own
spirits may be quickly required of you, or Gods Spirit may depart from you. You
will wish at last, as others have done, that the day of salvation had been
valued, let it therefore be no more neglected.

5. Consider, If you will not improve the Day of Grace, you can reasonably
expect nothing but a day of wrath. When mercy has acted its part toward
ungodly ones, and being still refused, makes its Exit; then fury and
indignation enters upon the stage; but of that traged* there will be no end.
Whole eternity will be taken up in feeling the effects of divine displeasure,
and in bewailing the loss of that Day of Grace, wherein this anger might have
been appeased.

I have done with the second Doctrine.

Doct. 3. The third follows: To know, in this Day of Grace, the things which
belong to our peace, is our great happiness and wisdom. If Jerusalem had been
thus wise, she would not have been, as she was, rejected. If thou had known,
says Christ: The defective speech is thus to be made up, If the things of thy
peace had been understood by thee, O Jerusalem, thy state would have been as
happy as now it is woeful; instead of being cut off, thou would have been still
as near to God and as dear as ever; instead of having his wrath poured out upon
thee to the uttermost, that mercy, which has been so often proffered, had
assuredly been bestowed, if thou had not foolishly shut thy eyes, so as not
to see either the value, or thy own need of mercy. A text somewhat parallel to
this we have Isai. 48. 17, 18. Thus says the Lord thy Redeemer, the holy One
of Israel, I am the Lord thy God, which teaches thee ^o profit, which leads
thee by the way which thou should go: Oh that thou ^^dst hearkened to my
commandments! ^hen had thy peace been as a river, and thy ^ighteousness as the
waves of the Sea.

In the prosecution of this Doctrine, ^ shall first open to you the nature of
^eace: Secondly, manifest what are the things which belong to our peace:
Thirdly, confirm the doctrine: Fourthly apply it.

In the first place I am to open to you ^he nature of peace.

This is a subject no less profitable then pleasant, Dulce nomen pacis, the
name of peace has a sweet sound. Peace implies a blessed conjunction between
heaven and earth, between the Creator and us his creatures; and, which follows
hereupon, a satisfaction and quietness in our hearts, so that those
disturbances and disorders, which were caused by sin, are becalmed and
regulated. The first of these, namely, Agreement with Heaven, is the
principally intended peace, which Christ speaks of; but the other, namely,
Quietness within, follows upon this, and is the superstructure upon this
foundation.

I shall therefore first explain the nature of Peace above, and afterward of
Peace within.

1. There is a Peace with God above: When I speak of peace with God, it is
supposed that by nature God and we are at variance, and sin is the makebate
between God and man. Sin is a thing that not only causes commotions and tumults
here below; therefore says the Apostle, From whence comes war and fightings
among you? comes it not hence, even of your lusts that war in your members?
Jam. 4. 1. but it also sets Heaven and Earth at odds; it so besots the
potsherds of the earth, that they venture to contend with him that is their
Maker, and who can easily dash them all in pieces. Sin has set us at a vast
distance from God, and is continually thrusting us further from him; yet we may
have peace, if we will indeed return to him: Though we have provoked him to be
an enemy, yet he is not such an enemy as is irreconcilable: Hark what language
he utters, Isai. 27. 4, 5. Fury is not in me; let him take hold of my strength,
that he may make peace with me, and he shall make peace with me. Peace with God
is here promised; God himself is ready to strengthen us, that we may make peace
with him, and the more abundantly to encourage us, he says, Fury is not in me,
that is, toward them who are willing to be reconciled, and to rebel no more,
he is not at all furious, but gracious and easy to be entreated, though their
awakened and fearful hearts are prone to imagine the Lord is made up all of
anger.

This Peace with God, several things are implied in it.

1. Peace with God implies the removal of his wrath. All sin is pardon'^ and
done away in the blood of Christ* and guilt being covered, the Lords anger
ceases, for sin is the only provocation to him. See how these are joined, the
forgiveness of sin, and the taking away of wrath, Psalm. 85. 2, 3. Thou have
forgiven the iniquity of thy people, thou have covered all their sin, Selah.
Thou have taken away all thy wrath, thou have turned thy self from the
fierceness of thine anger. The flaming sword is removed, and the Lord says,
Draw nigh to me, and I will draw nigh to you. We read, as of a Gulf fixed
between God and damned spirits, so of a middle wall of partition between God
and unregenerate sinners; the former, namely, the Gulf, indeed cannot be
passed through; but the latter, the middle wall, may be broken down, and it is
broken down when our peace is made: His wrath abides on those that will not
believe, that refuse to be reconciled; but his anger ceases toward them who
believe and yield to him. Thrice happy they, who are eased of such a load as
the wrath of God!

Speak O ye troubled Consciences, is not this anger your greatest trouble, and
that which makes the deepest wounds? Speak, O Hells Inhabitants, is not divine
wrath a punishment too heavy for you to bear? is not this the weight which
sinks you lowest in the bottomless pit? Finally, hear what Christ spoke when he
felt the displeasure of his Father, My Soul, says he, is exceeding sorrowful,
even unto death. Well may they rejoice, who through Jesus are freed from this
displeasure.

2. Peace with God implies an interest in his love. His love is every whit as
great toward those who are at peace with him, as before his wrath was. We may
cease to be angry with another, and yet not have any great affection for him.
But where the Lord turns away his wrath, the stream of his love does run amain.
The time of our reconcilation and returning is called a time of love: And this
love is the more to be admired, because it finds us in our blood, which makes
us deserve loathing; it finds no beauty, no comeliness at all in us, but what
it puts upon us. The Apostle speaks of rich mercy, and great love, which the
reconciled have an interest in, Ephesians. 2. 4, 5. But God, who is rich in mercy,
for the great love wherewith he loved us, even when we were dead in sins, has
quickened us together with Christ: by grace ye are saved. This love of God is
exceeding liberal, it sets open his fullness which is so all-sufficient, and we
may come, and take what we need at pleasure.

And as they, who are at peace with God, have an interest in his love, so this
love does enkindle love in them to him again: The unreasonable enmity of their
hearts against God is cured; the soul lifts up it self to God, Psalm. 25. 1.
which before very unreasonably doated upon the world, and much more
unreasonably upon its own lusts.

3. Peace with God implies the establishment of a sure and everlasting Covenant
between him and us. As the Lord makes this Covenant, so he makes over himself
in this Covenant; He becomes ours, and he takes us for his own, Ezekiel. 16 8. N^w
when I passed by thee, and looked upon thee, behold thy time was the time of
love, and I spread my skirt over thee, and covered thy nakedness; yea, I swear
unto thee, and entered into Covenant with thee, and thou becamest mine. This
Covenant is styled the Covenant of peace. The Lord being once a friend will
never become an enemy; he will be merciful to the unrighteousness of them that
are in Covenant with him; and as he has engaged not to leave and forsake them,
so he has promised to put his love and fear into their hearts, that they shall
not leave and forsake him: they are apt to be unstedfast, it is well they have
to do with a God that is faithful and changes not; to this is owing their
perseverance and their blessedness. That Is a sweet place, Isai. 54. 10. For the
mountains shall depart, and the hills be removed, but my kindness shall not
depart from thee, neither the Covenant of my peace be removed, says the Lord
that has mercy on thee. Oh that our hearts were but set to study this Covenant
of our God! How precious, how suitable are the Promises of it! We are guilty;
defiled, troubled, weak and lost creatures, but in this Covenant, Pardon, the
Spirit, Peace, strengthening Grace, and eternal Salvation are made over. And he
that has promised can as easily perform as promise. Nay, Christ has confirmed
this Covenant by his death, so that it cannot be altered. Our Lord at his death
engaged his Father to be a Friend unto all that did or should believe in him;
and therefore that he will be a sure and never failing Friend, may securely be
built upon.

4. Peace with God implies, his taking us into a new and near relation to
himself. He makes us his Children, and surely then we shall abide in his house
for ever. He not only says* I will be a God to you, but also, I will be a
Father unto you, and ye shall be my sons and daughters, says the Lord
Almighty, 2 Cor. 6. 18. Well may we wonder with the Apostle, 1 John 3. 1.
Behold, what manner of love the Father has bestowed upon us, that we should be
called the Sons of God! Those who are at peace with God are espoused unto Jesus
Christ, unto such, a Bill of divorce shall never be given. And as Christ
becomes their Husband, and God their Father so they consent to carry it like
Children, to love and fear the Lord in a child-like manner, to follow fully and
hard after him; they are willing to be faithful unto Christ, and to be subject
unto his commands, which are far from being grievous.

5. Peace with God implies freedom of access to him. Those who proudly harden
themselves in sin, the Lord beholds them afar off, but he is nigh to those
whose peace is made; such are invited not only to come, but to come with
boldness to the Throne of Grace; and mercy and grace to help shall not be
denied them, Heb. 4. ult. They may without discouragement approach to God, and
tell him of their temptations; He is ready to succor them: they may tell him
of their weakness, he is ready to strengthen them with might in their inward
man; they may tell him of the distempers, which they are burdened with, he is
ready to heal them; they may spread their desires before him, he is ready to
fulfill the desire of the humble, Psalm. 10. 17. Lord, thou have heard the desire
of the humble, thou will prepare their heart, thou will cause thine ear to hear.

And as the Soul, whose peace is made has freedom of access to God, so God
has freedom of access unto the soul. When Christ knocks, the heart opens; when
the Spirit moves, he does prevail; when God comes to dwell, the heart yields it
self to be his Temple and habitation; and how much hereby is the soul dignified
and advanced? The sinner is no longer foolishly stubborn, he denies the Lord
nothing; when he requires his heart, his desire, his love, none of these shall
be kept back any longer from him.

6. Peace with God implies fellowship and communion with him. There is a kind
of a commonness between God and them that are reconciled to him; whatever is in
God is theirs, because God is not ashamed to be called their God, Heb. 11. 16.
They have an interest and propriety in his Power, and Wisdom, and Mercy, and
fullness, and they are sensible of the blessed effects of these and other of the
Lords Attributes. God having given them himself, what will he refuse to
communicate? He is ever manifesting himself, and bestowing those blessings upon
them, which Aliens never do receive. He deals not toward them with a sparing
hand; the promise runs thus, Open thy mouth wide, and I will fill it, Psalm. 81.
10. And this is certain, that the more open our mouths are, the more open will
the hand of God be.

Thus you see what Peace above, what Peace with God is.

In the next place I am to speak of Peace within.

It Is natural to man to be his own enemy and tormentor. He that was possessed
with unclean spirits, it is said no man could bind him, no not with chains, but
he was in the Tombs and Mountains, crying and cutting himself with stones, Mar.
5. 5. In like manner, a child of disobedience, in whom the Prince of the power
of the Air works, will not be bound, will not be hindered from doing his soul
harm; those cords of restraint that the Word casts upon him, he breaks asunder
and casts away; he is continually cutting and wounding his own conscience, and
if he be not quickly translated out of this estate, he will quickly give
himself the fatal blow. As long as any are enemies to God, they are also their
own adversaries; but when they leave off fighting against God, they cease
warring against themselves.

Peace within is very comprehensive, several things are therein included.

1. Peace within comprehends calmness in the Conscience: This calmness follows
upon the apprehension and sense of our peace with God, and that now he is in
his Son reconciled. A reproaching Conscience is a fearful companion; we cannot
fly away from Conscience, it is always with us; if awakened 'twill speak
boldly, and tell us our own, be we never so proud or high in the world, and the
ear is forced to hear Conscience's accusations; when God gives it a command to
speak, how impossible is it for us to impose silence on it? Oh what a storm
does the remembrance of manifold sins, with their manifold aggravations, raise
in the Conscience? how amazed is it to see so much guilt, and God so much and
so justly incensed? But when God by his Spirit does say, Soul, though sin has
abounded, my grace does superabound; thy debts are all paid, thy iniquities are
all pardoned, Then the storm ceases, and there follows a great calm; Then
Conscience lays aside the whip of steel, wherewith before it lashed it self.

Conscience acquits the sinner, because God has first justified and absolved
him. Sins which are past are remitted, and instead of continuing in sin, the
heart is changed, and is sincerely desirous to have it slain; and this godly
sincerity Conscience gives testimony to, the effect of which is peace and joy,
2 Cor. 1. 12. Our rejoicing is this, the testimony of our conscience.
Conscience tells us of our duty, and urges us to the performance of it; now
when Conscience is heeded by us, and what we do for God our very hearts are in
it, Conscience will not condemn, but approve us, and this will quiet us; for
says the Apostle, 1 Job. 3. 20. Beloved, if our heart condemn us not, then
have we confidence toward God.

2. Peace within comprehends satisfaction in the heart. Solomon, while making
trial what sufficiency was in the things under the Sun, was far from peace
within, vanity was the fruit of all his labor, and his spirit is so far from
being satisfied, that 'twas filled with vexation. But when God does give
himself to us, whom our hearts must then needs look upon as a proportionable
happiness, as a sufficient portion, oh then we are come to our center, and are
at rest When the Soul ceases to tire and weary it self in pursuing after the
creatures, and is fixed upon God, who is a Sun, a Shield, an exceeding great
Reward; who is the God of all grace, and calls us to eternal glory; who cannot
only satiate our desires, but do exceedingly above our desires and thoughts,
according to that power which works in us, Ephesians. 3. 20. Then, then our peace
abounds, and passes all understanding. The heart is exceedingly pleased with
its choice, having made choice of God; it would not exchange conditions with
the greatest graceless ones in the whole world.

It must be acknowledged indeed, that in this life only the back parts of the
Lord Jehovah are seen, and little of him in comparison is to be enjoyed: Yet
this is certain, that Gods little is much more then the worlds all: The
enjoyment of the Lord in part, affords more peace and satisfaction, by ten
thousand degrees, then the creatures are capable of yielding; and that
satisfaction, how much is it heightened by the assured hopes, that at last we
shall be fully satisfied?

3. Peace within comprehends an agreement in our wills to the will of God. It Is
but reason, that since Gods will is so high, so holy, so good, our wills should
stoop and submit; and we cannot have peace but in that submission. The carnal
mind is enmity against God, and refuses to be subject to the Law and Word of
God: Nay, by that very Law the corrupted heart is irritated and provoked, it is
the more forward to sin, because forbidden to transgress: He was not
unacquainted with man's nature, who said, Nitimur in vetitum semper, cupimusque
negata. We are very prone to do that which is forbidden, and to desire what is
denied us: And while the heart is thus irritated by the Law, alas! the sinner
is like the troubled sea, when it cannot rest: Sin taking occasion by the
commandment, does work all manner of concupiscence, Romans 7. 8. But now what
peace is there, when our hearts are reconciled to our duty, when we do not
quarrel at, but love the Law, and wish, oh that our ways were directed to keep
it! How can there be peace within, unless there be some sutableness between our
spirits and Gods Word and Ordinances? unless what was before looked upon,
without cause, as a burden and weariness, be now esteemed as a privilege and
advantage?

Peace within comprehends ordinateness in the affections. Our passions and
affections, being corrupted by sin, are very tumultuous and unruly; and except
these are tamed and brought into right order, we shall not know peace. Those
are some of the worst kind of slaves that are enslaved by their own affections.
How is that man hurried, who is under the power of worldly or unclean desires?
His fleshly and his worldly lusts do so take up his time and pains, that they
will not permit him to eat, or drink, or sleep, and much less pray in quiet.
How is that heart rent and torn, that is by inordinate love glued to any
creature, when of that creature it is deprived? Oh the overwhelming sorrow which
follows upon love that is excessive! What a rack and torture is anger? What an
evil is fear? many times worse then the evil feared: And so I might instance in
other affections.

If the world be compared to a Stage, and the life of man to a part which he
acts upon it, we may truly say, that a wicked man does act, (...), the part of
a Self-punisher, because by giving way to his corrupt affections, he
contributes so much to his own disquiet.

But it is the work of the Spirit of God to renew these affections; the anger
and sorrow are turned against and on sin, the love and the desire are toward
God: And as here there is no danger of excess, so there is a certainty of
enjoyment: The heart sits loose from the world, and the world is not able to
disturb that peace which it has in God. None are more free from trouble then
those that are most masters of their own affections: And well may the Apostle
say, that the fruit of the Spirit is peace and joy, Gal. 5. 22. since he brings
our affections into captivity.

5. Peace within comprehends a ceasing to be our own foes. When are we our own
foes? Surely when we side with Satan against our selves, when we cherish those
lusts that war against our own souls. The Vipers offspring do eat out the
Vipers bowels; and sinful lusts, in like manner, will destroy at last those in
whom they are bred and fostered. Oh let us all be reconciled to our selves, and
not continue any longer the greatest accessories to our own misery.

I have showed now what Peace is.

In the second place I am to manifest what are the things which belong unto our
peace.

It Is in the Gospel that these things are revealed, which therefore is called
the Gospel of Peace, Romans 10. 15. How beautiful are the feet of them that
preach the Gospel of peace, and bring glad tidings of good things. Herein is
contained an Embassage of reconciliation: The God of peace proclaims to the
world what an inclination he has to be a friend and a Savior to the children
of men, and informs them upon what articles a peace shall be made and
established between him and them. The Law of Nature is here silent; the
Heathens by the light of that could never find out the way, how Divine Justice
may be satisfied, and an atonement for sin made. Nay, the written Law of God
speaks not a word concerning it: The Law teaches our duty, convinces of
transgression, thunders out curses against transgressors, and they would be
left under the curse, if the Gospel did not tell them how to be redeemed from
it, and how Grace, and Mercy, and Peace may be obtained.

There are three things which the Gospel reveals concerning our peace.

1. Who is the Mediator or Peacemaker, Jesus Christ. 2. What are the
conditions of this Peace. 3. How we may attain to an assurance of it.
1. One thing which we must know concerning our peace, is, Who is the Mediator
or Peacemaker between God and men, and he is Christ Jesus, 1 Timothy 2. 5, 6. For
there is one God, and one Mediator between God and men, the Man Christ Jesus,
who gave himself a ransom for all, to be testified in due time. Here it was
that Jerusalem was ignorant; a cruclfied Messiah (though his crucifixion was
necessary to his making of our peace) they hid their faces from, and
disesteemed. Christ crucified was to the Jews a stumbling block, and to the
Greeks foolishness, but to them that are reconciled and saved, he is the power
of God, and the wisdom of God: Hence it is, that the Apostle resolves to know
nothing besides him. All things that are revealed in Scripture must be known
with relation to Christ, else our knowledge will be uncomfortable and without
advantage.

What good will it do us to hear that God is gracious and merciful, unless in
Christ he be reconciled? what good, to be informed of heaven and glory, unless
Christ, who has the Key of David, do open the door that we may enter? What
good, to hear of the Promises, unless in Christ they be Yea and Amen to the
glory of God? Finally, what will it benefit us to hear of the privileges of
the Gospel, unless through Christ we are admitted to them? There is an
excellency in the knowledge of Christ our Peacemaker, in comparison of which
the Apostle counted all things but loss and dung, Phil. 3. 8.

Christ Jesus is our Peacemaker by a threefold means. His Satisfaction, his
Intercession, and the communication of his benefits.

1. Christ Jesus is our Peace maker by means of his satisfaction: For the
iniquity of his people was he smitten, and the chastisement of their peace was
laid upon him: He was sent on purpose to be a propitiation; 1 John 4. 10.
Herein is love, not that we loved God, but that he loved us, and sent his Son
to be the propitiation for our sins. Christ is said to reconcile both Jews and
Gentiles unto God, by the blood of his Cross, and to have slain the enmity
thereby. Corruptible things, as silver and gold, were insufficient, but the
blood of Christ was a sufficient price for our redemption.

We may conceive such a kind of dialogue as this, between Justice, and Christ,
and Man who has offended.

1. Divine Justice thus begins: Bring forth the Soul which has sinned that it
may dye: A righteous Law has been broken, and it is but righteous that the
curse should be inflicted: Here are not one, or two, but thousands of sins upon
record: Now therefore I am resolved to whet my glittering sword, and my hand
shall immediately take hold on vengeance, and I Will make the sinner know to his
cost, what it is to provoke the Lord to jealousy.

2. Christ answers; Hold Justice, stay thy hand! those sins thou speak of,
they are transferred unto another, therefore the Soul must not dye that is
guilty of them: The debt is great, but I undertake to pay it all; where thou
art wronged, it shall be put wholly on my account, I am resolved to be the
sinners Surety, I am content to be made sin for him, though I knew none, though
I never was my self in the least guilty

3. Unto this Justice replies, Then, O thou Son of God, I must sheath my sword
in thy bowels, I must wound, and bruise, and afflict thee: where ever I find
sin, though but imputed, I cannot for^ear to punish it.

4. Christ answers again; Do Justice, strike, and spare not; I am willing to be
wounded, that the sinners wounds may be closed and cured; I am willing to dye
that be may live; I am willing to undergo the curse, that he may receive the
blessing, even life for evermore.

5. Upon this the sinner wonders and cries out, Oh love that passes knowledge!
My Lord, my Savior! since thou have given thy life a ransom for me, I am
resolved to trust in thee, and to lay the stress of my salvation on thee; I
expect and desire favor and pardon no other way, then by thee, who art both
the Price and the Prince of Peace.

2. Christ is our Peacemaker by means of his intercession. As his satisfaction
is one, so his intercession is the other part of his Priestly office. He
seconds his sufferings by his intercession; and we may be confident his
intercession will be prevalent, because of that love which his Father bears
him, and because by his sufferings he has purchased whatever he intercedes
for. Christ the righteous is our Advocate with the Father, 1 John 2. 1. He
presents before his Father the compleatness of his satisfaction, and how he
has endured the Cross and shame, and drank off that whole Cup which his Father
put into his hand, and fulfilled all righteousness; how he did, and suffered
all that was required of him, and all this, not for himself, but us. Whereupon
the Father looks upon us with an eye of love, he is pacified toward us; and as
he is Christ's God and Father, so he is ours too: John 20. 17. Go tell my
brethren, I ascend to my Father and your Father, and to my God and your God.

Christ is our Peacemaker by the communication of his benefits: He is made
unto us wisdom, and then we see the way of reconciliation: He is made unto us
righteousness; sin is no longer imputed, and that quarrel which Justice had
with us comes to an end: He is made unto us sanctification, and then the
holiness of God ceases to be our enemy, and we no longer hate that holiness;
there is a sweet agreement between our renewed nature and an holy God, and his
holy Law, which he would have us walk according to. They that are sanctified in
Christ Jesus, love God because of his holiness, and they love the Word of God
upon the same score, Psalm. 119. 139, 140. My zeal has consumed m^, because
mine enemies have forgotten thy words: Thy Word is very pure, therefore thy
servant loves it. Finally, Christ is made unto us redemption, that is a fourth
benefit reckoned up by the Apostle, 1 Cor. 1. 30. He makes us free indeed,
because he frees us from that which is slavery indeed, he delivers us from the
bondage of corruption, and causes us to become the servants of God and
righteousness, Romans 6. And now we are reconciled to Gods Sovereignty and
Authority, we own him as our Lord, who as he has right to rule us, so it is our
honor, our advancement, our freedom to be ruled by him.

2. As we must know who is our Peacemaker, so what are the conditions of our
peace.

1. One condition is godly sorrow: And as the Lord does grant us peace, so he
himself does work this and the other conditions of it. If we will be
reconciled, we must mourn for our offending and provoking God to be an enemy.
The eye of the body can look every way but inward, and shall the eye of our
mind never look inward neither? Were our hearts but more acquainted with
themselves, they would be more broken and contrite hearts: How deeply is the
Law of sin engraven there? and this Law of sin forbids whatever the Law of God
commands, and commands whatever the Law of God forbids. The most venomous
creature is not more full of poison, then our hearts are full of enmity against
the Lord, and reprobateness to what is good: This corruption of our nature is
not a thing which has layn dormant and idle; no, but as a Fountain perpetually
sends forth water, so from the heart proceed evils abundantly, whereby the man
is defiled. It Is difficult to reckon up the sins of one day, or of one duty;
and how vast then is the total sum of our whole lives abominations? Oh break
hard heart for shame! who have so often broken the most equal laws, and broken
through so many obligations to obedience. If the offending God be made light of,
this will anger him more then all thy other offenses.

2. Another condition of our Peace is Believing. When the Jaylour was under the
sense of Gods anger and wrath, and tortured with the fears of damnation, and
cried out, What shall I do to be saved? Paul and Silas made this answer,
Believe on the Lord Jesus Christ, and thou shall be saved, Acts 16. 30, 31. How
much is faith preached up in the Gospel? and unto Christ our faith is directed,
for it is in him that God is well pleased, and it is through that beloved Son
alone, that he will be at peace, and well pleased with us: If we expect favor
or mercy any other way, but through Jesus, that very expectation is sufficient
to be an eternal impediment to our obtaining of either. The Lord has made
Faith one great condition of our peace and salvation, for two reasons.

1. Man being thus reconciled and saved by believing, all the glory redounds to
God alone: Man's boasting is utterly excluded: The hand of faith is an empty
hand, it brings nothing along with it; but it receives Christ, and with him,
and from him, freely all things. Faith exalts Christ, and abases the sinner,
and makes him see, that he is wretched, and miserable, and poor, and naked, and
that to Christ he must be beholding for every thing, he must thank himself for
nothing.

Man being thus reconciled and saved by believing, his peace with God is
lasting, his salvation sure, Romans 4. 16. Therefore it is of faith, that it
might be by grace, to the end the promise might be sure. Adam was at peace with
God when first created; but since the continuance of his peace depended upon
the constancy of his obedience, peace and life were soon lost by him. But faith
puts our peace and salvation in the hands of another, in the hands of Christ,
he undertakes to be the finisher of our faith, Heb. 12. 2. He has promised to
keep us from falling, and to confirm us to the end, 1 Cor. 1. 8. And the
believer rests upon this word of promise, which will never fail him.

That Is the second condition of peace, believing.

3. Another condition is; Conversion with the whole heart to God. How often
does the Spirit cry out, Turn and live^? And though the Lord was bitterly
provoked, yet upon his peoples returning, he promises to be pacified, Jer. 3.
12. Go and proclaim these words toward the North, and say, Return thou
backsliding Israel, says the Lord, and I will not cause my anger to fall upon
you, for I am merciful, says the Lord, and I will not keep anger for ever. Our
returning to him must be without delay, without deceit; we must not divide our
hearts between him and sin, between him and Mammon, but we must consent to be
wholly his, and never to leave him any more; but if through infirmity we do
fall, we must look unto the Lord to pity, and pardon, and heal, and raise us.
To turn away from God so as not to return, is inconsistent with peace. Thus you
know these things, which are the conditions of your peace; let me add, Happy
are ye if ye do them.

3. It concerns us to know, how we may attain to an assurance of Peace. The
soul indeed may be safe without this assurance, but withal 'twill be
disconsolate. Now it is the Spirit who makes this discovery: We read, Romans 14.
17. of peace and joy in the holy Ghost. Peace and joy are the fruits of this
blessed Comforter. In Scripture the Saints are said to be sealed by the Spirit
unto the day of redemption, Ephesians. 4. 30. And their being thus sealed, as it
denotes their distinction from the rest of the world, their being appropriated
unto God, and the value that is put upon them; so it serves to confirm them in
that persuasion, That God is theirs, and they are his. There is indeed a privy
Seal of his gracious Decree, of which the Apostle speaks, 2 Timothy 2. 19.
Nevertheless the foundation of God stands sure, having this seal, The Lord
knows them that are his. But afterward, when the Spirit works upon us, we
are sealed in a more discernable way. Now the work and method of the Spirit in
sealing and bringing those, who are reconciled, unto an assurance of peace, I
shall declare.

1. The Spitit convinces us of sin and misery, of our worthlesness and
weakness, and bows our hearts to a submission to the righteousness of Christ,
and draws us to a closure with him.

2. The Spirit sanctifies and cleanses us from the filthiness, in which we
wallowed, and causes us to yield obedience to the commands of God, Ezekiel. 36. 27.

3. The Spirit does more and more stir up and increase the grace which he he
has wrought, so that the actings of faith, and love, and hope, and zeal, are
the more strong and sensible.

4. The Spirit does discover the truth of these graces, letting us see, that
our hearts do prize Christ, and breath after God, and after a greater degree of
likeness to him, as the Saints in Scripture have done before us.

5. Then peace and joy follows. But here we must understand, that this peace is
twofold. First, more weak, mixed and imperfect. Secondly, more ravishing,
glorious and triumphant.

1. There is a peace more weak, mixed and imperfect, which is for our support
and encouragement, and this is common with believers, when they stir up
themselves, and seek the Lord with their whole desire, as they did, 2 Chronicles.
15. 15. Seldom is a duty performed with our heart and might, but some degree of
peace and satisfaction follows, the Spirit giving some intimation, and raising
a secret hope, that God through Christ does accept of us. Oh who would not
labor since there is such peace and rest attends it?

2. There is a peace more ravishing, glorious, and triumphing. How brightly
does the light of Gods countenance then shine upon us! How sweet is that love,
the sense of which the Spirit sheds abroad in the heart! Romans 5. 5. What
confidence have we then in God! How do we admire the richness of his grace! how
low are we in our own eyes, being astonished that such vile creatures should be
so advanced! How do we then despise the worlds delights, and the pleasures of
sin! How forward are we to obey, and to walk in all Ordinances blameless! How
undaunted at danger, and at death, which will but increase our pleasures,
sending us much nearer to the Lord, then here we are capable of approaching!
Thus it is by the Spirit that peace is spoken to us; and if we would attain to
this peace, we must heed the Spirits counsels, we must readily close with his
motions, we must gladly accept of his help and assistance, we must give up our
selves unto his guidance.

In the third place follow the reasons of the Doctrine.

Why, to know the things of our peace is our great happiness and wisdom.

The reasons are these.

1. Because a true knowledge of these things will be practical and industrious;
It will very much affect the heart, and quicken diligence, in seeking peace
before it be too late: A right understanding of it, will hinder a business of
such eternal consequence, from being any longer neglected by us.

2. Because of the evil which unavoidably follows, if of the things which
concern our peace we are ignorant. The ignorant soul is wretchedly careless, it
matters not whether God be a friend or foe, ^s if his loving kindness were not
to be ^alued; as if his wrath were not to be ^eared; and at last, the soul
misses of merry, which it does not regard, and falls ^uddenly and irrecoverably
into the pit ^f destruction, which it dreams not of, ^or endeavors to prevent.

Now follows the Application.

USE I. Of Instruction. There are two great lessons which we may learn from
this Doctrine.

1. One lesson is this, That believers are the wisest and happiest souls, for
the things of their peace are understood by them. Those things which are hid
from the prudent of the world are unto these discovered: I know they are
accounted children a^^ babes by the carnally minded, but in the end they will
be found to have had ^^ all others the greatest foresight, the faithest reach,
the truest understanding: Matthew. 11. 25, 26. At that time Jesus answered and
said, I thank thee, O Father, Lord of heaven and earth, because thou h^^ hid
these things from the wise and pr^dent, and have revealed them unto babes even
so Father, for so it seemed good in the sight.

Peace is a thing which all seek after but most are mistaken in judging wha^ is
peace, and are woefully deceived in the way to it: Only the believer hits righ^
for he is lead by a Guide that leads onl^ into truth.

It Is indeed found by experience, tha^ endeavors are used to blind and deceive
the believer himself; but he is too wise to be put off with peace and happiness
only in show.

Many things do proffer peace to him.

1. Pleasures do use this charming language. What is it, O man, which thou
seek for? Is it quiet and satisfaction? (...) taste the sweetness which
gratifying thy senses will afford: Is it not fine ^ g^^^ter in silk and silver
bravely? to be ^lothed in purple and fine linen, and to presumptuously and
deliciously every day? Who are more free from care and trouble, ^^en those who
chaunt to the sound of the ^^ol, who drink wine in bowls, who eat limbs out of
the flock, and calves out of ^^e midst of the stall, and after lay them down
upon beds of Ivory, and stretch themselves upon their couches? Come, come, away
with needless scruples, indulge unto thy appetite, please thy senses, whatever
thy eyes desire withhold not from them, and quench thy longing flame in
Dalilah's ^^braces.

Unto this the believing soul replies: Death is climbing up at the windows, the
Judge stands before the door, Eternity is just at hand; and, O all ye sensual
pleasures, can you last any longer then a short season? Where is the Glutton
that fared deliciously, that had as much as heart could wish? Is he not
tormented in the flames? Oh deceitful pleasures, which cheat men of eternal
joys, and drill them along to endless torments!

2. Wealth and worldly greatness do also make big offers: Would thou, O Man,
have peace? then seek a great estate, join house to house, and field to field,
let thy coffers be crammed with silver and gold, endeavor to be somebody in the
world: Do thou not know how many eyes, how much respect riches and honor
will draw after thee? Let this be thy aim, to live i^ plenty and esteem, and to
leave a name behind thee.

Unto this also the believing soul answers: To expect peace and contentation
from worldly abundance, is as absurd, as t^ hope to sleep quietly in a bed of
thorns. Who ever attained to greater earthly glory then Solomon? whose
treasures did ever more abound? yet he himself disgraces a^^ his own wealth and
honor, by calling them, Vanity and vexation of spirit.

3. At last the Lord calls to the Believer, and thus speaks to him: Is it
happiness, O man, which thou art searching after? Look unto me, who am the God
of love and peace: The creatures have but empty breasts, are but broken
cisterus; but I have store of living waters to quench thy thirst, and satisfy
thy longing: Sin is the disturber of thy peace, therefore let sin be cast away
with hatred, and trouble, that ever thou did give it entertainment. Come,
come to me without delay, I will be to thee a God, I will be all unto thee;
thou shall never lack as long as I am all-sufficient.

Hereupon the soul yields: Thou art my haven, O my God; till I am arrived at
thee I am in a storm, and every moment in langer to be cast away; in thee only,
through thy Son, I can have peace; oh therefore let me be glew'd to thee, that
nothing may cause a separation! well may the believing soul return unto its
rest, since God is his, and the peace which is made shall never quite be broken.

2. Another lesson which we may learn is this, The wretchedness of the ungodly,
for there is no peace to them; Isai. 57. 21. There is no peace, says my God,
unto the wicked. And the more wicked, the less peace, and the longer you
continue wicked, the less hopes that ever there will be any. I grant indeed,
that it is ordinary for wicked ones to cry peace to themselves, but this false
and imaginary peace is as bad, nay worse, then none at all.

1. The peace of the wicked is founded upon ignorance; they know not what cause
they have to fear and be troubled, the sins which they commit, the God whom
they every hour provoke, and the vengeance unto which they are liable, is not
in all their thoughts: These things they are willingly ignorant of, 2 Pet. 3. 5.

2. This peace of the wicked, many times it is the consequent of judicial
hardness; their eyes are shut, their consciences are cast into a dead sleep,
and are become past feeling; no wonder if they enjoy a kind of quiet.

3. This peace of the wicked is a great hindrance to their obtaining of true
peace: while they imagine their state is good and safe enough, they will not
seek to have it altered; by means of this the strong man armed does keep the
house in more quiet and secure possession.

4. This peace of the wicked is but of very short continuance; it is chased away
like a pleasant dream or night vision, and the succeeding woe and trouble will
be the more intolerable, because unlookt for it will come upon them.

A peace the wicked have, but it is without ground, and worse then none: True
peace what have they to do with, as long as the wickednesses, which are
practiced, delighted in, and pleaded for, are so many?

1. The ungodly have no peace in life. The Lord is their enemy, he hates them,
is angry with them, walks contrary to them. Hark how he proclaims war, Ezekiel. 5.
8. Therefore thus says the Lord God, Behold, I even am against thee, and I
will execute judgments in the midst of thee. And as the Apostle says, If God
be for us, who can be against us? So the words may be inverted, If God be
against us, what does it signify who is for us?

2. Much less have the ungodly any peace at death. The end of the perfect and
upright is peace; but the transgressors shall be destroyed together, the end
of the wicked shall be cut off, Psalm. 37. 37, 38 Then their hopes will prove a
Spiders web, their confidence as the giving up of the ghost. Perhaps when the
snares of death are upon them, the pains of hell may get hold of them,
Conscience may be affrighted, and they may be like wild Bulls in a net, full of
the fury of the Lord, and the rebuke of God: But if they dye stupid, there is
the less hope; if there are no bands in their death, it is the more certain they
will be bound immediately after, and thrown into the lake of fire.

3. The Judge will not find the ungodly in peace: No, no, they were not
diligent or desirous to be cleansed from their spots and filthiness. How many
sins unrepented of will accompany them to the Tribunal? which will prove them
enemies to God, and which with a loud united voice will cry for vengeance upon
them.

4. And will they find any peace in hell into which with a curse they must
depart? Can there be any ease, any rest taken in those devouring flames? How
many things will the damned have to trouble them? All the wrath of God stirred
up against them: The glory of his power manifesting it self in their
destruction: The reflections of Conscience upon the proffers of peace and life,
which were once made, but madly, sottishly despised, and which should never,
never be made more: Oh how will they be troubled, and bowed down, and mourn,
and wail, and weep eternally!

USE II. Of Exhortation to the Lords Enemies. O that you would be persuaded
unto peace! Many arguments I may fill my mouth with, to prevail with you to be
reconciled.

1. Do but consider seriously, what kind of enemy the Lord is, and that
consideration will make you afraid, that he should be your enemy any longer.

1. You cannot fly from his reach. Though you exalt your selves as the Eagle,
though you set your nest among the Stars, yet from thence the Lord can bring
you down, Obad. 4. Though you should go down to the bottom of the Sea, and hide
your selves at the earths center, yet there his hand can take you. If you
imagine that any refuge can secure you from God, that refuge will be found a
lie, and will deceive you. The Lord does fill both heaven and earth, nay the
Heaven of Heavens cannot contain him, how then is it possible any should fly
from him?

2. You cannot resist his power. Far stronger creatures then you, were not able
to withstand the God of heaven: The Dragon fought and his Angels, but how
easily were they overcome? After that Jehu had slain Joram and Ahaziah, the
Kings of Israel and Judah, we read that the Elders of Samaria were exceedingly
afraid, and said, behold two Kings stood not before him, how then shall we
stand? 2 Kings 10. 4: So may I say, Behold the Angels that excel in strength,
stood not before the Lord, he cast them, when they sinned, into chains, which
they can never break asunder; And how then shall man be able to stand, who
dwells in a house of clay, whose foundation is in the dust, and who is
crushed before the moth? Sinner! God will certainly be too hard for thee, thou
can no more resist his power, then a feather can bear up against a whirlwind,
or dried stubble defend it self from the fiercest ^ame.

3. You cannot bear his indignation. How does David faint and cry out, when a
little of Gods anger was stirred up against him? Remove thy stroke away from
me, I am consumed by the blow of thy hand, Psalm. 39. 10. And if a little be so
intolerable, what will the whole weight be? The Prophet brings in the
unsensible creatures, as if they had sense, fearing and quaking, when the Lord
does show his wrath, Nehem. 1. 5, 6. The mountains quake at him, and the hills
melt, and the earth is burnt at his presence, yea, the world and all that dwell
therein; who can stand before his indignation? and who can abide in the
fierceness of his anger? his fury is poured out like fire, and the rocks are
thrown down by him. Surely that heart is worse then rocky, which does not
tremble before him.

4. He can engage all the creatures against you. He is the Maker and also the
great Commander of the Host of Heaven and Earth. The Angels are ready pressed
for his service, and to do his will; all the Devils are at his beck, and
forward to be the Executioners, when he has passed an angry sentence: The
Thunder and the Lightning say unto him, Here we are: The stormy Wind does
fulfill his words: Nay, the smallest and most inconsiderable creatures he can
render dreadful, and tame the proudest by them. And since he is Jehova
Exercituum, the Lord of such Armies, Oh do not enter into battle with him.

5. He has access unto your very spirits, and can wound and fill your souls
with horror. When the Lord impressed his anger upon the heart of Judas, how
restless was he? though a covetous man, he flings away his silver, that would
not ease him; his life is a burden, and with his own hands he puts an end to
it. A wounded spirit who can bear? and wounds there the Lord can give you.

6. His power will reach his enemies in the next world: Nay, then his hand will
be heaviest of all; God will lay on load upon his adversaries, and not in the
least spare them: His patience will then be at an end, his goodness totally and
eternally withdrawn; and how low then will his vengeance weigh them down? Such
an enemy the Lord is, and this is one argument to persuade you to peace.

2. Be mindful of the dependence you have upon him. In him you live, and move,
and have your being, and if he should withdraw his visitation, your life would
presently conclude and vanish: And is it safe, or a wise part in you, to
provoke that God to be your enemy, in whose hand your breath is, and who can
take it out of your nostrils when he pleases? He can loose the silver cord, he
can break the golden bowl, and require your souls at your hands, without giving
you an hours or a minutes warning. Whosoever you fall out with, methinks you
should get and keep in with God, for it is his patience and mercy which keeps
you out of the grave and hell; of both which, by reason of sin, you are in
great danger.

3. The condescension and stooping of God is admirably great, in beseeching
such as you to be reconciled: And shall he entreat in vain? Shall the
malefactor be beseeched to accept of a pardon, and refuse it? That is a text
that should work upon the most refractory, 2 Cor. 5. 20. Now then we are
Ambassadors for Christ, as though God did beseech you by us, we pray you, in
Christ's stead, be ye reconciled to God. What is it come to this, does God
beseech, and Christ pray, that we, who are so mean and so vile, would be
friends, and shall we continue rebels? O earth, earth, earth, hear the word of
the Lord! for the impenitent, then the earth or stones, are much more stupid.
To slight the proffer of mercy, and to disobey the command to come for it, is
both a fault and a folly inexcusable; but to be deaf to entreaties, is worst of
all; this; goes nearest unto God, when his condescension and kindness is
disregarded and abused, and upon this abuse the greater contempt, and anger,
and hatred must needs follow.

4. Consider what kind of friend the Lord is. I might be large in describing
his excellencies, which they who are acquainted with him see and admire. Three
things at present I shall mention.

1. God is such a friend, whose love is transcendent. That sweet name (which is
as an ointment poured forth) he calls himself by, The God of love and peace, 2
Cor. 13. 11. Nay, he is styled (...), Love in the abstract, 1 John 4. 8. He
that loves not knows not God, for God is love. Whatever returns of love we
make, those returns fall infinitely short of the love of God from whence they
come. Indeed it is as possible to equal him in strength, in wisdom, or any
other of his perfections, as to equal him in love. Oh let this love of God be
as a loadstone to draw yours, and as a whetstone to sharpen it.

2. God is such a friend, whose fullness can never be exhausted. The Sun,
although it has shined ever since the Creation, yet it is as full of light as
ever it was. And though the Lord has supplied the wants of all them, whom he
has made his friends from the beginning, yet his stock and store is not at all
diminished; His wisdom is never posed in their greatest difficulties; when
believers know not what to do, and their eyes are unto him, he knows what to do
for them: His power can raise them out of the lowest deep; his all sufficiency
can give to the uttermost of their desires, nay exceedingly more then it has
entered into their hearts to desire or conceive: Who in his wits would not leave
a vain world, and deceitful lusts, to come to such a friend as God has always
showed himself to be?

3. God is such a friend, as will last when all other friends fail. He is the
Lord who changes not: He can as soon cease to be, as cease to be faithful; and
the faithfulness of God toward his friends, will make them also faithful; he
will not turn away from them, and he will hold them fast that they shall not
depart from him. The Lord is most constant; the Ordinances of the Sun, and
Moon, and Stars are not so immutable as the Promises he has made. Men of low
degree are vanity, men of high degree are a lie, Psalm. 62. 9. But God is true:
Wealth may take wings and fly away, prosperity may vanish so as to be
forgotten, flesh and heart may fail, but the Lord will be a friend and a
portion for ever. Oh consent to be reconciled, since such a friend hereby will
be gained.

5. Consider, If God be at peace with you, he will shield you from all other
adversaries; he will wrest those weapons out of your own hands, whereby you
endeavored your own destruction; he will give a deaths wound to sin, that it
shall not be your death. And though the world, and the God of the world, fight
against you, they shall not be able to prevail: Nay, their very enmity shall
befriend you, and God will turn to good what they do mean for evil. It Is
admirable to consider, how the adversaries of the Lords people, though they
have the intension of enemies, yet are forced to act like friends, and do a
kindness unto Saints by those means, whereby they thought to have injured and
destroyed them. Just as Joseph's brethren, when they would hinder his
promotion, sold their brother into Egypt, where he arrived to that honor,
which being foretold was the matter of their envy.

6. Gods late dispensations, in a way of judgment, do call upon you aloud to
sue for peace. He has displayed his Flag of Defiance, and the Motto of it has
been, Peste, Ferro, and Flamma, By Plague, and Sword, and Fire; By all these
the Lord has been fighting with us and our sins, and rebelling against him is
the ground of the quarrel. The Sword was drawn, which devoured flesh, and dyed
red the Sea with blood. The Quiver was opened, and out flew the Arrows of the
Pestilence; and what slaughter did those Arrows make? Heaps upon heaps the
Destroyer killed, many thousand went down to the Chambers of Death. We were
ready to conclude, when the Plague was over, that God had done with us, but we
were mistaken: A Fire was kindled in his wrath, which the strongest, the
stateliest buildings could not stand against: How did the flames roar? what
havoc did they make? In three days space, London was no more like it self,
then the dead bones, which have lay'n in the grave for several years, are like
unto the man, when he was alive, and in his greatest strength and beauty.

When these effects of his displeasure are looked upon with a considerate eye,
who can doubt that God was angry? and how little has been done to appease his
wrath? It Is high time to beg for mercy, and to abandon whatever is a bar in
Mercy's way. Oh that London, oh that England, would know the things that belong
to their peace! We are not brought so low but we may be brought lower, if we
provoke the Lord to continue still an enemy.

7. Consider, as yet there is a possibility of being reconciled to God: His
Arms are open and stretched forth, if you will but cast your selves into them:
If the most wicked will but forsake their ways and thoughts, and return to the
Lord, he will have mercy upon them; and though sin has abounded, he will
abundantly pardon, Isai. 55. 7. Oh what would the damned give, that mercy were
but possible to be obtained? It Is great mercy that you have not sinned your
selves beyond the reach of mercy: But if the favor of God and peace with him
be neglected, how quickly may you be concluded under sin and wrath, and your
salvation become as impossible, as is the salvation of those who are in Hell?

I hope by this time your ears will be readily open to hearken to some
Directions, how you may have your peace with God made.

The Directions are these.

1. Be sensible of, and bewail that enmity which is between God and you. You
have unnaturally rebelled and risen up against your Father that made you. Those
members which he formed, you have yielded as weapons of unrighteousness; those
powers which he has endued your souls with, you have employed sinfully: You
have dishonored him in your bodies and spirits, whereas you should have
glorified him in both. You are unjustly and unreasonably the Lords enemies;
what has he done to deserve your hatred? for which of his kindnesses do you
fight against him? But the Lord is justly an enemy to you, because your
transgressions against him have been so many and so mighty. That you should
have hearts alienated from such a God, so holy and gracious, and to whom you
owe all that you are and have, it should make your hearts break and melt within
you; and that you have engaged this God against you, should be esteemed an evil
and a bitter thing, Jer. 2. 19.

2. Let your cries be strong for peace: Resolve never to give over, till he
whom you have provoked to be your enemy, is become your friend. If you would
have an interest in the favor of God, that favor must be entreated, and that
with your whole heart: Psalm. 119. 58. I entreated thy favor with my whole
heart; be merciful to me according unto thy word. The condemned prisoner at the
bar, if there be hopes of speeding, how does he implore the Judges mercy? The
beggar, who is ready to starve for hunger, how does he make a noise, Bread,
bread, for the Lords sake, bread! And you have more cause to cry for peace with
God; for if you live and dye enemies, you are everlastingly undone. And to
hearten you to prayer, let that Scripture be considered, Psalm. 86. 5. For thou
Lord art good, and ready to forgive, and plenteous in mercy unto all them that
call upon thee.

3. The mediation of Jesus Christ must be used. The Apostle tells us, That
Christ came and preached to them which were far off, and to them which were
nigh, Ephesians. 2. 12. that is, both to the Jews and Gentiles: And that peace
which he preached, by his blood he purchased The blood of Christ has a voice,
which voice is loud, and peace is the thing which his blood cries for. You must
expect peace no other way but by the blood of the Cross. Believe that this
blood of Christ, the eternal Son of God, is sufficient to make an atonement for
your sin; and being encouraged by the proffers and promises which he has made
in the Gospel, be sure to trust in him, to be your Advocate with the Father,
and he will not fail to mediate your peace; who ever believed on him and was
confounded? Christ is styled the Prince of Peace, Isai. 9. 6. which shows that
he has an uncontrollable power to make peace, when, and for whom he pleases.

4. Let the design of God in the Gospel be considered as matter of
encouragement: which design is to reconcile the world unto himself, 2 Cor. 5
19. God is in Christ reconciling the world unto himself, not imputing their
trespasses to them, and has committed unto us the word of reconciliation. One
great thing which keeps ^en off from God, is an unbelieving fear, that ^^ is
avers^ from peace, rather forward to take veng^an^^ upon the sinner, then ready
to forgive his sin. But have they, who entertain such fears, ever looked into
the Gospel? If the Lord were so forward to kill and destroy, why has he
provided a City of refuge? why did he refuse to spare his Son? why does he
proclaim himself a God abundant in loving kindness, goodness and truth, who
has mercy for thousands, and forgives iniquity, transgression and sin? The
more firmly you are persuaded of his kindness and compassions, the sooner you
will yield to him.

5. Lay hold upon the Lords own strength, if you would have your peace made.
Consult the forecited place, Isai. 27. 5. Or let him take hold of my strength,
that he may make peace with me, and he shall make peace with me. Though by the
strength of the Lord, we may understand Christ Jesus, who is called, the Power
of God, and the Wisdom of God, 1 Cor. 1. 24. Yet I rather think the Holy Ghost
does intimate to us in that place, that unless God does draw us to himself by
his own strength, we shall never close with him, but still continue at a
distance and enmity. Your neck is so much like an iron sinew, that a less
strength then that of God is insufficient to bow it to his yoke. Desire
therefore, that this arm may be revealed, whereby your naturally stubborn
spirits may be made tractable and obedient.

6. Resolve to cover and keep nothing, whereby the Lord has been provoked. He
that covers his sins shall not prosper. And as sin, which is the cause of
war, must be forsaken, so you must leave the tents of Rebels; you must shake
off your acquaintance with them that are the Lords professed enemies, and
become companions of those that fear him.

USE III. Of Advice, to those whose peace is made.

Endeavor after an assurance of it. Be restless, while it may be questioned,
whether God be your friend, or whether he be your foe? His favor is a thing of
so great value, of such sweetness, and will have so great an influence, as that
it better deserves to be ensured then those things of the world, uncertainty
about which does so much torture the worldly minded.

Here I shall, first, Lay down some signs of that peace which is true.
Secondly, Some arguments to persuade believers to endeavor after an assurance
of peace.

The Signs are these.

1. True peace follows after contrition and trouble for sin. Thou art at peace;
but wast thou ever troubled? if not, 'twere well if thy peace were gone, and
trouble in the room of it. Thou art troubled at thy temporal losses, and when
thy expectation from the creatures is frustrated; affliction also is
troublesome, and acknowledged an evil, but were thine eyes open to see the evil
of sin? was thy heart ever troubled for it? If guilt be made light of, if
future punishment be not thought on, nor feared, if thou art unsensible that
sin is a plague, and it is not noysom to thee, if thy offending of God be the
smallest matter of a thousand, as long as thou feel nothing of his hand,
certainly thou wast never broken, and so thy peace is not thy privilege, but
thy punishment. Christ was anointed to bind up the brokenhearted, and to
comfort th^se who first have mourned, Isai. 61. 1. and those who have true rest
given them, were first weary and heavy laden.

2. True peace is the fruit of the lips. Isai. 57. 9. I create the fruit of the
lips, peace, peace to him that is far off, and to him that is near. Peace is
called the fruit of the lips, partly because it is obtained by prayer, partly
because it is grounded upon the Gospel which is preached to us: Where true peace
is, there has been a crying and lifting up the voice for it. Oh what
importunities have been used, that the Lord would cease to be an adversary?
what wrestlings for his favor and friendship? This peace has been valued
above all the world, and the soul has been contented to do any thing, to be
any thing, so it may be at peace with God.

True peace is likewise grounded upon the word; it is a peace not of our own,
but of the Lords speaking, Psalm. 85. 8. I will hear what God the Lord will
speak, for he will speak peace to his people, and to his Saints, but let them
not turn again to folly. And when he speaks peace, who then can make trouble?
The word discovers the marks and characters of such as are indeed reconciled
unto God, and become his children; that they prize the Lord Jesus above all, 1
Pet. 2. 7. that they hunger and thirst after holiness and righteousness, Matthew.
5. 6. that they love and fear, and are desirous to follow their Father, Ephesians.
5. 1. And the Spirit by the Word does work these gracious qualities and
inclinations in our hearts, and discovers that he has wrought them; and so we
come to conclude that we are indeed reconciled.

3. True peace is joined with the spiritual combat. The Spirit lusts against
the flesh in all those who are reconciled unto God. There is a war with sin
wherever there is a peace with God. If any of our lusts, which are both the
Lords enemies and our own too, are winked at, and provision is made for them
that they may be fulfilled, we plainly show we are still alienated from him.
But if the remainders of corruption, if that evil which is present with us, be
our burden, and makes us cry out, O wretched as we are; Romans 7. 24. and we
would esteem it one of the greatest happinesses, to be eased of that sin that
dwells in us, this shows evidently, that with our minds we serve the Law of
God, that we are in Christ Jesus, and there is no condemnation to us, Romans 7.
25. and 8. 1.

I grant, that in a wicked man there may be a combat between his will and his
conscience: Conscience may check and reproach him, for what his will has a
strong propension toward. But the combat between the flesh and Spirit is
another thing: Here the very heart and will is renewed, holiness is longed
after, sin, not only because of its guilt, but because of its filth, a burden;
and the heart is desirous that conscience were more awakened, that it might
exercise greater power, and cause a greater restraint from what is evil;
whereas the desire of unrenewed ones is, that conscience, when troubled, may be
hushed asleep, that so sin may be committed without any remorse.

4. True peace is inconsistent with careless walking. A Child of God, who has
attained unto peace, if he grows loose, and begins to live at random, presently
his peace withers, and conscience grudges and is unsatisfied, especially if
temptation to sin, that has more of presumption, does prevail. Can thou omit
thy duty? can thou be proud and peevish? can thou be excessive in thy
recreations? can thou be unwatchful over thy heart, and words, and ways, and
yet thy peace not at all abate? Assure thy self thy peace is but a mere
delusion.

The quicknings of the Spirit may be without the comforts, but never the
comforts without the quicknings. If thou grievest the Spirit by thy
lukewarmness and formality to withdraw his assistance, and to leave thee under
deadness, and thy peace still remains, that peace is not the Spirits fruit, but
thy own hearts presumption.

Thus of the signs of peace.

Now follows the arguments to persuade unto endeavors after assurance that
your peace is made,

1. Assurance of peace will inflame your hearts with love. How will the fire
kindle, and your hearts burn within you, when you perceive, that you, even you
in particular, have an interest in that love which passes knowledge? that God
has had thoughts of kindness and mercy toward you, before the foundation of
the world was laid, and that as his love is from everlasting, so to everlasting
it will endure? 1 John 4. 19. We love him, says the Apostle, because he first
loved us. And this manifestation and sense of the love of God will have the
greater influence, because it usually finds us in sorrow, doubting whether ever
favor will be extended toward such as we, fearing we are cast-awayes. Now
when in this doleful darkness the light of Gods countenance is lifted up, and
he shows his reconciled face, oh how do our affections work toward him! The
Prodigal, who came home with a sad and doubtful mind, when he found himself in
his Fathers arms, when he saw tha^ so long absence and great exorbitancies had
not extinguished his Fathers love, surely the workings of his love toward his
Father again were beyond expression.

2. Assurance of peace will fill you with joy and wonder. You will admire to
see how the case is altered with you, a while ago you were strangers, now
friends and favorites; a while ago you had not obtained mercy, but now you
have obtained mercy; a while ago dead in sin, but now you have attained to the
first resurrection, and so are some of those happy ones, over whom the second
death has no power; a while ago the children of wrath, and sons of death, now
adopted the children of God, and the heirs of glory! Well may your hearts
rejoice, and your joy no man takes from you. This joy is not like that of the
carnal and ungodly, it is built upon a surer foundation, affliction cannot damp
it, and the thoughts of death and judgment, which quite spoil the mirth of the
wicked, will but highten and increase it, it being an earnest of that fullness
of joy, which after dissolution will be entered into.

3. Assurance of peace will mightily engage you unto thankfulness. This is one
reason certainly, why David is called a man after the heart of God, because he
was so much in praise. And assurance will make you abound in thanksgiving.
Unbelieving doubts and fears cause us to be possessed with a dumb devil, so
that though our receipts are vast, our returns are small: We misconstrue
mercies, and say, they are common to hypocrites, and that they are given in
anger to us, and will serve only to increase both our sin and punishment. But
when we know that our peace is made, we shall also know our interest in those
blessings which are peculiar to Gods chosen ones; and as for outward mercies,
they will be very much sweetened, because coming not only from the hand, but
from the heart of God; and hereupon we shall be the more forward to offer the
sacrifice of praise to God continually, that is, the fruit of our lips giving
thanks to his name, Heb. 13. 15.

4. Assurance of peace will quicken you to duty, and make you steadfast in
obedience. With what forwardness will you pray, when you know you shall be
heard? with what willingness will you engage in other Ordinances, when you know
that God will meet with you in them? When you attend upon the ministry of the
Word, the Lord himself has engaged to be your instructor; when you come to the
table, he will certainly make you welcome, and will be, not only the inviter,
but the feast likewise. Your expectations may be justly raised, and you shall
not be ashamed of them. What encouragement does this afford? Add also, when you
know that you are reconciled to God, and have had a sight and taste how good
and gracious he is, you will cleave to him with the fuller purpose of heart;
you will find so much sweetness in him, that all the delights of sin and the
world, which Satan does so much magnify in his temptations, will be but cheap
and mean in comparison.

5. Assurance of peace will set you above the fears of affliction and of death:
Then you will be able to make application of that supporting truth unto your
selves, That all chastisements are from love, ^^d tend unto your holiness and
profit, ^eb. 12. 6, 10. and this will keep you from fainting and dismayedness
of Spirit. Nay, death it self will rather be desired then feared, when you know
it will admit you into the Lords presence, from whom, while in the body, you
are absent, when you know, that as soon as this earthly house of your
tabernacle shall be dissolved, you shall have a building of God, ^n house not
made with hands, eternal in ^he heavens, 2 Cor. 5. 1.

USE IV. Of Direction, how peace may be kept and maintained.

1. Let not your hearts be lifted up with pride after the Lord has manifested
himself to you. Pride is a great enemy to peace. God revives and comforts the
spirit of the humble, and the heart of the contrite ones, Isai. 57. 15. Those
who observe the workings of their own souls, shall find, after Gods manifesting
himself, that pride is commonly one of the first sins which assaults them. The
Apostle, after the abundance of revelations, was in great danger of being
exalted above measure; therefore the messenger of Satan is sent to buffet him,
that this self-exalting might be prevented. Oh do not think highly of your
selves, do not censure and undervalue others; the more low you are in your own
eyes, your joy and peace will be the more abiding.

2. Be watchful even against little sins: These will dead the heart, and grieve
the Spirit, causing him to suspend his sweet influences, and make way for
greater. Little sins have their peculiar aggravations. How inexcusable are we
when we stand with God about a small matter, and refuse to do a little for him?
Mispence of a little time, a little excess in using of the creatures, a little
frothiness of mind, the smaller stirrings of pride and passion, and such like,
which are more commonly to be found in professors; you must beware of, else
these lesser sins, to your cost and sorrow, will be found great enough, to
interrupt and break your peace.

3. Especially take heed of gross transgressions which waste the Conscience.
When David would needs feed upon forbidden pleasures, he lost his peace, and
the joy of Gods salvation, Psalm. 51. Grosser falls do break the bones, and
raise a new storm in the Conscience, where before a calm was. By these you will
not only cause the Lords enemies to reproach religion, but also your own hearts
to reproach you. Oh therefore cry, Uphold me continually with thy free Spirit,
and keep back thy servant from presumptuous sins.

4. Do the work of the Lord diligently. God does most constantly manifest
himself to those, who most constantly seek and search for him with their whole
heart, Jer. 29. 13. Never offer unto God a sacrifice, but let it have sound
inwards. The Psalmist tells us, That the Lords countenance does behold the
upright, Psalm. 11. ult. When we are sincere, and serve him with our whole soul,
then he shows his face, and in his looks we may read his love, and through
Christ his accepting of us.

5. Let your design in begging the continuance of peace be this, that hereby
you may be encouraged to do more for God, and to cleave the closer to him. Aim
at his glory as well as your own satisfaction in this matter. Lord! I desire a
continued assurance of thy love, but it is that I may love thee more, and be
more zealous for thine honor, and labor in thy work with greater life and
vigor.

6. Let it be your daily practice to walk with God. Be not religious only by
fits, this argues an heart much distempered.

Here I shall give a directory how to walk every day.

1. When your eyes are first open, lift them up to God, let your hearts be well
seasoned with holy thoughts and affections; they will be in the better frame
all the day:

2. Allot some time for secret prayer and searching of the Scripture, twice
every day at least: And servants, which are not masters of their own time, if
they cannot so conveniently pray at one time, should be sure to catch hold of
another opportunity.

3. Let not meditation be omitted. One quarter of an hour, at least, in
thinking upon some truth, the hearing or reading of which has a little moved
you, or which does most concern you, may be well spared.

4. Be serious in family duties, walk in in the house with a perfect heart, and
conscienciously do the duties of your places and relations, because the word
stands much upon these, and hereby Religion is adorned.

5. Accustom your selves to thoughts of God, and let your desires be frequently
ascending toward him.

6. In worldly business, remember Conscience is to be kept void of offense;
take heed of injustice, defrauding, overreaching.

7. Let not the world, when it flows into your hands, insinuate it self into
your hearts.

8. Study to excel in those things which may make Religion amiable in the eyes
of the world, as meekness, humility, contentedness with your condition,
charitableness, quietness, refusing to backbite and defame any.

9. Be vigilant against the sin which does most easily beset you, the sin of
your constitution, the sin of your calling, the sin which heretofore did bear
the greatest sway in you.

10. Resist temptation at the first appearing of it; start back from Satan's
baits, as one would do who is ready to tread upon a Serpent.

11. Let not Christian liberty degenerate into carnal licentiousness, use not
liberty for an occasion to the flesh; remember you are the Disciples of the
crucified Jesus, and so in your walking there must be not an enmity, but a
sutableness to his Cross.

12. Bad company abstain from, and be not intimate with lukewarm professors;
when necessitated to be with them, be jealous over your selves; never sinfully
comply with, but rather reprove them.

13. Design to get ground upon some sin or other every day; every day let some
progress be made in the work of mortification.

14. Observe providence, and get the good of them; let losses and crosses wean
you from the world, let afflictions imbitter sin, and let mercies indear the
Father of them.

15. Rest not in Ordinances, but consider you must be reckoned with how you
have improved them; If in these you neither meet with God, nor miss him, it is a
bad sign.

16. Keep a watch before the door of your lips; oaths, falsehood, vanity,
filthiness, your communication must be free from. Be also swift to hear, and
slow to speak, for in multitude of words there wants not sin.

17. If you fall, lie not where you are fallen, cry immediately for pardon and
healing; let the wound, while green, be cured before it fester.

18. Have daily recourse to Christ, to cover the sins of daily incursion; you
have as much need of daily pardon, as you have of daily bread.

19. Live as Strangers and Pilgrims; look upon the World as your Inn, and
Heaven as your Home, and act as within view of Death, and Judgment, and
Eternity.

20. At evening reflect how you have spent the day. An Heathen of old gave this
notable advice,

(...),
(...).
(...).
Which may be thus Englished.

Never let sleep, which senses ties,
At any night close up thine eyes,
Before the actions of the day
Thou thrice and seriously do weigh;
Where have I sinned? what have I done?
What duty have I let alone?
If you would walk after this manner, how perfect might your peace be? and how
much might your passage be sweetened through this vale of tears?

I have done with the third Doctrine: I shall be very brief in the two which
remain.

Doct. 4. The fourth Doctrine is this, That when sinners will not see, they are
smitten many times with spiritual blindness, and the things of their peace are
in a way of judgment hid from them.

The Lord hides the things of their peace from them several ways.

1. He causes his Spirit to withdraw: It Is the Spirits work to enlighten dark
understandings; but if the Spirit be gone, how great must the darkness be?

2. The Lord gives men up to the perverse reasonings and counsels of their own
hearts; and then a thousand absurdities will, by the carnal mind, be imagined
in the doctrine which is according to godliness; and how burdensome will the
practice of godliness be made to appear?

3. The Lord permits Satan to blind them; and by his means their hatred of
light, and of the works of light, is very much augmented; and hereupon, either
more abominable profaneness, or strong delusions follow.

4. The Lord in his providence causes several things to happen, which sinners
stumble at, and by which they are more confirmed in their prejudices against
the Word, and in their infidelity. The righteous are suffered sometimes to fall
into sin, and many times into great distress: The wicked often prosper in the
world, and live and dye in a false peace: And upon this the ungodly are more
darkened and hardened.

5. In all this the Lord acts as a Judge, and intends to punish their refusing
to be enlightened, and yet he is not the Author of sin: He is light, 1 John 1.
5. and no darkness can come from him. All ignorance and mistake is from
corrupted nature, being wrought upon by the Prince of darkness.

Neither is the justice of God to be quarrelled at for dealing thus with them
that reject illumination.

1. The merit of their sin is great. Nescire est ignorantis, nolle scire est
superbiae; there is abundance of pride in them that are unwilling to be
informed, and a great love to evil deeds, and also mighty ingratitude, for
light is a very great privilege.

2. This punishment is very suitable; What more equal, then that those, who
would not be enlightened by the Spirit of the Lord, and directed into the paths
of peace, should be suffered to be beguiled by Satan and their own spirits, and
so be misguided and lost for ever?

Use 1. Take heed of sinning against the light, for fear it be put out in
obscurity. The clearer the light shines, the more it aggravates the works of
darkness. Let not the lusts of your hearts be cherished and fulfilled, lest the
light of your heads be hereby extinguished.

Use 2. Do not unwarrantably surmise, that the things of your peace are in
judgment hid from you. All blindness is not judicial. If thou would fain know
the will of God and do it, God upon thy asking will give wisdom liberally
without upbraiding, Jam. 1. He will not fail by his Spirit to instruct thee,
who has made thee thus willing to be instructed.

Doct. 5. The last Doctrine follows, When souls are left under darkness, their
state is wretched and deplorable.

Consider, with such

1. God is extremely angry. When he punishes sin with sin he is most of all
displeased; and truly he cannot punish it with a worse evil then it self is. In
temporal judgments, it is to be hoped, the Lord aims at our reformation and
amendment; but when he gives up any to blindness of mind, and a reprobate
sense, it is a sign his love and mercy have done with them. As by the Spirit of
God believers are sealed up to the day of redemption, so by the spirit of
flumber the unbelievers are sealed up to the day of destruction.

2. With such Satan does what he pleases; he leads them along, and how little
do they perceive whither they are going? how do means make them worse? how bold
are they in sin? how quickly are they like to fill up the measure of their
iniquity, and grow rotten ripe for vengeance? and when that vengeance overtakes
them, then they will weep over themselves, as Christ does over Jerusalem, and
too late lament their own misery, when 'twill be impossible to have it removed.

Use 1. Earnestly entreat, that this may never be yours, which was the
punishment of Jerusalem: And if you would not lie under the like plague, you
must not be guilty of the like sin, namely, rejecting Christ, and the Gospel of
peace.

Use 2. Pity those who tread in Jerusalems steps, and provoke the Lord to
close their eyes; tell them of their danger, which they themselves do not
perceive; awaken them out of their Lethargy, if it be possible, before it
become past remedy.

Use 3. If the Lord, when others are blinded, is become both light and
salvation to any of you, break out into praise. The light is mavelous which
you are called to, and mavelous should be your joy. You have that eye salve,
with which few eyes are anointed, you have that Spirit which the world does
not receive. You were born blind as well as others, but a miracle of grace has
been wrought upon you; the vail is taken off, and you see the Lord, and your
interest in him, how should all that is within you bless him? This present
light, wherewith you are visited, is, as it were the dawning of the day of
glory, and a certain forerunner of the light that is everlasting.

THE END.
ERRATA.
The First Part. PAge 5. line 13. for Him read Me; p. 7. l. 20. for deadful r.
dreadful; p. 10. l. 11. f. nelp r. help; p. 12. l. 22. f. hepless r. helpless;
p. 22. l. 17. del. to be; p. 41. l. 5 f. de r. be; p. 46. l 12. f. ways r.
wages; p. 86. l. 6. f. vow r. voice,

The Second Part. PAge 4. line 16. for know read knew; p. 5. l. 19. f. eyes r.
eye; p. 15 l. 7 f. thlngs r. things; p. 16. l. 1. f sting r. stung; p. 33. l.
4. f. (...) r. (...); for (...) r. (...); p. 35. l. 15. f. vanity r. iniquity;
p. 38. l. 26. f questioned r quickened; p. 43. l. 13. f. sit r. sat; p 60 l. 16.
f. (...) r. (...); p. 69. l. 27. f. lethurgy r. lethargy; p. 74 l. 16. f. deep
r. sleep; p 80. l. 9. after not r. rest; p. 107 l. 23. f mastered r.
unaffected; p. 128. l 7. f. cruclfied r. crucified; p. 149. l. 7. f. should r.
shall; p. 151. l. 15. f. Nehem. r Nahum.


