WORDS OF ADVICE TO Young Men.

DELIVERED IN TWO SERMONS At Two Conventions of YOUNG MEN, The one December. 25.
1666. The other December. 25. 1667.

By THOMAS VINCENT, sometime Minister of Maudlins Milk-street, London.

Prove. 8. 17. I love them that love me, and those that seek me Early shall
find me.

Psalm. 119. 9. Wherewith shall a Young Man cleanse his way? By taking heed
thereto according to thy Word.

LONDON, Printed for Thomas Parkhurst, 1668.

TO THE Youth of the City of LONDON.
THE Lord having given me so great room in so many of your hearts, I am the
more encouraged to put these few words of Advice into your hands: Upon your
request they were preached in your Ears, and it is for your benefit that they
are now presented to your Eyes.

Vox audita perit, litera scripta manet. That which you only hear, you may
quickly forget, and so the words with the sound perish in the Air; when
written, especially printed words abide, and may bring to your remembrance the
things which you have heard long ago: But if you would have these words in
these sheets abide indeed with you, better than if they were engraven upon a
rock, and written with a Pen of Iron, and point of a Diamond, you must get them
transcribed and reprinted, I mean upon your hearts. Your hearts as yet in a
great measure, are a rasa tabula, like a fair table, or white sheet of Paper in
which little is written; Do not furrow the Table with Conscience-wounding sins;
do not blot and besmear the Paper with the defilements of Lust: But get the Law
of God engraven upon the Table of your hearts, and the Counsels of the most
High given you out of his Word written upon the white sheet within you. It is
true, the youngest of you are defiled with Original sin, and are grown more
foul with Actual transgressions, which none of you can in whole excuse your
selves from, however for the present you may be free from the more gross
pollutions of the World, and not arrived to that degree and height of
wickedness, which the audacious sinners of this vicious Age have attained unto:
But if you would get the Word written in your hearts, it will both make you
clean, and keep you clean, Psalm. 119. 9. Wherewith shall a young man cleanse
his way? by taking heed thereto according to thy Word. And v. 11. Thy Word have
I hid in my hear^, that I may not sin against thee.

Dear Youths, my love is great unto your Souls, and my desires are earnest
after your salvation; it rejoices my heart to see so many of your faces in my
Auditory here, it will more rejoice me, if I may see all those faces in Heaven
at last; and truly I hope that many of you will be my Crown and Glory in the
day of our Lord Jesus Christ; therefore it is that I preach, therefore I have
written these Words of Advice unto you, the chief heads of which are, 1. That
you would seek First the Kingdom of God, where alone your chief happiness does
lie, as the End. 2. That you would seek the Righteousness of God, which is in
his Son, that it might be imputed unto you for your Justification, and that it
might be imparted unto you for your Renovation and Sanctification, as the
necessary Means to attain this End, without which there is no possibility of
admittance for you into the Kingdom of God. 3. That (having obtained Grace in
the truth of it) you would labor to grow in Grace, and to be strong therein,
that you might be enabled both to do and suffer whatever God calls you unto.
4. That you would get acquainted with the Word of God, and endeavor that it
may abide and dwell in you richly, as the choicest of all Treasures. 5. That
you would labor to overcome the Wicked one, and all his temptations, whereby
he would draw you unto sin, especially those sins which in Youth you are most
inclinable unto.

Beloved young men, you live in the dregs of times, in a wicked and debauched
generation; take heed of following a multitude to do evil; save your selves
from their sins, as you desire God should save you from their punishments. Come
out from amongst them, if you cannot in regard of your place, be sure to do it
in regard of your course and practice; refrain too familiar converse with the
wicked and profane; let your Companions be such as fear the Lord; walk in the
way of Good Men; take that course as the most do that seem to be most serious,
and to have their faces toward Heaven. I have endeavored to answer and remove
the chief prejudices which are raised to discourage and divert from this way:
You may safely and confidently venture into it, and walk in it, and you will
find (whatever the oppositions and discouragements be therein) the end of it
to be peace and happiness. The Lord grant that this Book may be a Means to keep
you from sin, and help you forward in the way to Heaven, which is the desire
and prayer of

Your faithful Monitor, and dear Lover of your Souls, T. Vincent.

WORDS of ADVICE TO YOUNG MEN.
MATTHEW. 6. 33. But seek ye First the Kingdom of God and his Righteousness, and
all these things shall be added unto you.
THESE words are part of our Saviors Sermon upon the Mount, in which he spoke
with so much authority, that the people were astonished at his doctrine, for
never man spoke as he spoke. The subject of this Sermon, is many excellent
Promises, Precepts, Directions, Cautions, Exhortations, backed with Motives and
Arguments very needful for the promotion of Holiness in Heart and Life. 1. Our
Savior gives several promises of blessedness both here and hereafter, to
quicken his Disciples in their endeavors after some choice Graces and
qualifications of mind, and to encourage them against the outward persecution,
which for his sake they might meet withal in the world, chap. 5. from verse. 2.
to 15. 2. He directs them how they should behave themselves as Ministers, and
his Disciples, by the similitudes of Salt, Light, a City set upon a hill, unto
which they had or should have a conformity, from verse. 15. to v. 17. 3. He
declares the immutability and purity of the Moral Law, vindicating it from the
corrupt and false glosses of the Pharisees, and explaining it in its spiritual
reach and meaning. 4. He warns them against Hypocrisy in their Religious
Services, pressing them in their Alms, Prayers, Fasts, to approve the ^r hearts
to God, who sees in secret, that they might receive an open reward, chap. 6.
from v. 1. to v. 19. 5. He exhorts them to lay up for themselves Treasures in
Heaven, and not to be solicitous about the Provisions of this Life; which
Exhortation he backeth with six Arguments. The first is drawn from the safety
of Heavenly Treasures, being removed beyond the reach of rust, and moth, and
thies: The second, from the uncertainty of earthly Treasures, which are in
danger of being corrupted and stolen, v. 19. 20: The third from the
inconsistency of the true love of God with the over-eager love of things here
below, Ye cannot love God and Mammon, v. 24. The fourth from the assurance they
might have that the Lord would, without their carking care, provide as much of
these things as he saw needful for them; and that by their experience 1. Of
Gods goodness to themselves in things of a far greater moment, namely, in
giving them life which was more than meat, and in giving them bodies which was
more than raiment, v. 15. 2. Of Gods goodness to creatures of far l^ss dignity,
namely, his feeding the Fowls, and clothing the Lillies, v. 26. The fifth from
their inability to procure these things by their anxious thoughts about them,
v. 27. The sixth, because hereby they did sinfully conform unto the Gentil^s
and Heathens, v. 32. And then at last our Savior directs how to obtain these
earthly things without such sollicitousness; namely, by the seeking first of
heavenly things, as in the Text: But seek ye first the Kingdom of God, and his
righteousness, and all these things shall be added unto you.

In which words there are two parts,

1. An Exhortation, But seek ye First the Kingdom of God and his Righteousness.

2. An argument to enforce it, and all these things shall be added unto you.

In the Exhortation there is,

1. The Duty, seek ye the Kingdom of God, and his righteousness.

2. The Season or Order, in this word First, Seek ye first, etc.

In the Argument, which is a Promise, there is,

1. The Things premised, these things, temporal things, such as food, raiment,
and whatever is needful for the body, whereof our Savior had been speaking.

2. The fullness of the Promise, All these things, nothing shall be wanting.

3. The manner of conveyance, they shall be added unto you, they shall be cast
in as appurtenances and overplus.

SECT. I.
I Shall speak only to the former part of the words, namely, the Exhortation,
whence we may observe,

Doct. That it is the great duty of all the Children of men to seek first the
Kingdom and Righteousness of God. In handling of which point I shall show,

1. What we are to understand by the Kingdom and Righteousness of God.

2. What it is to seek this Kingdom and Righteousness.

3. What is employed in this word First.

4. That all the Children of men ought First to seek the Kingdom and
Righteousness of God.

5. Apply.

1. What are we to understand by the Kingdom and Righteousness of God. There is
a threefold Kingdom of God. 1. The Kingdom of his Power, 1 Chronicles. 29. 11.
Thine is the Kingdom, O Lord, and thou art exalted as head above All. 2. The
Kingdom of his Grace, Luke 17. 21. The Kingdom of God is within you. 3. The
Kingdom of his Glory, Joh. 3. 3. Except a man be born again, he cannot see the
Kingdom of God. The Kingdom of Gods Power be sure is not here spoken of, some
understand hereby the Kingdom of his Grace: But I rather think, that in this
place the Kingdom of God is to be taken for the Kingdom of his Glory, where the
chief and perfect happiness of men does lie, which our Savior would have them
to seek, and not be sollicitous about earthly things which are so empty and
transitory: And I the rather conceive that it is to be taken for the Kingdom of
Glory, because the Kingdom of Grace which is the way to Glory, is included in
the next word, namely, the righteousness of God, as Romans 14. 17. The Kingdom of
God is not meat and drink, but righteousness and peace, etc. There is a twofold
righteousness of God, 1. That righteousness which is imputed to us, whereby we
are justified, called the righteousness of God by Faith, Phil. 3. 9. 2. That
righteousness which is wrought in us, begun in regeneration, when we are
renewed after the image of God in righteousness and true holiness, Ephesians. 4. 24.
and in the work of Sanctification is more and more increased and augmented,
whereby we grow in our spiritual stature, until we come to a perfect man, to
be perfectly righteous, even as Christ Is righteous. The Object then which we
are to seek is the Kingdom of God, the Crown of glory, which God has laid up
for his people, the Happiness of Heaven as the End; and the righteousness of
God, reconciliation to him, through the imputation of his Sons rightcousness;
and conformity to him through the working inherent righteousness in us by the
operation of his Spirit, as the way to this Kingdom, and necessary means to
attain this end.

2. The second thing is to show what it is to seek the Kingdom and
Righteousness of God: and here two things are employed, 1. A diligent Enquiry
after these things. 2. A diligent endeavor in the use of means to obtain them.

1. A diligent enquiry after these things, and that both after the things and
after the means; such as seek after this kingdom and righteousness, they first
inform themselves in the nature, worth and need which they have of these
things, and then diligently inquire how they may get a part and i^terest in
them: First, they enquire who will show us the chief good? We see that the
Creatures cannot yield us satisfaction, we cannot find any perfect and
complete happiness upon the Earth, where shall we find it? And being informed
by the Word and Ordinances that God is the chief good, that his favor is
better than life, and that in his righteousness there is the beginning of true
happiness, and in his Kingdom there is perfection of happiness; that in his
presence there is fullness and eternity of joy and blessedness, and that whilst
they remain under the guilt and power of sin, they are under the Curse; and
before they obtain his righteousness, and a title to his Kingdom, they are in a
lost estate, their condition for the present is miserable, and they are exposed
every moment to be thrown into the dark and deep dungeon of Hell, where they
shall be most horribly and eternally tormented; they further (being convinced
of sin, and awakened with the fear of punishment) earnestly enquire how they
may be delivered from the estate of sin and misery, and be brought into a state
of salvation; as the Jaylour, Act. 16. 30. Sirs, what must I do to be saved?
And being told that Christ only can save them from sin and wrath to come; they
enquire how they may get an interest in Christ, and share in his righteousness;
and being told of the Happiness in the Zion which is above, they enquire how
they may get a title to the Kingdom of Heaven, and ask the way to Zion with
their faces thitherward, as the Church, Jer. 50. 5. Such as seek the Kingdom of
God to purpose, they set their faces toward the heavenly Jerusalem; their
hearts are set upon it, they are resolved to get it whatever it cost them; they
ask the way not with their faces Hell-ward, as some do, but with their faces
Heavenward, being resolved to submit to any terms; to make use of any means so
they may obtain it.

2. Seeking after Gods Kingdom and Righteousness, does imply a diligent
endeavor in the use of means (having found out what means are requisite) that
they may obtain these things. Having found the Field where the Treasure is hid,
there they dig that they may possess themselves of the treasure: Having found
the Cabinet where the Jewel does lie, they labor to open the Cabinet that they
may get the Jewel: Having found the Shop, the Market where the Oil is sold,
they come to the place and buy: Being informed of a Scepter of grace held
forth, they come and lay hold on it: Being informed of a Door of mercy, they
come and knock, there they will lie, there they will cry, there they will dye,
if they perish, they will perish in the use of means: Pray, hear, read,
meditate, they will use any means, which God has prescribed in his Word,
though never so harsh and displeasing to flesh, and cross to their carnal
interest: Though the use of powerful means may be hazzardous, though they may
endanger Liberty, Estate, Life, they will not flirich and start aside out of
Gods way to his Kingdom whatever enemies and opposition they meet withal
therein; they w^ll persevere in the way when the Sun of persecution shines hot
upon them, they will hold on their course whatever the way and weather be, and
so by patient continuance in well-doing seek for glory and honor, and
immortality, Romans 2. 7. if by any means they may attain the possession of this
Kingdom of God.

3. The third thing is to show what is employed in this word First, Seek first
the Kingdom and righteousness of God.

Two things, 1. Precedence of Time. 2. Precedence of Dignity. Seek First, that
is, Before other things. Above other things. Seek First, that is, Timely.
Chiefly.

1. Seek first the Kingdom of God and his righteousness, that is, seek these
things timely, before other things; seek them in the Morning of your Life, in
the Spring of your years, in the flower of your Youth. Read Ecclesiastes 12. 1.
Remember now thy Creator in the days of thy Youth, while the evil days come
not, nor the years draw nigh, when thou shall say, I have no pleasure in them.
Remember thy Creator, that God that made thee, and who alone can new make thee;
who formed thy body in the womb, and who alone can form Christ in thy heart;
who created thy soul, breathing into thee the breath of life, and who alone can
create the New Man in thee after his Image, by breathing into thee his
quickening Spirit: Remember thy Creator, who not long since brought thee out of
the loathed estate of Nothing, and numbered thee amongst his Creatures; and who
can bring thee out of the more loathed estate of sin, and number thee amongst
his Children: Remember him, endeavor to know him, how great and good he is,
how glorious and gracious; remember him, mind him who is every where present;
remember him, get a holy awe and dread of him upon thee; remember him, get an
interest in him, and acquaintance with him; remember him, make choice of him
for thy God, and chief good; seek his favor, seek his Kingdom and
Righteousness: And that Now in the days of thy Youth, in thy first years, when
it is not long since thou came out of his hands; remember him in thy Spring
and bloom, before the Winter come; remember him in thy best days, before the
evil days, and the years of old decrepid age draw nigh, when thy body may be
full of diseases, thy bones full of the sins of thy Youth, and thy Soul full of
evil habits, and thou shall say, I have no pleasure in them; when God whom thou
have forgot, shall say, I have no pleasure in thee; and thou shall say, I have
no pleasure in my Life; when thou shall have neither inward nor outward
comfort; when thy heart shall say concerning riches, honors, and all sensual
enjoyments, I have no pleasure in them; I hoped for good, but I have met with
disappointment; I looked for sweetness and satisfaction, but I am more
unsatisfied than before; that which I formerly took delight in, has a bitter
taste and reflection: My years now are irksome, and tedious, and I can find no
pleasure in them. This was Solomon's advice to young men to remember their
Creator in the days of their Youth, and this is the advice of our Savior a
wiser than Solomon, to seek first the Kingdom of God and his Righteousness; to
seek this timely, before other things.

2. Seek first the Kingdom of God, and his righteousness, that is chiefly, and
above other things. The things of this world may be sought; but it must be in
subordination to the things of Gods Kingdom: You must make Earth to stoop to
Heaven, and the concernments of the Body must give place to the concernments of
the Soul; you must let the things of God have the chief of your thoughts and
care.

4. The fourth thing is to show that all the children of men ought first to
seek the Kingdom and righteousness of God: All are bound to do it by virtue of
the Precept in the Text, as well as engaged by their own Interest. It is for
Gods glory that they should do it, and it is requisite in order to their own
good; and it is very reasonable for men to obey when God commands nothing but
what is in order to their own happiness, which they cannot neglect, but it will
be to their ruin and destruction: This duty then lies upon every one, to seek
Gods Kingdom and righteousness; no wealth, honor, dignity, or whatever else
this world conceits and flatters can give a supersedeas hereunto; no condition,
calling, temptation, or whatever engagements any may pretend, can excuse from
it; neither the voluptuous inclination of Youth, nor the tedious infirmities of
Old Age can be a sufficient dispensation for the neglect of it. The Emphasis of
the word First I shall reserve to speak to in the word of Advice by and by.

SECT. II.
THE Improvement I shall make of this Doctrine, shall be in two words.

1. By way of Reproof. 2. By way of Advice.
Use 1. For Reproof of those that seek the Kingdom of God and his righteousness
last.

2. That seek these things least.

1. That seek the kingdom and righteousness of God last; that make this the
last business of their ^ime, which should be done first; when their days ^re
stretched out to their full length, then they be^in to seek after Gods Kingdom;
In the mean time ^utting off Gods Ministers, who warn and call them ^s Felix
did Paul, until a more convenient season, Act. 24. 26. Thus like Bankrupt
Debtors they crave ^urther day, until as Job 20. 11. they are on a sud^n clapped
up into Prison, and lie down with their ^ones full of the sins of their Youth.

2. That seek the Kingdom and righteousness of God least, who seek these things
after a sort, but it (...) by the by, they do not make it their business; that
seek, but it is in a slothful, careless manner, that seek, but do not strive
to enter in at the straight ^ate, that do not seek heartily, diligently,
chiefly; that seek the things of the world in the first place, and the things
of Gods Kingdom afterward, and as ^ose things will suit with their secular
interests, and earthly concernments, as if Mammon were to (...) preferred
before God, and Earth were of more ^orth than Heaven, and the Body more
excellent than the Soul. I might here both speak of the si^ of those persons,
and show how they dishonor God of the folly of those persons, and show how
they ar^ injurious to themselves. But it is the next word (...) chiefly intend.

SECT. III.
Use 2. OF Advice, and that to Young Men, to pu^ in practice the duty of the
Text, See^ first the Kingdom of God, and his righteousness.

The chief composition of this Auditory at thi^ time being young men, and the
occasion of this Sermon being the desire of young men; I shall therefore
address my self wholly unto you, that ar^ young. It is a goodly sight to behold
so many o^ you come together, to hear something for your soul^ good. I had
several Texts propounded to my thoughts to speak unto; this I thought might be
a suitable and seasonable as any: Your forwardness to hear, makes me hope you
will be forward to obey O that my Doctrine might now drop like the dew and that
my words of advice out of the Word o^ God, might be like the rain falling upon
the tende^ grass, which causes it to spring: Let it not be lik^ water falling
upon so many rocks, which maket^ no impression; or like rain upon barren ground
which brings forth briars and thorns, instead o^ herbs meet for the Masters
use; you know tha^ such ground is nigh unto cursing and burning Heb. 6. 8.

Receive then, Dear Youths, the word of Advic^ which I now give you in the name
of my Lord an^ Master, from whose mouth the Word did first proceed: Seek, first
the Kingdom and righteousness of God. There is a generation of old ones who
are going off the stage of the world, and you are comeing on in their room; ere
long they will lie down in the dust, and you not long since did spring out of
it; they are almost come to their Journeys end, and you are setting forth on
the way; they are even arrived at the Port, and you are now putting forth to
Sea. It is of the greatest concernment in the world to take and follow good
advice at the first, before you are engaged too far. Here therefore I shall
put you in mind, that there are two ways or passages in which all the
children of men are traveling; the one is the way of sin, the other is the
path of righteousness: The way of sin is broad, an open, beaten road; you may
easily know it by the multitude of Travelers, it is the course of the world.
Your Parents when they bring you into the world, set you down in this way; and
many, yea most of them go before you in it: It appears to you the smoothest
and fairest way; it may seem a delightful way to you at the first, strewed
with roses; such company, such enticements you may have in this way, as may
render it most desirable, if you take Sense and Flesh for your guides and
counselors. But let me warn you beforehand that you walk not in this way, you
will quickly find the pleasur^s in this way to drop and fade, the flowers will
wither, the Sun will be clouded, the delights of sin will vanish; and heavy
griefs, and bitter sorrows, and vexation of spirit will succeed, and blot out
all the sweet relish you have had of unlawful enjoyments: You will find your
selves bereaved, and disappointed in that satisfaction and happiness you looked
and hoped for it a sinful course. It is a dangerous way; there ar^ unseen
snares in it, and you will receive secret, bu^ deep and mortal wounds, which
are beyond the ar^ of man to cure: It is the way which leads to destruction,
Matthew. 7. 14. It is the high road to Hell thither it will bring you: And if
there be some sensual sweetness in the beginning of the way, think what
bitterness there will be at the end thereof: Think how terrible Death will be
unto you, after a life of sin: but think how dreadful the punishment of Hell
will be when you are let through the gate of death, into that place of extreme
and dreadful torment.

There is another way, namely the path of Righteousness, the way of Holiness,
which is narrow and has a strait gate; which you must go through, if you would
get into it, namely the gate of Regeneration. It is a way that is difficult to
find, tedious and irksome at first; it is a weeping and sorrowful way at the
entrance, few there be that find it; most are discouraged by the narrowness
and difficulty of it, from putting their feet into it: But it is the way of
Life, it is the way to the Kingdom, it is the way of Peace, it is the way of
God, it is the way to Heaven. The difficulty is chiefly at the first; the
sorrows are mostly in the pangs of the New Birth, in conflicting for passage
through the strait gate; weepin^, may endure for a night, but joy comes in the
morning: Trouble may be your companion for a while, but peace and sweetness
succeed in its room. If you walk steadily, you will find it to be a way of
such pleasure and delight, as you never did find or can find in the way of
sin: And if there should be clouds and rain, and stormy winds of trouble and
temptation in the Journey, yet the latter end will be Peace; be sure there will
be rest and happiness in the Kingdom into which death will convey your Souls
after they are separated from your Bodies; there you will find fullness of
joy, and pleasure for evermore.

So that you have here Life and Death set before you; Heaven and Hell; eternal
Happiness and eternal Misery: the latter at the end of the way of sin, and the
former at the end of the way of Holiness. And which will you choose? if you
will run with the wicked in the same excess of riot, if you will follow the
multitude to do evil, if you will walk according to the course of the world,
fulfilling the desires of your flesh, and make provision for the satisfaction
of its lusts; you will be found at last in the number of the children of wrath,
and the wrath of God will certainly come upon all such Children of
disobedience: If you will live after the flesh, you shall die, you shall not
escape the stroke of eternal death, you cannot avoid the damnation of Hell. But
if you will turn your feet into the narrow path, and walk in the way of
Obedience, which is the beginning of wisdom, if you will seek first the Kingdom
of God, and his righteousness; you have a promise that God will provide for you
whatever is needful for you of temporal things, and in the end he will give
you the Eternal Inheritance. Let me press upon you, dear young Men, the advice
of the Text, to seek first the Kingdom and righteousness of God, seek the
Kingdom of God as the end, and seek the Righteousness of God as the way and
means.

SECT. IV.
I. FIrst seek the Kingdom of God. Here is a Kingdom proffered to you, not an
Earthly Kingdom, but the Kingdom of Heaven: here is a Crown set before you, not
a Crown of Gold, but that which is infinitely more precious, a Crown of Glory:
As mean as you are, you may be all Princes, Sons and Heirs of the King of
Heaven, if you will look and seek after it. Some Youths have aspiring minds;
like the Eagles they sore aloft, and would set their nests among the stars, as
Obad. 4. you cannot aspire to a greater dignity, than to get a title to the
Kingdom of God; here you may mount as high as you will in your aim without sin,
and attain an eternal Habitation, and Mansion above the Stars, even in the
Palace of Heaven. Some young men have covetous desires after the World, and
they will spare no labor in seeking after earthly riches, and an Inheritance
here below: Let me entreat you to covet earnestly the b^st riches; do not
endeavor so much to hoard up riches, as to lay up treas^res, I mean treasures
in Heaven, which neither mo^ nor rust can corrupt, nor thieves break through and
steal, Mat. 6. 20. Get a title to the Inheritance which is incorruptible and
undefiled, and sadeth not away, which Jesus Christ has purchased and prepared.
Some young men addict themselves to the pleasures of the flesh, they are very
jovial and frolic in their youth, walking in the ways of their heart, and in
the sight of their eyes, and very desirous of carnal delights, and sensual
satisfactions; here are delights and pleasures before you of a higher and purer
nature, more real and substantial, more durable and lasting. The way^s of God
are ways of pleasantness: But Oh what Joys are there laid up in store, what
delights are there in Heaven, in the immediate vision and full fruition of God
the chief good O seek the Kingdom of God, where there are full and everlasting
pleasures.

And if you would get a title to this Kingdom of God, and at length possession
of it, you must,

1. Study the vanity and emptiness of all things here below; hearken to Reason,
which will tell you so, because these things are unsuitable, unproportionable,
uncertain, of a fading and perishing nature. Believe the report of the Word
concerning the World and all things therein: Vanity of vanities says the
Preacher, all is vanity, Eccl. 1. 1. read that book throughout. Take the
experience of others, who have tried the world, and after the fullest and most
desirable enjoyment of these things, have come off with dissatisfaction. Think
how dangerous it will be for you to try: Let the Rocks which others have split
themselves upon, be a warning to you to steer your course another way. Never
look for, never seek happiness in the World; believe me, it is not there to be
found. And therefore do not lay up your treasure on Earth.

2. Look into the Word, where life and immortality is brought to light; where
the glory and happiness of Heaven, and the things which God has there prepared
for them that love him, are in some measure revealed. Look into the Gospel,
which like a Prospective-glass will give you some view of the glory which is
above; there you may perceive that Heaven is a place of rest, of peace, of
light, of joy, of perfect and eternal happiness.

By the Word you may understand what happiness is prepared for the Body, how
gloriously that will shine, even like the Sun, and be made like Christ's most
beautiful and glorious body at the Resurrection: There you may understand what
glory will be put upon the Soul, what shining garments of Holiness it will be
clothed withal, and what Joys of the Master it will be filled with.

3. Compare Earth and Heaven together in the balance, and see which does
outweigh; whether the exceeding and eternal weight of glory be not more
ponderous, than all the glory and happiness which the world can give, which
indeed is not so much as the dust of the balance to compare with it. And
having made diligent enquiry and seriously considered and compared both these,
then make your choice; the time of your Youth is the choosing time; renoun^e
the World, and make choice of this Kingdom of God for your portion and
Inheritance; and be ^o tented to stay for your chief happiness till you come
forth of the World: take not that for your portion which will so soon be spent;
but choose that which will be both satisfying and everlasting, though you stay
some time before you come to the full possession of it.

4. Apply the Promises of Eternal Life, 1 John 2. 24. This is the promise which
he has promised, even eternal life. Titus 1. 2. In hope of eternal life, which
God that cannot lie, has promised: Build upon these and the like Promises,
they are a firm footing and ground for Faith, which will not fail.

5. Apply your selves unto Jesus Christ, in whom all the Promises are yea and
amen, who has purchased this Kingdom, and has taken possession of it, and
alone can give you title and admission.

6. Be earnest for this at the Throne of Grace, that whatever God giv^s, he
would not deny you his Kingdom, that he would not put you off with the world
for your portion, that you may not have your good things only in this life;
urge the promises of eternal life, thew him his handwriting, plead the merit
and mediation of his Son; resolve to take no denial, press in at the door,
strive to get in at the strait gate; endeavor to take Heaven by violence; of
which more by and by.

7. Get those qualifications which are needful to fit you for this Kingdom,
which are included in this Word Righteousness: And that is the second thing I
would press you unto.

II. If you would seek Gods Kingdom, so as to obtain, you must also seek Gods
Right^ousness. Seek imputed righteousness; the guilt of sin must be removed
before it is possible for any to have admission into the Kingdom of God. You
all are guilty of sin, God is offended, his Justice must be satisfied, you are
insufficient, being finite; Christ has made it in your stead, his
righteousness is perfect, there must be an imputation hereof unto you, if you
would obtain remission of sins, and an inheritance among the people of God.
Your salvation does depend upon your application of Christ's righteousness;
study your need, get conviction of sin, consider your danger whiles^ under
guilt, understand the intent of Christ's sufferings, acquaint your self with the
tenor of the Covenant of Grace. And. Christ being held forth to you, lay hold
on him by faith, his righteousness being intended for you, and proffered unto
you, make application of it; cloathe your selves with it by faith, and therein
appear with confidence before God, pleading for pardon and acceptance.

2. Seek imparted righteousness: Imputed righteousness is necessary to entitle
you to Gods Kingdom, imparted righteousness is necessary to qualify and
prepare you for Gods Kingdom. This righteousness here is imperfect, and cannot
be the causa regnandi, the cause of reigning, yet it is via ad regnum, the way
to the Kingdom. This righteousness is begun in Regeneration, and further
increased in Sanctification, as has been said.

1. You must be regenerate, born again, if ever you would see the Kingdom of
God, John 3. 3. Old things must pass away, and all things must become new, 2
Cor. 5. 17. As a man must be born before he can possess an Earthly Inheritance,
so a man must be newborn before he can possess the Heavenly Inheritance. First
you must be Children before you can be Heirs of God; you must be Children by
adoption, and you must be Children by regeneration. Labor then after a
gracious change in your heart, see your need of it, apply your selves to God
for it; beg earnestly that he would by his Spirit be pleased to effect it; put
your selves under the influence of the Word, be ready to yield to the movings
and strivings of the Spirit.

2. Having shot the Gulf, passed through the strait gate of Regeneration, and
obtained the beginning of the work of grace, you must endeavor after
Sanctification, that you may grow up in holiness. You must by the Spirit
mortify the deeds of the body, and cleanse your selves from all filthiness
both of flesh and spirit, perfecting holiness in the fear of God; and hereby
you will be made meet to be made partakers of the Inheritance of the Saints in
light; and an entrance will be administered unto you most assuredly into the
Kingdom of God, 1 Cor. 7. 1. Col. 1. 12. 2 Pet. 1. 11.

SECT. V.
HAving thus given you advice as to the thing, to seek the Kingdom and
righteousness of God, I shall now further advise and exhort you to seek First
this Kingdom and Righteousness.

1. Seek First, that is, Timely, and before other things.

2. Seek First, that is, Chiefly, and above other things.

1. Seek First the Kingdom and Righteousness of God, that is Timely and before
other things. Do it now in the time of your Youth, in the Morning of your Life,
so soon as Reason does begin to d^wn. Here I shall give you three motives to
stir you up to do this in the time of your Youth.

Consider that the time of Youth is 1. The most Acceptable time. 2. The most
Seasonable time. 3. The most Safe time.

1. The time of Youth is the most acceptable time, 2 Cor. 6. 2. The Apostle
speaks of the day of the Gospel, and I may speak it of the day of Youth:
Behold now is the acceptable time, behold, now is the day of salvation. Any
part of the day may be acceptable; be sure the beginning of the day is most
acceptable. God is best pleased with young ones who seek the things which
belong to his Kingdom, and their salvation; that dedicate themselves to his
service betimes, before Satan and the World have ravished their
Virgin-affections. Under the Law God required the First Fruits and Firstborn
for Sacrifice, and under the Gospel God requires the first fruits and
firstborn of our time, and thoughts, and affections: The first fruits under
the Law were to be mingled with Oil and Frankincense, which gave forth a sweet
savor, Lev. 2. 15. when you devote the first of your time, and parts, and
strength to God, this is a sweet savor to him. God takes especial notice of,
and is exceedingly pleased with ea ly seekers, and timely services. Jer. 2. 2.
I remember the kindness of thy youth, and the love of thy espousals; and Cant.
6. 11. we read of Christ, going down into the garden of the Church, to see if
the Pomegranates budded; the buddings and blossoms of Youth are sweet and
pleasing to Christ: the youngest Disciple was Christ's beloved Disciple. It is
recorded for the commendation of Josiah, that he did that which was right in
the sight of God when he was but eight years old, 1 King. 22. 1. and of
Timothy, that from a Child he had known the Holy Scriptures, whereby he became
wise unto salvation, 2 Timothy 3. 15. None are like to bring so much glory to God,
as those that s^ek his Kingdom and Righteousness in their youth; and therefore
this time is the most acceptable time.

1. The grace of young persons is most conspicuous; it is like the
Morning-blush, like the first opening of the Rose, like a Diamond set in a Ring
of gold; early grace has a sweet fragrancy, and glorious luster in it: The
beauty of it does then most shine, and the power of it does then most appear,
when young ones do deny themselves, and take up the Cross, and bear the yoke in
their youth; when young ones do deafen their ears against all enticements unto
pleasing sins, and break through the temptatious they meet withal, and with
full purpose of heart stick close unto God. This does show the power of grace,
and tends much to Gods glory.

2. The time of young ones is longest which they have to glorify God; when
they seek and serve God betimes, they may not only escape many pollutions in
the World wherewith other youths are defiled, to the dishonor of God, and the
wounding of their own Consciences; but they may bring much glory to God in
their generations. God has work enough to employ them in (all tending to his
glory and their good) thorowout the whole day of their lives, though they
should begin in the Morning so soon as they can see, and work a whole and long
Summers day, until the night and darkness of old decrepid years. I might
instance in some of the works they are to be employed in; they have a pardon to
sue out, evidences to clear, corruptions to mortify, graces to get and
improve, a treasure to lay up, temptations to resist, relations to fill; so
many duties to perform to God, to Man: They may find more work than time;
Eternity-work is begun in this life. Now look, as a Master who drives a great
trade, is best pleased with those servants who rise most early, and are most
diligent in his business; so God who has so much work for his people, is best
pleased with young persons, who seek him early and diligently.

3. The Strength of young persons to serve God with, is the greatest. 1 John 2.
14. I have written unto you young men, because you are strong. Mavelous is
the strength and power of grace in some young ones, who have been sanctified
betimes, whereby they have been enabled to do him some notable service in the
world. In youth, as the Body is most strong and active, so the Soul is most
vigorous and lively, and therefore most fit to be employed by the Lord. Se^k
then Gods Kingdom and Righteousness in the time of Youth, because this is the
most acceptable time, God is best pleased therewith.

2. The time of youth is the most seasonable time. There is a time for all
things, says Solomon, Eccl. 5. 1. The time of youth is the most s^asonable
time to seek the Kingdom of God. There are four things requisite in seeking
Gods Kingdom to all such as would obtain it.

1. The Breaking of the heart for sin. 2. The Breaking of the heart from sin.
3. The Opening of the heart to Christ. 4. The Furnishing of the heart with
Grace.
The time of Youth is most seasonable for all.

1. You must get your heart broken for sin, if ever you would enter into the
Kingdom of Heaven; you must mourn for sin here, or weep for sin for ever; you
must sow in tears, if you would reap in joy. The time of youth is most
seasonable for this; your sorrow is like to be loss heavy, and more kindly: The
heart has a natural hardness, but if it has got a contracted hardness, it
will with more difficulty be broken, if ever it be broken: Custom in sin will
take away sense of sin; and if you continue in the practice of sin, you will
feel a senselesness and stupidity grow upon your spirit; and Conscience more
tender and timorous at first, by degrees will grow feared as with a hot Iron,
and be past feeling. Bring your hearts therefore now under the hammer of the
Word, that they may be broken; the longer you defer, the harder you will
find it to repent.

2. You must get your hearts broken from sin; you must turn from your evil
ways, otherwise iniquity will be your ruin. The longer you continue in sin,
the harder it will be to leave sin; custom will be a second nature to you; the
changing whereof will be like changing the skin of the Ethiopian, and taking
away the spots of the Leopard. When sin is rooted and riveted in you, if so be
you should turn from it, it will be with unexpressible tearings, and divulsions
of spirit. It is a hard thing to irradicate old habits, which at first in the
tender years may be done with more ease: Therefore, Dear young ones, labor to
get sin rooted out of your hearts betimes. Get sin mortified before it has got
too much life and strength; oppose sin before it has got too much head and
power, which you may do with more facility and success.

3. You must open your hearts and give entertainment unto Christ, if you ever
expect to have the gate of Heaven opened unto you, and to be entertained by
Christ in his Kingdom. Such as shut the door of their hearts against Christ
when they are young, will find (if Christ does not withdraw, and leave
knocking) that the door will be faster bolted and barred within against him;
the longer you hold it out, the more will Satan strengthen the Fort against
Christ, and more easily beat off whatever assaults are made upon you by the
Word and Spirit. Christ will come in most willingly to them that open to him
presently; and the match will quickly be made up, if in youth you hearken to
the motion. Let me beseech you, therefore, my dearly beloved young ones, to
open the door to Christ without any further delay; by me he stands now and
knocks for entertainment; what answer shall I return, that you have harbored
lusts there, where his lodging should be, and would not part with them? that
you put me off till a further day, until you had a little longer tasted the
sweets of sin: O take heed of such carriage of heart toward Christ, Qui non
est hodie, cras minus aptus erit, if you be not willing to open to Christ now,
you will be more unwilling to morrow: do it then presently; may I be
instrumental to join the Lord Jesus Christ and you together in marriage;
receive him into your hearts, and accept of him, to love, honor, and obey him,
and do it heartily and resolvedly, and he is yours.

4. You must get your hearts furnished with grace, if ever you hope to share in
the glory of Gods Kingdom. Grace is glory in the seed, and glory is grace in
the flower; grace is glory in the root, glory is grace in the fruit; grace is
glory in the first fruits, glory is grace in the harvest: You must get the seed
sown, the root planted, or no flower, no fruit, no harvest is to be expected;
you must get the Kingdom of Gods grace within you, Luke 17. 21. if ever you
would be admitted into the Kingdom of his glory. And the time of youth is the
most seasonable time for the getting of grace; no time like the Spring for
setting of this Plant of grace in the heart; in the youth the heart is more
pliable, and like the yielding Wax more ready to receive the impressions of the
Spirit.

3. The time of youth is the most safe time. If you make it your first care to
seek the kingdom and righteousness of God, you are most likely to find and be
successful; but if you make delays, you run your selves upon great
uncertainties: there is danger that you will never obtain, if you do not seek
whilst you are young. The danger lies in three respects:

In respect of 1. The Uncertainty of Life. 2. The Uncertainty of the Means. 3.
The Uncertainty of Gods working by the Means.

1. In respect of the uncertainty of Life; no Age ^s secure, and fenced against
the arrows of Death: Some flowers are nipped in the bud; some Springs run into
the Sea so soon as they arise; the thread of Life in some is quickly cut, and
the Candle blown ^ut within a while after it is lighted. You may dye whilst
you are young, and if you do not seek Gods kingdom and righteousness now, you
may not have ^ime to seek these things at all.

2. Your danger is in respect of the uncertainty of the Means of Grace: you
have now means and opportunities of seeking, hereafter you may be deprived of
the means, if you be not deprived of your lives. You have calls now, hereafter
you may be placed where you shall be out of call: you now are planted in a
fruitful soil, where the Sun shines, and the Dews of the Word do fall; if you
remain fruitless God may remove you out of his Garden, or he may withhold the
dews, and cause the Sun to retreat into a cloud: He may either take away the
Means of grace from you, or take away you from the Means; and if you do not
seek and obtain whilst you enjoy the Means, are you like to do it when you are
deprived?

3. Your danger is in respect of the uncertainty of Gods working by the Means,
though he should continue them unto you; the wind blows where and when it
lists. In youth you may feel the sweet breath of the Spirit moving upon your
hearts; if you do not hoist up sail when you have a fair wind, possibly you may
never have such a wind again as long as you live, God may swear in his wrath
that his Spirit shall no longer strive with you, God calls upon you when you
are young, if you refuse, you may hereafter call, and cry, and seek, and knock,
and not be heard or answered, and the door be shut up against you for ever. See
Prove. 1. 24. to the 31. Mic. 3. 4. Zacb. 7. 11, 12, 13. We read of Esau's
weeping for the blessing to no purpose; and the foolish Virgins going to buy
Oil when it was too late; and our Savior telling Jerusalem, that their day was
spent, and the things which belonged to their peace were hid from their eyes.
There are many that neglect the things of Gods Kingdom when they are young,
that have their day of grace set upon them, before their lives be half spent;
God does leave off calling, and the Spirit does leave off working, and they are
given up to a judicial hardness, as Act. 28. 26, 27. The time of youth then is
the most safe time. Hearken then, O ye young men, and be persuaded in this your
day to mind the things which belong unto your peace, and to seek. Gods kingdom
and righteousness. Seek this first, that is timely, before other things, and
that you may seek so as to obtain.

SECT. VI.
2. You must seek Gods Kingdom and Righteousness First, that is Chiefly and
above other things. These things must have the chief of your study, and care,
and labor; you must make it your business, and look upon it as your chief
business; if business about the world have more of your time, because of your
engagements in your particular callings, yet this should have more of your care
and heart. Better miscarry in any business than in this business; better miss
of an Estate, than miss of Gods Kingdom; better be a poor beggar than remain a
guilty sinner; better the body be clothed with rags, than the soul be without
the white robes of Christ's Righteousness; better the body were starved, than to
have the soul damned; the greatest poverty and misery in this life which can
befall you, is not to be compared with the eternal misery of Hell, which in the
neglect of the duty of the Text you cannot escape. And suppose you should gain
the whole world, what is that in comparison with the gain of the Crown of
Glory? what is earthly riches compared with heavenly treasures?

1. The worth then of Gods Kingdom, which is an Inheritance beyond any
purchase, except that of the blood of Christ; and the excellency of this
Righteousness, which when it is imputed, does bring with it pardon of sin, the
favor of God, the peace of Conscience, and sometimes the unspeakable joys of
the Holy Ghost, which the whole World were you possessed with it could not
procure: Where this Righteousness is imparted, it does include all the graces
of the Spirit, which are the choicest Jewels, the chiefest Ornaments, the best
Riches, the least measure of which is of more worth than ten thousand worlds,
and will stand you in more stead in a dying hour, and be of only signification
and advantage when you come forth of the body, and appear (naked, stripped,
quite naked and bereaved of all earthly enjoyments) before the Judgment Seat
of God; I say, the worth and excellency of Gods Kingdom and righteousness
should move you to seek after it above all other things.

2. The necessity of this Kingdom and Righteousness should further stir you up
to employ herein your chief care. It is the Unum Necessarium, the One thing
necessary; other things you may have, and you may be without, but you must have
a title to Gods Kingdom, or else you cannot be happy; you must have Gods
Righteousness imputed and imparted, or else the guilt of sin will remain, and
you will continue servants and slaves to sin, and cannot escape the punishment
of sin, the dreadful and eternal punishment of sin in Hell. There is a
necessity of the thing, and there is a necessity of seeking it chiefly, or else
you are not like to obtain; especially if you consider,

3. The difficulty of obtaining; it is no easy thing to get to Heaven; you
must labor if you would enter into this Rest, Heb. 4. 11. you must strive if
you would enter in at the strait gate, because many shall seek to enter in, and
shall not be able, Luke 13. 24. You must take the Kingdom of Heaven by
violence, if you would take it at all, Matb. 11. 12. not as if there were
opposition from within, for God is willing to entertain you, the Lord Jesus is
ready to set open the door before you, the Spirit is ready to help you; but
there is opposition about the walls (as it were) of the place; Satan he
builds Forts and strong Holds, and casts forth his fiery darts, to drive
you off, when you make any attempt this way: You will meet with opposition from
the Devil and the World, and chiefly from within your selves, when you do in
good earnest set your faces toward Heaven; therefore you had need labor and
strive, and make it your chief care and business to get into this Kingdom. You
are in a Sea as it were, where there are waves of trouble beating upon you, a
tide of inward corruptions working against you, and a boisterous wind of
temptation to carry you back; you had need to row hard, if you will get to the
Haven. You are traveling in the narrow path, where there are many bypath,
and many enemies to oppose you; you had need look well to your way, to get on
the spiritual Armor, and fight the good fight of Faith, if you would obtain
the Crown at the end of your way, and at last lay hold on Eternal Life. To
conclude, let me exhort you so to seek that you may find, so to run that you
may obtain, so to fight that you may overcome, that after all your travail and
pains you may sit down with Abraham, Isaac, and Jacob, in the Kingdom of God.

1 JOHN 2. part of the 14 Verse. I have written unto you Young Men, because ye
are strong; and the word of God abides in you; and you have overcome the
wickea one.
THE Author, or Penman which was employed in writing this Epistle, was John the
Beloved Disciple. The chief subject of this Epistle, or duty which herein he
exhorts unto, is Love, Love to God, and Love one to another. The Persons to
whom he writes this Epistle are all Believers in the general, and particularly
according to the three Ages of Men, he dedicateth his Epistle unto Fathers,
unto Little Children, and unto Young Men. The Text may be termed Young Men's
Epistle: I have written unto you young Men, because ye are strong, and the Word
of God abides in you; and ye have overcome the wicked one. Where the Apostle
does give three Elogiums or commendations of these young men, 1. That they were
strong, 2. That the Word of God did abide in them. 3. That they had overcome
the wicked one.

To observe Doctrines and prosecute them, might require too much time and room,
and not be altogether so profitable: I shall choose rather to spend my whole
discourse in a Use of Exhortation drawn from the Text unto you young men, who
have called me hither to preach unto you this day: and what the Apostle does
write of these young men in the Text by way of Commendation, I shall commend
unto you by way of Exhortation. There are three great duties which I from this
place exhort all you young men unto:

1. Labor to be strong. 2. Labor that the Word of God may abide in you. 3.
Labor to overcome the wicked one.
1. Young men labor to be strong.

And here I shall show 1. In what ye should be strong. 2. To what 3. In whom

(1.) In what ye should be strong. In general, labor to be strong in Grace:
Read the Exhortation of the Apostle unto his Son Timothy, 2 Timothy 2. 1. Thou
therefore my Son be strong in the grace which is in Christ Jesus. Labor
whilst you are young to get grace; above all gettings to gain this riches
which is of far more value than all earthly treasures; some of you are of one
trade, and some of another, and you endeavor to get an Estate hereby; let me
advise you all to trade for grace, which will be an Estate it self during your
abode here, and will be the earnest to you of an Inheritance in the Kingdom of
Heaven hereafter: Labor to get grace in the truth of it; take heed that you be
not mistaken, and deceive your selves with dross and brass in stead of true
gold, I mean with counterfeit instead of true grace: And labor to get grace in
the strength ofit; Grace is strong in it self; it can do more than all the
wisdom and learning in the world; let it be strong in you; the Fountain is in
Christ, let the Stream be in you; in him is the Ocean, labor that as full and
strong tides as may be, may flow from him into your hearts. Let the habits of
Grace be deeply and strongly rooted in you, and live in the powerful exercise
of those habits.

Particularly labor for strength 1. Of Faith. 2. Of Love. 3. Of Desire. 4. Of
Hope. 5. Of Joy.

1. Young men, labor for strength of Faith: some of you have strong bodies,
others have strong memories, others have strong fancies; labor all of you to
get a strong faith. Faith is an excellent grace, it is more precious than gold,
1 Pet. 1. 7. labor to get faith, and a strong faith. Abraham was strong in
faith, and hereby he brought glory to God, Romans 4. 20. show your selves to be
children of faithful Abraham, by getting such a faith as he had for kind, and
such a faith as he had for measure; this will be for Gods glory and for your
honor. Let your faith have a strong bottom, a firm and sure footing; build it
not upon the sand, or earth, much less upon the waters, but build it upon the
Rock, upon the Lord Jesus Christ, who is the Rock of Ages; build it upon the
foundation of the Prophets and Apostles, Jesus Christ being the chief
cornerstone; build it upon the Word of God in the Scriptures, and build it
upon Christ who is held forth in the Word. Let your faith have a strong bottom,
and let your faith put forth it self in strong actings; let your assent be
strong unto divine Truths; and let your recumbance be strong upon Christ and
the Promises of the Gospel. Get a strong eye of Faith to discern those
spiritual objects which cannot be seen with the eye of sense, to look upward to
God, and the glory which is about his Throne, to look downward to Hell, and the
torments which the damned do there endure for sin, to look forward to the
coming of Christ, and the general Judgment of the World at his appearance; and
get a strong hand of faith to lay fast hold on Christ, to apply his
righteousness for the remission of sin, and to receive his Spirit for the
cleansing you from filthiness, and perfecting holiness which is begun in you.
Let your trust and confidence be strong in God through his Son: Young men are
apt to be too credulous, too ready to believe and put confidence in men, when
the Scripture tells us, that all men are Liars, if not actually so, yet they
may be so, and the most are so; young ones before they have tried the world are
apt to trust in men, old ones that are more experienced, are more cautious; but
you cannot put too much confidence in God; he cannot lie, he never deceived
any, he never will fail them that put their trust in him. Some trust in
Chariots, and some in Horses, but let your trust be in the Lord; some trust in
Princes and great persons, others in Hosts and strong Forces, most in arms of
flesh, which are weak, and cannot give that help as is expected; but let your
confidence be in the Name of the Lord, who is a shield and buckler, and present
help to his people in the time of trouble; whose Name is a strong. Tower into
which the righteous may fly and be safe, in times of the greatest danger,
Prove. 10. 18. Be strong in Faith, according to the strength of this grace, all
your other graces will receive strength, Faith being the Nurse of them all.

2. Young men, labor for strong Love. In the time of youth affections do
spring, and they put forth themselves with more strength and vigor than in the
cold winter of Old age: Dear Youths, endeavor that your affections may be
directed to the right objects, that you may not defile your affections with
fin, nor debase your affections with the world; that you may not by misplacing
your Love, lose your Love, and with the loss of your Love, lose your Souls and
your happiness. You may love, and that with the greatest strength you have a
capacity for, and it is your duty to be strong in Love, but then let it be
carried forth in this order,

1. To God, 2. To one another.
1. Be strong in love to God; your hearts now will settle upon something; they
will work some way; if they do not work upward, they will work downward; if
they be not placed upon God, they will be placed upon the Creature. You have
now many suitors for your love; all the sensitive alluring objects which are
about you would entice and ravish your hearts; but these things if they seem
fair, will wither and prove deceitful, they are unworthy of your love. Give me
leave to be a suitor for your love; let me beg your Love for God and his dear
Son. This is the first and great Commandment, to love the Lord your God with
all your heart, with all your soul, and with all your mind, Matthew. 22. 37, 38.
God commands you to love him, it is your duty; God allows you to love him,
it is your privilege; God does chiefly require your love; My Son, give me thy
heart. If you give any thing, every thing you have besides, and keep back your
heart, it will not be accepted: And God does best deserve your love; he is the
most suitable object for your love; other objects will debase your love, God
will ennoble and dignifie your love: you cannot bestow your love better; none
so amiable as God, especially as he represents himself in his Son: If you look
for greatness, he is the most great and glorious Majesty of Heaven and Earth:
If you look for power, he is Omnipotent, has done, and can do whatever he
pleases: If wisdom has a beauty in it in your esteem, his understanding and
wisdom is infinite: If truth, faithfulness, mercy, goodness be amiable in your
eyes, he is truth it self, and cannot lie; he is full of mercy and kindness, he
has most tender bowels, he has riches and treasures of grace and goodness: If
love be an attractive of love, his love is beyond comparison, beyond
conception; there is a height in his love which cannot be reached; a depth in
his love which cannot be fathomed; a breadth and length in his love, which
cannot be comprehended; his love is first, without any beginning; his love is
free, without our deserving; his love is constant, without any changing; his
love is eternal, without any ending: He is most lovely, this should draw forth
your love much; he is most loving, this should draw forth your love more; he is
love it self, 1 J^h. 4. 8. God is love, not only has love, but is love; he is
all beauty and sweetness, all goodness and kindness, all bowels and love, O
what an incentive should this be to your love! whither are your hearts
wandering? O gather in all your scattcred affections, and fix them upon this
most beautiful object! place your love upon God now, before it be too far
engaged to something else, from whence it may be very difficult to withdraw;
love him with all your heart; love him truly, and love him strongly; love him
sincerely, and love him servently; love him supreamly, and love him constantly;
let the fire of your love ascend to him, as to its sphere; let the stream of
your love run to him, and lose it self in the Ocean of his goodness, where
alone it can find suitableness and satisfaction; here you may bathe your
selves without fear of drowning; here you may expatiate without fear of
exceeding; here you can never transgress the bounds of love; love him strongly
whom you can never love too strongly. Be strong in love one to another; you may
love one another, and you ought to love one another; love is the sum of the
Law, the first Table is fulfilled in love to God; the second Table is fulfilled
in love to your neighbor. See how the Apostle expresses it, Kom. 13. 8, 9,
10. Owe na man any thing, but to love one another; for be that loves another
has fulfilled the Law. For this, Thou shall not commit adultery: Thou shall
not kill: Thou shall not steal: Thou shall not bear false witness: And if there
be any other Commandment, it is briefly comprehended in this saying, Thou shall
love thy neighbor as thy self. Love works no ill to his neighbor, therefore
love is the fulfilling of the Law. There is a common love which you should bear
to all, even to the wicked and your enemies, which should not only withold
you from offering any injury unto them, or rendering evil for evil; but also
should put you upon doing good offices for them in reference to their
reputation, estate, relations, bodies, as the Lord does put opportunities into
your hands, and they stand in need of your help: You should be pitiful toward
the worst in their distress; if your enemy hunger, you should feed him; if he
thirst, give him drink: You should bless them that curse and revile you; do
good unto them that hate you; pray for them that despightfully use you and
persecute you: You should be loving and courteous in your converse and
behavior toward all men; you should grieve at their afflictions, rejoice in
their good, and be glad of occasions wherein you may show a real affection to
them you have acquaintance with; chiefly you should express your love to their
souls in your prayers, friendly admonitions, hearty counsels; you should
endeavor to awaken them, whom you see sleeping on the brink of the bottomless
pit; to reduce them that are hastening in the broad way of sin toward their
own destruction; you should use arguments with them to leave their sins, and to
close with Jesus Christ; especially if any of your relations and ^eer friends
in whom you have interest, be in a state of nature, you should use all possible
endeavors to persuade them to draw in the easy yoke of Christ with your
selves: Thus you must love all strongly: ^ut you must love them that bear the
Image of God upon them, that love and fear the Lord most strong^y: Your love to
the Brethren must be unfeigued, ^are and fervent, as the Apostle directs, 1
Pet. 1. 22. This will be an evidence to you that you are D^sciples ^f Christ,
Joh. 13. 35. By this shall all men know, much ^ore may yourselves know, that ye
are my Disciples, ^ye love one another. This will be an evidence that ye are
passed from death to life, 1 John 3. 14. We know that we are passed from death
to life, because we love the Brethren. This will be an evidence that ye are
born of God, and have a true knowledge of him, 1 John 4. 7, 8. Beloved, let us
love one another, for love is of God; and every one that loves is born of God,
and knows God; he that loves not, knows not God, for God is love. You
should mingle your converse with Gods people, with hearty and fervent love,
which will be pleasing to God, sweet to your own spirit, and advantageous to
them you converse withal: You should be made up of love and kindness; pass by
injuries, bear reproaches, cover infirmities, sympathize with sorrows, relieve
necessities, joy in the good of others as if your own, and be ready to do good
to all, especially to them who are of the household of faith. This is the second
grace you should abound in, namely, the grace of Love.

3. Young men, labor for strong desires; not after riches, and honors, and
pleasures, and friends, though these things in their place, and order, and
measure, may be desired; but if they be desired chiefly, if they be desired too
strongly, the fruit will be, not the looked for good and satisfaction, but
disappoint and vexation to your selves, besides the displeasing of God hereby:
But let your desires follow your love; let them be carried forth chiefly, and
most strongly toward God, and the things which concern his Kingdom and Glory,
your own peace and salvation. Because you lie under the guilt and power of sin
without a Christ, labor in the first place after strong, earn^st, thirsting
desires after Jesus Christ and his Righteousness, that you may have your sins
pardoned, and hearts renewed: Cry out, None but Christ, none but Christ; give
us a Savior, or else we are lost; give us Christ, or else we die and perish
eternally: Let your strong wishes be, O that we had an interest in Christ! O
that our hearts were united and joined to Christ! O for a drop of his blood to
sprinkle our consciences! O that he would undertake for us! that he would be
our Advocate to plead for us, and reconcile us unto the Father! Let your
prayers be, Lord, thou have given thy Son for us, give thy Son to us; thou
hold forth thy Son, help us to lay hold on him; thou call us to thy Son
by thy Word, draw us to thy Son by thy Spirit; thou have put thy Son to death
for sin, and accepted of the sacrifice which he has offered, O that our sins
might be forgiven upon his account! Let your desires go forth strongly after
the favor of God; there are many that say, Who will show us any good! Lord,
show us thy face! Lord lift up the light of thy countenance upon us! Desire
earnestly with David, the presence and communion with God in his Ordinances, as
Psalm. 27. 4. One thing have I desired of the Lord, that will I seek after, to
dwell in the house of the Lord all the days of my life, to behold the beauty
of the Lord, etc. And Psalm. 42. 1, 2. As the Heart pants after the
waterbrooks, so pants my soul after thee O God; my soul thirsts for God,
for the Living God, when shall I come and appear before God! Many young men
have earnest desires after the company of their friends, that are of pleasant
conversation; let your desires be carried forth most earnestly after the
company and communion with God in his Ordinances, wherein the chiefest pleasure
is to be found: Therefore prize and desire Ordinances for the sake of God;
because they are the means of bringing you and God together; of joining your
hearts unto the chief good; and if you desire the company of men, let it be the
company of Gods Children, who are the excellent of the Earth. Labor for strong
desires after the Image of God, that you may be holy as he is holy; after
conformity to Christ, in his death by dying to sin, and readiness to suffer for
his sake; in his Resurrection, by your newness of life: Let your d^sires be
strong after the Spirit, that he might be given to you, and abide in you;
desire every grace of the Spirit in the highest measure, and content not your
selves with any degree; desire the comforts of the Spirit, the joys of the
Holy Ghost; desire strength for every duty, that you might be made use of to
glorify God in your generation; that you might be kept from sin, rather than
from any evil; that you might be made victorious over all your spiritual
enemies; especially let your desires be carried forth with the greatest
strength after the Crown of glory, the undefiled and never-fading inheritance
in Heav^n, after the beatifical Vision, and full fruition of God in the New
Jerusalem; the perfection of holiness and happiness which is reserved for
hereafter; the fullness and eternity of joy in Gods glorious presence; and
desire the hastening of Christ's second appearance, that he would come quickly
and put you into the possession of that Inheritance which he has purchased and
prepared for you.

4. Young men, labor for strong Hope. Young men usually are big with hope and
expectation of some great things in the world; they hope for such an ^state,
and then that they shall be content; such de^ights and sensual enjoyments, and
then they shall be ^appy, and satisfied; but they that are elder, and have ^ad
greatest experience, find the world, and all things in it, to be empty and
vain, and their hopes ^ave been frustrated: however, being unacquainted ^ith
higher things, their hearts are still most irra^ionally set upon the world; but
I would exhort ^ou young men to have higher hopes than world^ings, and let your
hopes be strong. Do not hope for ^ch in the creature, it has not what you hope
for, ^ut let your hope be in God, let your expectation be from him only: Do not
hope for much here below; ^his is not the place of your rest and happiness; but
^et your great hopes be of things above; as your ^esires should be strong after
them, so your hopes should be strong of them. Hypocrites have some ^ind of
hopes, but they are thin weak hopes; like ^he Spiders web, Job 8. 14. which is
easily torn in ^ieces by the wind; the wind of affliction does rend ^he hopes
of Hypocrites from them; they have hopes, ^ut such as quickly perish and are
cut off, Job 13. 14. They are like the giving up the Ghost, Job 11. 20. When
they give up the Ghost, their hopes give up ^he Ghost; they and their hopes
perish together, because they are groundless and presumptuous. Labor therefore
for a strong hope; such a hope as is well grounded, which will end in fruition,
and never in disappointment, and make ashamed. Let the object of your hopes be
God, and the things which are above; and let the bottom, the foundation of your
^opes, be those two immutable things the Apostle ^peaketh of, Heb. 8. 17, 18,
19, 20. Wherein God willing more abundantly to show unto the heirs of Promise,
the immutability of his counsel, confirmed it by an oatb; that by two immutable
things in which it was impossible for God to lie, we might have a strong
consolation, who have fled for refuge to lay hold upon the hope set before us;
which hope we have, as an anchor of the soul, both sure and steadfast, and which
enters into that within the Vail, whither the forerunner is for us entered.
The two immutable things which are the foundation of our hope, are Gods
Promise, and Gods Oath; his Promise, This is the Promise which he has
promised, even eternal life, Job. 2. 25. His Oath which he swear by himself to
Abraham, and in him to all his children: Surely blessing, I will bless thee,
Heb. 6. 13, 14. which does include eternal blessedness. God who cannot lie
gives his Promise and his Oath: God who can do whatever he will, and will do
whatever he has promised; here is a good ground for your hope to build upon;
let your hope be strong, let it be a strong anchor to your soul, sure and
steadfast; and that it may be so, it must not be cast downwards, like those of
ships, which are cast to the bottom of the waters; but they must be cast
upwards into Heaven, into that within the Vail, whither the Lord Jesus Christ
the forerunner is for us entered to prepare Mansions for us. Let your hope of
Heaven be strong and lively.

5. Young men, labor for strong Joy; if your hopes be strong, and well
grounded, you may thence have strong consolation, Heb. 6. 18, That which
discourageth many young men and women from putting their feet into the ways of
God, is the apprehensions which they have, that should they engage in this way,
they must bid farewell to all mirth and cheerfulness, to all delights and
pleasures, and make tears and sorrows their companions, which they are loath to
do at least too soon, whatever necessity they see there is of being religious:
Whereas, although grief and sorrow be needful to sinners at their first
engagement in the ways of God, to imbitter sin, and prepare them for the more
ready closure with Jesus Christ; and a mixture of sorrow is needful after,
because of the mixture of sin in their lives, and the better to balance and
temper the spirit; yet the Lord does call his people to higher delights and
pleasures in his ways, than can be found in the ways of sin. God does not
require that his people should lay aside all delights, but change their sinful
delights for those that are spiritual and heavenly: God gives them leave to
rejoice, and he commands them to rejoice; not in ways of sin, he forbids
the pleasures of sin, which are but for a season; not excessively in the
creature (though moderately and subordinately they may) but they may and ought
to rejoice in himself. Read what Solomon says to young men, Eccles. 11. 9.
Rej^yce O young man in thy youth, and let thine heart cheer thee in the days
of thy youth, and walk in the ways of thine heart; and in the sight of thine
eyes; but know that for all these things God will bring thee into judgment.
Young men, you may rejoice and be cheerful in your youthful days, but if your
joys be in the ways of your heart, and in the sight of your eyes; if your
joys be in the ways of sin, in the lust of the flesh, and lust of the eyes,
if it be in satisfying the desires of your flesh, and pleasing your senses unto
the dishonor and displeasing of God; know, that God will bring you into
judgment, and then all your sinful, sensual delights will be turned into
bitterness and terror; but you may be cheerful in the ways of God; and if you
are reconciled unto God through his Son, and have an interest in his favor; if
you are renewed after his Image, and have a Title to his Kingdom; you have
reason to rejoice more than any wicked persons in their greatest outward
prosperity. Shall the slaves of Satan rejoice, and have not the children of God
more grounds? Shall the wicked rejoice that are dancing upon the brink of Hell,
and are ready every moment to tumble into the burning lake? and should not you
rejoice that are come to the borders of the heavenly Canaan, and live in hopes
of the glory of the New Jerusalem? Rejoice in the Lord continually, Phil. 4. 4.
Rejoice in the Lord always, and again I say rejoice. And rejoice in the Lord
greatly: Strong joy will be your strength, it will be a means to quicken all
your affections toward God, and make you shine brightly in the sphere where
the Lord has placed you.

Thus I have showed in what you should be strong.

SECT. II.
(2.) THE second thing is to show To what you should be strong.

There are four things unto which you should labor to be strong.

1. To do. 2. To suffer. 3. To fight. 4. To die.
1. Young men, labor for strength to do; you have many things to do, great
things to do, necessary things to do, and difficult things to do. I am not now
speaking of the works of your particular callings which require strength of
body; but I am speaking of the works of your general calling, as Christians,
which do more immediately concern Gods glory, and your own salvation; such as
treasuring up a stock of saving truths; making your peace with God; getting
your hearts broken for sin; closing with, and living by faith upon Jesus
Christ; getting your hearts furnished with every grace; living in the powerful
exercise of it; denying your selves; mortifying the deeds of the body; laying
out your selves, time and talents for the glory of your Master; standing daily
upon your watch; improving the means of grace; worshipping God, and seeking him
diligently in public, family, closet; making it your business to be religious;
laying up your treasure in Heaven; and laboring to get your heart more
loosened from things below, and raised and fixed upon things above; ^hese, and
the like things, are the works which the Lord requires of you all; all other
employments are of an inferior nature: These things you must do ^ere, or you
will not have opportunity for them ^ereafter: These things you must do, or you
are unone for ever; and since they are hard works to ^esh and blood, therefore
you had need to get much ^rength to enable you hereunto; I do not mean ^xternal
strength, but internal spiritual strength: ^eak sickly men cannot endure hard
labor; you must ^e strong, that you may work for the Lord, that you ^ay work
for eternity.

2. Young Men, labor for strength to suffer, I mean to suffer for the sake of
Jesus Christ. If you would be Christ's Disciples, you must take up his Cross and
follow him, Math. 10. 24. and sometimes his Cross is very weighty. It is not a
weak shoulder that can bear an heavy burden; and it is not a weak Christian
that can bear an heavy Cross, that can endure weighty and pressing afflictions.
You must therefore get much strength, great strength, that you may suffer great
things for the sake of Christ; otherwise you will shrink when you are put upon
the trial; you will be offended when sore persecutions do arise for the Word.
The Apostle prays for the Colossians, chap. 1. 11. that the Lord would
strengthen them with all might according to his glorious power, unto all
patience and long-suffering with joyfulness. Young ones, look for sufferings,
reckon upon them, and make full account of them beforehand; and prepare for
sufferings, get on winter Garments against winter seasons, I mean suffering
graces against suffering times. Get strength for sufferings, labor to be
strengthened with all might according to Gods glorious power unto all patienc^
and long-suffering with joyfulness: Get strength to endure much, and to endure
long, and to endur^ not only with patience but also with cheerfulness looking
upon it not only as your duty when called to suffer for Christ, but as the
greatest honor tha^ can be conferred upon you in this life, and as tha^ which
will work for you an exceeding and etern^ weight of glory, 2 Cor. 4. 17.

3. Young men, labor for Strength to fight, not with men, not with one
another; you must take heed of a quarrelsome and contentious spirit; but get
strength to fight with your spiritual enemies, which of all enemies are the
strongest and most dangerous: Young ones, you are called to be Soldiers in
your most tender years, when you engage your selves to be Christ's disciples,
you list your selves under his Banner, you wear his Livery, and carry his
Colors; you have need then of strength, that you get Victory over your
enemies, the Devil, the Flesh and the World, which war against Christ, and
war against your own souls: Those that war with men have need be strong in
body, and you that are to war with sin and Satan, and the allurements of this
present evil world, had need be strong in Spirit. You have need of strength to
resist strong temptations, to subdue strong corruptions, and to get the victory
over such strong enemies.

4. Young men, labor for Strength to Dye. It is a great thing to dye, and hard
thing to dye as a Christian; it requires strength to resign up the Soul, when
sickness and death come, which none can escape; but you may be called to lay
down your Lives for the restimony of Jesus Christ; you may be deprived not only
of Liberty and Estate, and all the comforts of this life, but also of Life it
self too, if you will cleave to Christ, and hold fast his Truths; this you must
prepare for, and resolve upon, otherwise you do not reckon what it may cost you
to be a Christian, and you do not accept of Christ upon the terms of the
Gospel: you have need of great strength to be enabled to dye for the sake of
Christ. Th^nk, that you may be called to dye for Christ, and if you should,
that this would be the most honorable death, that you cannot keep your life
long, and cannot lose it upon a better account; that if at such a time you
should seek to save it, you would within a while lose not only your natural
life some other way, but lose eternal life, and be eternally miserable. Thus To
what you should be strong.

SECT. III.
(3.) THe Third thing is to show, In whom you should be strong.

Negatively, you must not be strong in your selves, either to do, or suffer, or
fight, or die; for in your s^lves you are utterly insufficient for any of these
things; of your selves you can do nothing; if you undertake any duty in your
own strength, you will fail either in the thing, or in the manner of
performance; if you fight in your own strength with your spiritual enemies,
they will be too hard for you, you will be wounded and beaten to the ground: If
you think to suffer or die for Christ in your own strength, you will start
aside when you are put upon the trial. You have read of the self-confidence of
Peter, Deny thee! I will dye first; and yet he denied his Master when he was
tried; you know not what spirits you are of; you are not yet, it may be
acquainted with the deceitfulness of your own hearts, be not self-confident, be
not strong in your selves.

But Affirmatively: Be strong in the Lord, as the Apostle does exhort, Ephesians. 6.
10. Finally, Brethren, be strong in the Lord, and the power of his might. Our
Savior tells his Disciples, Joh. 15. 5. Without me ye can do nothing, and
they found it to be so; therefore the Apostle does disclaim all
self-sufficiency, 2 Cor. 3. 3. Yet however weak and nothing as he acknowledges
himself to be, he tells us, Philip. 4. 13. I can do all things through Christ
strengthening me: Let me then direct you to the right fountain of strength,
apply your selves to the Lord; I cried unto the Lord, and he heard me, (says
David) and strengthened me with strength in my soul, Psalm. 138. 3. Beg of the
Lord, that he would strengthen you with might by his Spirit in the inner man,
as Ephesians. 3. 16. When you feel your strength to fail or decay, apply the Promise
which God has made of renewing the spiritual strength, Isa. 40. 31. Thus much
for the First Duty, Young men, labor to be strong.

SECT. IV.
2. YOung men, labor that the Word of God may abide in you; There is a
twofold Word of God,

1. The Essential Word, which is Christ the Son of God, Joh. 1. 1. 1 John 5. 7.

2. The Written Word, which is the Scripture, 1 Thessalonians. 2. 13.

I shall speak concerning the Word of God in both acceptations.

1. Let the essential Word of God, let Christ abide in you. Let Christ abide in
your hearts. And here are two things I would exhort you unto.

1. To get Christ into your hearts. 2. To keep Christ in your hearts.
1. Labor to get Christ into your hearts; young men, be persuaded now to
receive Jesus Christ into your hearts: The time of your youth is the best time
to receive Jesus Christ; if you do not receive Christ now, it is a great
question whether you will ever receive him; very few that refuse Christ when
they are young, ever are persuaded to accept of him afterward; Christ stands
now at the door and knocks, if any will open to him, he will come in, Rev. 3.
20. Christ knocks by Judgments, by Mercies, by Word, by Ministers, by his
Spirit; when you feel some secret movings and stirrings upon your spirit to
thrust out sin, and let in Christ: when you have inclinations and persuasions
to receive Jesus Christ, then Christ is knocking by his Spirit; open then the
door, comply with those motions, and give Christ entertainment; he is the best
inhabitant that ever you received: until Christ be received, some base lusts
will inhabit your hearts; and which is the best Inhabitant, judge ye. Christ
where he inhabiteth does ennoble, Lust does debase; Christ does beautify, Lust
does deform; Christ does enrich, Lust does impoverish; Christ does purify,
Lust does desile; Christ does cure, Lust does distemper; Christ gives peace
and comfort, Lust does bring trouble, and is the parent of eternal sorrow and
woe. O then, give entertainment forthwith unto Jesus Christ; now you may have
him, and all in him, all with him; if you refuse him now, you may never have
another proffer of him made unto you so long as you live. And if you would
receive Christ, you must part with sin; if you would receive him, you must lay
hold on him by Faith, Joh. 1. 12. To as many as received him, to them gave he
power to become the Sons of God, even to them that believed on his Name.

2. Labor to keep Christ in your hearts. Seek him, seek him diligently, till
you find him, and having found him, hold him, keep him carefully; when he
knocks let him in, when he is in keep him there; embrace him close in the arms
of your Faith and Love; bring not in any Inhabitants which may justle him out
of his Lodging: let Christ abide in you without disturbance.

2. Let the Written Word of God, the Scriptures abide in you. The Book of the
Holy Scriptures is the most excellent Book that ever was written: It is the
Book of God. If an Angel should write a book, I believe you would get and study
such a book, were you capable of understanding it; much more should you study
the Scripture, which is of Divine Inspiration. This is Gods Book, and his only
written Book: there are not many Books of God to burden your memory; you may
read it over many times in your Life; it is translated into your Mother Tongue,
that you may read it; and it is written for the most part in a plain easy
style, that you may understand it: and it is full of most excellent matter:

The Matter of the Word is 1. Doctrinal. 2. Historical. 3. Prophetical. 4.
Preceptive. 5. Promissory.

In all the Word of God is most excellent.

1. The Doctrine of the Word of God is most excellent. In the Word you have the
highest Doctrines, concerning God, his one Nature in thr^e Persons; concerning
Christ, his two Natures in one Person; concerning the Church, the mystical
union of Christ the head, and all Believers his members; concerning man's
Redemption by Christ's death; concerning the way of man's salvation by the
Covenant of Grace, and the like. Look into all the writings of Philosophers and
the wisest Heath^ns that ever wrote, who have had the greatest learning, and
largest understanding of things, and you shall find no Doctrine they have
taught to be in the least comparable with the Doctrine of the Scriptures. What
are all the Arts and Sciences in the World? what are the most subtle
speculations, the most accurate and rational discourses concerning the secrets
and mysteries of Nature, in which the most knowing have been puzzled, and
fallen short of a full understanding, in comparison with the Doctrine of the
Word, and the mysteries of the Kingdom of God, which are revealed in the
Scriptures?

2. The History of the Word is most excellent: In the Word you have the History
of the Creation; the history of the Old World; the history of the Flood; the
history of the burning of Sodom and Gomorrha with Fire and Brimstone from
Heaven, the history of Gods calling Abraham and the Patriarchs, the history of
Gods bringing the Children of Israel out of Egypt with many signs and wonders,
through the Red Sea and Wilderness, into the Land of Promise; the history of
the Jewish Paedagogy, and Gods various dealings with his Church before Christ
came; but especially you have the history of Christ; his birth, his life, his
works, his death, his resurrection, his ascension, his session, and
intercession at the right hand of God; the history of the first plantation of
the Gentile Church by the Apostles, their preaching and success, and the like:
Look into all the Historians which have written, and where shall you find such
an history as is in the Scriptures? Surely there is no history like to the
history of the Bible for antiquity, for certainty; no history in which you have
such concernment as in this history; you may read of the memorable acts of some
great Princes and famous Captains, which may yield some pleasure to your fancy,
but you are never the better or the worse for what has been done by these men
so many years ago; but you are concerned in the history of the Church, in the
history of Christ the Savior of the World, your salvation and happiness does
depend upon his birth, and death, and resurrection, and appearance in Heaven to
intercede for you.

3. The Prophecy of the Word is most excellent; not to say any thing of
Prophesies already fulfilled concerning the children of Israel in the Old
Testament, concerning the First appearance of Jesus Christ foretold long
before: In the Word you have Prophecy concerning the calling of the Jews, the
destruction of Antichrist, the bringing in the fullness of the Gentiles; which
yet we are in expectation of. Especially you have prophecy of the end of the
World, of the conclusion of Time, and of what God will do with the children of
men when Time, and all the by-us-visible-place shall be no more. You have
prophecy of the second most glorious appearance of Jesus Christ to Judgment,
of the Punishment which shall be inflicted upon all the ungodly in Hell; of the
Reward which shall be given unto the righteous in Heaven: This is a great and
most sure, and most excellent Prophecy. Some men have taken upon them to
foretell future things, and have been foully mistaken; and what they have
foretold have been but of small moment in comparison: This Prophecy of the Word
is most sure, because the Prophecy of God, who knows all future things,
insomuch as he is omniscient, and all things depend upon his decree. And these
things he has foretold are of the greatest weight of any other things which he
has made known beforehand to us, that we might prepare for that which is asar
off.

4. The Precepts of the Word are most excellent. It would be too large to
discourse of the Precepts in the Moral Law, and the sweet commands of the
Gospel, where you have such admirable rules for the government of the thoughts,
heart, affections, speech, behavior, and whole conversation, as are not to be
found in the Books of the most exact Moralist that ever wrote.

5. The Promises of the Word are most excellent. Promises of all temporal
things needful; Promises of spiritual favors; promises of eternal happiness;
promises suitable to all our wants; promises precious, of things of the
greatest value; Promises free, without condition of merit; Promises sure, of a
God who is most powerful and most faithful. The matter then of this Word of God
is most excellent; therefore young ones be persuaded to study this Word; let
this Word of God abide in you.

1. Labor to get this Word of God. 2. Labor to keep this Word of God.
1. Labor to get this Word of God.

1. To get it into your minds. 2. To get it into your hearts.
1. Get the Word of God into your minds, so as to understand it, so as to
believe it. And that you may do so, I would advise you to take a right method
herein, that you would begin with the Principles of Religion. One that would
have a good understanding in the Tongues, must first learn the Grammar: One
that would attain knowledge in the Art and Sciences, must begin first with the
Principles, the Rudiments and Elements of them: And so one that would attain a
good understanding in the Word of God, must begin with the Principles of
Religion, which are collected together in the most easy way to understand in
Catechisms, where you have the great fundamental truths of Religion, which are
necessary to be known, believed and practiced in order unto salvation, set down
by way of question and answer. And because some Catechisms are very deficient
in giving clear light, and some are very full: I shall above all commend to you
the Catechism of the Assembly of Divines, where all the heads of Religion are
proved out of the Scripture, which is the fountain and foundation of all: and I
would have you first to learn the shorter Catechism exactly, with the proofs;
then proceed to the larger Catechism and consession of faith; and as you go
along, labor to understand the meaning of every thing you learn; and not only
to get a notional understanding, but also a spiritual discerning, and to mingle
these great truths with faith, to receive and believe what you find proved by
the Scripture to be the Word of God, and therefore most firmly to assent to
them. For this end you must look up to the Lord, and make your prayer to him,
that he would give you his Spirit to teach and lead you into all truth. Besides
learning Catechisms, you must keep a constant course of reading some portion of
Scripture every day, and labor to carry about with you something of the Word
in your minds, which you may entertain your thoughts withal, when you get them
off from other business.

2. Get the Word of God into your hearts; endeavor that your hearts may be
a^ected with the Word; let not only your minds receive light by it, but also
your hearts receive warmth by it. Imitate David in his affections to the Word,
which you may read especially in the 119. Psalm, in his prizing the Word, v.
71. The Law of thy mouth is better to me than thousands of gold and silver. In
his love to the Word, v. 97. O how love I thy Law! it is my meditation all the
day. In his desires, v. 82. My eyes fail for thy Word, saying, When will thou
comfort me? And v. 20. My soul breaks for the longing that it has to thy
judgments at all times. In his hope, v. 81. My soul faints for thy
salvation, but I hope in thy Word. In his delight, v. 162. I rejoice at thy
Word as one that finds great spoil.

2. Labor to keep the Word of God; let the Word of God abide in you; do as
David, Psalm. 119. 11. Thy Word have I hid in my heart, that I might not sin
against thee. And take Solomon's advice and encouragement, Prove. 4. 20, 21, 22.
My Son attend unto my words, and incline thine ear unto my sayings; Let them
not depart from thine eyes, keep them in the midst of thine heart; for they are
life to those that find them, and health to all their flesh. There are three
things in the Word which you should especially keep:

1. The Truths of the Word. 2. The Commandments of the Word. 3. The Promises of
the Word.
1. Keep the Truths of the Word; buy the Truth whatever pains it cost you; but
never sell the Truth, whatever you may get by it: Seek for the Truth as for
silver, and dig for it as for hidden treasures: And having found it, keep it as
a treasure; do not part with it upon any terms. If you make shipwreck of faith
and a good conscience, you will make shipwreck of your souls upon the rocks of
perdition and destruction, and be drowned in the Ocean of Gods wrath: Therefore
you must earnestly contend for the Faith, that is the Doctrine of Faith, the
Truths of the Word once delivered unto the Saints, Jude 4. You will have
attempts made upon you by the Agents of Hell, by the Instruments of the Devil,
to rob you of the Truth, and to give you damnable errors instead of soul
saving Truths: But as you desire the salvation of your souls, hold fast the
Truths of the Word; get on the girdle of Truth; let the loins of your mind be
girt about with the Truth, Ephesians. 6. 14. Let not the Truth hang loose in your
minds, lest it be snatched away from you, but get the Truth girt; get it
fastened and fixed; get it rooted and riveted, that you may not be wavering like
a wave of the Sea tossed to and fro with every wind of Doctrine; labor for a
mind established in the Truths of the Word.

2. Keep the Commandments of the Word; labor that your hearts may be cast into
the mould of this Word; get the Law written upon the Tables of your heart as
with a Pen of Iron, and point of a Diamond; and let your life be a fair Copy of
the Law; let the Precepts of the Word be exemplified in your conversations; let
all men know what God requires by your obedience; shine as lights in the
places where you live, that others seeing your good works, may glorify your
Father which is in Heaven.

3. Keep the Promises of the Word; look upon the Promises as your great
Christian charter, as your choice treasure, as your storehouse, where are laid
up the most rich provisions. Acquaint your selves with the Promises of the
Word, and apply them; lay up the Promises in your heart, and make use of them
daily; plead them at the Throne of Grace, fetch supplies from them, feed upon
them, live upon them, delight your selves in them, go to them for strength when
weak, for recovery when sick, for quickening when dull, for softning when hard,
for enlargement when straightened, for succor when tempted, for cordials when
fainting, for comforts when troubled. Thus for your second duty: Young men
labor that the Word of God may abide in you.

SECT. V.
3. YOung men, labor to overcome the wicked one. By the wicked one we are to
understand the Devil, who is called the wicked one by way of eminency, because
the Devil was the first wicked one, and is the most wicked one, and is, the
cause of all, or most of the wickedness in the world; he drew our first Parents
unto the first sin, and he has a hand in the greatest sins that are committed
by their Posterity, and therefore all the wicked are called the children of the
Devil, Joh. 8. 44. Ye are of your Father the Devil, and the lusts of your
Father ye will do. Then this wicked one is overcome, when his temptations to
sin are resisted and repelled.

Young men, labor to overcome the wicked one. The Devil is very busy about
young men.

1. To prejudice them against Gospel obedience. 2. To draw them into the
commission of sin.
I shall give you advice how you may overcome the wicked one's prejudices, and
how you may overcome the wicked one's temptations.

1. The wicked one would prejudice you, and so keep you from the obedience of
the Gospel; and here his prejudices which he would raise in the minds of young
men, are

1. Against Professors. 2. Against the Profession of the Gospel.
1. The wicked one does endeavor to raise prejudices against the Professors
of the Gospel in young and tender minds, to keep them from Gospel-obedience, by
representing Professors unto them.

1. As rude and illiterate. 2. As foolish and unwise. 3. As proud and singular.
4. As factious and rebellious. 5. As hypocritical and wicked.
1. The wicked one does represent the Professors of the Gospel to young ones,
as rude and illiterate that it was first preached by ignorant and unlearned
Fishermen, and since entertained by none but such; that the greatest Scholars,
and most learned Doctors in the world, reject and slight it: If the Gospel were
so elegible, would it not be more entertained by the learned? Who can judge so
well of the worth thereof as they? That you may overcome this prejudice, know,

1. That the Gospel began to be preached by the Lord Jesus Christ, the wisdom
of the Father, who had more knowledge, than all the Doctors and learned men in
the world, who came down from Heaven to reveal the Gospel unto men, and was the
greatest Prophet that ever lived upon the face of the earth.

2. That the Apostles, though Fishermen at the first, and illiterate in regard
of humane learning, yet that they received from Jesus Christ extraordinary
gifts of the Holy Ghost, whereby they attained more knowledge than all the
writings of men could teach them; and that the Doctrine both of Christ, and
which they preached was confirmed by many miracles, whereby it is manifest that
it came from God.

3. That there have been, and at this day are many learned men, which have, and
do receive the Gospel; I might give instance in many learned Fathers, who had
knowledge in all sort of learning, and by their writings have given evidence to
the world, that they were zealous defenders of the faith of the Gospel; and all
along unto this day, there are as learned men as any in the world, who are
Ministers of the Gospel.

4. That if many learned men do slight the Go^pel, it is through Gods just
judgment upon them, who lean to their own understanding, whom he gives up to
a reprobate mind, as not needing their learning to defend his Truths.

5. That if the greatest number of Professors are ignorant and unlearned in
regard of humane learning, yet they have divine learning; they are not skilled
in the writings of men, but they have skill in the Scriptures; they are not
taught by men, but they are taught by the Spirit of God; they do not understand
the mysteries of nature, but they understand the mysteries of the Kingdom of
Heaven: Unto which I might add, that it is for Gods glory to make choice of
such persons who will give him the whole praise of their instruction and
salvation.

2. The wicked one does represent the Professors of the Gospel, as foolish and
unwise; that it is for want of cunning that they do not take any course to
thrive in the world; that it is for want of wit they deny themselves the
profits, and pleasures, and dignities which they might have in a sinful way.

That you may overcome this prejudice, know,

1. That the wicked of the world are the veryest fools, and above all others
the most unwise: Are they not fools that wound themselves by sin, that wound
their consciences? which is worse than wounding their flesh; that run headlong
to their own ruins, and are the cause of their own eternal destruction? Are
not they foolish and unwise that endeavor to please their flesh, more than to
please God? that choose gold before grace, Earth before Heaven? that when they
are capable of salvation and eternal happiness, do neglect and refuse it,
preferring the good things of this life before it, which they will certainly,
and they know not how soon they may be deprived of.

2. That sincere Professors of Religion have above all others the greatest
wisdom: None are so wise as those that make their peace with God; that get
their feet out of Satan's snare; that flee from the wrath to come; that choose
God for their portion; that deny themselves some sensual satisfactions, that
they may obtain eternal pleasures: Those are the most wise, that are wise unto
salvation; that have the wit to thrive in grace, that make provision for
eternity.

3. The wicked one does represent Professors as proud and singular; that they
are a company of selfconceited persons, that think themselves wiser than the
whole world besides; that they affect singularity, and are needlessly precise,
and make the way to Heaven narrower than it is.

That you may overcome this prejudice, know,

1. That sincere Professors, of all others, are the most humble persons; they
have the highest esteem of God, but they have the lowest esteem of themselves.
Indeed they have high designs, they are very ambitious, they cannot be content
with earthly riches, and honors, but they must be Kings and Princes; they are
ambitious of being made Sons and Daughters of God, and Heirs of the Kingdom of
Heaven; this is a lawful ambition, but yet withal they retain the lowest
thoughts of themselves, and look upon themselves as unworthy of the least mercy.

2. That sincere Professors are indeed singular and precise, but they do not
affect more than what God does command, and more than what is necessary unto
salvation; they do not make the way narrower than God has made it. Our Savior
tells us, that strait is the gate, and narrow is the way that leads to
life, and few there be that find it, Mat. 7. 14. They dare not blot that verse
out of the Bible, lest God should blot their names out of his Book; they dare
not do as the most do, lest they go to the same place of endless misery,
whither the most are hastening; they know they must be singular, otherwise they
cannot be sincere; they must walk in the narrow way, and strive to enter in at
the strait gate, or else they shall never be admitted into the New Jerusalem.

4. The wicked one does represent Professors as factious and rebellious: That
they are a company of seditious and lawless persons, that they are disobedient
to the Civil Magistrate whom God has set over them.

That you may overcome this prejudice, know,

1. That none are more obedient unto the Civil Magistrate in lawful commands,
than sincere Professors, because they know if in such things they disobey man,
they do more displease God; and therefore that this calumny of the Devil, which
was the false accusation of our Savior, that he ^orbad to pay tribute to
Caesar.

2. That indeed when the Civil Magistrate does command any thing unlawful and
repugnant to the Law of God, that then they think they are bound to obey God
their supreme King, rather than any man living on the earth; then they choose
rather to displease the greatest man, than to wound their own consciences.

3. That if when unlawful things are commande^ by the Civil Magistrate, though
they cannot, they dare not obey actively, yet they will obey passively by
submitting m^ekly and patiently unto the penalties of their Laws for their
supposed crimes.

5. The wicked one does represent Professors as hypocritical and wicked; that
they make a fair show, but they have rotten hearts; that they are all a company
of hypocrites, and secretly wicked, and would not stick at any sin upon
occasion more than others who make no profession, which he would induce them to
believe, because some here proved hypocrites, and fallen quite away, who have
made as high a profession as any, and therefore that they are all alike:
Moreover that some whom all account to have been sincere, have committed as
great sins as the most wicked on occasion, as David's murder and adultery; and
then Satan does employ his instruments, some to invent and raise slanders on
many sincere persons, especially the most faithful Ministers of the Gospel; and
others to divulge them, and endeavors what he can that all might believe
them, that young on^s especially may hereby be prejudiced against all
Professors, and by consequence be kept from obedience unto the Gospel.

That you may overcome this prejudice, know,

1. That i^ is very irrational to conclude, that all Professors of the Gospel
are hypocrites, because some are so. I believe you will not be kept from taking
money, because some have proved to be brass, silvered over: Though all be not
gold that glistereth, yet all gold glistereth: The counterfeit of sincerity i^
an argument that there is sincerity; and if the falling away of some does
evidence hypocrisy, the standing and perseverance of others in the ways of
God to their lives end, does evidence that they are sincere.

2. If some that are sincere have fallen grossly, yet let me tell you, that
there are but few sincere ones, whom God does suffer all their days to fall
into such sins. Young Joseph had opportunity, inticements, secrecy to commit
adultery wi^h his Mistress, and yet he stood; he did not dare to do that great
wickedness and sin against God: And I believe there are thousands of sincere
and humble Christians; that would choose rather to be torn to a thousand pieces,
than to commit that, or any other gross sin: It was a noble Christian spirit in
that young man, who when enticed by a Harlot to commit adult^ry, and he could
not defend himself with his hands, they being tied, bit off his tongue, that
the pain thereof might quench all natural desires aften the pleasure which she
most obscenoly provoked him unto.

3. That such of Gods children that have fallen into sin, have not fallen
often^ have not layn long; have not lived in a course of sin, have bitterly
bewailed it, been deeply humbled for it^; and as God has permitted this, that
backsliders might not d^spair of mercys that all might see where their strength
lies, not in themselves, but in God; and that they all might stand upon their
watch, and take heed of dallying with temptations; so those persons have risen
again by repentance, and been more careful in their walking afterward.

4. Since the report of some sins which are fastened upon some Professors and
Ministers through the cunning of the Devil to prejudice people against the
ways of God, are mere lies, and slanders, and abominable falsehoods; therefore
you should take heed of harkening to such reports, and believing them without
sufficient proof. It is the rule of the Apostle, not to receive an accusation
against an Elder, but before two or three witnesses, 1 Timothy 5. 19.

2. The wicked one does endeavor to raise prejudice in the minds of young
ones, to keep them from obedience to the Gospel, against the way that
Professors walk in.

Representing it 1. As an uncertain Way. 2. As a difficult Way. 3. As an
unpleasant Way. 4. As a reproachful Way. 5. As a dangerous Way.

(1.) The wicked one does represe^t the Way of the Gospel that Professors walk
in as an uncertain Way. That Professors are divided; some say this is the way,
and some say that is the way; and therefore he would persuade young ones to
hold on in their course of sin, until all sides are agreed, and then let them
come into the way.

To overcome this prejudice of the wicked one, know,

1. That you must never think to come into the ways of God, nor obtain the
Kingdom of Heaven, if you stay till all are agreed, because this is not likely
ever to be in this world. If you should resolve not to eat till all the Clocks
in the City should strike twelve together, you must resolve to starve and die:
So if you will resolve not to come into Gods ways, till all Professors are
agreed, you must resolve to die in your sins; whatever uncertainty there be
apprehended in the way to Heaven, be sure the way of sin you are walking in is
the way to Hell.

2. That there is a necessity as the Apostle speaks, that there should be
heresies, that they which are approved might be made manifest, 1 Cor. 11. 19.
There are two ways whereby God does try his people, and make manifest their
sincerity: One, by persecutions; when persecutions arise, many hypocrites drop
off, and flinch away, and leave the sincere to bear the brunt: The other is by
Error and Herefie; and here some hypocrites that have held out under some
kind of persecutions, do fall away, and drink in the poison of damnable
errors, unto the destruction of their souls; but the sincere hold fast the
Truth, and it is impossible that they should be deceived, because of Christ's
promise, undertaking, and the indwelling of the Spirit of Christ in them.

3. That though the great disagreement is between the orthodox and heretical,
yet there may be a disagreement between the orthodox, the sincere amongst
themselves, but it is only in circumstantials of Religion, not in Fundamentals,
and all of them be in the same way to Heaven, and meet at the Journeys end,
where they shall disagree no more.

4. That the way of God is certain, the uncertainty is from our own blindness.

Qu. But what shall poor ignorant persons do, that have but weak judgments,
mean parts, to understand which is the right way?

Answ. 1. I answer, First, that such are not so often, and so foully mistaken,
as those who have great parts, and lean to their own understand^ngs.

2. Let such therefore be humble, and keep close to the Ministry and
Ordinances of Christ's appointment, that they may not be led out of the way,
when they break over this hedge they will wande^ in the mist and darkness, and
hardly find the way again.

3. Let them apply the Promises which God hat^ made of pouring out his Spirit
upon simple one^ Prove. 1. 23. and of leading them by his Spirit into all truth,
Joh. 18. 13.

4. Let them do and practice the will of God which they know, and they shall be
established in the knowledge of the doctrine of Christ, John 7. 17.

(2.) The wicked one does represent the way tha^ Professors walk in as a
difficult way: There are many hard sayings that they cannot hear, there ar^
heavy yoaks which they cannot bear; there are difficult duties required which
they cannot perf^rm he would persuade young ones that they will nev^ be able to
walk in such a difficult way, therefore they had better hold on in the more
easy wa^ of sin.

To overcome this prejudice of the wicked on^ know,

1. That the most difficult things are the most excellent things, Pulchra quae
difficilia: though it b^ a difficult way, it is the way of God, not the way
(...) the Devil; it is a clean way, not the way of wickedness; it is the way to
the Crown, to the Kingdom not the Road that leads to Hell, and therefore,

2. That it is a necessary way: it is necessary tha^ you come into this way, if
you would be happy, you would escape eternal misery.

3. That the difficulty is not from the way, b^ from your selves, from your own
lusts, which a^ the weights that hang about you, and makes the way to seem
difficult and tedious to you: lay aside those weights, and the sin that does
easily beset you, and you may not only walk, but run with easiness in this
race, Heb. 12. 12.

4. That though it be a difficult way to flesh and blood, yet it is easy with
God to help you, and he has promised to help you, to write his Law in your
hearts, to remove your natural enmity and indisposition, and to give you
suitableness of spirit to his Law, and to cause you to walk in his Statutes,
and keep his Judgments, and do them, Jer. 31. 34. Ezekiel. 36. 27.

5. That the greatest difficulty is at the first: when you have accustomed your
necks to his yoke, and your backs to his burden, you will acknowledge that his
yoke is easy, and his burden is light.

(3.) The wick^d one does represent the way that Professors walk in as an
unpleasant way: he would persuade young on^s, that they must never look for a
pleasant hour any more, if they will be religious; that their laughter must be
turned into weeping, and their joy into heaviness: that there is required so
much repenting and mourning, that they will never endure it.

To overcome this prejudice of the wicked one, know,

1. That indeed you must repent of sin, if you would be saved, and your sorrow
in some measure must last so long as your lives last, because of the lasting of
sin.

2. That you must mourn for sin here, or else you must burn for sin in Hell,
where you will mourn without measure, without end, and to no purpose.

3. That you cannot avoid sorrow, if you should continue in the way of sin,
pride crossed, the world failing, afflictions unexpected coming upon you, which
are born with cheerfulness by the children of God, may be heartbreaking to
you; one time or other you will have sorrows in a sinful course; and is it not
better to have godly sorrow which works repentance unto salvation, than the
sorrow of the world and lust which works death and destruction?

4. That if you can obtain a kindly sorrow for sin, which is a sweet melting of
the heart with the sense of Gods love, you will find more pleasure to your
inward man than ever you did in all the delights of sin.

5. That you are not required in this way to throw away all your comforts in
your creature-enjoyments, but only to deny your selves the excess and
inordinacy, which where it is taken, breeds more bitterness in the
disappointment, than ever it yielded sweetness unto any: You may take a
subordinate comfort in friends, and habitation, and food, and the like, and
herein more real comfort through the sweetning of these things with Gods
blessing and love, than ever you could find in these things before.

6. That though your sinful delights must be denied, yet God has promised
other delights in exchange, he will give you spiritual delights: If you walk
closely and strictly, and do not wound your selves by your sins, you may have
such sweet peace and refreshing joys in the light of Gods countenance, and
sense of Gods love, in communion with God here in his Ordinances, and in hopes
of the beatifical vision, and full fruition of him in glory hereafter in
heaven, as have never entered into the heart of natural men to conceive.

7. Whatever sorrow you have for sin now, and whatever griefs for afflictions
which in this life you are exposed unto, yet consider that it is but for a
little while: Yet a little while, and these sorrows will be turned into joys,
weeping may endure for ae night, but joy comes in the morning, Psalm. 30. 5.
and if you sow in tears, you shall reap in joy, if you go forth weeping,
bearing precious seed, you shall doubtless return again rejoicing, bringing
your sheaves with you, Psalm. 126. 5, 6. at least when you come to heaven, you
shall have rest, in the New Jerusalem all tears shall be wiped away from your
eyes, when you enter into your Masters joy, then all sorrow shall come forth
and depart, sorrow and sighing shall flee away and never return more, your joy
in Heaven will be full and eternal; and should the unpleasantness of the way
discourage you from coming into it?

(4.) The wicked one does represent the way of the Gospel which Professors walk
in as a reproachful way; he would discourage young ones from this way by the
scorns and divisions they are like to meet with, that they shall be scoffed at,
and reproached by their companions.

To overcome this prejudice of the wicked one, know,

1. That they are the most vile and contemptible persons in the World that
reproach and deride Gods people, and it is as ridiculous a thing for them to do
it, as to laugh at the shining of the Sun: It is as if black, deformed, crooked
persons should laugh and deride at those who are most fair and beautiful, and
therefore their reproaches and derisions are not in the least to be valued.

2. That such as are reproached for Religion by men, are most highly honored
by God and Christ, he esteems them as the most excellent persons here, and he
will own and crown them in the face of the world at the last day.

(5.) And lastly, the wicked one does represent the way that Professors walk in
as a dangerous way: he would persuade young ones, if they come into this way
they will run themselves upon great hazards and dangers, they may lose their
Estate, they may lose their Liberty, they may lose their Life.

To overcome this prejudice of the wicked one, know,

1. In reference to Estate, which you may lose, if you should lose Estate
(which you ought to reckon upon) in the way of God, 1. Possibly you may not
keep your Estate in a way of sin; some lusts may be as expensive to you as
others Consciences are unto them; and if 2. You have less of the world, you may
not have the less comfort; if the stream fail, you may fetch comfort from the
Fountain. 3. None can take away the treasure of grace in your heart, nor
deprive you of the treasure of glory in heaven, and whatever you lose of wealth
for Christ's sake, will have an abundant recompense in that which is of an
higher nature.

2. In reference to Liberty; 1. That though men may cast your Bodies into a
Prison on Earth, yet they cannot cast your Souls into the Prison of Hell. 2.
Though they may take away your civil liberty, yet they cannot take away your
spiritual liberty and privileges; they may shut friends out from seeing you,
but they cannot shut you out of the presence of God, nor keep you from the
Throne of grace.

3. In reference unto Life: 1. That though: men may destroy the Body, yet they
cannot destroy the Soul; and 2. you must dye, as was shown before, and you
cannot die upon a better score: unto which I may add, that I believe none in
the world dye with more peace and joy than those that dye for the testimony of
Jesus, and of a good Conscience. My dear young ones, labor thus to overcome
all the prejudices of the wicked one, whereby he would keep you from coming
into the ways of God, and yielding obedience unto the Gospel, that is the
First.

SECT. VI.
2. Labor to overcome the Temptations of the Wicked one, whereby he would draw
you to the commission of sin.

Sin in its own nature is so black and odious, that if your eyes were but
opened to see what dishonor it reflecteth upon the pure and holy God, and how
it defiles your own Souls once made after the image of God; you could not
choose but loath and abhor it, and with hatred you would fly from it as from
a Pestilential disease, or venomous Serpent, and no arguments would persuade
you to commit it, or give it any room or harbor in your hearts; therefore the
wicked one does use the greatest art and cunning to paint and color over sin
with fair glosses, that the monstrous nature and deadly poison of it might be
hid from your eyes and knowledge.

And as God has his methods in the conversion of young ones, and uses many
arguments by his Ministers and Spirit, to persuade them unto the practice of
Religion: So Satan has his methods and arguments to draw away young ones from
God unto the commission of sin, and continuance therein.

1. The first work of God upon young Converts, is Illumination of the
Understanding, he opens their eyes to see their sin and misery, the way of
salvation by Christ, the beauty and excellency of holiness; so on the contrary,
Satan the wicked one, called the God of this World, does endeavor to blind
the eyes of young ones, to keep them in the dark, that the light of the
glorious Gospel might not shine upon them, to discover either their sin or
their Savior; and he endeavors to stir up in them a hatred of the light,
that so they might sin without reproof, or control.

2. The second work of God upon young Converts, is Contrition, he awakens their
Consciences, fills them with fears and terrors through apprehension of his
anger, and the dreadful wrath that hangs over them, and they know not how soon
may fall down upon them, and sink them into the lowest Hell for their sin, that
hereby they being terrified, may apply themselves without any delay unto the
Lord Jesus Christ, the only Savior of mankind: So on the contrary, the wicked
one does labor to still and calm, and quiet the Consciences of young ones
under the guilt of their sins; to lull them fast asleep, and keep them from all
disturbances, from an unquiet Conscience, which if awakened, would plead the
cause of God against sin.

3. A third work of God upon young Converts, is a powerful bending and
enclining the Will to embrace Jesus Christ as their Savior and Advocate, and
to resign up it self in full compliance with his will in every thing: So the
wicked one does endeavor to (...) the wills of young ones against Christ and
the Law of God; he does what he can to corrupt and depr^ve it, and to draw it
unto a full bent and resolution for sin.

4. A fourth work of God upon young Converts, is upon their heart and
affections, whereby he draws them and engages them for himself: So on the
contrary, the wicked one is very busy in tampering with the affections of
young ones; and as God does use arguments in effecting a gracious change upon
young Converts, so the wicked one does use arguments to persuade them unto the
practice of si; which arguments are his temptations.

Young men, labor to overcome the Temptations of the Wicked one, and that I
may help you herein, I shall

1. Set before you as in a glass the chief Temptations whereby the wicked one
does draw young men unto sin, and endeavor to arm you against those
Temptations, that you may overcome.

2. Caution you against the particular sins of Youth, which the wicked one
would draw you unto, and then shut up my Discourse with a word of Encouragement.

1. Concerning the Temptations whereby the wicked one does endeavor to draw
Young men unto sin. And here I shall speak of the Five most ordinary
Temptations whereby young ones are drawn unto sin.

1. By the delight and pleasure of sin. 2. By the glory and repute of sin. 3.
By the utility and advantage of sin. 4. By the pretended smallness of sin. 5.
By the hopes of future repentance.
(1.) The first Temptation whereby the wicked one draws young men unto the
commission of sin is by the delight and pleasure of it; and here he is very
cunning in the management of this temptation, that it may take effect.

1. He labors to hide from the eyes of young men those pure, spiritual, and
more excellent pleasures, those heavenly, ravishing, and far transcendent
delights and joys which are to be found in God both here, and chiefly
hereafter; persuading them, that the ways of God are irksome and unpleasant,
which is furthered by their own experience, they find them to be so to them
upon a little trial, for want of a spiritual appetite to relish that real
sweetness which is in them; for as Angels cannot relish carnal pleasures,
because they have no carnal senses, so neither can carnal persons relish
spiritual pleasures, because they have no spiritual senses.

2. He labors to hide from them the sting and bitterness of sin, the sorrow
and vexation which it will certainly produce in the conclusion; he covers the
hook out of their sight, labors to divert their thoughts from all serious
considerations of the gall and wormwood that is in the bottom of the cup.

3. He represents the delights of sin as most sweet and satisfying; as present
and at hand, and easy to be had without difficulty and labor; and sometimes
as secret too, which no mortal eye can take notice of.

4. He joyneth in with the lusts of their hearts, with which he has a secret
correspondence, and proposes such objects unto them as are most suitable and
desirable. It is by the pleasure and delight of sin that most young men are
bewitched and persuaded to the commission of it. It was by the pleasantness of
the forbidden fruit that this Old Serpent enticed our first Parents to eat
thereof, and hereby it is that he does entice their posterity.

Dear young men, labor to overcome this temptation of the wicked one, by the
delight and pleasure of sin, by taking into your most serious thoughts these
few Considerations.

1. Consider, that all the pleasures of sin are low, mean, empty, thin,
unsatisfying pleasures; they are sensual and br^itish: A beast can find (...)
pleasure in the most of them than you can do, who are capable of higher
pleasures; these delights may please your sensual appe^te, but they cannot
satisfy your rational souls, they may satiate and glut the senses, but they
cannot content the heart: The Devil and lust may promise full satisfaction and
contentment, if you will commit such and such sins, but they always fall short
in the performance. I would ask these three questions of the most luxurious
persons. 1. Whether ever they found so much pleasure in any sin as they
expected and desired? 2. Whether the choicest of their pleasures have not in a
short time brought a weariness and trouble upon their spirits? 3. Whether this
weariness and trouble has not been more irksome and grievous to them, than
their sensual pleasures have been pleasing and delightful? yea let me add a
fourth: If amongst the choicest and chiefest of their delights in which thev
find most sweetness, they had but one delight without change and variety,
whether that delight would not quickly lose its nature, and prove a torment to
them? If they were bound always to eat, or continually to drink. or without
intermission to be always in the act of adultery, would not this be more
bitter than sweet? These pleasures are unsatisfying; the soul can be satisfied
with nothing beneath the enjoyment of God, by whom, and for whom it was made.

2. Consider the shortness of these pleasures: The Apostle calls them
pleasures of sin for a season, Heb. 11. 25. And as he says of some meats, that
they perish in the using, Col. 2. 22. so some pleasures they perish in the
enjoying; the enjoyment of them does put a period unto them; and those that are
most durable, they quickly flit away as a cloud or vapor, which if not blown
away by the wind, they vanish of their own accord: If the stormy wind of
outward affliction do not puff out the candle of wicked men's joy, yet the days
of old age are drawing on, in which they shall say, They have no pleasure in
them, Eccles. 12. 1. Death be sure will sweep them all away; there will be no
sinful pleasures in the other world.

3. Consider the sting of the pleasures of sin, which is not in the mouth, but
in the tail: Grief and wounds, and piercing sorrows, will be the issue of sin:
Sin has a far differing aspect in the temptation before it is committed, and
in the reflection after it is committed, especially when they begin to be
plagued for it: In the temptation sin lookerh fair and beautiful, and with a
pleasant countenance; but in the r^flection it is black, grizly and terrible:
Hence it is that wicked men who can delight themselves so much in the
fore-thoughts of sin when they are enticed unto it, yet cannot endure to look
back on sin with fore-thoughts of the account they must give unto God for it.
Sin, though never so pleasant, will in a short time produce more bitterness a
thousandfold, than ever it did yield sweetness. Besides, the lashes and stings
of conscience which sensualists sometimes have in their secret retirements; how
are they (if any thing awakened) at their latter end even utterly consum^d with
terrors: But O the horrible anguish that will seize upon their spirits so soon
as they are separated from their bodies! O the tearings that they will feel of
the never-dying Worm, when they are clapped in the dark dungeon of Hell, where
they will be under the immediate impression of the wrath of the sin-revenging
God! If sensualists did but believe, and seriously consider the pains which
they must endure in body and soul for ever for their sinful pleasures, it would
quench their desires after them. If the Drunkard did see Dives; instead of his
bowls and goblets of rich wine, begging for a drop of water to cool his tongue,
surely they would sooner drink poison, than drink unto excess: I^ filthy
forn^cators did but know what dreadful horror does now possess and fill the
parted souls of those which have lived in that sin; surely they would rather
take a Toad into their bosoms, than embrace the bosom of an Harlot.

(2.) The second Temptation whereby the wicked one draws young men unto the
commission of sin, is, by the glory and repute of it. Not long after our
Savior was baptized, he was led into the wilderness, and tempted by the wicked
one, and amongst other temptations, this was one, the discovery and proffer
which he made unto him of the glory of the world, if he would fall down and
worship him, Luke 4. 5, 6, 7. And with the proposals of glory and repute in a
way of sin he does persuade young men to the practice thereof; in the
management of which Temptation,

1. He does represent unto them the ways of God as reproachful, the service of
God as ridiculous, the people of God as the most contemptible persons under the
Sun, as base, ignoble, and mean-spirited people; hiding the high dignity and
honor the Lord has conferred upon them.

2. He covers the shame and disgrace of sin, he does what he can to hide from
their consideration the filthiness and loathsome nature of it, and what
confusion of face will be the consequent of sin at the last.

3. He puts a glorious attire upon sin, and painteth it over with such fair
colors, and represents it unto them with such a varnish of brightness and
beauty, that it seems to them very desirable. He uses many arts to bring sin
into credit, and employeth his cursed Agents to commend sin with the highest
Elogiums, as if it were a noble thing, and worthy of great repute, to encourage
young men by acclamations of bravery of spirit, when they aspire to be wicked
in a high degree.

4. And so fourthly, joining in with the lust of Pride and a desire of esteem,
he does provoke them to do any thing which may make for their repute.

But dear young ones, labor to overcome this temptation of the wicked one,
whereby he would draw you to sin by the glory and repute of it; which that you
may do, consider,

1. That sin has no repute, except it be amongst the vilest persons, whose
esteem thereof does render it so much the more odious and abominable.

2. That the Holiness of God is his most glorious Attribute, and therefore sin
which is directly opposite hereunto can have no real glory in it, therefore sin
is the only abominable thing which he hates, therefore he lightly esteems,
he looks upon afar off, he scorneth and despises, he loatheth and abhors
all the workers of iniquity.

3. That the honor of sin is empty, vain, windy, short, transitory, like the
crackling of thorns under a pot, it soon vanishes away, and will quickly end
in disgrace, in shame and confusion.

4. That sin is matter of the greatest shame in the world, as it dishonors
God, defiles the soul, blotteth the name, enslaveth the whole man unto the
black Prince of darkness; and will bring upon such as live in the practice of
it, contempt and scorn at the appearance of Jesus Christ.

(3.) The third Temptation whereby the wicked one does draw young men unto the
commission of i^, is ^y the utility and advantage of it: He persuades them
that such and such sins will bring in much profit and (...) unto them; and so
joining in with the dust of covetousness and worldly-mindedness, he draws
them unto sin. Hereby it was that Achan was tempted to take the silver, and
gold, and Babylonish garment, which God had expressly forbidden, Josh. 7. 21.
Hereby it was that Geh^zi was temp^ed to take the Talents and change of raiment
of Naam^, which his Master had refused, 2 King. 5. 20, 23. Hereby Ahab was
tempted to permit the cuting off of Naboth for his Vineyard, 1 King. 21. 4, 5,
etc, Hereby Judas was tempted to betray his Master for thirty pieces of silver,
M^th. 26. 15. Hereby Demas was tempted to forsake the Truth, and cleave to this
present world, 2 Timothy 4. 10. And here the wicked one does represent a great
convenience to themselves and families in getting earthly gain^ whatever sin
they commit to effect it: And he does sometimes persuade them of a necessity of
these gains, that they cannot live without them; and a necessity of such and
such sins, as lying, overreaching, oppression, and the like, without which
they could not thrive.

But young men, take heed of being overcome by the wicked one here, of being
taken with the bait of profit and worldly advantage. Consider,

1. What the Apostle says, 1 Timothy 6. 10, 11. They that will be rich fall into
temptation and a snare, and into many foolish and hurtful lusts, which drown
them in perdition and destruction: For the love of money is the root of all
evil, which while some have co^eted after, they have erred from the faith, and
pierced themselves through with many sorrows. And then think with your selves
whether there be a convenience in unlawful gains: Is it convenient to be
entangled and drowned? Is it convenient to make shiowrack of faith, and to make
shipwreck of the soul? Is it convenient to wound the conscience with guilt, and
pierce the heart with many sorrows? Are these things (the attendants of sin by
this temptation) more gainful or more hurtful? Is it conv^nient to steal a
Cloak which is infected with the Plague, and will bring death almost as soon as
warmth? Is it convenient to gain any thing which shall be mingled with Gods
curse, a far worse evil than that of the Plague? Consider, is there nothing
lost by sinful gains? What think you of the favor of God, which is b^tter than
life; of the peace of conscience, which is a continual feast; of grace here,
and glory hereafter, the choicest treasures? Can any sinful gain our-ballance
that which is lost by sin?

2. Moreover as to the plea of necessity, consider that most of those
necessities which the worldlings suppose they have of these things, are created
n^ties, created by themselves, but fancied necessities; they are necessities
only to satisfy the lust, not for the stay and support of life. Nature craveth
but very little for necessity; what nec^ssity is there of getting so much to
lay out upon superfluities? what need so much to lay up for posterity? and
would not the Lord supply necessities, if you kept within the bounds of duty,
and cast your care upon him? has not he given the life, and would not he giv^
meat? has not he given the body, and would not he give raiment? does not he
take care of irrational creatures? and would not he take care of you? has not
he promised? and is he not faithful?

But what necessity is there of sin, to get the good things of this life? Duty
is necessary to all, but sin is never necessary to any. There is one thing
necessary, to get an interest in Christ, and lay up the treasure in Heaven; but
it is not necessary to commit any sin to get provisions for the body and
family; yea, it is dangerous and destructive: Sin, whatever necessity is
pretended, will bring ruin and damnation upon such as live in the practice of
it: Better starve the body, than damn the soul; better the body should drop
presently into the pit of the grave through want, than that the soul should
drop into the pit of Hell through sin: A man had better be without meat or
drink, without house or friend; yea, he had better lose his life a thousand
times, if it were possible, than to live in the practice of any known sin,
though all these might be preserved hereby; because the gain of all these, yea
of the whole world, cannot countervail the loss of the soul, Matthew. 16. 26. But
who can plead such necessity as this for sin?

(4.) The fourth Temptation whereby the wicked one does draw young men unto the
commission of sin, is, by the pretended smalness of it. As Lot said of Zoar, Is
it not a little one? they are but small faults; if it were blasphemy, or
murder, or adultery, or drunkenness, or the like heinous sins, there might be
more scruple; but they are but little sins, small ones, and not many, a little
wantonness, lying, and the like.

But dear young men, be not overcome by the pretense of the smalness of sin,
considering,

1. That no sin is little or small in its own nature; Though some sins have
more venom in them than others, yet all are of a poisonous nature: Some sins
are greater, but all are great; all are the breaches of the Law of the great,
the infinite Majesty of Heaven and Earth; and that which has an infinite
object cannot be small. Est eadem ratio rotundi in nummulo exiguo, quae est in
magno, there is the same reason of roundness in a small piece of money, as in
the greatest: and there is the same reason of sin in small sins, that there is
in the most heinous, because it is committed against the same Law of the same
God. See Jam. 2. 10, 11. Wh^soever shall keep the whole Law, and yet offend in
one point, he is guilty of all. For he that said, Do not commit adultery, said
also, Do not kill. Now if thou commit no adultery, yet if thou kill, thou art
become a transgressor of the Law. Though you should refrain some sins, yet if
you venture to commit others, though they be less sins, and allow your selves
therein, you break the Law of the same God, and are under the guilt and power
of sin, and as equally liable to the punishment of sin, as those which live in
the practice of those which are most notorious: And let me tell you, that it is
as hard to get a pardon for those sins which you call small ones, as for the
greatest; God can as easily pardon the one as the other; the smallest sins
require the infinite mercy of God, and the infinite merits of Christ for their
pardon; therefore no sin is in it self small.

2. Consider, is the thing but small which you are tempted unto? this in some
respect aggravateth the offense, if you yield to the temptation: A man that
will forfeit the favor of his Prince, or friend, for a small thing, it argues
a great slighting of their favor: So the least wilful sin argues a great
slighting of the favor of God, which hereby is forfeited. Thou sellest thy
people for naught, and do not increase thy wealth by their price, says the
Psalmist, when he apprehended that God took little regard to his people, Psalm.
44. 12. So may I say on the contrary, when you will offend God for a small
thing, you do, as it were, sell your God for naught, and what advantage will
you get hereby? It was the saying of our Savior, Mat. 24. 26. What shall it
profit a man if be gain the whole world, and lose his own soul? And what can a
man give in exchange for his soul? Much more may I say; What shall it profit a
man, if he should gain the whole world, and lose his God? and what can a man
give in exchange for God, who is the chief good, and in whom does consist our
chiefest happiness? But if you will lose or exchange your God for naught, for a
trifle, by little sins, this, as it argues great folly; so it is a great
aggravation of sin.

3. Consider that the least sin which you allow your selves in the practice of,
is sufficient to damn your souls. A small leak in a ship unstopped, will
quickly let in water enough to drown the ship, though not so soon as the
greatest breach. A prick with a pin in the heart, will as surely kill a man, as
a wound with a sword: So the least sin unrepented of, will as surely shipwreck
and destroy the soul, as the greatest and most heinous osfences. The Law
curses and condemns every one that continues not in all things which are
written in the Book of the Law to do them, Gal. 3. 10. And such as lie under
the curse cannot inherit the blessing. Let not any think then to get to Heaven,
who allow themselves in the practice of the least sins; who make no conscience
of petty oaths, officious lies, idling away their precious time, and the like,
which are accounted small and trivial things by the men of the world.

4. Consider, though the wicked one seems modest and shamefac't in his first
temptations in asking but little things, yet he will not rest there, but by
degrees will proceed further, and hereby bring you unto the commission of
greater. As the habits of grace, so the habits of sin are strengthened by
degrees; though the beginning be but small, yet within a little while sin will
greatly increase. Rivers at first arise from small springs, which in running
gather waters, and increase into a great stream: So actual sins (I speak not of
original sin, which is a deep and unsearchable fountain, from whence actual sin
does arise, and by which it is fed) I say, actual sins in their first beginning
are but small, which if a man allows himself in the practice of, they will
swell and increase, and carry him with a strong stream toward the Ocean of
Gods wrath; if you make no conscience of small sins, you will easily be tempted
to those which are great and more notorious. First, Satan will propose sin to
your thoughts, it is no great thing to think; and if you can dally with sin in
your thoughts, then he will by delightful pleasing thoughts of sin lay siege to
your will; it is no great matter to desire, if you do not act; then if the fort
of the will be taken, all the under-forts of the affections will quic^y yield;
and when you have entertained sin in your hearts, you will be tempted to
proceed further, to vent it at your lips; it is no great thing to speak, and
then, as you have opportunity, he will tempt you to practice; go a little
further, the sin is sweet, try but once, put but one step into this way, and
retire again as soon as you will; and when once you have committed the act, it
may be with smitings and reluctance of conscience, then he will entice again;
it cannot be much worse, try once again, and by degrees the reluctance wears
off; and though you commit sin at first with more regret, yet afterward you
will do it with more ease and delight; yea, with greediness and resolution,
with hardness and obstinacy; and one great sin will make way for the commission
of more; so that in time you will not forbear the greatest sins. Nemo repent
fit turpissimus, no man arriveth to the highest degree of wickedness upon a
sudden, but is step by step drilled on by the Devil, and his own hearts lusts
from little sins to the greatest. By degrees Gods reverence is more lessened,
the will more inclined, the conscience more seared, the habits of sin more
strengthened, the Devil more encouraged, and so way is made for any sin. Lesser
Commandments (says one) are a hedge about the greatest; if by small sins you
break down this hedge, you will quickly make breaches upon the greater too:
Smaller sins many times will engage you to commit greater, to maintain and
defend them; the least link in a chain will draw the greatest after it. If you
would be kept from great sins, you must take heed of the first beginnings,
obsta principiis, etc. A small wound in the body, if it be not looked after,
may fester and gangrene, and endanger the life: So small sins, if not stopped and
healed, will breed a gangrene in the spirit, and bring certain death and
destruction. If you do not resist the beginnings of sin, it will be hard to
make head against it afterward, when it has got more strength: It will be as
hard to leave off a custom of sin, which will be a second nature, as for the
Ethiopian to change his skin, or the Leopard his spots. Non obtinebis ut
desinant, si in^ipere permiseris: Imbecillis est primo, vires dum procedit par
at: Excluditur facilius quam expellitur: Facilius non recipiuntur quam exeunt:
says Seneca. Vice is but weak at the first, it gathers strength as it
proceeds; it is easier kept out, than thrust out; it is easier not to receive
it, than being received, to leave it. Dear Youths, take heed then of small
sins, resist the first motions and temptations to sin, crush sin in the first
rising of it, delight not in the thoughts of it: Keep your hearts, guard your
senses if you would overcome this temptation of the wicked one.

(5.) The fifth Temptation whereby the wicked one does draw young men to the
commission of sin, is, by the hopes of future repentance. You may allow your
selves a little longer in the practice of sin; you may rejoice, and take
pleasure in the days of your youth, it is time enough hereafter to think of
growing serious and religious, to think of repenting and turning, and making
your peace with God. That you may overcome this temptation, remember what has
been said already, concerning the uncertainty of your Life, the uncertainty of
the Means of grace, the uncertainty of Gods working by the Means.

Thus much for the first particular, concerning the most ordinary and
prevailing Temptations whereby the wicked one does draw young men to sin.

SECT. VII.
2. THE Second thing is to caution you against some particular sins of Youth,
which the wicked one would draw you unto.

Now there are these 20 sins of Youth, which I shall caution you against.

1. Uncleanness. 2. Drunkenness. 3. Gluttony. 4. Gaming. 5. Quarrelling. 6.
Swearing. 7. Lying. 8. Unfaithfulness. 9. Disobedience. 10. Idleness. 11.
Sabbath-breaking. 12. A Frothy spirit. 13. Scoffing. 14. Pride. 15.
Censoriousness. 16. Procrastination of Repentance. 17. Carnal Security. 18.
Carnal Confidence. 19. Rashness. 20. Unsteadfastness.
1. Young men, take heed of uncleanness. The wicked one will be busy to tempt
you, and your hearts in these years will be most ready to incline you;
youthful lusts are now apt to stir within you, especially in such a City as
this, where there are so many objects to entice your eye and heart; but for
your Life, take heed that you be not drawn to this sin. Flee fornication and
adultery; other sins are without the body, but he that commits fornication,
sins against his own body, 1 Cor. 6. 18. Not to speak any thing of men's
weakening and consuming their bodies by their frequency in this sin: he that
commits fornication des^leth his body, it is a filthy nasty sin^ hereby the
body is more defiled in the eyes of God, than if the body were drenched in a
Jakes: it is just with God that such as venture upon this sin should, as many
do, get the soul disease hereby, and that their members should ^ot and putrify
whilst they are alive. He that commits fornication or adultery, sins
against his own soul, he defiles his soul, he wounds his soul, and he
destroys his soul; his heart, which should be God Temple, is hereby defiled,
and he loathes such an habitation; his Conscience which whilst whole, is a
continual Feast, is hereby wounded; his spirit, which whil^st chaste and clean
is safe, is hereby exposed unto inevitable ruin and destruction: Therefore it
is a foolish sottish thing to commit this sins see Prove. 6. 32, 33. Whosoever
commits adultery with a woman, lacks understanding, he that does it
destroys his own soul; a wound and dishonor shall he get, and his reproach
shall not be wiped away. Such as commit this sin blot their Name, as well as
defile their Spirit; wound their Reputation, as well as wound their Conscience;
but chiefly, they lack understanding, because hereby they d^stroy their own
Soul. Young men; look into two or three Scriptures, which methinks should be
sufficient to deterr you from this sin, where you may perceive, whatever
sweetness and pleasure this sin may promise and yield, that bitterness and
destruction is at the end, and in the conclusion. See Prove. 5. 3, 4, 5. The
lips of a strange woman drop as an honeycomb, and her mouth is smoother than
Oil: But her end is bitter as worntwood, sharp as a two-edged sword; her feet
go down to death, her steps take hold on hell. See also Prove. 7. from verse. 6.
to the end of the chapter; where Solomon speaks of the young man void of
understanding, whom he took notice of out of his window, meeting with an
Harlot, who enticed him, and persuaded him to accompany her to the bed of lust;
and he tells you that he went after her, as an Ox to the slaughter, and a
sool to the correction of the stocks; as a bird to the snare, till an arrow
struck through his liver, not perceiving the danger he was in of his life.
Therefore he calls upon young men to hearken, and take warning, and to turn
away their feet from her paths; and that because her house goes down to Hell:
and chap. 2. 19. he tells you, that none that go unto her return again,
neither take they hold of the paths of Life. This sin does so stupifie men,
that it is ten thousand to one but you go to Hell without ever thinking of
returning, if you commit it: for he that commiteth-fornication or adultery,
sins against God, and he severely threatens all such, Heb. 13. 4. Marriage
is honorable in all, and the bed undefiled, but whoremongers and adulterers
God will judge. And it is a fearful thing to fall into the bands of the living
God, Heb. 10. 31. Hereafter you will be repayed with ten thousand times more
pain and heartsgrief in Hell, than ever you found delight in this sin.

Young men, take heed of Uncleanness; as you ever hope for salvation, and to
escape future wrath, refrain this sin, take heed of actual adultery; avoid
occasions, come not near the places where Harlots live; shun the company of
such as are light and wanton; entice not any, by speech, or look, or behavior,
neither be enticed your selves; take heed of going to Stage Plays, where a
dart may strike your heart, where you may have incentives to the sin by the
immodest actions of actors, or the immodest garb of spectators. Come not near
the flame, lest a fire be enkindled in your bosoms before you are aware; be
not found in the Devils School, lest he catch you in his snare, and bind you,
and lead you captive. If the wicked one assault you in your place, and you be
tempted by any that converse with you, flee the place, as Joseph when his
Mistress enticed him, say, How can I do this great wickedness, and sin against
God? And young Virgins, yield not to this sin, if you be enticed; encourage not
any by your carriage to make an attempt; rush out of the hands of the
temptation with speed and indignation; proclaim the shame of any that shall
twice move you; keep your selves chaste and pure, it is your ornament, it is
your glory.

Young men, take heed of actual uncleanness with others, and take heed of
self-pollutions, which are Murder and Adultery before God; do not dishonor
your own bodies by your selves. Take heed of speculative uncleanness, do not
look upon a woman to lust after her. Make a Covenant with your eyes, that you
may not think upon a Maid; suppress the first rising of lust in your mind; get
this evil concupis^ence mortified by virtue drawn from Christ's death, and the
operation of the Spirit; beat down your flesh with labor and abstinence, if
you find your selves very prone to this sin; and if no other course will do to
quench the burning, God has appointed a remedy by Marrying: But diligently and
faithfully use all other means first, if other considerations do not move you
to that Relation.

This Treatise would swell into too great a bulk, should I speak thus largely
concerning every sin; therefore I shall be more brief in the rest.

2. Young men, take heed of Drunkenness. You are strong in body, be not strong
to drink unto excess. This sin will distemper your body, intoxicate your
spirit, and destroy your soul; take heed of it; it is one of the fruits of the
flesh, Gal. 5. 21. and such as commit it cannot have any Inheritance in the
Kingdom of Heaven, 1 Cor. 6. 10. think of the bitter cup of Gods wrath
hereafter, which you must drink of, if you exceed the measure in your sweet
cups here. Take heed of frequenting those places, I mean Taverns and Alehouses,
where the temptation does chiefly lie; neither go into those places often,
neither stay in those places longer than need does require. Take heed of the
company of drunkards, turn away from them, if they tempt you; shake them off if
they hang upon you; choose sober persons for your associates and familiars,
Take heed of the ungodly practice of drinking Healths, a heathenish custom, too
much in use amongst some loose Christians; I might say, a hellish custom, which
the Devil does put men upon, that it might be a shooing-horn to drunkenness.
You are halt persuaded to be drunk, when you are persuaded to drink a health,
forbear it, it is an occasion of much sin.

3. Young men, take heed of Gluttony, especially in these leisure days,
wherein so much time and cost is laid out in Feasts. This Gluttony is called
by our Savior, sursetting, which he warns his Disciples against, Luke 21.
34. Take heed to your selves; lest at any time your hearts be overcharged with
surfeiting and drunkenness, and that day overtake you at unawares: Here
Gluttony and Drunkenness are coupled together, as being much of the same
nature, the one is drinking to excess, the other is eating to excess; then our
Savior bids, take heed of overcharging their hearts; when the body is
overcharged with meat, the heart is overcharged, the Soul is overcharged as
well as the Body, and therefore unfit for the service either of God or Man.
Then he commands them to take heed, lest at any time they overcharge
themselves with such excesses; it is not lawful at any time, neither on
ordinary days, neither on extraordinary days, not on Feasting days; God
allows his people to feast, but not to gluttonize; they may eat for
necessity, and something for delight, but they must never eat unto excess, to
distemper and discompose themselves for action. And lastly, he subjoyns an
awakening Consideration, lest that day overtake them at unawares, lest the day
of Judgment overtake them, if not of the general Judgment, yet of their
particular Judgment; lest Death should surprise them, and the wrath of God
should surprise them at unawares, and they should be taken away in the act of
this sin, as Psalm. 78. 30, 31. Whilst the meat was in their mouths, the wrath
of God came upon them, and slew the fattest of them.

4. Young men, take heed of Gaming. Some sports are lawful, and innocent, and
needful at some times for the health of the body, but take heed your
affections be not set upon any Sports, and than you spend not more time in them
than is needful. But there are other. Games that are useless and hurtful,
that are thieves of money and time, and unlawful; such as Carding and Dicing,
which being pure Lottery, and Lottery being a sacred thing should not be made
use of in Games, (as I conceive) no more than Oaths in common discourse. Cards
may well be termed the Devils Books, and Dice the Devils Game; look not into
those books, though they have no sense in them, yet they will strangely bewitch
you to spend hours and nights together in turning them over: Throw not away
your time with the Dye, you can never recover what you lose, I mean your
precious time; not to say any thing of the danger you will be in of spending
all you have, as some who have been worth many thousand pounds at night, have
not been worth a thousand pence by the morning. There is no exercise of the
body in th^se Games, and I am sure there is a corrupting of the Mind, and a
loss of the precious time; and what plea can you have for such Games? Have you
no employment for your time? Is it not pity that so many golden hours should
run waste? Be not enticed to this sin by Friends; be not persuaded to it by
custom; if you will do as the most do, you must go where the most go, and
that is to Hell. Think, if you lay upon your death bed, whether this sin of
Gaming would not trouble you; and whether those will not have more peace, that
our of Conscience have forborne to touch a Card or Dye all their lifetime.

5. Young men, take he^d of Quarrelling; forbear gaming, and you will be out of
the occasion of many quarrels. Take heed of a contentious spirit: In your young
blood and strength of body, you are apt to have that which the world falsely
terms a high spirit, and may be ready to offer affronts and injuries to others,
and be able to bear none; but let me tell you, that such a spirit is a low,
base spirit, a mean ignoble spirit: The high spirit indeed is such a spirit, as
is most like the Spirit of Christ, he who had the most noble soul that ever God
created, and his Spirit was humble and meek, who did injury to none, but bore
all injuries patiently; who when he was reviled, reviled not again; when he
suffered, he threatened not; when he was smitten, he did not return blow for
blow. This was noble. Young ones, labor to be like unto Jesus Christ in
meekness, and patient bearing injuries and reproaches: Strife and contention
comes from beneath, and is termed James 3. devilish; but meekness and patience
comes down from above, and will truly ennoble you; a meek and quiet spirit,
not on^y in women, but also in young men, is their ornament, and before God of
great price, 1 P^t. 3. 4.

6. Young men, take heed of Swearing; It is the express command of our Savior,
Matthew. 5. 34, 37. I say unto you, Swear not at all, etc. that is, in your
ordinary discourse, but let your communication be yea, yea, nay, nay, for
whatever is more than these comes of evil. If you will be Christ's Disciples,
you must obey him. What advantage can you get by this sin? What honor is it to
swear? What pleasure can you find in it? be sure it will bring damage, it
provokes God to punish, he has threatened to curse swearers. We read Zach. 5.
2, 3. of a flying Roll, the length twenty cubits, the breadth ten cubits, which
is interpreted to be the curse that goes over the face of the Earth, to cut
off him that steals on one side, and him that swears on the other side. God
threatens to condemn swearers, Jam. 5. 12. Above all things swear not, lest ye
fall into condemnation. Take heed of the horrid oaths of the roaring Blades in
our times, and take heed of more petty oaths of faith and troth; take heed also
of cursing, and taking Gods Name in vain, remembering that the Lord will not
hold such guiltless.

7. Young men, take heed of Lying. See Ephesians. 4. 25. Wherefore putting away
lying, speak every man truth. You would not speak lies, if the party you spoke
them unto did know and could prove them to be lies, the intent of lies being to
cover: God knows your lies, you cannot cover any thing from him; and God
being Truth, loves truth, and hates lies, and has threatened liars to give
them their portion in that lake which burns with fire and brimstone, Rev. 21.
8. Take heed of accustoming your selves to this sin of lying whilst you are
young, it will be hard ever leaving it. Whatever advantage you may think to get
by a lie, I am sure your damage will be greater: Whatever credit you may think
to get by a lie, your dishonor is greater: Whatever fault you cover by a lie,
you do hereby the more aggravate it: Whatever kindness you may think to do
another by a lie, you do your selves a thousand-fold more injury: Though you
may account lies but words, and words but wind, yet for such words you will be
condemned, and such a wind as one says, is sufficient to blow your souls into
Hell.

8. Young men, take heed of Unfaithfulness. You that are Apprentices, or
Servants, take he^d of unfaithfulness to your Masters, that you do not wrong
and d^fraud them in the least, remembering that dreadful threatening, that God
will be avenged upon all defrauders, 1 These. 4. 6. They may not know your fraud
and deceit, but God is privy to it, and the vengeance will be fearful which one
day he will recompense unto you for this sin. Read the duty of servants in this
regard, Tit. 2. 10. where they are warned against purloining, and exhorted to
show all good fidelity, that they may adorn the doctrine of God our Savior in
all things. Be faithful to your Masters as to their estates, their money and
goods; be careful as if they were your own; do not wrong them, or any else
whilst young; remembering that you must make restitution, as ever you hope for
salvation, if you be able to do it; and be faithful to them as to their
counsels; do not blaze abroad their secrets; do not make known their
infirmities; serve them with all uprightness and fidelity, as if you were to
serve Christ himself for indeed he will count it so, and has promised a reward
to faithful servants, beyond what their Masters can give, Ephesians. 6. 8. Col. 3. 24.

9. Young men, take heed of Disobedience. Children obey your Parents in all
things, for this is well pleasing to God, Col. 3. 20. For this is the first
Commandment with promise, Ephesians. 6. 2. Servants be obedient unto them which are
Masters according to the flesh, with fear and trembling, in singleness of your
heart as unto Christ; not with eye-service as men-pleasers, but as the servants
of Christ doing the will of God from the heart, Ephesians. 6. 5, 6. Here is a copy
of your duty, take heed of the contrary sin, which the wicked one will be busy
to tempt you unto. In disobeying Parents and Governors, you are disobedient
unto God, and displease Christ your great Master; if they be strangers to
Christ, you ought to obey them, except in those things which are unlawful.
Young ones that are yet under Government, take heed of disobedience; as
obedience will be rewarded by Christ, so disobedience will be punished by him
at his second appearance: Be not disobedient to Governors, and behave not your
selves irreverently toward the aged and gray headed, for you ought to honor
the silver-hair.

10. Young men, take heed of Idleness. Do not loiter away your time, especially
the time of your youth: Time is very precious, the time of your youth is most
precious, the choicest and chiesest; it is your seed-time, your gathering-time;
you are now more active and fit for employment; you may happily spare a month
better if you should live beyond fifty years, than an hour now; your whole time
is short, the time of your youth will be slipped away quickly, manhood and old
age will steal on you before you are aware; but you ^ie whilst young: You can
call no time yours (...) the present: O how precious is the present hour I
think if the damned had but one hour given them, how they would esteem and
improve it. I have heard of a Lady at her death, who had misspent the ^ime of
her life, groaned out in her air breath this sad speech with bitterness and
earnestness, (...) thousand worlds for one quarter of an hour (...) Take heed
of lavishing away your time in sin and va^y; let not an hour pass without doing
something, fill up your whole time with duty; you may can, and drink, and
sleep, but let not the concernments of your body, devour too much of your
precious time; let them not have more of your time than is necessary, more than
is duty. Redeem your time, double your diligence, remember how much of your
time is irrecoverably gone; how much of your work is still to do; remember how
near you are to eternity when time shall be no more, therefore apply your
hearts to wisdom, and whatever your hands find to do, do it with all your
might. Take heed of idleness in your particular callings; be diligent in your
secular employments; the diligent hand makes rich; but the slothful person is
brother to him that is a great waster: Take heed of idleness, of spiritual
sloth in your general Callings: Take heed of wholly neglecting the duties of
Gods Worship, either public, or family, or closet; of neglecting to hear, or
read, or pray; and take heed of negligence in these duties; there is a curse
denounced against such as do the work of the Lord negligently, Jer. 48. 10. You
must not be slothful, if you would be followers of them who through faith and
patience have inherited the Promises, Heb. 6. 12.

11. Young men, take heed of Sabbath-breaking: Do not idle away this day as too
many young men do, in the fields, in visits, in vain company, much less in
Taverns, or Alehouses, in drinking, and greater wickedness than all the week
besides. Value the Sabbath day, above all the days of the week; spend it in
the duties of Gods immediate Worship; you may get something in the shop en the
week day, you may get more in Gods House and Ordinances on the Lords day,
spiritual light, and life, and strength, and peace, and joy, Gods favor;
Jewels of grace, evidences for Heaven, are worthy your seeking; do not lose
such benefits as these by profaning the Sabbath Day, by suffering worldly
business to entrench upon this sacred time, which God has sanctified, and you
ought to keep holy.

12. Young men, take heed of a frothy spirit. Some young ones are full of froth
and vanity, very toyish and foolish, without any solidity or seriousness. It is
time for you now to put away childish things; get the vanity of your minds
emptied; let the frothiness and levity of your spirits be curbed by the fear of
God, an awful apprehension of his omnipresence, and all-seeing eye; put your
spirits under the Government of the Lord Jesus Christ.

13. Young men, take heed of Scoffing. If you have wit, let it not vent it self
in scurrility, in jesting and jeering at others, which the Apostle eau^oneth
against as inconvenient and unbecoming the Gospel, Ephesians. 5. 4. Do not mock at
others infirmities, but pity them; let nothing be the object of your scorn,
except it be sin, neither should you scoff at others for their sins, but labor
to reduce them by your friendly admonitions. Above all, take heed of fcoffing
at any for their holiness and strict walking, which is an undoubted character
of a profane and carnal heart; and such persons as do so, are scorned by God,
and most contemptible in his eyes.

14. Young men, take heed of Pride. Do not overvalue and esteem your selves;
do not conceit an excellency in your selves above others, but with lowliness of
mind esteem others above your selves: If you have any gifts and seize
that may be useful, glorify God with them in your sphere; be thankful for
them; and withal, be so well acquainted with your imperfections and secret
corruption of heart, that you may be humble. Be not proud of gifts of mind,
much less of strength and beauty of body, and least of all, of hair, which is
but an excrement, or of clothes, which are a badge of man's Apostasy. Remember
that pride goes before destruction, and a haughty spirit before a fall: That
God looks upon the proud afar off, when he has a respect to the lowly, Psalm.
138. 6. That God resists the proud, when he gives grace to the humble, 1
Pet. 5. 6.

15. Young men, take heed of Gensoriousness, of rash judging of others. Take
the caution of our Savior against this sin, Matthew. 7. 1, 2, 3. Judge not that
ye be not judged, for with what judgment ye judge ye shall be judged, and with
what measure ye mete, it shall be measured unto you again. And why beholdest
thou the mote that is in thy brothers, eye, and considerest not the beam that
is in thine own eye? If you censure others, you will be censured again; be sure
ye will be judged and condemned by God; you are apt to spy little faults, motes
in others, be acquainted with the beam in your own eye, with your own greater
faults, and you will not then be so forward to judge. Take one more Scripture,
which cautioneth you against this sin, Jam. 4. 11, 12. Speak not evil one of
another; he that speaks evil of his brother, and judges his brother,
speaks evil of the Law, and judges the Law. He does in effect say, that the
Law which condemns this sin, is not so fit a Law. But if thou judge the Law,
thou art not a doer of the Law, but a Judge. There is one Lawgiver, who is
able to save and to destroy? Who art thou that judge another?

16. Young men, take heed of Procrastinating, your Repentance. Do not put off
this great work until to morrow; remember what hazards you run; how uncertain
life is; how unlikely that ever you should repent, if you do not improve your
youthful season for it. Set about the work presently, break off your sins by
repentance presently, and make your peace with God without further delay, left
you be cut off from the Land of the living before you are aware, and hereafter
there will be no room for repentance.

17. Young men, take heed of ^nal security. You have health, and strength, and
peace, and prosperity it may be (...), and never tasted the bitter cup of
Affliction; and therefore may be apt to be secure, and secretly hope that this
state will last, that your Mountain is so strong, that you shall never be
moved, that you shall never come into Adversity. Alas! you are little
acquainted with the World; Man is born to trouble as the sparks fly upwards;
crosses, and cares, and losses, and sickness, and pain, and many miseries are
the attendants of this Life; and you must look sooner or later, in one measure
or other, to have your share: be not secure, but prepare, lest being
unprovided, the miseries of this life be more irksome and unsupportable.

18. Young men, take heed of carnal Confidence. You may be apt now to put your
trust in Arms of flesh, to repose much confidence in Friends or Means, and some
external props; but you will find them all like broken reeds, or a foot out of
joint; and where you have the greatest hope and trust, you are like to meet
with the greatest disappointment: Cease then from Man, whose breath is in his
nostrils; trust not in uncertain riches; stay not upon any Creature, but put
your trust in the Lord, who is omnipotent and faithful; in him you may be
secure as to the greatest evil, and you may have confidence of all needful
supplies.

19. Young men, take heed of Rashness. Be not rash in your Promises, lest you
repent, or be found unfaithful: Be not rash in your Undertakings, in your
engagement in any business; especially take heed of rashness in changing your
condition. Remember that Proverb, That Youth rides post to be married, and
lodges in the Inn of Repentance. In all the weighty affairs of your life,
Pray to God earnestly for his guidance; consult with wise and faithful
friends; and seriously deliberate things in your own minds. Observe the rule
of the Word, and let your design be the glory of God.

20. And lastly, young men, take heed of Unsteadfastness. Be not inconstant in
your resolutions as to civil affairs and undertakings; but especially take heed
of inconstancy and unstedfastness in the ways of God. Take heed of a wavering,
unsettled mind, of backslidings and revoltings from God, let not your Zeal
degenerate into Lukewarmness, and your present Forwardness end in Apostasy. But
watch, stand fast in the Faith, quit your selves like men, be strong, 1 Cor.
16. 13. and with full purpose of heart stick close unto the Lord, Au^. 11. 23.

Labor to keep your selves from these sins of Youth which the wicked one would
draw you unto, that so you may be victorious, and if you overcome, you shall
eat of the tree of Life which is in the Paradise of God, Rev. 2. 7. You shall
not be hurt of the second death, v. 11. You shall eat of the hidden Manna, and
have the white stone, wherein the new Name is written, which none-can read but
they that receive it, v. 17. You shall have the Morning Star, v. 28. You shall
be clothed in White Raiment, and Christ will confess your Name before his
Father, and before the Angels, ohap. 3. 5. You shall be Pillars in the Temple
of God, and go no more out, and have the Name of God written upon you, v. 12.
You shall sit with Christ on his throne, as he overcame, and is set down with
his Father on his throne, v. 21.

My most dearly beloved young men, labor thus, that you may be such young men
as are commended in the Text, to be strong, that the Word of God may abide in
you, and to overcome the wicked one.

SECT. VIII.
AND now I shall shut up my whole Discourse with a few words for encouragement
of you in these Duties.

1. This will be your Wisdom; whosoever is wise will observe these things. Read
one place concerning David's wisdom upon this account, Psalm. 119. 98, 99, 100.
Thou through thy commandments have made me wiser than mine enemies; for they
are ever with me. I have more understanding than all my teachers; for thy
testimonies are my meditation. I understand more than the ancients; because I
keep thy precepts. Remember, that the fear of the Lord is the beginning of
Wisdom, it is the chief part of Wisdom, and they have the best understanding
that keep his Commandments, Psalm. 111. 10.

2. This will be your Glory. This will be an or-nament of Grace unto your head,
and like a Chain about your neck, Prove. 1. 9. It will make you shine like
Lights in a dark World, and it will not only render you truly honorable, but
also tend exceed-ingly to your Masters glory.

3. This will be your Advantage. It will bring in the truest, purest, surest,
and most lasting gain.

4. This will be your Safety. This will shelter you under the wings of the
Almighty, secure you in times of great Judgments here, and from storms of
future wrath.

5. This will be your Peace. Great peace have they that love Gods Law, and
nothing shall disturb them. This will yield peace and comfort to you in Life,
this will bear up your spirits in the hour of Death, and at length procure for
you a Crown of Glory which fades not away.

Be strong then, O ye young Men, because in due time ye shall reap, if ye faint
not.

Let the Word of God abide in you, because of the Treasure laid up for you.

And overcome the Wicked one, because of the Crown of Glory which shall be set
upon the head of the Conquerers.

Vincenti Corona dabitur.

FINIS.

