The Wells OF SALVATION OPENED: OR, WORDS WHEREBY We may be Saved.

By THOMAS VINCENT, Minister sometime in Maudlins Milk-street, LONDON.

Act. 16.29. Then he called for a Light, and sprang in, and came trembling, and
fell down before Paul and Silas,

Verse. 30. And brought them out, and said, Sirs, What must I do to be saved?

V. 31. And they said, Believe on the Lord Jesus Christ, and thou shall be
saved, and thy House.

V. 32. And they spoke unto him the Word of the Lord, and to all that were in
his House.

LONDON, Printed for Thomas Parkhurst, and are to be sold at his Shop at the
Golden Bible on London Bridge. 1668.

TO THE Citizens of LONDON.
I Have sounded two Trumpets of Judgment in your ears, the former signifying
Gods terrible Voice to the City, in the late terrible Judgments of Plague and
Fire which have devoured so many Inhabitants and Habitations, as the space of
many Ages (should the World so long continue) would not blot out the
remembrance of; the later signifying Gods terrible Voice to the World, at the
second appearance of Christ to the last and Universal Judgment of all the
Children* of Adam, which is both sure and near; the dreadfulness of which
Judgment to the Wicked, no Tongue is able to express: The chief intent of both
my Treatises concerning the late, and future Judgment, has been to awaken
sleepy Sinners out of their carnal security, and to prepare them for the great
Salvation purchased by Jesus Christ, and proclaimed, proffered and promised in
the Gospel* therefore having at first purposed, and in my last Book of Christ's
Appearance to Judgment, promised to treat more largely of Salvation than in
the close of a Use I could do; I have here endeavored to fulfill my Promise,
in telling you Words whereby you may be saved. We read 1 Timothy 1.15. This is a
faithful saying, and worthy of all acceptance, that Christ Jesus came into the
World to save Sinners. And Heb. 2.3, 4. that this Salvation began to be spoken
of by the Lord, and was confirmed by them that heard him. The Lord speaks to
you from Heaven by his Spirit in his Word and Ministers, that you would accept
of this Salvation: See then that ye refuse not him that speaks; for if they
escaped not who refused him that spoke on Earth, much more shall not ye escape
if ye turn away from him that speaks from Heaven, Heb. 12.25. They that seek
this Salvation diligently, shall find it certainly; but they that refuse or
neglect it, must needs perish unavoidably, and be miserable eternally. That
this little Piece may be blessed by the Lord, and made use of as a Means to
promote your Salvation, is the Prayer of him whose great desire is, that you
might be saved.

Thomas Vincent.

WORDS Whereby we may be Saved.
ACT. 11.13, 14. And he showed us how he had seen an Angel in his house, which
stood and said unto him, Send men to Joppa, and call for Simon whose surname is
Peter, who shall tell thee Words whereby thou and all thy house shall be saved.


WE read in the second and third Verses of this Chapter of the contention
which some of the Circumcision had with the Apostle Peter, because he had gone
in to, and eaten with such as were uncircumcised. Whereupon Peter gives an
account to them of his reason, and the occasion of his so doing; rehearsing the
matter more briefly from Verse 4. to the 18th. which is related more largely in
the whole foregoing tenth chapter.

First he tells them of his Trance at Ioppa, and the Vision which himself had
of the Vessel descending from Heaven with unclean Beasts in it; and the command
from Heaven to eat, not calling that common and unclean which God had cleansed;
the Lord hereby giving him to understand, That like as under the Law, though
there were diverse kinds of meats forbidden, and therefore unclean, and
unlawful to be eaten; yet under the Gospel, that prohibition being taken off,
and the meats sanctified by the word of Gods command or allowance, believers
might freely eat of them without sin: So also, though under the Law, before the
coming of Christ, the people of God in the Nation of the Jews, where only the
Church of God was to be found, were to separate themselves from all heathen
Nations as unclean, and it was unlawful for them to go in and eat with Heathen
or Gentile persons, lest they should be defiled and enticed by such familiar
converse with them, unto their Superstitions and Idolatries* yet God having
before foretold and promised the accession of the Gentiles unto the Church; and
under the Gospel having sent his Son, who brake down the middle wall of
partition between the Jews and the Gentiles; and having sanctified the
Gentiles by his Spirit and Faith; they were no longer to be accounted unclean,
and therefore it was as lawful for the believing Jews to eat and converse
with them as one with another. Moreover he he tells them of the Circumcision
of the Vision which Cornelius a Gentile had of an Angel, and the command, which
he had from the Lord by the Angel to send for him, to preach the Gospel of
salvation unto him; together with the effect of his preaching namely the
falling of the Holy Ghost upon the Gentiles, as upon themselves at the
beginning; and therefore that it would have been no less than a withstanding of
God himself for him still to have kept at a distance from the Gentiles. Which
answer of Peter gave such satisfaction, that it did not only put to silence
them which contended with him, but also caused them to glorify God in behalf
of the Gentiles.

My Text is a brief rehearsal which Peter gives of Cornelius his Vision which
he had from his mouth. And he showed us, how he had seen an Angel in his house,
which stood, and said, Send men to Joppa, and call for Simon whose surname is
Peter, who shall tell thee words whereby thou and all thy house shall be saved.
I might present you with diverse Doctrines from the words, but because I intend
to handle but two, I shall mention but two, which to me are the most observable.

Doct. 1. That God does make use of Ministers to preach the Gospel rather than
Angels.

Doct. 2. That Ministers are to tell people such words whereby they may be
saved.

It is the latter of these which I intend chiefly to insist upon; yet the
former lying in the way, and being so worthy of note, and may be of such use, I
shall spend a little time about it.

SECT. I.
Doct. 1. THat God does make use of Ministers to preach the Gospel rather than
Angels.

The Angel appears to Cornelius, does not preach the Gospel to Cornelius, but
from the Lord directs him to send to Peter, to Peter, who was one of Christ's
Ministers, and He should preach unto him, and tell him such words whereby he
and his should be saved. The Angel could have told him such words himself; he
could have set forth the Lord Jesus Christ in his Divinity, and eternal abode
with God; in his Humanity, with which he clothed and veiled himself, and abode
for a while here amongst men; in his Life so holy, his Works so powerful, his
Love so great, his Death so painful, his Resurrection so soon, his Ascension
so wonderful, his Session and Intercession at the right hand of God; and the
Glory which he has with the Father in Heaven, however he had been vilified by
some men when he was upon the Earth. The Angel could have preached the Law with
such Thunder and Lightning, as should have made the Conscience of Cornelius to
tremble, even as the Israelites did when the Law was given by their
ministration on Mount Sinai. He could have shot the arrows of the Almighty so
deep into his Spirit, as no balm on earth should have been able to heal his
wounds: The Angel could have represented the God of Heaven in a more terrible
way than man can do, as Lord of an innumerable host of mighty Angels, of which
he was but one, and as set in battel-array against Christless sinners; and told
Cornelius what dreadful threatenings were denounced, and what heavy Curses did
belong unto such as had broken Gods Law; and hereby could have put him into
such terrors and consternation in reflection upon the least guilt, as should
have sunk him down to the very brink of the burning Lake in his own
apprehension, and forced him in the anguish of his spirit to cry out, O what
shall I do to be saved? And then he could have represented the Lord Jesus
Christ unto him as the only, and an all-sufficient, and most merciful Savior
of Mankind, who had undertaken the Office of Mediator and Advocate, and was
faithful. He could have described his beauty and excellency in such high
expressions, and invited Cornelius to come to Christ with such sweet words and
pressing arguments, as never proceeded out of the mouth of any man. But the
Angel had no commission to preach the Gospel to Cornelius; only to speak to him
from God, that he would send men to Ioppa, and call for Peter, and he should
preach the Gospel unto him. And as it was in the beginning, so it is still, God
does not send Angels down from Heaven to preach Christ, and Salvation by Christ
unto the people; but he sends Ministers, men whom he qualifieth and
commissioneth for the work.

The Reasons why God does make use of Ministers to preach the Gospel rather
than Angels, may be chiefly these three.

1. Because of our Infirmity. 2. For the honor of the Ministry. 3. That he
might secure his own Glory.
Reas. 1. Because of our Infirmity. We could not in this state of darkness,
weakness, and sinfulness, bear the preaching of Angels that are so holy and
glorious: Our eyes would be dazzled, our spirits would be amazed, and hearts
sink within us at the voice of Angels, should they appear unto us in their
glory. Manoah thought he should dye when an Angel came to him, and foretold him
of a Son which should be born to him, Judge. 13. Zacharias was sore troubled at
the appearance of an Angel with the like message, L^k. 1. The Shepherds in the
Field were exceedingly afraid when the Angel came to them to bring tidings of
the birth of our Savior, Luke 2. And Christ's Disciples were no less afraid
when the Angels brought news to them of his Resurrection. And if holy men could
not bear the appearance of Angels, much less could the unholy and wicked, whose
guilt and defilement would make them a thousand-fold more fearful. If an Angel
should immediately descend from Heaven into this place, and taking my room
should preach unto this Auditory before me; would not fearful thoughts arise
in the hearts, and paleness get upon the checks of the best amongst you? But
what dread would there seize upon the spirits of such of you as are graceless
and profane, who are yet in your sins, and have not made your peace with God?
How would you shrink and crowd out faster than you crowded in, as not being
able to endure? When Moses had been forty days upon the Mount with God, and
had seen only his back-parts, yet his face did shine with such luster by
reflection of the beams of Gods Majesty upon him, that the children of Israel
could not look upon his face without a Vail: And if Angels who continually
behold the face of God in Heaven, should come down and appear and preach, men
would not be able to hear and bear: Therefore God makes use of Ministers to
preach the Gospel, men of like passions and infirmities with our selves, for
our infirmities sake: Men who will not affrighten us with their glory, whom we
may look upon without dazzling our eyes, whom we may speak unto, and converse
with familiarly, without dread and terror. As Elihu said of himself to Job,
chap. 33.6, 7. So it may be said of Ministers, they are in Gods stead, and yet
formed out of clay, and their terror shall no^ make us afraid.

Reas. 2. For the honor of the Ministry. Jesus Christ himself the Son of God
was a Minister when he was upon the Earth, and his employment was to preach the
Gospel; and the highest spiritual honor that can be conferred upon any, is to
be Christ's Ambassadors, Representatives, and to succeed him in this office and
work of the Ministry, which honor he has conferred upon some men rather than
Angels.

I am not of their opinion, who think, that Gods people are exalted to a higher
dignity than the Angels; neither do I think the consequences to be right from
Heb. 1.1^. on which this Notion is grounded: Are they not all ministering
spirits (speaking of Angels) sent forth to minister for them which shall be
heirs of salvation? It does not follow, because Angels do minister to the
Saints, therefore they are inferior to the Saints: for Jesus Christ himself
did minister to them, though he be their Lord and King; when he washed his
Disciples feet, in which act he appeared so like a servant, yet then he calls
himself their Lord and Master, Ioh. 13.13. Ministering to others does not imply
inferiority, unless it be such as does withal imply dependency, but rather the
contrary; our Savior tells his Disciples, when he perceived them to be
ambitious of greatness, that whoever would be the greatest amongst them should
be their Minister, Math. 20.26. Indeed our humane Nature in Christ is exalted
above Angels; but in other respects we are inferior to Angels. The Angels are
above us in regard of spirituality, they are all spirit, we are partly flesh,
and but partly spirit: In regard of immortality, they never dye, we cannot
escape death long: In regard of purity, they have not the least tincture of
sin; the most holy persons on earth are not without some remainders of
defilement: In regard of neerness unto God, they dwell with God in Heaven, and
behold his face continually; we are on earth, and see but his back-parts, and
what we see it is but darkly and through a glass: In regard of power, wisdom,
and many excellencies which we may be ignorant of, for who does perfectly
understand the nature, and all the properties of Angels? Yet although in these
and the like respects the Angels are above the Saints on Earth, the Lord has
given this honor to Ministers rather than to Angels, to preach the Gospel of
salvation by Jesus Christ. We read of three thousand converted by one Sermon of
Peter, Act. 2. but where in the whole Scripture do we read of the conversion of
any by Angels?

Reas. 3. And chiefly for Gods glory it is that Ministers are made use of to
preach the Gospel rather than Angels, that the efficacy of the Gospel preached
in the conversion and salvation of people might appear to be from God alone,
and so the glory might be ascribed in whole unto himself, and nothing unto the
Creature. If Angels were employed to preach and convert souls, people would
hardly be withheld from Idolizing, and giving that Worship to them which is
Gods due; they would be ready to glory and boast in the Angels should they be
wrought upon by their preaching, instead of glorying in God. If the Corinthians
did so in their Teachers when they were men of great eminency for gifts, I am
of Paul, I am of Apollos, I am of Cephas; much more would Christians be apt to
glory in Angels, if they were sent to be their Teachers: I am of Michael,
happily one might say, it was he convinced and awakened my Conscience when fast
asleep in sin and security, and O with what thundering words did he speak,
enough to pierce the ear of such as are dead! Another, I am of Gabriel, It was
his Sermons which persuaded me to repent and believe, and O what arguments did
he use, such as would have moved a Stone! And thus instead of looking to, and
admiring Gods free grace, people would be apt to look to and admire the Angels,
and give them the praise which is due to God alone. Therefore God makes use of
Ministers to preach the Gospel, rather than Angels, that he might hedge in all
the glory of Man's salvation to himself; that if any sinners be converted and
saved by such weak instruments, they may say, It is the Lords doing; it is the
Lords work and free grace, and it is mavelous in our eyes. God will not make
use of the wisdom of men in preaching of the Gospel, lest the Faith by such
preaching should stand in the wisdom of men, and not in the power of God, 1
Cor. 2.4, 5. And this may be one reason why God does not make use of the wisdom
of Angels in preaching the Gospel, lest the Faith produced hereby should stand
not in his own power, but in his Angels wisdom. God makes use of the
foolishness of preaching (so accounted by the world because plain) by foolish
Ministers (men of little esteem amongst such as are not able to discern real
worth) to save them that believe, 1 Cor. 1.21. God deals forth Treasures out
of Earthen Vessels, that the excellency of the power might be of God, and not
of men, 2 Cor. 4.7.

SECT. II.
Use 1. FOr Reproof, does God make use of Ministers to preach the Gospel rather
than Angels? this then may reprove, 1. Such as take upon them to preach, and
are no Ministers. 2. Such as take upon them to be Ministers, and are no
Preachers? 3. Such as blemish their Ministry by an ungodly Conversation. 4.
Such as will hearken to the Devil rather than to Ministers, though God does
employ them to preach rather than Angels.


1. This reproves such as take upon them to preach the Gospel, and are no
Ministers. And here let none mistake me, as if I spoke against the preaching of
any that are true Ministers of Jesus Christ, whether they be set apart for the
work and office in the Episcopal or Congregational, or Presbyterian way: But I
speak against the preaching of them which are no Ministers, and have no call
nor commission for this work. The Angel is sent here to Cornelius, but he does
not preach the Gospel to him; yea he did not dare to do it, because he had no
commission; for if the Angel had received a commission to preach, he would not
have dared to have forborne: None will d^ny that the Angel had gifts sufficient,
if that had been commission; but because he did not preach, it is a sign he had
no commission; and if the Angel did not dare to preach when he was not
commissioned, how dare uncommissioned men to do it? I speak not only of the
preaching of such as are lamentably deficient in gifts (except in their own
conceit) but also of the preaching of them which have good gifts (which might
well and regularly be made use of in a private way) but they are of other
callings in which they are commanded to abide, if they would abide with God, 1
Cor. 7.24. How dare they to entrench so far upon the office of the Ministry, as
to do that which is one of the chiefest parts of the work of the Ministry,
namely, to preach the Gospel? If any such should read these lines, and have an
honest design in what they do, and suppose they do well herein; let them
seriously consider whether they be not under a temptation of the Devil, and
think of these sad consequences which have been, and may be the fruit of such
men's preaching.

1. The bringing of the Ministry of Christ into disesteem. Do not such persons
themselves for the most part, do not their hearers slight true Ministers? and
will not this one day be accounted a slighting of Jesus Christ himself, whose
Ambassadors and Representatives they are? and will such be able to give a good
account hereof, who have been the occasion?

2. The weakening the hands of Christ's faithful Laborers, whom all should
endeavor to encourage and strengthen in their arduous employment. I could tell
you of a Layman, one Mr. Bernard in Wiltshire, who has been eminently
instrumental to bring much light into a corner which before was very dark,
where some thousands do relish the Word and Ordinances, so that they will
travail many miles to hear good Sermons, and it is judged that some hundreds in
those parts have been really converted; and this work has been effected not by
Mr. Bernards preaching himself* though in gifts he do exceed many who intrude
upon the Ministerial employment, but by calling able Ministers to preach, and
standing by them, which has (through Gods blessing) exceedingly promoted the
work; whereas, if he had entrenched upon the office of the Ministry, and taken
upon him to preach himself, I am persuaded he would have had as ill success as
others; and we should not have had that cause of glorifying God for him, and
for what has been done by his means.

3. The encouraging of ungifted persons to preach, who in their own conceits
have as good gifts as themselves, and may plead as good authority: as also the
encouraging erroneous persons privily to broach false Doctrines unto the
corrupting of the minds of the hearers; and by consequence the introduction of
confusion, and tearing the Church of Christ, which in the issue may prove its
de^^ruction.

I know that Lay-preachers will plead the practice of the Apostle Paul, who
wrought in his Trade of Tent-making, whilst he was a Preacher of the Gospel. I
grant that Paul was a Tent-maker, but he was called and ordained to be a
Minister; and though he did practice his trade after this, yet I do not
remember that he did it more than once, which was amongst the Corinthians, and
that upon a special occasion, that he might preach the Gospel freely, and be
like some false Teachers who boasted herein: but when did he do it again? Did
he not receive maintenance from other Churches without working for his living?
besides, he had extraordinary gifts by immediate inspiration, which none now
may hope to obtain without the use of ordinary means. But whatever Paul's
practice was, he does never make mention of it for an example, which other
Ministers should imitate him in; for when he writes to Timothy a Minister, he
enjoyneth him from the Lord to spend his whole time about his Ministry, and not
in any other calling; he exhorts him to give himself to reading, and
meditation, and doctrine, to be in these things wholly, as the original word
does signify. Moreover, the other Apostles, however they were at first
Fishermen by trade, yet when they were called to be Fishers of men, they leave
their Nets, and after Christ's ascension they would not so much as take upon
them the work of Deacons to minister unto Widows, why? read the reason, Act.
6.4. that they might give themselves continually to Prayer, and Ministry of the
Word. Surely then it is the will of God that such as take upon them to preach,
should give themselves to the Ministry of the Word, and not follow other
callings. They have work enough to do in the Ministry, if they employ
themselves therein conscienciously, for their whole time, had they more time
than they have, they had not need to be diverted by worldly businesses; they
find it hard enough to attend upon the Lord without much distraction, that
have none of these secular employments: what an unsuitable frame must they be
under that follow another calling all the week, and come reeking from the
world, and engage to speak to people in an extemporaneous discourse? Is the
Lord pleased with such Ministrations? If the Lord does not strike such persons
dead, who do thus presume to entrench upon the Levites Office, as he did Vzzah,
who might have pleaded a greater seeming need of his help when the Ark did
shake, and was ready to fall, than they can do, 2 Samuel 6.6, 7. Yet they are in
danger of a greater spiritual Judgment than natural death, namely of being
smitten with spiritual deadness; some wither strangely within, when they make a
glorious outward flourish. Yet God forbid that the door of employment in the
Ministry should be shut against all those that at first have been bred up in
other callings; for if any L^ymen that be holy, and knowing, and have gifts and
hearts for this employment, do leave their other calling, and dedicate
themselves wholly to the work of the Ministry, and be tried, and set apart
according to the Rule, I should not be against their preaching; but I am verily
persuaded that such transgress the rule, that take upon them to preach whilst
they follow other callings. Let such examine themselves wherefore it is that
they continue in their other callings; is it not from a carnal and worldly
motive? is it not because worldly emolument comes in this way? But would it
not be more for their advantage, if by breaking off their trade they gained
less Estate for themselves, and more souls for Jesus Christ? Let them either
leave their other calling, or leave their preaching; if they have not a
livelihood but by their trade, why may they not trust God for provisions as
others have done? Has not the Lord appointed that people should maintain their
Ministers, and communicate unto them in carnal things who receive spiritual
things, things of more worth from Ministers?

But some will pretend an extraordinary commission and call from God to preach,
and this they think will bear them out in their preaching though they be no
Ministers; b^t let such take heed they be not under a delusion of Satan
herein: To caution such therefore against such delusions, I shall give you a
Relation which Mr. Vavasir Powel did s^nd in a Letter to a friend of his in the
City, when himself was in Prison; the words which I transcribed my self out of
the Letter written with his own hand are these.

Concerning that Delusion in Kent (a Relation of which I had and still should
have in the Country in writing, under the godly man's own hand and some other
brethren) though I do not remember all the circumstances, yet the substance of
it was this. There was one John Moody a godly man, under Bapt. (I suppose first
joined to Mr. Kyff* in London) being in bed one night there appeared a great
light in his Chamber, and a Voice spoke to him thus: John Moody, arise, and go
preach my Gospel in the West, for my people perish for want of knowledge there.
To which John Moody answered, I am not fit to preach, I want gifts. The Voice
answered again, I will give thee gifts, and fit thee* Moody replied, I am a
poor man, and have no means to maintain me therein. The Voice said, Meet me at
such a place (and so named both time and place) and I will supply thee with
silver and gold, and so departed. The next day John Moody acquainted one or
more of his Christian acquaintance; and they fearing it was a delusion, advised
him to be very careful what he did, and dissuaded him from going, counselling
him if it came again, he should ask who he was, and particularly, whether he
was Jesus of Nazareth (for it was he that had power to send out Ministers.) The
Devil came again either the next night, or within few nights after, in the same
manner, asking him, Why he did not go upon his message. John Moody asked him
who it was that sent him; the Voice answered, I am God. But says he, Art thou
Jesus of Nazareth. The Voice said again, I am God. Then John Moody resolutely
answered, If thou be not that Jesus that suffered at Jerusalem, and that sits
at the right hand of God in Heaven, I will not go. Thereupon the Devil
departed, making a great noise, and taking part of the top of the house away
with him. This was the substance, and the thing undoubtedly true.

Thus far are the very words of Mr. Powels Letter. Now if this Man had not
questioned this thing, but gone into the West to preach, he and others who
heard the relation, might have judged that it was an extraordinary call and
commission which this man had from Heaven, and that with seeming greater
grounds than what others pretend for their extraordinary commissions; whereas
upon further search, you perceive it was the Devil was sending a good man out
of his way; if he being no Minister had then preached upon this sending, he had
been a Messenger of the Devil, and not a Messenger of Jesus Christ. For my
part, I cannot believe that any are called and commissioned by Christ to
preach, unless they can show their call and commission in the Scripture; Take
heed then (my Beloved) especially you which are young, that if gifts increase
you be not puffed up with pride, and begin first to undervalue Christ's
Ministers, and think you can do their work better your selves, and so venture
to transgress Scripture-rules by preaching without commission and
Scripture-warrant; very dangerous may the consequences of such preaching be, as
I could give some instances. God has appointed one Office for this work of
Preaching, and that is the Office of the Ministry; and though he have Angels
about him full of wisdom and knowledge in the mysteries of salvation, yet he
does not employ them in the work, but qualifieth and calls some men unto it;
and if Angels which are not Ministers of the Gospel must not preach, much less
may men do it who are not Ministers.

2. This reproves such as take upon them to be Ministers, and are no
Preachers. God makes use of Ministers to preach the Gospel rather than Angels,
therefore they ought to preach, or they are unworthy to be Ministers. Such as
call themselves Ministers, but are ignorant and unskilful in the work of
preaching, which Ministers are called unto; such as take upon them to be
teachers of others, and have need to be taught themselves which be the first
Principles of the Oracles of God, and are children, yea babes in understanding,
being unacquainted with the Word of righteousness and mysteries of salvation:
Such who know not how to divide the Word of God aright, and give every one his
portion; whose Sermons are like wood, and hey, and stubble, without any silver,
or gold, or precious stones of spiritual, heavenly and soul-saving doctrine;
who give men chaff instead of corn, and stones instead of bread; who fill their
Sermons with frothy wit, or husky quotations of Authors, or knotty
School-notions, and distinctions, or secret, bitter invectives, and
scorpion-slings and lashes at the power of godliness, instead of convincing,
soul-edifying truths, which may administer grace unto the hearers; they will
have a fearful account to give unto the great Shepherd, when he shall appear
to make inquiry concerning the flock committed to their charge, and shall
charge upon them the guilt of the blood of so many souls as have perished
through their neglect. Are there not many such Ministers at this day in England
that can neither pray without a book, nor preach without a book; I do not speak
of those Ministers who road their own Notes which they have studied in their
Closets, but of them which read others Notes, as if they were their own unto
the people. It is not long since I spoke with a Bookseller, who has sold many
Manuscript Sermons unto such, who signified plainly enough unto him the use
they intended to put them unto. Yea some have been so audacious as to preach
out of the Printed Books of others, as is well known both in the City and other
places; yet, however such as cannot make their own Sermons are not fit to be
Ministers of the Gospel, they may by reading good wholesome Sermons of others be
more beneficial to the people, than those who without acquaintance with the
Word, preach their own, but it is such raw, crude, indigest^d, unprofitable
matter, as raises blushes in the cheeks of the judicious, and rendereth them
ridiculous unto the most that hear them. Surely, no Angel from Heaven would
have directed a Cornel^us to send for such Ministers to preach the Gospel unto
him.

3. This reproves such who blemish their Ministry by an Ungodly Conversation;
when God honors Ministers so as to employ them to preach the Gospel, rather
than Angels, God does expect that they should be Angelical in their Doctrine,
and Angelical in their Lives; some there are that be so in their Doctrine, but
their Lives are so loose and intemperate, that they both cast a blot upon their
Function, and invalidate their Doctrine, yea are hereby instruments of
hardening the wicked more effectually than if they could not preach at all. I
have heard of a woman who sat under the Ministry of one who preached very
powerfully, but lived very wickedly, whereupon she was tempted to Atheism; of
which she gave this reason to him upon demand of the cause, that it was from
himself, That when she heard him preach so like an Angel, and saw him live so
like a Devil, she was thence prone to believe that there was no God. We read of
the wickedness of Eli's Sons, who were Priests, which made the offering of the
Lord to be abhorred, 1 Samuel 2.17. And so the drunkenness, uncleanness,
covetousness, oppression, and profaneness of many in our days, who call
themselves Ministers, makes the administration of Gods Ordinances by such
persons to be abhorred by many serious and sober-minded Christians. None are
more honorable than such Ministers as tread in their Masters steps, as are
holy and exemplary in their conversition: But wicked Ministers of all others
are the vilest and most contemptible; they are spots and blemishes in the body
of the Church; they are the scum, the filth, and offscouring of the pot; the
foam and froath of the water; they are Trees without Fruit, Salt without
savor, Candles without light; they are a deep pit, full of mire and dirt; they
are Clouds without rain, for whom the mist of darkness is reserved for ever.

4. This reproves such as will hearken to the Devil rather than to Ministers,
though God employeth them to preach the Gospel rather than Angels.

1. And first this reproves them that hearken to the Devil when he persuades
them to sin, and will not hearken unto Ministers who persuade them to accept of
Jesus Christ: Such as readily open the door when Satan knocks, though he be
their enemy, and intend their ruin; but shut the door, and deafen the ear
against the calls of Ministers in the Name of Christ, though they be their
friends, and seek their salvation: Such are persuaded by the Devil to wound
themselves by sin, to drink sweet po^son which will introduce eternal death,
and suffer themselves to be drawn in the Chains of Satan, in the broad way to
Hell, but will not hearken to Ministers, who are spiritual Physicians, and
would endeavor the cure of their deadly wounds, who are spiritual Guides, and
would lead them in the way to Heaven. None in the world are such fools as those
persons who are Satan's slaves, and led captive by him in the cords of their own
lusts: They are blinded and deluded, the Devil puts the greatest cheat upon
them, and beguileth them (worse than children are beguiled) of such things,
that when their eyes are opened at the last, and they perceive what they have
lost by their sins, which the Devil has drawn them unto, and that their loss
is irreparable; and when they are awakened to feel the pain and torment which
the Devil by sin has brought them unto, and they see that now it is
unavoidable, and though so intolerable, yet will be eternal; they will then
be ready to tear themselves to pieces for their folly and madness, that they
should hearken to the Devil, and not hearken to Christ's Ministers: that when
the Devil proffered only Counters, but Ministers Gold, that which is more
precious than fine Gold; when the Devil proffered Pebbles, Ministers the Jewel
of the greatest price; when the Devil proffered Pictures, such as all worldly
vanities are, but Ministers proffered Deeds of Conveyance to a great
Inheritance, even a conveyance of the eternal Inheritance by the deed of the
King of Heaven. O the folly and sottishness of sinners! that they should choose
the former, and refuse the latter; that they should sow the winds all their
days, grasp a shadow, pursue a F^ather, follow lying vanities, through Satan's
persuasions, and hereby not only neglect and miss of mercy which Ministers
brought to their doors; but also run headlong into the flames of everlasting
burnings, when Ministers warned them so frequently hereof, and entreated them
so earnestly to close with Christ, who alone could deliver them; they will then
perceive too late and rue to no purpose their desperate madness in complying
with Satan's temptations, and neglecting the calls and counsels of Christ's
faithful Ambassadors.

2. It reproves such as hearken to the Devil when he persuades them unto
damnable errors, and will not hearken to Christ's Ministers, who would teach
and establish them in the soul-saving truths of the Word. Satan does appear
many times like an Angel of light, 2 Cor. 11.14. not as the Angel did to
Cornelius, to direct men unto Christ's Ministers, but to draw them away,
endeavoring the subversion of the Ministry and Ordinances of Christ's
Institution. Satan has his Ministers, who appear like Ministers of
righteousness, when indeed they are Wolves in Sheeps clothing, who by good
words and fair speeches deceive the hearts of the simple, Romans 16.18. who are
deceived themselves, and labor to deceive others: First endeavoring to
prejudice them against Christ's Ministers, and then privily bringing in damnable
heresies, wresting the Scripture to their own and others destruction. Where
people do turn away their ears from the truth, and open them to their errors
and delusions, when they forsake and cannot endure the sound teaching of
Christ's Ambassadors, but with itching ears are delighted with the pretended
new discoveries of false Teachers, and greedily drink in the poison of their
false doctrines, and follow the p^rnicious ways of such as are given up to the
efficacy of error to believe lies; they choose the Devil for their Teacher,
instead of Jesus Christ by his Ministers, and then you may easily guess whither
he is like to lead them.

SECT. III.
Use 2. FOR Exhortation 1. Of Ministers. 2. Of People.


1. For exhortation of Ministers: Does God make use of Ministers to preach the
Gospel, rather than Angels? It is a great honor the Lord has put upon us, and
there is great duty which the Lord does expect from us. Let this consideration
1. Q^icken us to diligence and faithfulness in Preaching. 2. Engage us to a
blameless and exemplary conversation.


1. Let us be diligent and faithful in preaching the Gospel. Let us be instant
in season and out of season to reprove, rebuke, exhort with all long-suffering
and doctrine, 2 Timothy 4.2. In meekness instructing those that oppose themselves,
if peradventure the Lord will give them repentance, 2 Timothy 2.25. Let us fulfill
the Ministry the Lord has entrusted us with, Col. 4.17. serving the Lord, and
the souls committed to our charge, with all humility of mind, and faithfulness;
keeping back nothing which is profitable for them, that we may keep our selves
pure from the blood of all men. Let us testify repentance toward God, and
faith toward the Lord Jesus Christ, and open the treasures of the Gospel, and
mysteries of the Kingdom of Heaven, with all plainness and perspicuity, dealing
forth wholesome food unto hungry souls, as faithful Stewards of the manifold
grace of God. Let us not use deceit, or guile, or flattering words, or a cloak
for covetousness or uncleanness, or boasting words, but as we are allowed of
God to be put in trust with the Gospel; so let us speak and preach, not as
pleasing men, but as pleasing God, who searches the heart; being so
affectionately desirous of the salvation of souls, as to be willing to impart
unto them our souls with the Gospel if we could, and it would do them good. And
let us not count estate, or liberty, or life it self dear to us, that we finish
our course with joy, and the Ministry we have received from the Lord, Act. 20.
1 These. 2. 1 Pet. 4.

2. Let the honor the Lord has conferred upon us, engage us unto a blameless
and exemplary conversation. Let our conversations shine with holiness, as well
as our Sermons shine with truths: Let us teach by our life, as well as by our
doctrine: Let us be examples to the Believers in word, in conversation, in
charity, in spirit, in faith, in purity, 1 Timothy 4.12. Let the way to Heaven be
read in our steps: Let us be blameless, and harmless, the Sons of God, and
Ministers of Christ without rebuke in the midst of a crooked generation,
amongst whom let us shine as lights, as we hope hereafter to shine like stars:
We are employed to preach rather than Angels; let us live as if we were Angels
on earth, and as those who hope to live with Angels in Heaven.

2. For Exhortation of People. Does God make use of Ministers to preach the
Gospel, rather than Angels?

Be exhorted then 1. To love and esteem Your Ministers. 2. To Hear Your
Ministers. 3. To Believe Your Ministers. 4. To Obey. Your Ministers.


1. Esteem and love your Ministers, 1 These. 5.12, 13. We beseech you Brethren,
that you know them which labor am^^gst you, and are over you in the Lord, that
you esteem them very highly in love for the works sake. How beautiful should
the feet of them be that bring glad tidings of good things? How welcome should
their voice be that preach the Gospel of peace? Romans 10.15. We read of some who
had so great love to the Apostle, that they could have plucked out their eyes,
and given to him, yet his affection was greater, for he could have plucked out
his heart and given to them. How should people love their Ministers, who are
their spiritual Fathers, and Nurses, and Physicians? Love them, they are your
soul-friends, and therefore your best friends: Esteem them, they are Christ's
Ambassadors and Representatives. The Galatians received the Apostle Paul,
notwithstanding his infirmities, as an Angel of God, even as Christ Jesus, Gal.
4.13, 14. Give them reverence as those which stand in the room of Christ, and
are in this honored above Angels to be employed by the Lord to preach the
Gospel. Give them countenance; do not forsake them when they fall into trouble
for the Gospels sake: give them maintenance* they impart their spirituals unto
you, and you ought to impart your carnal things (far beneath in worth) unto
them, and this by the Lords ordination, 1 Cor. 9.11, 12, 13, 14. Give them
audience, which is the second thing.

2. Hear Ministers. Woe be to them if they do not preach the Gospel, when they
are commissioned to the work, rather than Angels; and woe be to you, if you do
not hear the Gospel which they preach: He that hears them, hears Christ,
Luke 10.16. And they that turn away their ears from hearing them, it will be
more tolerable for the Land of Sodom in the day of Judgment, than for such
persons, verse. 11.

3. Believe Ministers, what they preach out of the Word of God* it is not their
own, but is of Divine Authority, and therefore is true infallibly. Believe in
Christ whom they tender to you by the preaching of the Gospel; they call you to
repentance, hearken unto them; they hold forth Christ, believe in him, close
with him by faith. If you do not repent and believe by their preaching, you
will not by any other means, no, though God should send some out of the other
world to preach unto you. If a Dives should come from Hell to his wicked
brethren, and tell them what torments he felt, and must endure there for ever
for such sins as they lived in the practice of, and that they were like to come
to the same place if they did not repent, this might affrighten them, but it
would not convert them: If they believe not Moses and the Prophets, neither
would they be persuaded though one should rise from the dead and preach unto
them, Luke 16.31. Suppose that God should send unto you which are wicked from
Hell, and let loose one of your wicked companions out of the dark prison, where
he has been filled with unexpressible anguish under the sense of Gods
immediate wrath, which has immediately been laid upon him; and he should
appear to any of you who are going on in a course of such sins as once he
joined with you in, and should come, and should appear to you in the dark,
silent night, and awaken you out of your sleep with a hideous noise, and there
roar out before you under the sense of the pain which he does endure, crying
out of his drunkenness, his uncleanness, his swearing, and Sabbath-breaking,
and should tell you that for such sins he is tormented most horribly, and must
be tormented eternally; and that your sins unrepented of will certainly be
punished with the like plagues. This might startle you, and scare you (it may
be) out of your wits, but it would not convert you from your sins. If you be
not persuaded to repent by the preaching of Ministers, who as certainly
foretell you of the same eternal Judgments out of the Word of God, which are
prepared in Hell for the impenitent, and with whose preaching God has promised
his blessing, which alone can make any means effectual for working repentance;
surely the other means without his blessing, which he has no where promised,
would be ineffectual. Or suppose that an Angel should come down from Heaven,
and tell you what he has there seen and enjoyed, and how happy all true
Believers departed are in the vision and fruition of God, and should set forth
the joys of Heaven with such words as no man can utter; and withal should
invite sinners unto Christ, that they might through him have a title unto, and
at length share in this glory and happiness; yet if they do not believe, and
will not be persuaded to come to Christ by the preaching of Ministers, which is
accompanied with the holy Ghost sent down from Heaven, 1 Pet. 1.12 which is
more than if an Angel should be sent down from Heaven; they would not be
persuaded by the preaching of an Angel.

4. Obey Ministers, Heb. 13.17. Obey them which have the rule over you, for
they watch for your souls, (...) they that must give an account. And you also
must give an account; what they command you out of the Word of God, obey, as if
God spoke to you with an audible voice from Heaven; and what they forbid out of
the Word of God, forbear, as you wi^^^ answer it at the great day.

SECT. IV.
Doct. 2. THat Ministers are to tell people such word^ whereby they may be
saved.

In handling of which point I shall first show what salvation is here meant,
and what it is for a people to be saved. 2. What words Ministers are to tell
people whereby they may be saved. 3. How they are to tell the people such
words. 4. Why Ministers must tell people words whereby they may be saved, where
I shall give the Reasons of the point. 5. And lastly, Make some application.

1. The first thing is to show, what salvation is here meant, and what it is
for a people to be saved.

Negatively, we are not here to understand any temporal salvation; not a
salvation from numerous, potent and furious earthly enemies, which come forth
against Gods Israel to destroy them; not a preservation from a Senacharibs
host, or an Ethiopian Myriad, ^r the confederate bands of Moab and Ammon, and
^lount Seir, who join together to cut off the name of Gods people from the face
of the earth; not a ^escuing from Egyptian bondage, or Babylonian capti^ity, or
Turkish Vassallage; not an opening of prison doors, a pulling out of deep
dungeons, and ^nocking off strong Iron chains and shackles; not a sheltring of
houses from fire, when in danger of being ^onsumed, or of persons from the evil
arrows of Pe^tilence, when they fly thick about the ears; not a ^eliverance
from sore pain of body, or violent sickness, or any outward calamity which
might render the life grievous, and keeping off for a while the ^ruel stroke of
temporal death, which none can long ^scape.

But positively, by salvation here we are to understand spiritual and eternal
salvation; and a people may be said to be saved in the sense of the Text,

1. When they are saved from the wrath and displeasure of an angry
sin-revenging God, who is the most potent and furious enemy against whom there
is no lifting up the hand to defend, when he lifts up the hand to destroy. The
whole world of mankind is guilty of sin before God; our first Parents sinned,
and ^n them all their posterity, who are conceived and born in sin, and unto
all of whom sin is natural, un^ill the nature be renewed. And, as when the
Angels ^inned, they were cast out of Heaven, and became Devils; so when our
first Parents sinned, they were cast out of Paradise, and since all sinners are
out of favor; yea, they lie under Gods anger and displeasure, until they be
reconciled: All the children of men are by nature the children of wrath, Ephesians.
2.3. And God is angry with the wicked every day* Psalm. 7.11. They have a
natural enmity in their hearts against God and his Law, Romans 8.7. and God is an
enemy unto them* yea, has a hatred in his heart against all the workers of
iniquity, Psalm. 5.6. God is an enemy unto the wicked, because of their sins;
and this is worse ten thousand degrees, than (...) they had all the creatures
in the world their enemies* because of the power of his anger, which none ca^
resist, when once he suffers it to break forth. We read of the stout-hearted,
and men of might, the chariot and horse cast into a dead sleep at one o^ Gods
rebukes, and who can stand in his sight where once he is angry, Psalm. 76.5, 6,
7. And God is coming forth with armed vengeance against his enemies* he has
prepared instruments of death; he has when his sword, and girt it upon his
thigh; yea, drawn it forth, and lifted up his arm to strike; he has bent his
bow, and made ready his arrows upon the string, and sinners can neither fly
from him, nor defend themselves against him. Then a people are saved indeed,
when they are saved from Gods displeasure, when his anger, and the guilt of
their sin, which is the cause, is removed; when their peace is made with God,
through the mediation of Jesus Christ, when God forgiveth all their sins, and
accepts of them as perfectly righteous in his sight, through the imputation
of his Sons righteousness unto them, and so puts up, and lays aside his
sword, unbends his bow, and casts it behind his back, and receives them into
favor, as if they had never offended him.

2. When they are saved from the slavery of the Devil, and their own lusts. All
the wicked are spiritual slaves and vassals, they are in worse than Egyptian
bondage, their thraldom and captivity is greater, than that of the Jews once to
the Babylonians: The Devil has his fetters upon their hands and feet, and
leads them captive by the chains of their own lusts at his will, 2 Timothy 2.26.
They are shut up as it were in prison, and lie in a deep dark dungeon, where no
light does shine; they are fallen into a horrible pit, and their feet stick in
the miery clay; they are sunk into deep waters, and the stream is gone over
their soul; they are fallen into a deadly sickness, and a loathsome disease
has seized upon their spirits; they are full of boils, and blains, and
putrefying sores, all this and a thousand times worse is their condition,
through the power and reign of sin in them; then a people are saved in a
spiritual sense, when they are redeemed from sin and Satan, when the Lord Jesus
Christ does rescue them out of the Devils chains, when he leads captivity
captive, spoileth principalities and powers, and snatcheth them like a prey out
of the teeth of the roaring Lion, when he delivers them from the power of
darkness, and translateth them into the household and family of God, when he
brings them out of the house of bondage, and leads them out of Egypt through
the Red Sea of his own blood, in which he drowneth and destroys their
Egyptian lusts which do pursue them, when he opens the prison doors, and
pulls them out of the deep dungeon, and knocks off the chains from their feet,
when he breaks the bonds of the Devil, and sin, and brings them forth into
freedom and enlargement; when he takes them out of the pit, and draws them out
of the water; when he heals their sickness, cleanses and cures their
putrefying sores; I mean, when he delivers them from the power of sin which
entangled, overwhelmed and defiled them, and was more dangerous than any
sickness of body could be unto them: then they are saved, when Satan is taken
off, and sin has no more dominion over them, and the Throne of Christ is
erected in their hearts, and his graces implanted there, which do beautify
them instead of lust, which did besmear and deform them; when being made free
from sin and Satan, they are become the Servants of God, and yield up their
members as instruments of righteousness, Romans 6.13, 22. when they are enabled
to overcome the Devil and his temptations, and to crucify the flesh with its
lusts and affections; when the old Serpent is wounded in the head, and cast
out, and the old man is wounded in the heart, and its reigning power taken
down, and they are made victorious through Christ the Captain of their
salvation who loves them.

3. When they are saved from the Law; not only from the yoke and bondage of the
Ceremonial Law, which the Jewish Church of old was under, which required many
burdensome, expensive, and more carnal services, but also from the rigor,
irritation, curse and malediction of the Moral Law. The Law is like the
Egyptian Taskmasters, who required Brick of the Israelites, but gave no Straw;
it requires duty, perfect obedience, but gives no strength; it discovers
sin, but gives no power to overcome it; and it enjoyneth service, but it
gives no ability to perform it; therefore the Law is said to be weak through
sinful flesh, Romans 8.3. Yea the Law when it breaks in with a full spiritual
light and conviction of sin upon the spirit, forbidding heart concupiscence,
and the least motion or inclination of the soul to sin, and pressing to
spiritual and heart-purity and obedience; it is so far from beating down and
killing the power of sin, and from strengthening the soul, and enabling it unto
obedience, that it does revive the power of sin, which seemed to be dead before
in the soul, and occasionally does irritate and provoke to all manner of
concupiscence; the discovering it awakens the enmity of the heart against it
self, which lay before dormant. As the Apostle does complain, Romans 7.5. For
when we were in the flesh, the motions of sin which were by the Law, did work
in our members to bring forth fruit unto death. And v. 7, 8. Sin taking
occasion by the Law wrought in me all manner of concupiscence; for without the
Law sin was dead, but when the Commandment came, sin revived, and I dyed.
Moreover, the Law does curse all the children of men that are within its power
and reach, because of their sins, which none are wholly free from, Gal. 3.10.
For as many as are of the works of the Law, are under the curse: for it is
written, Cursed is every one that continues not in all things which are
written in the Book of the Law to do them. People are saved from the Law when
they are delivered from the rigorous yoke of the Moral Law, which is called the
Law of sin and death, as it occasioneth sin, and threatens death for it; or
discovers our death and utter insufficiency of our selves to obey its
injunctions; and have instead thereof, their necks put under the sweet and
easy yoke of the Law of Christ, which is called the Law of the spirit of life
in Christ Jesus, because life and strength is given by the Spirit of Christ, to
yield obedience thereunto: As Romans 8.2. For the Law of the Spirit of Life in
Christ Jesus has made me free from the Law of sin and death. And verse. 3, 4.
For what the Law could not do, in that it was weak through the flesh, God
sending his own Son in the likeness of sinful flesh, and for sin condemned sin
in the flesh; that the Righteousness of the Law might be fulfilled in us who
walk not after the flesh, but after the spirit. The Law could not give strength
against sin, because of the strength of the flesh; the Law discovered sin, but
it could not subdue sin; but God sending his own Son in the likeness of sinful
flesh, in which flesh he suffered and offered a sacrifice for sin, by which
sin, or sin-offering (as the word sin does elsewhere signify; as Hos. 4.8.
They eat the sins of my people, that is, the sin offerings of my people) he
condemned sin in the flesh; sin was hereby judged and condemned to lose its
power in his people; it was condemned to death, which death or sin-offering of
Christ has virtue and influence upon sin to kill it, to crucify it, like as
Christ was crucified for it; and so Gods people are said to be delivered from
the Law, from the irritating and provoking power of it unto sin, that being
dead wherein they were held, and whereby the Law did stir up such motions, that
they might serve in newness of spirit, Romans 7.6. that they might yield the
fruits of new obedience, that the Righteousness of the Law might be fulfilled
in them, sin having lost its strength, they have strength from the Spirit of
Christ to yield such obedience to the Law, as through Christ shall be accepted:
And with this deliverance of people from the rigor and irritation of the Law
is conjoined their deliverance also from the curse and malediction, by Jesus
Christ, who was made a curse for them; instead whereof the blessing of Abraham
the father of the faithful, is given unto them, as it is expressly said, Gal.
3.13, 14. Christ has redeemed us from the curse of the Law, being made a curse
for us, as it is written, Cursed is every one that hangs on a tree, that the
blessing of Abraham might come upon the Gentiles through Faith.

4. When they are saved from the eternal damnation of Hell; all unbelieving
sinners are under the sentence of damnation, Ioh. 3.18. He that believes not
is condemned already; they are condemned by the great Judge unto an utter
exclusion from the glorious presence of the Lord in that place of joy and
happiness which is above, and to endure most horrid, extreme and endless
anguish and torment in soul and body, in the place of utter darkness which is
beneath, where their worm shall never dye, and where the fire shall never be
quenched: This sentence is dreadful, and all unbelievers are liable every
moment to the execution thereof upon their souls. So soon as God shall give
commission to the Sergeant Death to arrest them, and clap up their bodies into
the Prison of the grave, then their souls being found guilty will be delivered
into the hand of the Devil the Jailor of Hell, whither he will drag them, and
where they must remain full of anguish, through sense of Gods immediate wrath
wherewith they will be filled, and bound up in chains of darkness and woe until
the Judgment of the great day; on which great day the Lord Jesus Christ will
be sent by God to judge the whole world together, and they shall be brought
forth in chains to his bar, and having reassumed their bodies shall be judged
by him soul and body unto the flames of everlasting fire prepared for the Devil
and his Angels; and O the dread and horror which will then possess them: O the
howlings and bitter lamentations which then they will make, when the God of
Heaven shall execute the fierceness of his anger upon them for their sins, in
the extreme and remediless torments of Hell which shall never have an end. The
sentence of eternal damnation which all unbelievers, whilst such, are under
here is dreadful, yet whilst here it is reversible, whilst the reprieve of
execution lasts, a repeal of the sentence may be obtained, by an appeal from
the Court of the Law, to the Court of Chancery, from the Bar of Gods Justice
to the Throne of Grace, by application of themselves unto Christ to be their
Advocate, and of his Righteousness to themselves by Faith, whereby Justice has
been satisfied, and they may be acquitted. People are saved from eternal
damnation, when through an interest in Christ they obtain pardoning mercy, and
so are freed from all obligation to punishment by their sins; hence it is said
that there is no condemnation to them which are in Christ Jesus, Romans 8.1. and
they that believe, are not condemned, Joh. 3.18. and that because Jesus is
their Savior, and has delivered them from the wrath which is to come, 1 Thessalonians. 1.10. Believers have a title to eternal salvation here through their
title to Christ; it is sure, and they may be assured of it; but hereafter they
shall actually obtain it at the day of Judgment and perdition of the ungodly,
when the wicked shall be condemned, and thrust into the place of torments, they
shall be acquitted, saved, and received into Heavenly Mansions, prepared by
their Redeemer for them in his Fathers house, where there is fullness of joy,
and pleasures for evermore, and so they shall march along with him unto the
Zion which is above with shouting and the voice of triumph, with Songs in their
mouths, and unspeakable delight in their hearts; they shall then obtain
everlasting joy and gladness, and sorrow and sighing shall flee away, and no
place be found for it to dwell, where they shall take up their eternal abode.
This is the Salvation which is here meant, and which God has promised to show
unto them who believe, and order their conversation aright: And thus you see
what it is for a people to be saved.

SECT. V.
2. THE second thing is, To show what those Words are which Ministers are to
tell people whereby they may be saved. And here I shall for the present speak
only of those words which the Apostle Peter told Cornelius, whereby he and his
house were saved; there was great power and virtue which went along with them,
for it is said, whilst he was speaking of them, the Holy Ghost fell upon the
Gentiles unto whom he preached, as upon the Apostles themselves at the
beginning, chap. 10.44. and therefore they are worthy your serious regard;
possibly you that are unconverted in the hearing or reading these words, may
have the Holy Ghost fall upon you, and feel such a wonderful power going along
with them, as shall draw you unto Christ, and bring you out of the estate of
spiritual death and damnation in which you are by nature, into a state of life
and salvation; whilst I am speaking to your ears, God may speak to your
hearts, whilst I am presenting these words before you, and holding forth the
light unto you, God may open your eyes, and give you by his Spirit such a
spiritual discerning of these things as you never had before, and so affect
your hearts, as no word of man is able to do: hear then a Sermon of God out of
the mouth of the Apostle Peter, which has been effectual for conversion, and
who knows but it may produce the same effect in some of you in the repetition
and explication of it, as it did in the Gentiles in the first preaching of it?
It is said, the Holy Ghost fell upon all them which heard these words when
Peter preached them; O that the Holy Ghost might fall upon some of you whilst
I am preaching them! The Gentiles had extraordinary gifts of the Holy Ghost
given unto them in their hearing Peter, O that you might have a true work of
conversion by the Holy Ghost given in the hearing of me! They are the Words of
God, receive them as his words, which may effectually work to your salvation,
if the Lord give faith in the hearing. Look up then to the Lord for his
blessing, on which the efficacy of the Word does depend. The words are in Act.
10. from the 34th to the 44th Verse. I shall first read them, and then open
these words of salvation to you. After that Cornelius had sent for Peter to
Ioppa, he sent for many of his friends to his house, and when they were come
together, and Peter was come, and had a relation from Cornelius of his ^ision,
and they had told him, that they were all there present before God, to hear the
things which were commanded him of God. Verse. 34. he begins his Sermon. Then
Peter opened his mouth, and said, Of a truth I perceive, that God is no
respecter of persons* but in every Nation he that fears him and works
righteousness is accepted with him. The Word which God sent unto the Children
of Israel, preaching peace by Jesus Christ (he is Lord of all) That Word (I
say) ye know, which was published throughout all Judea, and began from Galilee,
after the Baptism which John preached: How God anointed Jesus of Nazareth with
the Holy Ghost, and with power, who went about doing good, and healing all that
were oppressed of the Devil, for God was with him. And we are witnesses of all
things which he did, both in the land of Judea, and in Jerusalem, whom they
slew and hanged on a tree: him God raised up the third day, and showed him
openly; not to all the people, but to witnesses chosen before of God, even to
us who did eat and drink with him after he rose from the dead. And he commanded
us to preach unto the people, and to testify, that it was he which was
ordained of God to be the Judge of quick and dead. To him gave all the Prophets
witness, that through his Name, whosoever believes on him shall receive
remission of sins.

This Sermon of Peter's, which is the first Sermon which was preached unto the
Gentiles after the partition wall was broken down, is but brief, but it has
much sweet and soul-saving doctrine in it, and it is likely that the Scripture
does b^t briefly rehearse the heads of that which the Apostle discoursed of
more largely unto them; and therefore I shall endeavor to open this Sermon
unto you, which is like a rich Cabinet of most precious treasure, wherein is to
be found the Pearl of the greatest price, which the wise Merchant-man will
sell all that he has to obtain, because it is not only desirable to enrich
him, but also necessary to save him; I mean the Lord Jesus Christ whom the
Apostle does describe and hold forth unto the Gentiles. We read, Luke 24.31.
that the Disciples hearts burned within them, whilst our Savior spoke to them
by the way, and opened to them the Scriptures, and O that you might feel your
hearts burn within you, whilst I am opening unto you this Scripture, which
does relate Peter's Sermon.

The Sermon of Peter may be reduced to Four general heads.

1. Concerning God. 2. Concerning the Word. 3. Concerning Jesus Christ. 4.
Concerning the way of salvation by Christ.
SECT. VI.
1. THE Apostle speaks unto the Gentiles concerning God, v. 34. and 35. Of a
truth I perceive that God is no respecter of persons, but in every Nation he
that fears him and works righteousness is accepted with him. Two things he
gives them to understand concerning God.

1. His gracious disposition to accept of Men. 2. His good will toward the
Gentiles.
1. He lets them know how gracious God was in being willing to accept of men,
of any men, without respect of persons, whatever their sins had been, so that
they did turn from them, in his fear, and wrought righteousness for the future.
This is needful for sinners to know, that they might be encouraged to seek
after salvation: For if they apprehend God only as he is holy, and just, and
jealous, if they are told only that he is powerful and furious, and a
sin-revenging God; when they reflect upon their guilt, they will be ready to
fly away from him, under a slavish fear of punishment, and in discouragement
and despair go on in the practice of sin as long as they can: Therefore
Ministers must represent God unto sinners as gracious and merciful, slow to
anger, and of great kindness, pardoning iniquity, transgression and sin, as he
sets forth himself to Moses, Exodus 34.6, 7. they must tell sinners, that God is
gracious, and ready to accept of all those that fear him, and turn from their
evil ways, and resolve to work righteousness for the time to come, and that he
will be found of, and give a reward unto all such as diligently seek him, Heb.
11.6. He that comes to God, must believe that he is, and that he is a rewarder
of all them that diligently seek him. O that you who are going on in sin, were
persuaded of this, how gracious and merciful the Lord is, whom you do so highly
offend by sin, and how ready he is to accept of you, if you would but turn from
sin: He has given us Ministers commission to tell you, that there is an
accepted time, and a day of salvation for your souls, which he yet lengthens
out unto you: Yea, we are sent as his Ambassadors to entreat and beseech you
that you would be reconciled unto God, 2 Cor. 5.20. And when God declares by us
that he is so willing to accept of you, that he desires you to accept of his
salvation, and beseeches a reconciliation, when he can so easily avenge
himself upon you, and glorify his justice and wrath in your destruction, and
stands in no need of you, only for your own sake entreats you to be
reconciled, that you might not be destroyed, that you might not even force him
to punish you, which he will do with a witness, and with a vengeance, if you
refuse: Methinks this amazing condescension and kindness of God should astonish
you, and stop you in the way of sin, and make you tremble, and let fall your
weapons out of your hand, with which you have been fighting against him, and
cast your selves with shame and self-loathing at his feet, grieving at the very
heart, that ever you offended a God of such infinite loving kindness.

2. Peter tells them further of Gods good will towar^s the Gentiles, that in
every Nation whoever feared him should be accepted with him. They were Gentiles
whom he preached unto, and they might have feared that salvation was only to be
found amongst the Jews; and that however God were gracious and ready to receive
men unto favor that feared him, yet that God having made choice of but one
Nation in the world to be his peculiar people, and they being none of that
Nation, that no grace or mercy was attainable by them, who were Heathens, who
are called the people of his wrath. Therefore Peter gives them to understand,
that however God had set narrow bounds to his Church formerly, and confined his
mercy to one Nation, yet that now the hedge and middle wall of partition was
broken down, and any Nation might find acceptance. This was the first
appearance and breaking forth of Gods mercy toward the Gentiles, in that he
declares himself now to be no longer a respecter of Nations, but that other
Nations should taste of his favor as well as the Jews. This was intended from
the beginning by God, and foretold long before by the Prophets. See Isa. 49.18,
19, 20, 21, 23. Lift up thine eyes (speaking to the Church) round about; behold
all these gather themselves together, and come to thee: as I live, says the
Lord, thou shall surely clothe thee with them all as with an ornament, and
bind them on thee, as a Bride does; the Land shall be too narrow; the children
which thou shall have after thou have lost the other, shall say in thine ears,
the place is too strait for me, give place to me that I may dwell. Then shall
thou say in thine heart, Who has begotten me these, seeing I have lost my
children, and am desolate? and who has brought up th^se? Thus says the Lord,
Behold I will lift up mine hand unto the Gentiles, and set up my standard to
the people, and they shall bring thy Sons in their arms, and thy Daughters
shall be carried upon their shoulders, etc. And chap. 54.1, 2, 3. Sing O barren
that did not bear, break forth into singing and cry aloud, Thou that did
not travel with child, for more are the children of the desolate, than of the
married wife, says the Lord. Enlarge the place of thy Tent, and let them
stretch forth the curtains of thine habitations: Spare not, lengthen thy cords,
and strengthen thy stakes; for thou shall break forth on the right hand, and on
the left, and thy seed shall inherit the Gentiles, and make the desolate Cities
to be inhabited, etc. And the Apostle Paul writing to the Gentile Romans, which
were converted to the Christian Faith, makes mention of diverse Prophecies
together, of Gods good will which he intended to show unto the Gentiles,
through his Lord Jesus Christ; as you may read, Romans 15.9, 10, 11, 12. And that
the Gentiles may glorify God for his mercy, (...) it is written, for this
cause will I confess unto thee amongst the Gentiles, and sing unto thy Name.
And again he says, Rejoice ye Gentiles with his people. And again, Praise the
Lord all ye Gentiles, and laud him all ye people. And again Isaiah says, There
shall be a root of Iesse, and he that shall rise to reign over the Gentiles,
and in him shall the Gentiles trust. And this he writes for their encouragement
and comfort, that they might be filled with all joy and peace in believing,
verse. 13. Now the time was come for the fulfilling of these Prophecies, when
Christ was come, who had reconciled unto God both Jew and Gentile in one body
by the Cross, breaking down the middle wall of partition between them, and
destroying that which was an occasion of enmity, even the Law of Commandments
contained in Ordinances, for to make in himself of twain one new man so making
peace, Ephesians. 3.14, 15, 16. Therefore he gave Commandment to his Disciples,
after his resurrection, to preach the Gospel unto all Nations, and here sends
Peter to Cornelius, and them that were with him. This is ground of singular
comfort and encouragement unto us who are Gentiles, that the Lord has good
will for us, and has sent his Gospel to be preached amongst us by his
Ministers, which may give further hopes of your attaining salvation, when God
has given you the means, and sends his Ministers to preach to you such words
whereby you may be saved.

SECT. VII.
^. PEter speaks to them concerning the Word which God sent unto the children
of Israel; and he tells of a twofold Word sent to them by God.

1. The Word of Repentance, which he calls the ^aptism which John preached unto
them. 2. The Word of Peace which was preached unto them by Jesus Christ.
1. He tells them that God sent a Word by John to the children of Israel, and
that was a word and Baptism of Repentance which he preached. John was Christ's
^orerunner, who went before his face to prepare his way, and to make the people
ready for the entertainment of Christ: He came to level the mountains of pride,
and to straighten crooked dispositions, and to smoothen rough spirits; his
doctrine was a doctrine of Repentance, Luke 3.3. He came into all the Countries
about Jordan, preaching the Baptism of Repentance for the remission of sins.
And in Mat. 3.1, 2. it is said, John came preaching in the wilderness of Judea,
and saying, Repent ye, for the Kingdom of Heaven is at hand. John preached the
Law to convince men of sin, and to awaken them unto repentance; he tells
sinners plainly, that they were a generation of Vipers; does not spare the
hypocritical Pha^isees, who boasted so much in their privileges, but were
grossly deficient in moral duties; he tells them of Gods Ax which was laid to
the root of the tree, ready to cut them down if they did not ^epent; he tells
of the unquenchable fire which they should be cast into, if they did not
reform. The word of Repentance is a necessary word unto salva^tion, and
therefore is necessary to be preached to all and what John the Baptist cried in
the wilderness, would cry in your ears this day, Repent. Repent if yo^ would
have remission of sins. Repent if you would be prepared for the entertainment
of Jesus Christ Repent, or else you will all certainly perish, Luke 13.3
Repent, or else iniquity will be your ruin, Ezekiel 18.30. Repent, or else ye
cannot be saved. When th^^ Jews who had crucified the Lord of glory, heard
Peter's Sermon, which ripped up their sin, and they being pricked in their
hearts, cry out to Peter and the rest of the Apostles, Men and Brethren, What
shall we do? Act. 2.37. We have committed a great sin, and what shall we now
do? What course shall we take that we may be saved from that eternal wrath and
death which we have deserved? The Apostle directs them to Repent for the
remission of sin, verse. 38. And will not conscience accuse you of the guilt of
sin? Are there no drunkards in this place? no swearers? none that have
committed adultery, and been unclean in secret places? no unrighteous persons
that have defrauded their neighbor? no Sabbath Breakers, nor profane persons?
no liars nor covetous persons? and are not the most civil and morally honest of
you all that are out of Christ, guilty of many heart-sins, yea and lip-sins,
and some gross slips in your life, which conscience does sometimes twinge you
for? Are not you guilty of impenitency and hardness of heart, and unbelief, and
want of love to God, and his Son, and neglect of your own salvation? Let me
tell you all that have not yet repented, that unless ye repent, and that
speedily, ye shall all perish certainly, and ye shall be miserable
everlastingly. Repent of your sins, mourn for sin, and turn from sin, or else
you will weep for sin hereafter to no purpose, and burn for sin for ever. Loath
sin, and leave sin, or else Christ will disdain you at the last day, and
sentence you to depart from him into everlasting fire. Confess sin, and forsake
sin, or else you will find no mercy here, nor end, or the least asswagement of
misery in the other world. Drunkards, repent of your sins, you have felt (after
your revellings, and excessive carousings) your heads ache, and have vomited up
your drink sometimes, O that you could now feel your hearts ache, and that you
would vomit up your sin by repentance. Swearers, repent of your sins; you have
taken Gods Name in vain, yea even torn it in pieces by your oaths, O that you
would hallow Gods Name in confessing your sin, and that you would rend and tear
your hearts with sorrow for the affronts you have by your oaths offered to the
highest Majesty. Adulterers and unclean persons, repent of your sins; you have
tasted sweetness in your ^oul sins, O labor to taste bitterness in grief for
your sins, that you may not feel the bitterness of hell torments, which without
repentance will certainly be your portion. Unrighteous persons, liars, covetous
persons, repent, or you will not escape Gods righteous judgments.
Sabbath Breakers, get your hearts broken for your sins, or else God will break
you to pieces with his Iron Rod. Profane persons, and all ye that have sinned
more grossly, repent, and humble your selves before the Lord the more deeply:
The most crimson and scarlet ^ins may be washed away; those who embrewed their
hands in the blood of Christ were forgiven upon repentance; and there may be
hope of remission for the worst of you if you repent. And you that have been
more civil, yet under the power of some sin which has reigned in your hearts,
though it has not broken forth so notoriously in your lives, and have moreover
lived in the neglect of Christ, and your own salvation by him, not perceiving
your need so much of him. Let me tell you, as our Savior told the Scribes and
Pharisees, that sometimes Publicans and Harlots, the vilest and most notorious
come into the Kingdom of Heaven sooner than you, because they are more readily
awakened, and humbled, and made sensible of their need of Christ, than the
civil and fair dealing men and women who are very apt to lean and trust to
their own righteousness, without such earnest seeking of the righteousness of
Christ to justify them: Therefore let me warn you also to repent of your sins,
of heart-sins, and Gospel-sins, which are the greatest sins, and will certainly
sink you without repentance. Look upon your own righteousness as filthy rags,
and cast it away, and loath your selves, and be persuaded, that if ever you be
pardoned and saved, you must be as much beholding to free grace as the vilest
sinner.

2. Peter tells them that God sent a Word of Peace, which was preached by Jesus
Christ. It is said, Ioh. 1.17. The Law was given by Moses, but grace and truth,
and I may add peace too, came by Jesus Christ. The Law which came by Moses, was
given for this end to lead men; yea, it was a Schoolmaster to whip men to
Christ; and God did enjoin those legal services upon his people, that they
might look to Christ in them, and look for Christ who should deliver them from
that yoke of bondage. The Law, which was from Mount Sinai, gendereth to
bondage, and was given with thunderings and lightnings to awaken men; and in
preaching of the Law God gives a spirit of bondage to work men to fear and
repentance: But Christ came in a more mild way, and in a more soft and still
voice preached Peace, and the Gospel of Reconciliation. The word of Peace was
that which the Angels preached unto the Shepherds at Christ's birth, Luke 2.14.
Glory be to God in the highest, on earth peace, and good will toward men.
Peace was that which Christ preached in his life, Ephesians. 2.17. He came and
preached Peace to you which were afar off, and to them which were nigh. Peace
was that which Christ purchased by his death, Col. 1.20. He made Peace by the
blood of his Cross. Peace was that which he spoke to his Disciples at his
appearance after his resurrection, Ioh. 20.19. Jesus came and stood in the
midst of them, and said, Peace be unto you. Peace he left with his Disciples
behind him as a Legacy, when he was to go away from them, Ioh. 14.27. Peace I
leave with you, my Peace I give unto you. And Peace he commissioned his
Disciples to preach unto the world, Mark 16.5. Go ye into all the World, and
preach the Gospel unto every creature: Which Gospel is a Gospel of Peace,
containing glad tidings of good things, Romans 10.15. Christ preached Peace, not
Peace with men (though this also he would have his Disciples endeavor after,
as much as in them lies, to live peaceably with all men, Romans 12.28. and to
follow after peace with all men, so far as it consists with holiness, and a
pure conscience, Heb. 12.14.) For he tells his Disciples, Luke 12.51. Suppose
ye that I am come to give Peace on earth, I tell you nay, but rather division.
Whatever peaceable disposition he taught, and his Gospel does work in the heart
where it prevails, yet accidentally it causes division, and stirs up to
opposition in those that will not yield obedience thereunto; and therefore the
world hate and contend with his Disciples, because he has chosen them out of
the world; wicked men have an enmity in their hearts against Believers, and
will not be at Peace with them. But Christ preached Peace with God. Christ came
from Heaven to bring this glad tidings to earth, that the God of Heaven was
willing to be at Peace with sinful men. It would not have been an easy thing
to have made sinners believe (especially if they had been convinced of sin, how
heinous it is in its own nature, how highly it affronts and provokes the
highest Majesty; if they had been awakened with a sense of the dreadfulness of
the punishment which God has threatened, and they had deserved for their sins)
that so great and holy a God should be willing to put up all affronts, and
forgive all iniquities, and be at Peace with sinners; yea, that he should seek
after it: They might have questioned not only how this could be, but also how
any could have known it: But to put all out of doubt, Christ the eternal Son of
God has come forth from Heaven, declaring what he has heard of the Father,
and has made known this, that God is willing to be at peace with us. Christ
was sent from the King of Glory upon the Embassage of Peace, and he preached
Peace therefore unto men; not unto all men, for Isa. 57.21. There is no Peace
to the wicked; that is, to such as are impenitent and senseless of their sins,
and go on still in their trespasses. Christ threatened the wicked as severely as
John Baptist; he tells the impenitent that they should perish, Luk 13.3. and
the unbelievers, that they should die in their sins, Ioh. 8.24. And he calls
the hypocritical Pharisees (who persevered in their opposition of him and his
ways) Serpents and Vipers that could not escape the damnation of Hell, Matthew.
23.33. But Christ preached Peace to all that repented, were troubled for their
sins; that mourned and turned; that believed and yielded up themselves to the
obedience of the Gospel. He preached the Gospel to the poor, to the bruised and
broken, that is, such as were sensible of their sins, and their need of a
Savior, Luke 4.18. And we Ministers have commission from the Lord to preach
Peace to the children of men; we are Ministers of the Gospel of Peace; unto us
is committed the Word of Reconciliation, 2 Cor. 5.19. Indeed we must sound the
Trumpet of War from Heaven in the ears of secure sinners to awaken them; but we
are to hang out the white flag, and to come with Olive branches of Peace from
God to them that tremble at Gods Word, and are humble for their sins.

Sinners, are there any among you, whose hearts the Lord has touched and
bruised for sin, yea broken to shivers, and melted, and filled with grief and
sorrow for a life of past-wickedness, that have not only legal terrors, but
true Evangelical repentance: I have a word of Peace to deliver to such of you
from the Lord. God is willing to be at Peace with you through his Son: There is
an Advocate with the Father, who is ready to make up the breach which sin has
made between God and your souls; and God does call you to lay hold on his
strength, that you may make Peace with him, and he promises that you shall
make peace with him, Isa. 27.5.

Thus concerning the word of Repentance and Peace which Peter tells Cornelius,
and them which were with him.

SECT. VIII.
3. PEter speaks to them of the Lord Jesus Christ, by whom this Peace was
purchased, and the Word of Peace preached, and that, 1. Concerning his Unction.
2. Concerning his Life. 3. Concerning his Miracles. 4. Concerning his Death. 5.
Concerning his Resurrection. 6. Concerning his Ordination to be the Judge of
the World. 7. Concerning his Mission of them to preach.


1. Peter speaks to them concerning the Unction of Christ. He tells them that
God anointed Jesus of Nazareth with the Holy Ghost, and with Power. God poured
forth his Spirit without measure upon Christ, which qualified him for his
offices, and he gave him power and authority to execute them.

There is a Threefold Office which Christ was anointed unto.

1. The Priestly Office. 2. The P^^phetical Office. 3. The Kingly Office.
1. Christ was anointed to the Priestly Office; who offered up sacrifice to
God, even a sin-offering and Peace Offering, ^o make reconciliation for sin;
not the sacrifice of Bulls and Goats, or Lambs, or Rams, which could never of
themselves take away guilt; but he through the eternal Spirit offered himself
without spot to God, he offered the sacrifice of himself for a sweet smelling
savor, and shed his own blood for the remission of sins, by which blood having
obtained eternal redemption for his people, he entered into the Holy place not
made with hands, which was but figurative, but into Heaven it self, there to
appear in the presence of God, to make intercession for them. Christ is the
great High priest, not after the order of Aaron, who were many, and mortal,
and sinful, and their Priesthood changeable; but he is a High Priest for ever
after the order of Melchisedec; has an unchangeable Priesthood, therefore is
able to save all those to the uttermost that come unto God by him, seeing he
ever lives to make intercession in their behalf, Heb. 7.25. Moreover, v. 26.
he is holy, harmless, undefiled, separate from sinners, and yet very tender and
compassionate toward sinners, being touched with the feeling of our
Infirmities, and knows how to pity them which are tempted; he is merciful and
he is faithful too in this Office which the Lord has anointed him unto.
Having therefore such an High Priest over the House of God, sinners have
encouragement to draw near unto God, with full assurance of acceptance through
him, Hebr. 10.21, 22.

2. Christ was anointed to the Prophetical Office: Christ is that Prophet whom
the Lord promised to raise up to his people like unto Moses, Deuteronomy. 18.15. but
is far greater than Moses, who came down from Heaven to preach the Gospel of
salvation to lost sinners; who revealed the counsels of the Father, which were
hid from ages and generations, and kept secret until his time, from the
foundations of the World; who discovered the purposes of Gods Love, and the
promises of his Grace, and brought life and immortality to light by the Gospel.
Christ is the great Prophet anointed by the Father to teach his people by his
Word and Spirit, who opens the eyes of the understanding which naturally is
dark and blind, and leads his people into all truth, who of themselves would
wander into error, without whose teachings there can be no saving light, nor
spiritual discerning and relish of Gospel Mysteries.

3. Christ was anointed unto the Kingly Office: Peter in his Sermon calls him
Lord of all. God has given him a Name above every Name; he has exalted him
above all Principalities and Powers, and Might and Dominion, both in Heaven and
Earth, and has put all things under his feet, and all power into his hand, and
appointed him to be head over all unto his Church. He is the King of Saints,
whose Kingdom is an everlasting Kingdom, and whose Scepter is a Scepter of
Righteousness; he has given Laws to his people with great wisdom, and rules
in their hearts with great power, and whosoever will not submit to his Scept^r
to be ruled by his Laws, he will break them in pieces with his I^on Rod. Thus
concerning Christ's V^ction to his Offices.

2. Peter speaks to them concerning Christ's Life; that he went about doing
good. His Life was holy, free from sin, he did no evil, no injury to any man,
he was harmless, his whole employment was to do good. Never was there such a
man living upon the face of the Earth, who never committed any sin in his life,
neither in thought, word, or deed. Some indeed have said they had no sin, but
they have lied; for no man lives that sins not: but Christ was born without
sin, and lived without sin; he was perfectly good and righteous, and he did
good. His Life was exactly according to the Rule; he fulfilled the Law not only
by his passive, but also by his active Obedience.

3. Peter speaks to them concerning Christ's Mi^acles, whereof they were
witnesses: instance is given of his casting out Devils, likely he told them of
more, of his calming the Winds and Sea with a word, his feeding five thousand
with five Loaves, his opening the eyes of them which were born blind, his
raising the dead that had been buried several days, and the like; which works
were a testimony of his Divinity, and that he came from the Father.

4. Peter speaks to them concerning Christ's Death. Him they slew and hanged
upon a tree. Christ humbled himself not only to take upon him our Humane
Nature, to be born of a mean Virgin, and live in a low condition, when he was
Lord of all, and God equal with the Father, to take upon him the form of a
servant; but he humbled himself further, to become obedient unto Death, even
the death of the Cross, Phil. 2.6, 7, 8. It was a cursed, disgraceful,
lingering and painful death, which he endured, and however it was inflicted
upon him by the hands of cruel, blood-thirsty men, yet it was according to the
fore-appointment of God, for the satisfaction of Gods Justice, for the
expiation of Man's sin; it was not only for an example of suffering to men, but
in the room and stead of sinners, who otherwise must all have unavoidably
perished; and for the ratification of the New Testament and Covenant of Grace:
So that the salvation of Man from sin and Hell, and the Inheritance of glory
and happiness does depend upon the Death of Christ which was the purchase
hereof.

5. Peter speaks to them concerning Christ's Resurrection. Him has God raised
from the dead, and showed openly. Though Christ dyed and was buried, yet the
bands of death could not hold him, and the Holy One did not see corruption* his
body was not so long in the grave as to put^^fie, but within three days he
arose again from the dead, and was seen of Mary Magdalen first, after of two
Disciples as they went unto Immaus, after of Peter and all the Apostles, after
of above five hundred Brethren at once. He was declared to be Man by his death,
he was declared to be the Son of God with power, by the Spirit of holiness in
him, which raised him from the dead; forty days he remained upon the Earth
after his Resurrection, and then was caught up to the Throne of God in the
presence of his Disciples, and there he that was dead is alive, and lives for
evermore; whose Resurrection as it has an influence upon the spiritual
Resurrection of his people from sin, who when dead in sin are quickened by the
same Spirit which raised him up: So it is the first fruits of the resurrection
of his people from the grave, who in their order and Gods appointed time shall
be awakened out of their long sleep of death, and come forth of the dust, and
be caught up to meet him in the Air at his last appearance to Judge the World,
which is the next thing Peter speaks of Christ.

6. Peter speaks to them concerning Gods ordination of Jesus Christ to be the
Judge of quick and dead. God has appointed a day in which he will judge the
World in Righteousness, and has ordained Jesus Christ to be the Judge; who
will so soon as the mystery is finished, and the Elect are gathered, come down
from Heaven where now he is, with a great shout, and the sound of a Trumpet,
and awaken all the dead, and summon the whole world to his bar, and render
unto all according to their works; to them that have repented and believed, and
by patient continuance in well-doing, have sought for glory and honor, and
immortality, he will give eternal life; but to them which have been impenitent
and hard-hearted, and disobedient to the Gospel, he will give indignation and
wrath, tribulation and anguish, and sentence them to eternal Death.

7. Peter speaks to them concerning Christ's Mission of them to preach. He
sent the Apostles to preach repentance and remission of sins in his Name; and
he has appointed the Office of the Ministry to continue to the end of the
World, for the calling and conversion of those which belong to the Election of
Grace, and the building up and perfecting the Saints which are called, until
they all come into the unity of the Faith, and of the knowledge of the Son of
God, unto a perfect man, unto the measure of the stature of the fullness of
Christ, Ephesians. 4.12, 13. Thus the Apostle Peter preaches Christ unto Cornelius,
and them which were with him.

SECT. IX.
4. AND lastly, Peter speaks to them concerning the Way of Salvation by Christ,
verse. 43. To him gave all the Prophets witness, that through his Name whosoever
believes in him should receive remission of sins. There is no Name under
Heaven whereby we can be saved, but the Name of Christ, Act. 4.11. and there is
no salvation by Christ but by Faith. When the Jailer with trembling enquired of
Paul and Silas, What shall I do to be saved? they tell him, Believe in the Lord
Jesus Christ, and thou shall be saved, Act. 16.30, 31.

There are three Arguments which will evidently prove, That all such as truly
believe in Christ do receive remission of sins, and consequently are in a state
of Salvation: The First may be drawn from Christ's Satisfaction: The Second from
Christ's Intercession: The Third from the Promises of the New Testament.

I. First from Christ's Satisfaction. If Christ has fully satisfied Gods
Justice for the sins of men, and this satisfaction be accepted by the Father in
the behalf of sinners; and this satisfaction be imputed unto all them that
truly believe in Christ, as if they bad made it themselves: Then all those
that truly believe in Christ, do receive remission of sins; inasmuch as guilt
being an obligation to punishment, and where satisfaction is made, this
obligation is removed.

(1.) But first Christ has made satisfaction to Gods Justice for the sins of
men; he only was qualified to do it, and he has actually done it.

1. Christ only was qualified to do it; no mere man could make it, because Gods
Justice being infinite requires an infinite satisfaction, and all Creatures
are finite: but Christ was more than a Creature, he was God and Man in one
person. It was necessary that he should be a Creature, because otherwise he
could not have suffered, the Deity being impassible; it was necessary he should
be Man, because Gods Justice required, that the same Nature which did commit
sin, the same Nature should suffer punishment for it, Genesis 2.17. In the day
thou eatest thereof, Thou a Man shall die. Therefore Christ took not upon him
the nature of Angels, but the seed of Abraham, Heb. 2.16. And it was necessary
that he should be God; because otherwise he could never have born up under, nor
have got loose from that dreadful punishment which was inflicted upon him: It
would have sunk the whole Creation under its weight: Because otherwise his
Merits would not have been of infinite value, and fully satisfactory to Gods
Justice: therefore he was God and Man in one person, and so duly qualified to
make satisfaction.

2. Christ has actually made satisfaction to Gods Justice for Man's sin: he
has born the punishment which their sins did deserve, 1 Pet. 2.24. Who his own
self bare our sins, that is the punishment of our sins, in his own body on the
tree, Isa. 53.5. He was wounded for our transgressions, and bruised for our
iniquities, and the chastisment of our peace was upon him. And Ephesians. 5.2. He
has given himself for us, an offering and sacrifice to God for a sweet
smelling savor; which leads to the second particular.

(2.) This satisfaction which Christ has made unto Gods Justice, is accepted
in the behalf of sinners: There might be sufficiency of value in Christ's
sufferings and sacrifice to make satisfaction for the sins of the whole world,
and yet God might have required the satisfaction from the offending party, and
received the debt from none but sinners themselves that owed it: but God has
accepted Christ's satisfaction, as is evident, 1. From Gods eternal Covenant
with him, that if he would make his soul an offering for sin, he should see his
seed, and should prosper in his work, Isa. 53.10.2. From his sealing and
setting him apart for the office and work of Mediator, Ioh. 6.27. Him has God
the Father sealed. 3. From his mission or sending him into the world for this
very end, Ioh. 3.16. Gal. 4.5. 4. From his owning of him when he was sent, and
that both by a voice from Heaven, saying, This is my beloved Son in whom I am
well pleased* and by his large effusion of the Spirit upon him, which did
appear in his life so holy, his doctrine so pure, his miracles so powerful. 5.
From his raising him up from the dead on the third day, where he must have
continued for ever, if having undertaken to satisfy, he had not done it, and
it had not been accepted. 6. From his receiving him up into glory, and setting
him at his right hand, and hearing his prayers in the behalf of sinners* All
which Arguments do abundantly prove Gods acceptance of Christ's satisfaction.

(3.) The satisfaction is as really imputed unto true Believers, as if they had
made it themselves. Forasmuch as Faith does appropriate Christ and his
Righteousness, and therefore Christ is called (speaking of Believers) the Lord
our Righteousness, Ier. 23.6. And we are called (through the imputation of the
merits of his death by faith) The Righteousness of God in him, 2 Cor. 5.21.
Christ's Righteousness is made over to Believers by Faith as if it were their
own. If then Christ has fully satisfied Gods Justice for the sins of men; and
this satisfaction is accepted by the Father in behalf of sinners, and imputed
unto all true Believers, then all true Believers are absolved from the guilt of
sin; and that not only upon the account of mercy, but justice too, which cannot
require a double satisfaction; therefore God is said, as he is just, to
justify them which believe, Romans 3.28.

II. The second Argument to prove, that all true Believers do receive remission
of sins, may be drawn from Christ's intercession. If Christ does intercede for
the remission of sins, and this intercession be prevalent with the Father, and
all true Believers have an interest in this intercession, then all true
Believers do receive remission of sins.

1. But first Christ does intercede for the remission of sins, Heb. 7.25. Heb.
2.17. He intercedeth for reconciliation, therefore for remission of sins.

2. This Intercession is prevalent with the Father. Whatever Christ prayed for
on earth he obtained, Ioh. 11.42. Surely then his intercession in Heaven is
prevalent, which might be made further evident from his neerness and interest
in the Father, from the dear love of the Father unto him; and because his
intercession for remission of sins, is for that which he has purchased by his
death, and what the Father has purposed and promised, and is for his glory to
give.

3. All true Believers have an interest in Christ's Intercession: having by
faith an* interest in Christ's person, they have an interest in Christ's
intercession.

III. The third Argument to prove that all true Believers do receive remission
of sins, may be drawn from the promise of remission of sins in the New
Testament, Heb. 8.12. I will be merciful unto their unrighteousness, and their
sins and ^niquities will I remember no more. Which New Testament is of full
force through the death of Christ the Testator, Heb. 9.16, 17. And Believers
have an interest in, and by faith do apply the promises to themselves;
therefore true Believers do receive remission of sins.

Thus concerning Peter's Sermon to Cornelius, and them which were with him, and
the words which he spoke to them whereby they were saved.

SECT. X.
3. THE third thing is to show, How Ministers must tell people words whereby
they may be saved. Now this must be done 1. Sincerely. 2. Plainly. 3.
Convincingly. 4. Boldly. 5. Compassionately. 6. Warmly. 7. Earnestly. 8.
Frequently.


1. Ministers must preach the words of salvation Sincerely, and that both as to
the matter, and as to the design.

1. As to the Matter, the Doctrine of salvation which they preach, must be
sincere; in Doctrine they must show uncorruptness, sincerity* sound speech,
which cannot be condemned, Tit. 2.7, 8. The Apostle complains of many who
corrupt the Word, 2 Cor. 2.17. The Word is corrupted when the Scripture is
wrested, and the sense perverted, when errors and damnable opinions are
broached and vented for truths, and mingled with some truths of the word, which
will bring destruction and not salvation to them that receive them, 2 Pet.
3.16. Ministers must draw forth the pure waters of the Sanctuary out of the
fountain of the Scripture, and the sincere milk of the Word out of the two
breasts of the Old and New Testament, 1 Pet. 2.2. They must deal forth the
wholesome food of sound doctrine, which is according to godliness, called words
of our Lord Jesus Christ, and words of faith whereby the receivers may be
nourished, 1 Timothy 4.6. chap. 6.3.

2. As to the Design, Ministers must have a sincere design in preaching the
word of salvation; like the Apostle Paul with his fellow-Ministers, 2 Cor.
2.17. But we are of sincerity as of God, in the sight of God speak we in
Christ. They preached neither corrupt doctrine, neither had they corrupt
designs, but were sincere in their preaching, as of God, as sent of God, as
Ambassadors of God, the great King of Heaven; as in the sight of God, who
searched the heart, and could discern what their aims were unto whom they
endeavored to approve themselves; as in Christ, as in the room of Christ, as
Christ preached when he was upon the earth; or as in Christ, as those which
were ingrafted into Christ, and had an interest in Christ themselves, and
therefore did sincerely endeavor the bringing of others to him. The chief
design of Ministers in preaching, should be the glory of God, and the salvation
of them that hear them. 1. The glory of God above all should swey with them,
not their own glory and esteem, nor of men sought we glory, 1 These. 2.6. They
must sincerely endeavor the magnifying, not of their own name, but the name of
God; and the promoting not of themselves, but of their Master in the esteem of
men: If some kind of discourse would advance their Lords name and honor,
though their own reputation should hereby be lessened amongst some, they must
use it; and if on the contrary they could gain much honor to themselves by
some kind of preaching wherein they might appear in great flourish of words,
and give delight to the fan^y by the ostentation of their wit and ingenuity;
but their Masters were not like to be glorified, nor the souls of their hearers
soundly edified, they ought herein to deny themselves. 2. Ministers must design
in their preaching, the salvation of their hearers; they must not use the Word
as a clo^k for covetousness, and design the gain^ng of filthy lucre to
themselves; but the gaining of souls to Jesus Christ; they must not endeavor
to make a gain of their hearers; a gain of their souls they ought to endeavor
after, but not a g^in of their estates, as the Pharisees, who made long
prayers, that they might devour Widows houses* they must not chi^fly seek any
profit, or earthly emolument unto themselves, but the profit of their hear^rs,
that they might be saved. When the Apostle was crafty, as he tells the
Corinthians, 2 Cor. 12.16. he was sincere; and when he used some kind of gu^le,
it was to catch them from destruction, unto which they were hastening; it was
in spreading the Gospel Net most cunningly to draw them out of that stream of
sin in which they were swimming toward the Ocean of Gods wrath.

2. Ministers must preach the words of salvation Plainly, not with wisdom of
words, as 1 Cor. 1.17. not with excellency of speech, or of wisdom, or with
enticing words of man's wisdom, chap. 2.4. but with plainness of speech, such as
is most intelligible and edifying, such as is most likely to attain the end of
preaching most effectually; some kind of wisdom of words does both obscure and
enervate the Sermons that are stufft with it, and therefore should be forborne.

Not that all wisdom of words, or humane wisdom is to be forborne: For,

1. It is lawful for Ministers in preaching to make use of the most apt,
proper and significant words: there are some words which are more ponderous and
weighty, which carry a greater force and evidence, and perspicuity than others;
which Ministers should make use of for the more effectual clearing and pressing
their matter; and of all words those which we find in the Scripture are the
most weighty, which having oftentimes more significancy in the Original than in
the Translation, therefore Ministers should be acquainted with the Original
tongues, that they may have the more full understanding of the meaning of God
in his Word, themselves, and that they may the better explain it to others.

2. It is lawful for Ministers to use some kind of Eloquence in their
preaching. It was the commendation which the Scripture gave of Apollos, that he
was an eloquent man, Act. 13.24. Variety and fluency of expression in
explaining and proving, in applying and pressing the truths of the Word, is of
singular use. There is much Rhetoric and divine Eloquence, especially in some
parts of the Scripture, which Ministers in preaching may make use of and
imitate.

3. It is lawful for Ministers to make use of Philosophy and humane Reason in
preaching the Gospel; Logic is needful for the regulating of thoughts, the
methodizing of discourse, the distinguishing between things that differ, the
defining and explaining of things that are obscure, the ordering, deciding and
determining of controversies: Ethics, Physics, especially Metaphysics are
very useful unto a Minister, for the refining of his understanding, and
enabling him to speak the more clearly and edifyingly to others, and to defend
the truth against such as do oppose it.

But there is a Wisdom of Words which may not be used by Ministers in preaching.

1. Ministers must not in preaching show more wisdom in their Words than in
their Matter; and study more for outward show than for inward substance; more
that their Sermons be well worded, than that their doctrine be well proved;
more that their Sentences may have a handsome close, than that their Arguments
be conclusive: It ill becomes thin and weak sense to be clothed with fine and
neat speech: Ministers must take heed that their matter be not drowned and lost
in the stream and abundance of words. Such whose wisdom and art does show it
self in gathering a bundle and heap of the finest words together, neglecting
substantial matter, their wisdom is but folly, and pains to little purpose.
Words may fill the ear; Things soak and sink into the soul to edification.

2. Ministers must not ordinarily in preaching make use of words of another
language which the people do not understand; nor fill their Sermons with
quotations and allegations out of Fathers, Schoolmen, and other Authors, which
does but stun and amuze ordinary and the generality of hearers, and savours
mostly of ostentation, but tends to little edification. Though the Apostle
could speak with more tongues than any beside, yet in the Church he chooses to
speak five words in the known tongue to edify, than ten thousand words in an
unknown tongue, 1 Cor. 14.18, 19. Indeed Original words sometimes may be
mentioned with their interpretation, as the tongues were to be used in the
Church, 1 Cor. 14. and Authors may be quoted, when there is real need, so it be
done rarely and soberly; but for Ministers to enterlard their Sermons all over
with Greek and Latin, and sayings of men, they must needs leave out much of
the Word of God which they might use, and it cannot be so profitable for the
Hearers.

3. Ministers must not use such words and speeches as gender strife, I mean the
perverse disputings which Skeptical Philosophy will put them upon, whereby they
may be spoiled, and deceive both themselves and others, through the errors and
mistakes, which hereby they may run into.

4. Ministers must not use in preaching too much neatness of speech, and humane
Eloquence: The most excellent, and enticing words of man's wisdom the Apostle
did forbear, 1 Cor. 2.4. It is not needful for a Minister to read all Heathen
Poets and Orators, that he may fill his Sermons with their fancies and
rhetorical expressions; but he should chiefly fetch his Rhetoric from the
Bible; Indeed Apollos was commended for his Eloquence, Act. 13.24. not humane
Eloquence but divine. It is not said, he was mighty in other Learning, but
mighty in the Scriptures; not mighty in the writings of Heathens, but mighty in
the writings of God; his Eloquence was drawn from the Word, which is most
persuasive. The Lord does not require that his Ministers should preach the
Gospel neatly, but plainly; the former may make them esteemed as the better
Scholars, but the latter will make their hearers the better Christians: That
way of preaching they should use which is most intelligible and profitable, not
that which is most learned and Scholastical, Melius est ut nos reprehendant
Grammatici, quam non intelligant populi; says one, that could speak in an
eloquent strein. It is better that Grammarians should reprehend us, than that
the people should not understand us: and he desired that since the vulgar could
not ascend so high as to understand a more refined language, that learned men
would stoop so low as to accommodate their speech to their capacities.

Thus Ministers must preach the Gospel, not with wisdom of words, but with
plainness of speech. There is a light in the Gospel, the purest and most
glorious that ever shined; wisdom of words does darken and obscure this light,
it does ^ully the truths which shine most when they are naked without such
ornaments: It is like a bright Cloud between us and the Sun, which keeps off
the greater light, like painting of a Diamond or a beautiful face. There is a
power go^th along with the Word preached to convert sinners. Heb. 4.12. The
Word is compared to a sharp, two-edged Sword, piercing and separating between
the joints and the marrow, between sin and the soul, which are more near than
marrow is to the bone; but wisdom of words, or humane Eloquence does guild as
it were the edge of the Sword, which takes away its sharpness; or is like to a
rich Scabbard, which delights the eye, and pleases the fancy, but keeps the
Sword from entering the bowels and wounding the Conscience: It is in plain
preaching that the Sword is drawn forth naked, which makes the sinner sly or
yield. Plain preaching is the most effectual means to pull down the strong
holds of sin and Satan, and to draw men unto a closure with Jesus Christ.
Humane wisdom usually puffs up both them that use it, and those that hear it.
Humane wisdom is apt to beget an humane faith, which stands in the wisdom of
men; plain preaching begets faith which stands in the power of God. There
is no such edification as in plain preaching: In plain preaching, the bread of
life and wholesome food of the Word is distributed; but humane wisdom is like hey
and stubble, which is food for horses and not for men; so humane wisdom may
please and best agree with natural and brutish men, but true Christians cannot
feed upon it; it is no more suitable to their spiritual appetite than hey and
stubble is to their natural. It is like Pictures in learn^d books, which may
delight children, a Scholar does not regard the Pictures, but the writing; the
word of God does feed and edify a gracious heart when it is preached plainly
and homely; humane wisdom, or wisdom of words in preaching, does take away much
of the taste and relish, and does hinder its virtue and operation. The Word is
compared to milk, which must be sincere, to food which must be simple and
uncompounded, that it may nourish and strengthen the body: It is compared to
Wine that must be unmixed that it may cheer and refresh the spirits; wisdom of
words is like water, or rather like some fulsome liquor mingled with the wine,
which does much invalidate and render it nauseous unto the Appetite of the New
Creature. Ministers therefore must preach the word plainly, that they may do it
edifyingly: they must not use wisdom of words, which will evacuate the Cross of
Christ, and render their preaching ineffectual, and put a cloud between the
light and the eye, especially of the ordinary hearers; much less may they use
mysteriousness of words, dark sayings, and high-^lown notions, that shall
puzzle the minds of the wisest to guess at the meaning of: They must not in
preaching make plain things difficult by their way of expressing them, as many
do, but make more difficult things plain, they must preach plainly. I have been
more large in this head, I shall be more brief in the rest.

3. Ministers must preach the words of Salvation Convincingly. They should
preach so as to convince the Judgment of truth, and to convince the Conscience
of sin, and therefore they should preach in the evidence and demonstration of
the Spirit, 1 Cor. 2.4.

1. Ministers should labor to speak so as to convince the Judgment of the
truth which they preach. They must not only assert Truths, but prove them; they
must hold forth the Word of Faith with a clear evidencing light, and hold fast
the Word in a strenuous defense of it against opposers, and with sound doctrine
they must not only exhort but also convince gainsayers, Tit. 1.9. Ministers
should make manifest the words of salvation which they preach, that they are
the words of the God of truth, with whom dwells no error or falsehood: They
should prove by undeniable Arguments that the Scriptures are of Divine
Authority, and therefore as full of truth as the Sun is full of light; and then
they should prove the doctrine which they preach by the Word, and that with
such reason for the belief of it, that no reason may be left to contradict it.
Ministers should be shining lights in the places where they live, dispersing
abroad the bright beams of Gospel Truths with such power and conviction, as may
be sufficient through the concurrence of the Spirit to vanquish and dispell all
those clouds of ignorance which the minds of men naturally are filled withal.

2. Ministers should preach so as to convince not only the Judgment of truth,
but also so as to convince the Conscience of sin; and that they may do this,
they must not rest in general discourses of the nature of sin, but particularly
apply themselves to their hearers, and reprove them homely and sharply for
their particular sins: They must not sow pillows under the elbows of secure
sinners, and deal gently, fearing to touch the soars of some, lest they lift up
the heel against them; but with all faithfulness they must tell all of their
sins, and endeavor to awaken them by discovery of their danger; their words
must be like Nails and Goads which will prick unto the quick; they must lance
and rip up the soars, that they may be healed; they must cry aloud and spare
not; they must lift up their voice like a trumpet, and cause the people to know
their iniquities; they must bend the bow, and shoot the arrows of bitter and
sharp reproof into guilty Consciences; they must draw forth the Sword of the
Spirit, which is the Word of God, and therewith lay about them in Gods Name,
and as those which are in Gods room, and lash and wound sinners to the very
heart, that have been so audacious as to break Gods Law* they should endeavor
to make the sword enter into the Soul with such a force that sinners being
convinced, judged, and condemned, may with trembling fall down, and in
perplexity cry out, as those did whom Peter had convinced of their great sin in
crucifying the Lord of glory, Act. 2. Men and brethren what shall we do?

4. Ministers must preach the words of salvation Boldly: This the Apostle
desires prayers for himself to the Lord that he might be enabled to do, Ephesians.
6.19, 20. And for me, that utterance may be given unto me, that I may open my
mouth boldly to make known the mystery of the Gospel; for which I am an
Ambassador in bonds, that therein I may speak boldly as I ought to speak.
Ministers should deliver their Message with all boldness and authority, as
being the Ambassadors of the King of glory; they should speak boldly without
shame and without fear.

1. They should speak boldly without shame, as Paul, Rom: 1.16. I am not
ashamed of the Gospel of Christ, for it is the power of God unto salvation,
unto every one that believes; the preaching of the Gospel is accounted folly
by some of great account in the World for wisdom; and the Preachers of the
Gospel are accounted Fools, and despised: Some reproach them, others mock and
deride them, especially when they preach in such plain language as is most
easy for all to understand; but Ministers must preach boldly, notwithstanding
all the scoffs of the ungodly and profane; and in a good sense they may glory
in their shame; for indeed that which the wicked do make the matter of scorn
and shame, is matter of the greatest glory; it is the honor of Ministers to
preach the Gospel of salvation, such an honor as the Lord has not conferred
upon the Angels (as has been shown) and therefore they should preach boldly
without shame.

2. Ministers should preach boldly without fear, they must deliver the message
they are entrusted withal by God, without fear of the face of men. 1 Thessalonians.
2.2. We were bold in our God, to speak unto you the Gospel of God with much
contention. Though the wicked contend with them, and oppose, though they
persecute and do what they can to hinder them; though they command them to
preach no more, and would stop their mouths, and threaten imprisonment,
banishment, death; yet being entrusted with the Gospel, they must preach the
Gospel with all boldness: This was the practice of the Primitive Ministers when
they were threatened for preaching, Act. 4.29. And now Lord, behold their
threatenings, and grant unto thy servants that with all boldness they may speak
thy Word; and this is the duty of all Ministers, if God open to them a door of
opportunity to preach, they should open their mouths boldly to declare the
mysteries of salvation, whatever danger they may incurr of sufferings hereby.
Men may say, Woe be to you, if you do preach the Gospel; but when God says, Woe
be to you if you do not preach, they have reason to fear and obey God rather
than Men.

5. Ministers must preach the words of salvation Compassionately. The Apostle
Paul writes to the Corinthians with many tears, 2 Cor. 2.4. and he preaches to
the Ephesians with many tears, Act. 20.19. O what tender bowels of compassion
should Ministers have toward poor souls in preaching the Gospel of salvation
to them! how should they pity sinners that lie w^ltring in their blood, that
have no pity for themselves, that are cruel to their own Souls, that are
wounding themselves, as being more distracted than the man we read of, who tore
his own flesh, and cut himself with stones? Mark 5.5. How should they
commiserate sinners that are wounding their Consciences by sin, not knowing
what they do, and are posting on in the broad way unto destruction and eternal
misery, not knowing whither they go, that are running against a rock, which
will dash them to pieces, and ready to leap into flames, where they must burn
for ever? Ministers should weep and bleed over such, and with the greatest
tenderness tell them of their danger, and show them the inevitable ruin which
is before them, and beseech them to turn from their evil ways, that iniquity
may not be their ruin, and accept of Jesus Christ, by whom they may attain
salvation. Ministers should be ready to beseech sinners upon their knees (if
that would do) that they would not destroy themselves: O Turn ye, turn ye, why
will you die? and be ready to lay their hands under their feet, (if that would
move them) to put their feet into the narrow way of salvation.

6. Ministers must preach the words of salvation Warmly; and that both with a
warm love to the Souls they preach unto, and with a warm sense of what they
preach upon their own spirits.

1. They must preach with a warm love to Souls, as the Apostle with other
Ministers to the Thessalonians, 1 Thessalonians. 2.8. So being affectionately desirous
of you we were willing to have imparted unto you not the Gospel of God only,
but also our own souls, because ye were dear unto us, Ministers should preach
the Gospel with such ardent affection to Souls, and thirsting desires after
their salvation, so as to be willing to pluck out their hearts, and give them
to their hearers, if this would promote their salvation; they should be ready
to spend themselves and be spent, and not think much to consume themselves with
fervor of heart toward, and for the good of poor souls.

2. Ministers should preach with a warm sense of what they preach upon their
own spirits, as those that have been under the impressions of the Word, and
have experienced the powerful operations thereof unto their own salvation.
Moreover, they should get their hearts affected more and more with the words
which they preach, that they may preach the more feelingly; that they may speak
as if they were in earnest, as those that believe and know those things to be
true which they deliver unto others. Cold or lukewarm preaching usually makes
little impression upon the hearers; when the Word does little affect the heart
of the Minister, it does seldom affect the heart of the people. When Ministers
preach Sermons as Scholars speak Orations, in which they have no concernment,
only to show their good language and ingenuity, they may possibly gain applause
amongst some of a slight and trivial spirit, but they are not like to gain
souls; the Word must come from the heart that is likely to reach the heart.
Ministers must preach warmly if they would preach affectingly.

7. Ministers must preach the words of salvation Earnestly. Ministers must be
very earnest in their preaching with souls to endeavor after their salvation;
they must use all the persuasive arguments and motives they can think of that
they may prevail; tell them of the necessity hereof, of the manifold
advantages, of the honor they shall attain hereby, and the unspeakable
pleasures; tell them of the great evils they are under, and the greater evils
they are exposed unto whilst they are out of a s^ate of salvation: And then
they must urge arguments as fully, and press upon them as homely as they can;
and use the greatest importunity with them, as if they were begging for their
own lives, as if their own salvation and happiness were bound up with their
hearers; they should take no denial, if possibly a grant may be obtained, they
must call and cry, and pray, invite and woo, and entreat that sinners would
come to Christ, that they may be saved by him.

8. And lastly, Ministers must preach the words of salvation Frequently; they
must lay hold on all opportunities to call sinners to Christ, they must be
instant in season and out of season, 2 Timothy 4.2. on the Sabbath Day, on the
Weekday: In the Morning they should sow the seed of the Word, and the Evening
they should not withold their hand, because they do not know which the Lord
will prosper.

Thus you see how Ministers are to tell people Words whereby they may be saved.

SECT. XI.
4. THE Fourth thing is to show, Why Ministers must tell people Words whereby
they may be saved.

Reas. 1. Because they have a Commission to do it. Mark 16.15, 16. And he said
unto them, Go ye into all the World, and preach the Gospel unto every Creature;
He that believes and is baptized, shall be saved; he that believes not shall
be damned. They are the words of our Savior, who being the King and Head of
the Church, had power to make Church Officers, and to give Commissions; he
commissioneth his Apostles in the first place to preach the Gospel of
salvation, and in them all his other succeeding Ministers unto the end of the
World, with whom he promises to be, so long as the Sun should endure, Math.
28.20. Ministers they are Christ's Ambassadors, 2 Cor. 5.20. and they have a
Commission from Heaven to declare the glad tidings of salvation, to give notice
to the World out of the Word, of the Savior which God has provided for
fallen, lost sinners, and the way of salvation by him; to make known the
Covenant of grace which the Lord has made with men through his Son, and the
exceeding great and precious promises of pardon, and grace, and salvation; all
which promises are yea and Amen in Christ, who has purchased with his blood
whatever is promised in the Covenant. Ministers have a Commission to preach the
Gospel, and they may do it authoritatively, and they ought to do it, it being
their duty, and the great work they have to do in the World.

Reas. 2. Because the Lord has qualified them for this work, not only by
bringing them into a state of salvation, but also by pouring forth his Spirit
more plentifully upon them, and bestowing ministerial gifts upon them,
utterance in preaching, prayer, etc. for this end, that they might show men the
way of salvation.

Reas. 3. Because they must give an account of the souls which are committed to
their charge, and woe be to them if they do not preach the Gospel, 1 Cor. 9.16.
Ministers that neglect to show men the way of salvation will have a fearful
account to give, they draw upon themselves the guilt of the blood of Souls.
They are the Lords Watchmen, and if they do not blow the Trumpet, and tell
sinners of their sin and danger, and how they may be saved by Jesus Christ,
sinners indeed will dye in their sins, but their blood will the Lord require at
the Watchmans hands, Ezekiel. 33.8. Knowing therefore the terror of the Lord, we
persuade men, says the Apostle, 2 Cor. 5.10. knowing the terror of the Lord,
not only in respect of the people which we preach unto, how terrible the Lord
will be unto them at the last day, if they be found under the guilt of sin; but
also knowing the terror of the Lord in respect of our selves, how terrible the
Lord will be unto us, ^f we be found unfaithful, we persuade men to endeavor
their salvation, and to flee from the dreadful wrath which is to come.

Reas. 4. Because by telling people words whereby they may be saved, Ministers
may be instrumental not only to save themselves, but also to save them that
hear them. God is most glorified in the salvation of Souls, and it is the
greatest glory of Ministers to be made instrumental herein; it is better to be
the Father of one Soul, than to be Heir to the largest Revenues upon the Earth:
But if they be instrumental to turn many to Righteousness, they shall receive a
Crown of glory which fades not away, at the appearance of the great Shepherd,
1 Pet. 5.4. they shall shine not only as the brightness of the Firmament, but
also like Stars for ever and ever, Dan. 12.3.

SECT. XII.
Use 1. ARE Ministers to tell People Words whereby they may be saved? Hence
learn what a Privilege such People enjoy, that have liberty to hear such
Ministers as are faithful in declaring the glad tidings of salvation. We read
of some temporal blessings which render a people subordinately happy, Psalm.
144.12, 13, 14, 15. when their Sons spring and grow up like pleasant Plants in
their Garden; when their Daughters are like the polished Corner-stones of a
Palace; when their Garners are full and replenished with all manner of store;
when their Sheep increase in their Fields by thousands and ten thousands; when
their Oxen are strong to labor, when there is a hedge about their substance
without any breaches; when there is no complaining in the streets through wrong
and injury; happy are the people says the Psalmist that are in such a case;
but far more happy are the people that enjoy spiritual privileges, that hear
the joyful sound of the Gospel, that have Ministers to show them how they may
be saved from eternal death and wrath which they have deserved, and by sin are
exposed unto.

Moreover, you may here learn the reason why so many people, especially those
who most seriously and earnestly desire and endeavor their salvation, choose
to hear Ministers preach rather than others; because they are commissioned by
the Lord to preach the Word of salvation, and their Ministry is most likely to
be effectual: Others may preach without a Commission the same words and do no
good, for want of Gods blessing; It is not the bare speaking the words of
salvation that will bring salvation, but the revelation of Gods arm and
operation of his Spirit with the Ministry of the Word: As when our Savior
raised Lazarus from the dead, he cried with a loud voice, Lazarus come forth,
and he that was dead received life, and came forth, Ioh. 11.43, 44. Others
could have spoken the same words as our Savior, and cried over the grave with
as loud a voice, Lazarus come forth, but with no effect; the dead man would
have remained still in the state of the dead, whatever any man could have
spoken or done; but when our Savior spoke the words, the dead man was
quickened; there went forth a virtue and efficacy, a divine power and spirit
with our Saviors words which raised him from the dead; so uncommissioned
persons may entrench upon the work of the Ministry, and preach the Gospel,
speak words of salvation, and cry to sinners to leave their sins, to arise from
their spiritual death, to come forth from their graves, they may exhort them to
repent and believe, that they may be saved, and yet none of their words be
likely to take impression, and effect a saving change in the heart, because
being out of Gods way they cannot expect Gods blessing; but Ministers are
qualified and commissioned for the work, and through Gods blessing there is a
life and power goes along with their preaching, which makes it effectual for
salvation: no wonder then if such as are led by the Spirit do choose to hear
Ministers preach (refusing others) that they may be safely guided by them in
the way of life and salvation.

SECT. XIII.
Use 2. FOR Reproof 1. Of Ministers. 2. Of People.


(1.) Are Ministers to tell people words whereby they may be saved? this then
reproves such Ministers, 1. As do not preach at all: 2. As do not preach
soul-saving Truths: 3. As do not preach in such a Way as is likely to do good.
But my business being chiefly to speak unto People, I shall pass by this Use.

(2.) People are here to be reproved, unto whom the Lord sends faithful
Ministers to tell them such words whereby they may be saved.

1. It reproves such as persecute such Ministers; that are of such a spirit as
the wicked Jews of old spoken of, 1 Thessalonians. 2.15, 16. Who both killed the Lord
Jesus and their own Prophets, and persecuted us; and they please not God, and
are contrary unto all men; forbidding us to speak to the Gentiles, that they
may be saved, to fill up their sin always, for wrath is come upon them to the
uttermost. Some there are that persecute Ministers with the tongue, by
reproaching of them, others persecute Ministers with the hand by imprisoning of
them, and many other ways afflicting of them, seeking the extirpation of them,
as persons not fit to live upon the face of the earth; thus ungratefully they
endeavor the ruin of them that desire and seek their salvation, and foolishly
endeavor to blow out the light which would show them the way to Heaven.

2. It reproves such, who if they do not persecute Ministers, yet hate them,
bear a secret spite and enmity in their hearts against them; and the reason is
because they testify that their works are evil, upon which account our Savior
was hated, Ioh. 7.7. they hate them because they reprove them for their sins,
and disturb their Consciences sometimes, by sounding peals of Judgment in
their ears, that they cannot sin with that freedom and security as they desire:
Poor souls, how will they endure the pains of Hell themselves, that cannot
endure the sore-thoughts of them, and hate them which bring such sad thoughts
into their minds, though it be in order to their escape? Would any of you hate
a neighbor that should cry aloud in the dead of the night, Fire, fire, and
bounce at your doors, and awaken you out of your sleep, to warn you of a Fire
drawing near to your habitation, which if not prevented would burn house and
goods and persons together? And what do Ministers more than cry Fire, fire, and
tell you of your near approach to everlasting burnings, in which without some
speedy course taken for prevention, will certainly seize upon you, and consume
you everlastingly? And have any reason to be troubled and offended, and hate
Ministers for awakening them upon such an account as this, when their souls lie
at stake, and are in such danger? A Physician of the body is not hated, that
tells his Patient that his disease is dangerous, which if let alone without
taking such a remedy will certainly be his death: And have any reason to hate
Ministers who are Physicians of the Soul, because they tell men of the disease
of sin, which if not cured by the blood of Christ will certainly and may
suddenly bring eternal death?

3. It reproves such, who if they do not so deeply hate Ministers, yet will not
be persuaded to hear them; such as are so drencht in the World, and so over
head and ears in worldly business, that they mind nothing else. If any could
tell them of a good bargain, or some notable way of thriving in their Estates,
such a one they would visit and hear, and O how would they relish such
discourses! But though Ministers give notice of the best bargain that ever was
made, and bring tidings of the most notable way of thriving, namely of the way
of thriving in spiritual and heavenly riches, and show men how they may gain
pardon, and peace, and the favor of God, and the graces of the Spirit, and
escape future misery, and attain salvation and everlasting happiness; yet like
Gallio they mind none of these things, they will not step over the threshold
to hear Ministers preach the Gospel of salvation; and how shall they escape who
neglect so great salvation? Heb. 2.3.

4. It reproves such, who if they do hear Ministers, yet do not understand
them; that are so dull of hearing, that they know not what Ministers say, nor
whereof they affirm; that gather about a Minister as beasts about a Man that
sounds a Trumpet, and stare upon him, but know not what the meaning of the
sound is; so they hear Ministers, and look and stare upon them, some strange
things are brought to their ears, which they know not the meaning of, and are
like words of another language to them, because their eyes are closed, and they
want spiritual sense and discerning; and a great reason is, because they do not
desire, and will not take pains to get an understanding in these things, by
beginning first with the Principles of Religion in the Catechism, and begging
earnestly for the teachings of the Spirit, and readiness to do according to
what they already know.

5. It reproves such, who if they have some notional knowledge of the Doctrine
of salvation preached by Ministers, yet they do not believe the Doctrine: their
words seem to them like idle tales, or some cunningly devised Fable; they do
not receive it as the Word of Truth, as the Word of God, which effectually
works in them that believe, 1 Thessalonians. 2.3. they feel no effectual operation of
the Word in the change of their hearts, and the change of their lives; they
that were filthy are filthy still; and they that were unjust are unjust still;
and they that were Drunkards, and Swearers, and the like, go on still in their
sinful course, whatever notion they have of sin, and whatever discovery of
their danger, and Savior, and way of salvation by him; which is an evidence
that they do not believe; and this unbelief is the great God-provoking and
Soul-damning sin; such make God a liar, 1 Ioh. 5.10. but they will find him to
be true to their cost and pain.

6. It reproves such, who if they have some notional knowledge, and historical
Faith, yet do not relish the Words of salvation which are preached by
Ministers; 1. Those that do not relish the things, who make no account of
salvation, as if there were no desireableness therein: 2. Those that if they
desire salvation from Hell Torments and future misery, yet they do not relish
the terms, they do not like the Lords Yoke, they will not bear his Cross, they
will not be persuaded to deny themselves, to mortify the deeds of the body;
they could like to be saved from Hell, but they do not like to be saved from
sin; they could like to have Christ to be their High Priest and Advocate, but
they will not have him to be their King and Lord, and will not have him to
reign over them: To part with all sin, and to be universally holy, to lay down
Estate, Liberty, Life it self, at the Lords feer, and be resolved to suffer the
loss of all, if they stand in competition with Christ; are such hard sayings
that they cannot bear: But how hard will it be for them to bear the loss of
Heaven and happiness, and endure the dreadful, eternal wrath of God in Hell,
as they shall certainly do, who will not accept of salvation upon the terms of
the Gospel.

SECT. XIV.
Use 3. ARE Ministers to tell People Words whereby they may be saved? I shall
then endeavor to put in practice this duty of Ministers, in telling you words
whereby you may be saved.

In order to your salvation, I shall speak, 1. Some Words to try you whether
you be in a state of Salvation. 2. Some Words to move you to endeavor after
your Salvation. 3. Some Words to guide you in the way to attain Salvation.


1. The first words shall be to try you, whether you be in a state of
Salvation; and here I must put you upon the trial of your selves, wherein I
may give you some help; take the Exhortation of the Apostle, 2 Cor. 13.5.
Examine your selves, whether ye be in the Faith, prove your own selves. Examine
your selves by the Rule of the Word: And because these Words are chiefly
intended in order to the salvation of such as have not yet attained it; to
prepare them for the following Motives and Directions, which, if they mistook
themselves to have already attained to a state of salvation, would likely do
them no good: Therefore I shall briefly out of the Word of God give

Some Characters of such as are not in a state of Salvation.
1. Ignorant persons are not in a state of salvation. See this Isa. 27.11. It
is a people of no understanding, therefore he that made them will not have
mercy on them, and he that formed them will show them no favor: Those that are
grossly ignorant of the Fundamental Truths of Religion, concerning God and
Christ, the lost estate of Man since the fall, the way of Salvation,
Repentance, Faith, the Resurrection from the dead, the last Judgment, and the
future Rewards and Punishments in Heaven and Hell, and the like Principles of
Religion, which are necessary to be known in order to salvation, they cannot
for the present be in a state of Salvation; the meanest understanding is
capable of knowing these things by the teachings of the Word and Spirit,
therefore such as do neglect the means of Instruction, and do not search the
Word, and cry to God for it, but nuzzle up themselves in an affected ignorance
in these things, are inexcusable in their fault, and will bring unavoidable
destruction upon themselves, Hos. 4.6. My people are destroyed for lack of
knowledge.

2. Negligent persons are not in a state of salvation, I mean such as neglect
their salvation. Heb. 2.3. How shall we escape if we neglect so great
salvation? Such as do not value and prize this great salvation purchased by
Christ, and published in the Gospel; such as never were made sensible of their
need hereof; such as never had any great desires after it; such as never took
any pains in the use of means to obtain it; all which are evidences of their
neglect, they cannot escape the dreadful punishment of Hell, which is prepared
for such persons. Such as are diligent to make provision for their Bodies, but
neglect the salvation of their souls; if they persevere in this negligence they
must needs miss of salvation.

3. Impenitent persons are not in a state of salvation. Luke 13.3. Except ye
repent, ye shall all likewise perish. All are guilty of sin original, and
actual, and have matter for repentance; such as have an obdurate and impenitent
heart, which never was broken, and melted, and humbled; which never was
affected with true evangelical sorrow for sin; but on the contrary, can commit
sin with delight, rolling it as a sweet morsel under their tongue, which they
will not part withal, they must needs perish everlastingly, if they should die
in this estate; the word is express, that iniquity will be the ruin of the
impenitent, Ezekiel. 18 30.

4. Unregenerate persons are not in a state of salvation. Ioh. 3.3. Except a
man be born again, he cannot see the Kingdom of God. Such as never had a
gracious change wrought in their hearts, that are asleep in sin, and never were
awakened; as are dead in sin, and never were quickened; such as have old
natures and old hearts, and never were renewed; that never put off as
concerning their former conversation the old man which is corrupt, according to
deceitful ^usts, and put on the new man, which is created in righteousness and
true holiness, Ephesians. 4.22, 24. they are incapable whilst such, of this
salvation, there is no entrance for them into the Kingdom of Heaven.

5. Christless persons are not in a state of salvation, 2 Cor. 13.5. Know ye
not your own selves, that Jesus Christ is in you, except ye be Reprobates. Such
as have not Christ, and are not themselves in Christ, they are for the present
in a state of Reprobation; It is Christ only can save; those that are without
Christ, that are not united to him by Faith and the Spirit, that are
Unbelievers without Faith, and carnal without the Spirit, they cannot, whilst
such, be saved.

6. Unsanctified persons are not in a state of salvation. Heb. 12.14. Without
holiness none shall see God. Such as are unholy, such as live after the flesh
shall die, none but those that through the Spirit do mortify the deeds of the
body shall live, Romans 8.13.

7. And in a word, Disobedient persons are not in a state of salvation. Heb.
5.9. He became the author of Eternal Salvation to all them that obey him, to
none else; and Ephesians. 5.6. The wrath of God comes upon the Children of
disobedience. Such as walk in a course of disobedience, as live and allow
themselves in the practice of known sins, whatever they be, they are children
of wrath because children of disobedience. The Scriptures are so plain, that I
need without many words of mine, only lay them before you, as a Glass wherein
you may discern your spiritual state. Try your selves by these places, these
Texts will reach all that are not in a state of salvation.

SECT. XV.
II. THE second words shall be to move you to endeavor after your Salvation.

The Motives to stir up you to endeavor your salvation may be drawn, 1. From
the consideration of your selves, Whom you should endeavor the salvation of.
2. From the consideration of the salvation which you should endeavor to
obtain. 3. From the consideration of the Damnation of all such as do not obtain
salvation.


Motive 1. From the consideration of your selves, whom you should endeavor the
salvation of: It is the salvation of your selves, which I would press you unto;
It was the exhortation of the Apostle, Phil. 2.12. Work out your own salvation
with fear and trembling, and this is my exhortation of you this day, Labor
after your own salvation: If I were to persuade you to do some great kindness
for another, were it a difficult thing and like to cost you much labor and
trouble, I should not likely prevail; but when I am persuading you to do a
kindness for your selves, and the greatest kindness in the World, even to
endeavor after the salvation of your selves; methinks the natural Love which
you bear to your selves should induce you to hearken and do whatever is
requisite in order hereunto, though it cannot be done without difficulty and
trouble. How far will carnal self-love carry carnal men? what difficulties will
they go through? what expenses of time and pains and strength will they be at?
how will some rise up early and sit up late, deny themselves food and rest and
many comforts of this (...)? how will others comp^ss Sea and Land and hazard
life it self, and all to get an estate in the wo^d for themselves? and should
not spiritual (...), which is the only real self-love, carry y^^ n^^^ow
difficulties? should you think much of ex^^^nding time and pains that you may
get salvation for your selves? carnal self-love will bring destruction and
misery upon such as are swayed by it, and in the issue will prove self hatred;
as you really love your selves, as you would escape the most dreadful misery,
and obtain the chiefest happiness for your selves, labor after salvation for
your selves. Your self, your Persons do consist of two parts, namely, Soul and
Body; it is the salvation of both, which I exhort you unto.

1. Consider, it is the salvation of your Souls which I would have you
endeavor after, the salvation of your precious souls; your souls are more
precious than your bodies, and they are more precious than the whole world.

1. Your souls are more precious than your bodies, they are by far your more
excellent part: the original of your soul is more immediately from God: he
forms the spirit of man within him, Zach. 12.1. they are beams, they are
streams that issue forth immediately from God; moreover they carry more of the
impress and image of God upon them as they are invisible, spiritual, rational,
free, immortal; they have also more high and excellent operations than the body
is capable of, as of the understanding, conscience, memory, will, affections;
and I may add that if there be any luster upon the body, it does receive it
from the soul, when the soul is gone, the beauty is gone; whatever motion or
use there is in the body, it does depend on the soul; when the soul is
departed, the body can neither hear, nor speak, nor see, nor walk, nor do any
business; the body is a rotten stinking carcass without the soul; and whilst
the soul does abide in it, the body is the inferior part, the body is but the
Cabinet, the soul is the Jewel; the body is but the house of clay, the soul is
the living inhabitant; the body is as it were the beast (as one says Corpus
homini jumentum) which the soul does make use of to carry it from one place to
another; the body is the servant, it is the soul that rules, O labor then
after the salvation of your souls, which are your most excellent part; what
care do some take to preserve their bodies? much more reason have you to
endeavor the salvation of your souls: when London's Fire was burning the
houses, those who could not save all their goods, took care to save those which
were the most precious, especially their money and jewels; O whatever become
of your bodies here, whatever sickness or hardship they be exposed unto, labor
to save your jewels, your precious souls; the Cabinet will be spoilt, the clay
and mudd-wall will be broken down, and the soul will survive the body; O take
heed that when your souls come forth of their houses of clay, that they be not
cast into the deep and dark prison of Hell.

2. Your souls are more precious than the who^e world; our Savior esteemed
them so, and he best knew the worth of souls, who knew the mak^ng of them, and
made purchase of so many lost souls, see Matthew. 16.26. What is a man profited,
if he shall gain the whole world, and lose his own soul? or what shall a man
give in exchange for his soul? Suppose that you had your hearts-desire in the
world, that your baggs should throng in your Coffers, till there were no more
room; your gold and silver should increase without number; suppose you had
great possessions abroad, large revenues, stately houses, fruitful gardens and
orchards, pleasant groves and walks, spacious fields and meadows, which as the
Poet says, would weary the wings of a Kite to fly over in a day, suppose that
you had sweet and beautiful wives at home, like loving Hindes and pleasant Roes
unto you, like fruitful Vines about your houses, that you had towardly and
hopeful Children like Olive-plants round about your Tables; that you had most
kind and faithful friends of most pleasant conversation; that you had
servan^s, horses, chariots, coaches, dogs, hawks, and all sorts of serviceable
and delightful creatures, the best and in the greatest number at your commands
to attend your pleasure: suppose you were clothed with purple, wrapped in fine
linen, adorned with gold and silver, and precious stones, and had the most
rich and glorious Attire that the greatest cost and art could make for you:
suppose that your food were most delicious, that Air, Earth, and the Sea were
ransacked to provide dainties for your Table; that your courses were served up
with the most rich and generous Wine, the most sweet and harmonious music:
suppose that you were laden with titles of honor, and had all the Crowns and
Scepters of the earth laid at your feet, and that the whole world had you in
the highest esteem, and were in willing subjection unto you; yet what would it
profit you to gain all these things, or any thing else that the heart of man
could desire in the world, and lose your souls, which are a thousand fold more
precious: the gain of these things are but for the body, and but for a while;
whereas the loss of the soul is for ever; and when the soul is lost, all is
lost; when the soul leaves the body, a period is put to all earthly
enjoyments; and the more you have of these things, the more grievous will it be
to part with them; Think with your selves that you must dye certainly, and may
dye suddenly, and then, if not before, you will acknowledge the worlds vanity
and the preciousness of your souls, which are of longer duration than the age
of ten thousand worlds put together, and what is the gain of the world which is
so transitory and temporal, in comparison with the loss of the soul which is
immortal, and whose loss is irrepairable: a loss in the estate may be
recovered, Riches may fly away upon the wing, and sometimes return upon the
wing again, as in the case of Job; but the loss of the soul can never be
recovered; when once the soul has taken wing and is fled into the lower
regions, it will never find wings to return again to its former estate: O
therefore whatever you lose, take heed you do not lose your souls, your souls
are very precious, seek after their salvation.

2. It is the salvation also of your Bodies which I would have you endeavor
after: I do not mean the salvation of your bodies from sufferings, which
Religion does sometimes call you unto; nor a salvation of your bodies from
sickness and temporal death, which Religion does not exempt any from; but the
salvation of your bodies from perpetual death and pain of Hell; you may pamper
your flesh for a while on Earth, which may make it a more fit bait for the
Worms in the grave, and your bodies after death may be at rest, and take a
sweet sleep for many years in the dust; but there is a morning approaching
after the long night of death and many hours of darkness, in which the graves
will be opened and the dead will be awakened, and then your bodies will come
forth of the dust; and they will be adjudged by Christ unto most horrid and
endless torments in Hell, to burn for ever in unquencheable Fire, if you be
found under the guilt of sin: O therefore labor after the salvation of your
Bodies; when your bodies now are sick, you endeavor to get them cured, when
they are full of pain, you use means to get the pain removed; and you will fly
as fast and as far as you can from natural Death, and you will do much to
lengthen out and strengthen the thread of your life, though do what you can, it
will in time be cut asunder, and death which has you upon the chase will
overtake and overcome you whatever resistance be made; O labor to get
deliverance from the pains of body which are prepared in Hell for the damned:
Fly, O Fly from eternal Death and the strokes of Gods wrath which will come
upon the bodies of the wicked hereafter; if you would not have those faces
scorched, those eyes and tongues and hands roasted, and that flesh broiled and
fearfully tormented in the flames of Hell fire, labor after salvation. As you
love then your selves, your souls and bodies, seek after your salvation.

SECT. XVI.
Motive 2. FRom the consideration of the Salvation which you should endeavor
to obtain; and here I shall set before you some properties of this salvation to
move you the more effectually to seek after it.

1. It is a great Salvation. 2. It is a rare Salvation. 3. It is a necessary
Salvation. 4. It is a possible Salvation. 5. It is a near Salvation. 6. It is
an evident Salvation. 7. It is a free Salvation. 8. It is a sure Salvation.
1. It is a great Salvation, and that both in regard of the thing it self, and
in regard of the causes of it.

(1.) It is great in regard of the thing it self. As in Motion, so in Salvation
there is the terminus a quo, and the terminus ad quem, the term from which, and
the term to which; that which people are in Salvation delivered from, and that
which in Salvation they attain unto, both which are exceeding great.

1. That which people in Salvation are delivered from.

There are six great evils which those that are saved are delivered from.

1. From sin, the greatest evil of all, from the guilt of sin, Ephesians. 1.7. and
the power, the reigning power of sin, Romans 6 14. 2. From Satan the greatest
enemy of all, from his power and tyranny, Col. 1.13. 2 Timothy 2.26. 3. From the
Law, the evil which it occasioneth, namely, the provoking to concupiscence and
disobedience, Romans 7.5, 6. and the evil which it denounces, namely Gods curse,
Gal. 3.10, 13. 4. From the world, not in regard of their place, but in regard
of their course, Gal. 1.4. Ioh. 15.19. Ioh. 17.16. 5. From Death, the sting of
death, and the fear of death, at least the grounds of fear, Heb. 2.14, 15. 6.
From wrath, the wrath of God which is to come, 1 These. 1.10.

2. This Salvation is great in regard of that which in Salvation people do
attain unto. All the privileges of the Gospel are wrapped up and included in the
word Salvation. Election is the foundation of it; Effectual calling is the
beginning of it, Justification, Adoption and Sanctification are contained in it,
and Glorification is the consummation of it. This Salvation then is great in
regard of the thing it self.

(2.) This Salvation is great in regard of the causes of it.

1. Efficient. 2. Meritorious. 3. Instrumental. 4. Final.
1. This Salvation is a great Salvation in regard of the efficient cause, and
that is God the Father: Salvation is ascribed to him as the author, Tit. 3.5.
According to his mercy he saved us. God is the cause of our Salvation, 1. as he
has chosen us unto Salvation, Ephesians. 1.4. As he has chosen us in him before the
foundation of the world: which Election being of Free grace, we are said to be
saved by Grace, Ephesians. 2 5. 2. As he has sent his only begotten Son into the
world, to purchase Salvation for us, Joh. 3.16. God so loved the world that he
gave his only begotten Son that whosoever believes in him should not perish,
but have everlasting life. Gal. 4.4, 5. When the fullness of the time was come
God sent forth his Son, made of a Woman, made under the Law, to redeem them
which were under the Law, that we might receive the Adoption of Sons. 3. As he
reveals this Salvation unto us by the Preaching of the Gospel, for which end
he qualifyeth and sends his Ministers upon this Embassage to make known the
glad tidings of Salvation. 4. As he conferrs Salvation actually upon us in our
effectual calling, Justification, Adoption, Sanctification and Glorification,
all these are from God. Now that must needs be a great Salvation which is
effected by the great God, especially if we consider that it is the greatest
and most glorious of all his works in the world, and unto which all his other
works have some kind of tendency.

2. This Salvation is a great Salvation in regard of the meritorious cause, and
that is the Lord Jesus Christ, the excellency and greatness of whose nature,
office and sufferings do demonstrate the greatness of this Salvation which was
purchased by him. The sufferings of Christ were most properly the meritorious
cause of man's salvation, and they were the greatest sufferings that ever were
endured, insomuch as 1. They were the sufferings of the greatest person; as man
he was the head of the creation in regard of dignity, he was a greater King
than Solomon, Matthew. 12.42. a greater Prophet than Moses, Heb. 3.3. a greater
Priest than Aaron, even a Priest after the order of Melchisedec, Heb. 7.
Moreover he was God as well as man, God manifested in the flesh, 1 Timothy 3.16.
and though the Godhead could not properly suffer, yet through its union in the
same person to the Manhood, it put an efficacy in his suffering, and
strengthened the humane nature to undergo greater sufferings as to the value of
them in that short space of time, than all the Angels and Men in the world (had
their strength been united together in one person) could have endured, if the
greatest extremity of misery had been laid upon such a one unto all eternity:
For 2. The sufferings of Christ were equivalent unto eternal death, and ^he
torments of the damned in Hell, yea they were far exceeding, as is evident,
because Gods infinite Justice is hereby fully satisfied, and there is
sufficiency of merit in them for the redemption of the whole world not only of
Believers, but also of Unbelievers, not only of Men but of Devils too: Christ's
sufferings were of infinite value, not in regard of the sufferings, but in
regard of the Divine nature so closely united unto the Humane nature: Therefore
the salvation purchased by these sufferings must needs be a great salvation.

3. This salvation is a great salvation in regard of the Instrumental Cause,
and that is Faith; faith is a grace of great worth and excellency, insomuch as
it does not spring from any root or power of nature, but is wrought by the
power of God, and requires such exceeding great power in the effecting of it;
we read of the exceeding greatness of Gods power toward them that believe
according to the working of his mighty power, Ephesians. 1.19. which shows that the
salvation is great which is effected by this grace of Faith.

4. This salvation is a great salvation in regard of the Final Cause, and that
is the manifestation of Gods glory: 1. The glory of his Wisdom in contriving
such a way for Man's salvation, which no created understanding could have
tho^ght of: 2. The glory of his Justice which is as fully satisfied through
Christ's sufferings, as if all Believers had been eternally punished: 3. And
chiefly the glory of his free grace and mercy, which is set forth and magnified
so eminently in all the degrees of man's salvation, that nothing may be ascribed
unto Man, but all unto God alone.

Thus you see, that this salvation is a great salvation in regard of the Thing
it self, and in regard of the Causes of it. It is so great salvation as it has
no comparison, and is beyond expression, therefore labor to attain t^is
salvation; some endeavor to get a great Estate, others to get great Friends,
others to get great honor and repute in the world, do you labor to obtain
this great salvation which does exceed all in greatness, it is a high and noble
design, and is worthy your uttermost care and diligence in seeking after it;
other things are but small things, mere toys and trifles in comparison;
nothing in the world has the least degree of worth, compared with this so
great s^lvation. I shall be more brief in speaking of the other properties of
this salvation.

II. This salvation is a Rare Salvation: I mean, that few do obtain it; Many
are called, few are chosen, Matthew. 20.16. Many are damned, few are saved: There
are many troops of sinners that are posting in the broad way of destruction, it
is but a thin scattered company that are pressing forward in the narrow way of
life and salvation; this is evident from the Answer of our Savior upon the
Question propounded unto him, Luke 13.23, 24. Then said one unto him, Lord are
there few that he saved? And he said unto them, Strive to enter in at the
strait gate, for many I say unto you will seek to enter in, and shall not be
able. In which words he does in effect say, that Few, very Few should be saved,
for he tells them plainly, that the gate of salvation is a strait gate, and
many cannot pass through a strait gate; and although many should seek to enter
in at this gate, yet they should not be able; and if many that seek to enter in
shall not be able, then it follows, that none of those which do not seek to
enter in shall be able: Hence then we may gather a strong argument to prove,
that very few shall be saved; If the most of men and women in the world do not
seek salvation at all, and they cannot possibly attain it, and many that seek
salvation shall never find it, then there are but few that shall be saved; but
the most in the world do not seek salvation at all, to say nothing of the
Heathen world which is by many degrees the far greater part of the world, who
sit in darkness, and from whom the Gospel of salvation is hid, and therefore
are expressly said to be lost, 2 Cor. 4.3. Even in the Christian world where the
light of the Gospel does shine, the most of men and women, that bear the name
of Christians, are ignorant, or profane, or only civil and moral, and live in
the total neglect of the salvation of the Gospel, and such cannot possibly
attain salvation that do not at all seek after it: And of them that make some
profession of Religion, and do something in order to salvation, many shall not
be able to attain it; our Savior says, that many shall seek to enter in and
shall not be able, because they do not seek in a right manner, because they do
not seek salvation chiefly; they seek the satisfaction of their lusts, before
the salvation of their souls; because they do not seek it diligently, they are
careless and formal in the use of the means of salvation; they seek, but they
do not strive to enter in at the strait gate; they do not press toward the
mark for the prize of the high calling, and therefore they fall short and miss
of it; there are but few that strive to enter in at the strait gate, that
strive as wrestlers in wrestling, or racers in running, or warriors in
fighting, as the word (...) does signify; few that seek their salvation above
all other things, and with all their heart and might, few that are resolved for
salvation whatever it cost them, whatever they do, or suffer for it, unto which
resolution and endeavor all must come, or else they cannot be saved, and these
being so few, certainly there are but few that shall be saved. More plainly our
Savior speaks to the same purpose, Math. 7.13, 14. Enter ye in at the strait
gate, for wide is the gate and broad is the way that leads to destruction,
and many there be which go in thereat; because strait is the gate and narrow
the way which leads unto life, and few there be that find it. The gate and
way of sin which leads to death and Hell, are wide and broad, and the most in
the world are passing through this gate, and walking in this way; the course of
the world is a course of sin, the end of which course is destruction, and the
reason why so many go in at the gate of sin, which is the outer gate of Hell,
is, because strait is the gate, and narrow the way which leads unto life;
because of the difficulties in the way of life and salvation, which require
much pains and diligence if we would go through them; we must give all
diligence, if we would make our calling and election sure, 2 Pet. 1.10. We must
work out our salvation with fear and trembling, if we would attain salvation,
Phil. 1.12. we must labor if we would enter into Rest, Heb. 4.12. we must
strive if we would enter in at the strait gate, Luke 13.24. we must run if we
would obtain the prize, 1 Cor. 9.24. we must fight the good fight of Faith if
we would lay hold on eternal life, 1 Timothy 6.12. the Kingdom of Heaven suffers
violence, says our Savior, and the violent take it by force, Math. 11.12. we
must lay siege to Heaven, if we would take it, and wi^h force and violence
overcome those potent enemies, the Devil, the Flesh, and the World, who would
draw or drive us away from the walls and gates of the New Jerusalem. It is not
an easy thing to be saved, the way to Heaven is narrow, and it lies up hill,
our endeavors for Heaven especially at the first, are like climbing up a steep
hill, like hewing a way through hard rocks, like swimming against a strong
stream, like cutting hard wood against the grain; and because of the opposition
and difficulty in the way of salvation, therefore there be but few that find
the path thereof; most choose a broader and easier way. It is evident then from
what has been said, that this salvation is Rare and scarce, the consideration
whereof should not discourage you, but quicken you unto the greater diligence
in your endeavors after it; the rarity of it shows the worth and excellency
of it; Jewels and precious stones are rare and hard to be got; what
difficulties will some go through? what dangerous voyages unto the uttermost
parts of the Earth will some undertake, to bring home some rare things? but
especially the consideration withal of the necessity of salvation (of which in
the next particular) should quicken you to seek after it. Think with your
selves (my beloved) think seriously, and think frequently, that there are but
few that shall be saved; and then examine, what reason you have to think that
you are in the number of those few: When our Savior told his Disciples that
but one of them should betray him, they looked one upon another, and every one
asked him, Lord is it I? there was none of them without their fears which made
them so inquisitive, and they seem to be in pain until they are resolved; what
then would they have thought and said? how fearful would they have been, if
our Savior had told them that the most of them should have betrayed him, yea
that all of them should betray him, but one? May not I without uncharitableness
say, that not one in twelve, no nor one in twenty, no nor one in a hundred in
this City and Nation shall be saved? If I should tell you that hear me this
day, that some of you will be damned, yea that many of you will be damned, yea
that most of you will be damned, and that but few of this great company will be
saved, should I be a false Prophet? I will not say it will be thus, neither can
I do it, because this is Gods secret; much less do I desire it should be thus,
for the end of my preaching is, that you all might be saved; but let me tell
you, that I fear that many of you here present will be found in the number of
those many our Savior speaks of, that shall seek to enter in at the strait
gate, and shall not be able; our Savior told his Auditors, that flocked to
hear him, thus, and are you better than they? you all seek to enter in at the
strait gate, by coming into this place where the Gospel is preached, and where
the gate is set open before you; but are there not many amongst you that seek
in a careless and negligent manner? May not I say of all the seekers here, that
there are but few that strive to enter in at the strait gate? Do you all, or
the most look as if you had your eye upon the mark and glorious prize before
you, and were pressing with all your might toward it? do you hear as if it
were for your lives, as if you might hear words this day whereby you may be
saved? do you pray and seek as if you were in earnest, as if you were resolved
to take Heaven by violence, and whatever you were denied in, would not be
denied your salvation? Such as do not strive shall never get through the strait
gate. Think with your selves, It may be that many in this place shall be
damned, and then say, Shall not I? shall not I? and O what a miserable wretch
shall I be if I should be damned! if I should get only to the gate of Heaven,
and not get through! if I should come only to the borders of the Heavenly
Canaan, and dye in the Wilderness! if I should be found in the number of the
negligent seekers which will miss of salvation? What grounds have I to think
that I shall be saved? there are but few, can I think that I am in the number
of the few? Methinks this consideration of the Rarity of salvation should
awaken you to give earnest heed that with the most that seek it, you may not
miss of it.

3. This salvation is a necessary salvation: the great difficulty of obtaining
some precious things discourageth the endeavors of the most in seeking after
them, especially when they may be well enough without them; but this salvation
is necessary, you cannot be without it; it is of absolute and universal
necessity; some things you may have, this you must have; without it you are
undone, you will be irrecoverably and eternally miserable; there is no medium,
no middle condition between salvation and damnation (of which more by and by):
some things are necessary to the body, but salvation is necessary to your
happiness, without it there is no possibility (in this fallen state) of
obtaining the chief end, the chief good which you are capable of; without this
no coming near to God in whom your chiefest happiness does consist, no vision
or fruition of him either in part here, or in full and eternally hereafter.
Some men have need of one thing, and some of another, but all the men and women
in the world have need of salvation, because all are sinners, all are children
of wrath by nature. There is not one person amongst you all but have been
guilty of sin, for the whole world is guilty before God, Romans 3.19. and every
moment of your lives you are exposed unto the punishment of sin in Hell, unless
you are brought into a state of salvation. It is necessary therefore that all
of you should above all things seek after your salvation.

4. This salvation is a possible salvation; though there were never so much
worth and excellency in, never so much necessity of this salvation, yet if
there were an impossibility of obtaining it, all arguments would be used in
vain to press any to endeavor after it; but this salvation is possible, it is
possible that you should attain it, that the meanest of you, the vilest of you,
yea that every one of you that hear these words may attain it.

1. The meanest of you may attain this salvation, and that 1. Such of you as
are of the meanest parts, though you have neither humane learning, nor capacity
or ability for it; though your judgment be shallow, your fancy and invention
dull, your memory weak, and so could never understand and retain the many Arts
and Sciences in Philosophy, and the diverse kinds of Languages, which learned
men have written their books in; yet you are capable of being made the
Scholars and Disciples of Jesus Christ, and he can teach the dullest and
shallowest of you all the deep mysteries of salvation by his Spirit, yea and he
can give you a greater understanding in them, than the wisest and most learned
men that are without the Spirit do attain unto; For he hides those things from
the wise and prudent which he reveals unto babes, Matthew. 11.25. And the
natural man, let him be never so learned a man, receives not the things of the
Spirit, neither can he know them because they are spiritually discerned, 1 Cor.
2.14. And therefore when not many wise men after the flesh are called, God
chooses the foolish things of the world to exalt the riches of his free grace
in their salvation, 1 Cor. 1.26, 27, 31. Surgunt ind^cti and rapiunt coelum,
quum nos cum omni doctrina in Gehennam detrudimur, says one. The unlearned
arise, and take Heaven by violence, when we with all our learning are violently
thrown down into Hell. So that you who are of no learning, and but mean natural
abilities, have encouragement to seek after this salvation of the Gospel,
seeing the Lord can teach you by his Spirit, and it does better suit with his
design of glorifying his free grace in bestowing it upon such as you, rather
than on the wise and learned men of the world, who would be apt to ascribe the
glory unto themselves. 2. Such of you as are not only of the meanest parts, but
also of the meanest condition in the World, may attain this Salva^ion; the poor
have the Gospel preached unto them, Matthew. 11.5. If with poverty in regard of
Estate, you are also poor in spirit, the riches of grace and salvation are
tendered freely unto you; read for your encouragement what the Apostle says,
Iam. 2.5. Hearken my beloved Brethren, has not God chosen the poor of this
World, rich in Faith, and H^irs of the Kingdom, which he has promised unto
them that lo^^ him. If you were to seek some great favor from an Earthly
Prince, your mean attire and condition might keep you at a distance; and you
might have no regard given to your request, should it have a hearing; The
Petitions of the great and rich are heard in Courts on Earth, when the poor and
mean are despised: but the King of Heaven does regard the rich no more than the
poor, Job 34.19. And if you seek diligently after this Salvation, you may have
as free access to the Lord as any, and your Petitions shall be heard in the
Court of Heaven, and you shall certainly obtain this Salvation which you seek
after.

2. The vilest of you all may attain Salvation; Some of you it may be have been
notorious sinners, your consciences do accuse you of such great sins, with such
heinous aggravations, that you may be discouraged and out of hope that such as
you should be saved; you have offered such high affronts and indignities unto
the highest Majesty that you think he can never put them up; you have run so
deep and so long upon the score, that you think the scores can never be wiped
off; if they had been smaller faults, or more ordinary slips, or you had sought
after Salvation sooner, you might have hoped to speed, but now you fear the
door of mercy is shut, and the day of Grace is spent, and there is no pardon
and salvation for such vile sinners as you: But let me tell you that the vilest
of you all may attain Salvation, the door of mercy is not so fast shut as yet,
but by knocking hard it may be opened; and so long as the day of your life is
continued, and the means of grace are continued, you cannot say that the day of
grace is quite (...); there is salvation attainable by the worst of you all, if
you will look after it; our Savior tells us of Publicans and Harlots that
entered into the Kingdom of Heaven sooner than the Pharisees who boasted in
their own righteousness, Matthew. 21.31. He conversed with, and called the worst
of sinners to repentance, Matthew. 9.11, 13. Inde^d when the Apostle makes
mention of notorious sinners, he tells us, that such whilst such, could not
be saved, 1 Cor. 6.9, 10. Know ye not that the unrighteous shall not inherit
the Kingdom of God, Be not deceived, neither Fornicators, nor Idolaters, nor
Adulterers, nor ^ffeminate, nor Abusers of th^mselves with Mankind, nor
Thieves, nor Covetous, no^ Drunkards, nor Revilers, nor Extortioners, shall
inherit the Kingdom of God. Those that are such notorious sinners, and continue
in the practice of such sins without repentance, they cannot be saved; but
withal he adds in the 11. verse, that some of them had been such sinners,
but were now in a state of Salvation through their interest in Jesus Christ,
and the operation of the Spirit of God upon their hearts, And such were some of
you; but ye are washed, but ye are sanctified, but ye are justified in the name
of the Lord Jesus, and by the spirit of our God; they were justified, their
sins pardoned and persons accepted, in the name of the Lord Jesus, through the
imputation of his righteousness unto them, and they were washed and sanctified
by the Spirit of God, through infusion of Grace by the Spirit into them: I
might add further inst^nces of notorious sinners who have been saved, as
Manasses, Mary Magdalen, Paul, who before Conversion calls himself the
chiefest of sinners, yet obtained Mercy and Salvation; and let me tell you
moreover, that if you repent now and apply your selves to Christ, the greater
your sins have been, the more will Gods glory be illustrated in your Salvation,
and the abounding of your sins will make way for the super-abounding of his
grace.

3. All of you that hear these words may obtain Salvation, it is possible that
every one of you in this place may be saved; it would be a rare thing, but it
is a possible thing: indeed there are but few that shall be saved; but who
knows but all of you may be found in the number of those few; and O how would
it rejoice my heart to see all those faces in Heaven whom I see here this day
to hear the words of Salvation. Be encouraged to seek after your salvation by
the possibility of obtaining. Now salvation is possible for all of you that
have not as yet attained it; but let me add, that it will not be possible long
for you all; whilst you are in the land of the living it is possible, though
you be condemned to Hell for sin whilst unbelievers, Ioh. 3.18. He that
believes not is condemned already; yet the sentence of condemnation is
traversible, you may appeal from the Court of the Law, to the Court of
Chancery; you may fly from the bar of Gods justice, unto the throne of grace;
and if you heartily repent of sin, and by faith lay hold on Christ, you may
obtain pardon and salvation: Whilst the reprieve of your life lasts,
salvation is attainable; but when once your life is come to an end (which you
know not how soon it may be) and you be found in a state of impenitency and
unbelief, then the percullis will be shutt down upon you for ever; then the
black flag will be hung out; then the talent of lead will seal up the measure
of your wickedness; and your condemnation will be irreversible; when the day of
your life is spent, the day of grace will be spent too, and the door of mercy
will be shut upon you for ever; and it will be impossible for any of you that
have not attained, then to attain salvation.

5. This salvation is a near Salvation. Say not in your heart, Who shall ascend
up into Heaven to learn what it is there? or who shall descend into the deep to
bring notice of it from thence? or who shall take the wings of the morning, and
fly into the uttermost parts of the earth thence to bring tidings of it to you?
for the word of salvation is near unto you, it is brought home to your own
doors, it is that word which is now sounding in your ears, even the words which
we Ministers preach unto you: read what those words are which are brought so
nigh, Romans 10.8, 9, 10, 11, 12, 13. The word is nigh thee, even in thy mouth,
and in thy heart, that is the word of faith which we preach, That if thou shall
confess with thy mouth the Lord Jesus, and shall believe in thy heart that God
has raised him from the dead, thou shall be saved: For with the heart man
believes unto righteousness, and with the mouth confession is made unto
salvation. For the Scripture says, Whosoever believes on him shall not be
ashamed: For there is no difference between the Jew and the Greek: for the same
Lord over all is rich unto all that call upon him: for whosoever calls upon
the Name of the Lord shall be saved. Heretofore salvation was only amongst the
Jews, and whoever of other Nations would be saved, they must travel to
Jerusalem, and worship the Lord in his Temple, and enquire for salvation in
that place: then salvation was afar off from the Gentiles, especially from
these British Isles; but now since the revelation of Jesus Christ, as those
which were afar off are made nigh by the blood of Christ; so the word of
salvation is brought nigh unto us; you have many Messengers of Peace, which
bring the glad tidings of salvation near unto you, and this may further
encourage you to seek after it.

6. This salvation is an Evident Salvation: I mean, that it is more clearly and
evidently made known unto us, than it has been in former ages unto any, or
than it is in other places unto many.

In former ages this salvation was not made known so clearly unto any, I mean
in the ages before the coming of Christ: the Prophets themselves who prophesied
of it, did not fully understand what the Spirit in them did signify, when it
foretold of this grace which should come unto the Church in after ages, 1 Pet.
1.10, 11. And therefore the first preaching of the Gospel of salvation, is
called a revelation of the mystery which had been kept secret since the world
began unto that time, Romans 16.25. And a manifestation of that mystery to the
Saints which had been hid from ages and generations, Col. 1.25, 26, 27. The
Gospel of salvation was indeed revealed in the dispensation of the Law upon
Mount Sinai by Moses, but it was more obscurely; it was wrapped up in types and
figures; and as there was a vail before Moses his face, so there was a vail
before the truths of salvation, so that the children of Israel could not
steadfastly look unto the end of those things which were after to be abolished,
2 Cor. 3.13. but this vail is done away in Christ, v. 14. When Christ suffered
upon the Cross, the vail of the Temple, which kept the people off the Holy of
Holies, was rent from the top to the bottom of it, and then the way into the
Holy of Holies was made manifest, and Christ by his appearance abolished death,
and brought life and immortality to light by the Gospel, 2 Timothy 1.10. Then
darkness did pass away, and the true and mavelous light did shine upon the
Church, 1 Ioh. 2.8. And now with open face believers do behold as in a glass
the glory of the Lord, 1 Cor. 3.18. The scope of which places is to show the
obscurity of former revelations, and the clearness and evidence of the
revelation of the Gospel in these latter days.

In other places this salvation is not made known so clearly unto many; it is
not made known at all unto the most in the world; a thick darkness of ignorance
does overspread the greatest part of the face of the earth, and even amongst
those that call themselves by the name of the Church of Christ: there are in
many places such fogs and mists of error and heresy, that the truths of
salvation are darkened, and peoples minds are blinded; but now unto you this
salvation is made so clear and evident; the thing and way of it is made so
manifest, that it is a great encouragement to seek after this salvation.

7. This salvation is a Free Salvation; it will cost you no money, you may have
it for nothing, you may have it for accepting: If you were taken captive by
men, if you were slaves to the Turks, possibly you might not be delivered
without some considerable sum for your ransom; but you may be delivered from
the slavery of the Devil, and your own lusts, you may be saved from sin and
Hell without money: Indeed a price has been paid for your ransom, not silver
or gold, but that which is ten thousand times more precious, and that was the
blood of Jesus Christ, which was shed upon the Cross for you; yet though your
salvation cost Christ dear, it is free unto you, it will cost you nothing;
pardon is free, and grace is free, and eternal life unto you is a free gift;
you are invited to come unto the waters, and to buy wine and milk, but it is
without money and without price, Isa. 55.1. The Spirit says, come, and the
Bride says, come, and whosoever is a thirst let him come, and take of the
waters of life freely, Rev. 22.17. There is sufficiency of grace in God for the
salvation of you all, and you may come and partake of this grace in your
salvation freely: You may have it without money, if you be poor, the gifts of
God cannot be bought; and you may have it without merit; if you conceit that
you deserve any thing, you shall be sure to have nothing; if you are sensible
of your unworthiness, and apply Christ's merits and righteousness, through him
you may have salvation freely.

8. And lastly, This salvation is a Sure Salvation; you have the promise of God
for it, and there can be no greater certainty of a thing than the word of God,
especially if you consider that God is infinite in power, and therefore can do
whatever he will, and that God is infinitely true, and therefore will do
whatever he has promised: God is most powerful, and therefore able to save
you; there is strength sufficient in his Almighty Arm, to bring salvation unto
you; and God is most faithful in the promises of salvation, which he has made
in the Covenant of Grace; if you get faith to apply the promises, you shall
certainly have the thing: There is an uncertainty in every thing else in the
world, but there is a certainty in this salvation, that there is such a thing
is certain from the revelation of the Word of God, who cannot lie; and that you
may have it if you will accept of it, is certain from the nature and firmness
of the promises; and when you have attained unto any degrees of this salvation,
the perfecting of it will be most sure; for he that has begun a good work in
you, will perform it until the day of Jesus Christ, Phil. 1.6. Thus I have laid
before you the properties of this salvation; it is a great salvation; it is a
rare salvation; it is a necessary salvation; it is a possible salvation; it is
a near salvation; it is an evident salvation; it is a free salvation; it is a
sure salvation; all which being laid together, may be a strong motive and
inducement to you to labor that you may attain a share in this salvation.

SECT. XVII.
FRom the consideration of the Motive 3.
Damnation of all such as do not obtain salvation. The damnation of all such
persons will be Dreadful and Certain.

(1.) The Damnation of such as are not saved will be dreadful.

1. The Day of their damnation will be dreadful. 2. The Sentence of their
damnation will be dreadful. 3. The Execution of their damnation will be
dreadful.
1. The Day of the damnation of such as are not saved will be dreadful, and
that is the last day, the day of judgment: O how dreadful will this day be to
you that are wicked and ungodly, when the Heavens shall be opened, and the Lord
Jesus Christ, the Judge of the world shall descend with a shout, with the voice
of the Archangel, and the loud sound of a Trumpet; when the Earth shall be
opened, and you shall be raised out of the dust, and summoned to appear before
Christ's Tribunal; and the Books shall be opened, and all your sins shall be
made manifest before the whole world; when the Heavens shall be on fire, and
melt down upon you, and pass away with a great noise; and the Earth shall be on
fire, and burn under you; and every Mountain and Hill shall flee away before
Christ's face; and Christ shall be on fire, and come in flames of anger to take
vengeance upon you for your sins. Think, O think how dreadful this day of
damnation will be unto all such of you as shall not then be found in a state of
salvation! O what dread will seize upon you so soon as your eyes are opened,
and you find the predictions of the word which you formerly slighted to be
true, and perceive that now indeed the day of Gods wrath is come, when you
shall be dragged like so many malefactors before the Judgment Seat, and there
stand naked horribly lashing your selves in the reflections of conscience upon
your fore-past wickedness; how will you be ready to tear your selves to pieces
for your folly and madness, that you did not provide for this day, and flee
from this wrath of God, which then you will not be able to escape? how
willingly would you creep into some rock, or under some mountain, or abide
still in your grave, or cast your selves into the Sea, if possibly any place
could be found to hide you in this terrible day, but shall be able to find no
hiding place for your selves? Think what hideous thoughts, what sinking fears,
what horrible perplexity of mind you will on this day be filled withal, it
will be a dreadful day.

2. The Sentence of the damnation of such as are not saved will be dreadful;
when the Books are opened where your sins are recorded, and you are convicted
by the Judge; then he will proceed to pass sentence upon you. Depart from me ye
cursed into everlasting fire, prepared for the Devil and his Angels, Matthew.
25.41. O dreadful words! the voice will be loud with which they will be
pronounced, such as shall reach the ears of all the wicked together of all
generations, and how will they all quake and tremble at the sound thereof! You
may cry it may be to the Lord for mercy, but it will be in vain; you may say,
Lord open to us, and receive us into thy Kingdom, that we may participate in
the joys thereof; but he will say unto you, Depart from me, I know ye not all
ye workers of iniquity: But if you must depart, you may wish for his blessing,
as Esau, though it were but an inferior blessing; no, depart ye cursed, depart
with a curse: If then you must depart with a curse, you may wish for some
convenient place of abode, and good company, as Cain, when he went forth from
the presence of the Lord with a curse, he built a City to dwell in, and took
some comfort, it may be in his habitation, and wife, and children; no, depart
into everlasting fire, prepared for the Devil and his Angels; you must dwell in
devouring fire, and inhabit everlasting burnings, and your companions will be
the Devil and his Angels, and fellow-damned sinners, in whom you will not find
the least comfort, which leads to the third particular.

3. The Execution of the Damnation of such as are not saved, will be dreadful,
and this will be in Hell; when the irreversible sentence of damnation is passed
upon you, immediately the execution will follow, and you will be haled from the
Judgment seat, and the everlasting doors of the prison of Hell will be lifted
up, where a horrible fire is burning, which can never be quenched, into which
you must enter, and be shut down, and shut in to take up your eternal abode in
that place of torment; there every part will be tormented, every member of your
bodies, every faculty of your souls, and that in the highest degree of
extremity beyond your now capacity, and your torments will have no
intermission, neither will you have any hopes of their conclusion. I have
already treated in my Book of Judgment of the universality, extremity, and
eternity of the torments of the Damned, and therefore shall not here enlarge.
From what has been said, you may evidently perceive, that the Damnation of
such as are not saved will be dreadful, which should awaken you to endeavor
after your salvation, especially if withal you consider,

(2.) That the Damnation of such as are not saved will be Certain; where there
is no Salvation there will be unavoidable Damnation, because between these two
hereafter there will be no middle condition; such as are not saved will most
certainly be damned; Heaven or Hell, eternal happiness, or eternal misery will
be the portion of all the Sons and Daughters of Adam. I might show, that Gods
Justice, and Holiness and Truth, does require the Damnation of all such as do
not obtain Salvation by Jesus Christ, so that either God must prove unholy, and
unjust and false in his Word, which is impossible, or you which are not saved
must be damned, therefore this is most certain, there is no escaping of the
damnation of Hell by such as neglect the great Salvation of the Gospel, Heb.
2.3.

And methinks by this time I should hear some of you cry out as the Jews when
Peter preached, or the Jailer, O what shall we do to be saved?

SECT. XVIII.
III. I Am to tell you Words to guide you in the way to attain Salvation. And
here I shall 1. Direct what things you must do, that you may be saved. 2. Show
what Means you must make use of to help you in those things.


1. What Things you must do that you may be saved. Take this in these Ten
Directions.

1. You must see your selves lost. 2. You must mourn for sin. 3. You must turn
from sin. 4. You must believe in Jesus Christ. 5. You must get a new Nature. 6.
You must lead a New Life. 7. You must resolve upon sufferings for Christ, if
called. 8. You must study and apply the Promises of the Covenant of Grace. 9.
You must give up your selves in Covenant unto God. 10. You must be steadfast and
persevere in the Ways of God unto your lives end.
Direction 1. You must see your selves lost, if you would be saved; Luke 19.10.
our Savior tells us, that he came to seek and save that which was lost. You
must be lost if you would be found: We read Luke 15. of the lost Sheep, the
lost Groat, and the lost Son, all which were found again, and that with joy.
When sinners perceive themselves to be lost and undone, and know not what to
do, then they are near to be found and saved by Jesus Christ: O then as ever
you expect Salvation by Christ, you must see and be sensible of your lost
estate, whilst you are in a state of Nature: And for this end you must get a
Conviction, 1. Of your sin. 2. Of the Punishment you have deserved for your
sin. 3. Of your Insufficiency to satisfy Gods Justice. 4. Of your inability to
make resistance, and defend your selves. 5. Of the Impossibility of your
fleeing and escaping Gods wrath. 6. That as yet you have no Interest in Christ,
who alone is able to deliver you from the wrath to come.


1. That you may be sensible of your lost estate, you must get a Conviction of
your sin, your eyes must be opened to see your selves guilty of sin before God,
and your mouths must be stopped, so as to have nothing to say if the Lord
should condemn you. You must not only understand the nature of sin in the
general, that it is a transgression of the holy, and righteous, and good Law of
the holy and glorious God of Heaven and Earth; but also you must be
particularly and thoroughly convinced, that you have transgressed this Law of
God; you must be convinced of your particular sins: As to the kinds of your
sins, you must 1. See your selves guilty of Original sin, of Adams first
transgression by a just imputation, you being in his loins, and parties in the
first Covenant: and then you must see what inherent sin there is in your
nature, that you were conceived and born in sin, that you are a viperous brood,
a Se^p^ntine generation, a seed of evil doers; that the Toad is not fuller of
poison, than your natures are full of sin; that your natures are contrary unto
the nature of God, and have an enmity in them against the Law of God, Romans 6.7.
You must be convinced, how your natures are depraved, being wholly destitute of
Original Righteousness, empty of all good, and inclinable wholly unto evil;
that they are a polluted fountain, from whence can proceed nothing but what is
unclean; that they are a bitter root, from whence does spring forth such cursed
fruits of sin in your lives; and you should look upon your sin of nature to be
the worst, because the Original of all actual transgressions. 2. You must be
convinced of your actual sins, how you have broken Gods Law in thought, word
and deed, you must see your sins of Omission, and your sins of Commission,
against the first and second Table of the Law, and take notice of the number of
them, so far as you can remember, together with their aggravations; if they
have been committed through ignorance when you have had means of knowledge, if
against light of Nature and the Word, if against the reluctance of natural
Conscience, if against many Warnings and Reproofs, if they have been committed
with security, hardness of heart, delight, greediness, pride, presumption,
obstinacy, and the like; and that you might be convinced of the gu^lt of sin,
you must look into the Law, in which as in a glass you may see your natural
face, and all the spots thereof; the Law will discover the sin of your natures,
as it requires perfect conformity thereunto in habit, disposition, and
inclination, and forbids all evil byasses of the will and heart to sin, as
well as external transgressions; Moreover the Law will discover to you your
actual sins; but then you must look beyond the head Precepts of the Law, which
are but ten, for you must take notice of the several branches belonging to
every head, which are many; as for instance, If you would find out whether you
are guilty of Adultery, you must not only look upon the Precept as forbidding
only the gross outward act, Thou shall not commit Adultery, but as reaching to
the inward desires and inclinations, and so our Savior, Math. 5.28. interprets
this Precept, that whosoever looks upon a woman to lust after her, has
committed Adultery with her already in his heart; and so in the Precept, Thou
shall not kill, it is murder not only to take away the life of another by
violence, but also to be angry with our brother without a cause; and so in the
other Precepts. And as you must look into the Law for Conviction of sin, so you
must also look into your own Consciences, and read what is there registered, and
compare your hearts and lives with the Law; and you should call to mind the
places you have lived in, the busin^sses you have been employed about, and the
circumstances of your lives may bring to remembrance many sins committed long
ago, with their aggravations. You must get thus a conviction of the guilt of
your sins, especially if you have fallen into any grosser sin in your life, as
adultery, drunkenness, theft, if you have been guilty of swearing,
Sabbath-breaking, profaneness, or the like; you must see the heinousness of
them, and withal you must see that every sin which you have committed is
heinous, as it is a dishonor to the highest Majesty, who is infinitely more
exalted above the greatest Earthly Kings and Potentates, than they are exalted
above the meanest Worm, or Fly; and for such as you to dishonor and affront
him by sin, is very heinous. This is the first thing, a Conviction of your
sins, which you must endeavor after.

2. That you may be sensible of your lost estate, you must get a convic^ion of
the punishment which God has threatened, and you have deserved for your sins;
will the Lord put up the affronts which are offered to him by his Creatures?
will he bear the dishonours of his great and glorious Name by sin, without
punishing the sinn^rs? No surely, his holiness will not permit it, his Justice
has been offended, and must have satisfaction, and therefore he threatens to
punish the offenders most severely; God threatens temporal calamities and
death, as the wages of sin; and because through patience he forbeareth to
punish many transgressions so remarkably in this life; and the most dreadful
temporal Judgments which he inflicteth upon any, are no ways proportionable
to the desert of their sins, and the demands of his infinite Justice; therefore
he threatens eternal punishment in Hell; look into some places of Scripture,
where the Lord does denounce severe threatenings against sinners, Gal. 3.10.
Cursed in every one that continues not in all things which are written in the
book of the Law to do them. Romans 1.18. The wrath of God is revealed from
Heaven, against all ungodliness and unrighteousness of men. Ephesians. 5.6. Because
of these things comes the wrath of God upon the children of disobedience. 2 Thessalonians. 1. 8, 9. Christ will come in flaming fire, taking vengeance on them
which know not God, and obey not the Gospel, who shall be punished with
everlasting destruction from the presence of the Lord, and the glory of his
power. Romans 2.6, 8, 9. God will render unto every man according to his deeds,
to them who are contentious and do not obey the truth, indignation and wrath,
tribulation and anguish on every soul of man that does evil. That you may see
and be sensible of your lost estate, you must be convinced not only in the
general of the justice and equity that such Judgments should be inflicted on
sinners, because God himself has denounced them in his Word, who cannot be
unjust toward his Creatures; and because sin has deserved them, being the
breach of his Law, which is holy and just and good; and an offense of an
infinite Majesty, whose Justice is infinite, and must be satisfied with a
proportionable punishment unto the offense: but also you must be convinced that
you are such sinners; that you have committed such and such sins, that you have
broken the Law in such a point, and such a point, and in every point; that you
are guilty of fornication, or drunkenness, or theft, or covetousness, or lying,
or profaneness; and it may be of all these, and more than these: The first is
the conviction of the Law, the second the conviction of the Fact, then follows
the third conviction which is of the State, that therefore you are under the
Curse, that you are condemned, that the wrath of God hangs over your head,
and that you must be tormented for sin most horribly and eternally in Hell: It
is the conviction of the dreadful punishment of Hell which God has threatened,
and unto which you are exposed for sin, that will awaken you to a sense of your
lost state, when the conviction is imprinted deep upon you by the Spirit; when
you believe that Hell is no Fiction, but a reality, as certainly prepared for
the wicked, as God is above preparing places in Heaven for his people; and you
have a peep-hole (as it were) into Hell, and imagine something of the torments
which the damned there do, and shall endure for such sins as you have
committed; how they roll and tumble in flames of brimstone, how they are lashed
by an accusing Conscience, tormented with and by the Devil, and even consumed
by the wrath of a sin-revenging God, how they cry, roar and howl, how they weep
and wail, and gnash their teeth, and that this must be their condition for
ever; and when withal you think that you are walking upon the brink of this
pit, and hastening toward the place of these flames, that Hell does belong to
you, that you are in the number of the cursed crew, some of whom have already
taken up their lodging in Hell, and that you are like to come thither shortly,
that you are liable every moment to drop into the burning Lake, then you will
perceive that you are lost and undone.

3. That you may be sensible of your lost estate, you must be convinced of your
insufficiency to satisfy Gods Justice for your sins; if you could do this, you
might do well enough; but this you cannot do, Gods Justice is infinite, and
requires infinite satisfaction, which you being finite are insufficient to
give; what can you offer to God? thousands of Rams, rivers of Oil, Mines of
Silver, Mountains of Gold, Rocks of Pearl, yea the whole Creation, if it should
offer it self to be annihilated, could not make compensation to Gods Justice
for one sin, nothing less than infinite must be the satisfaction; and therefore
this should make you further sensible of your lost estate in your selves.

4. You must get a conviction of your inability to resist and defend your
selves against God, who has threatened so severely to punish you for sin; as
Gods Justice is infinite, and therefore you cannot satisfy it; so his Power is
infinite, and you cannot resist it; who can stand in his sight when once he is
angry? who can defend himself against an Omnipotent arm? If God whet his
glittering Sword, and his hand take hold on vengeance, what Powers of Earth are
strong enough to make resistance? Read how God expresses himself concerning
such as set themselves against him, Isa. 27.4. Who would set the briars and
thorns against me in battle? I would go through them, I would burn them
together. Look upon your selves as briars and thorns, yea as dried stubble
before a consuming fire, which has no power to resist the flame; and therefore
that you are lost and undone in your selves because of your sins.

5. You must get a conviction of the impossibility of your fleeing from and
escaping Gods wrath, which has you in pursuit; whither can you go from his
presence? or whither can you flee from his anger and indignation? See Amos 9.2,
3. Though they dig into Hell, thence shall mine hand take them; though they
climb up into Heaven, thence will I bring them down; and though they hide
themselves in the top of Carmel, I will search and take them out thence; and
though they be hid from my sight in the bottom of the Sea, thence will I
command the Serpent, and he shall bite them. You cannot flee into any place but
God will follow you; you cannot hide your selves in any place but God will
find you; there is as little hopes of escaping Gods Wrath, as of resisting his
Power. See Psalm. 21.8, 9. Thine hand shall find out all thine enemies, not
only some, but all sinners, thy right hand shall find out them that hate thee:
Thou shall make them as a fiery Oven in the time of thine anger, the Lord shall
swallow them up in his wrath, and the fire shall devour them. By this time
sinners, methinks you should perceive your selves to be lost and undone; all
refuge now fails you, there is no escaping for you.

6. But lastly, that you may fully know that you are in a lost estate, you must
get conviction, that as yet you have no interest in Christ, who alone can
deliver you from the wrath of God, which is to come upon the ungodly. Indeed
Christ can and does deliver his people from wrath, and the punishment their
sins have deserved; but when you know that you are out of Christ, then you may
know you are in a lost estate; if you suppose that you have an interest in him
without good grounds, you are like to be lost irrecoverably, and not know it
till it be too late; therefore you must know that as yet you have no interest
in him, that all your pretensions to him have been presumptuous conceits; that
so you may be lost in your own apprehensions. Can you think you have an
interest in Christ, that never truly mourned for sin, that never hungered after
Christ, that have no true Faith to apply him? have you interest in Christ that
have no true Love to Christ, and never yielded subjection to Christ? Have you
interest in Christ that have no Influence from Christ? have you Union to Christ
that have no Communion with him? No, no, all you that are Unbelievers, and have
persisted hitherto in a sinful course, are strangers unto Christ, and
therefore be convinced that you are in a lost estate: And O how should fear and
trembling possess you through the apprehensions of the dreadful wrath of God?
how should you go up and down like condemned malefactors, that are condemned to
Hell, and know not how soon they may be dragged to execution? O what reason
have you to lie down in terror, and rise up in terror, and feed upon terror
all the day long! Such thoughts as these are suitable to the condition of such
as you. It may be the next step I take, I may step into Hell: Alas! Alas! I am
in a state of damnation, and did not know it; I have been dancing about the
brinks of Hell, and did not perceive it; I have been affronting God all my
days by my sins; now I see that God is highly offended with me for those sins
I made light of: I am the covet^us person whom the Lord abhors, Psalm. 10.3.
I am the deceiver whom he curses, Mal. 1.14. I am the Adulterer whom he will
judge, Heb 11.4. I have greatly sinned, and now I see God is greatly angry, and
his anger burns like fire; he frowns, and his frowns are most dreadful, and I
fear he will cast me to Hell, and make me feel the power of his anger in my
everlasting ruin; I fear I must dwell with devouring fire, and take up mine
eternal abode with the Devil and my fellow-damned sinners: O I fear I am
damned! I am damned! O happy is the Dog and the H^rse, yea the Worm and the
Toad, who ere long shall be anihilated; but I am cursed, and I fear that I
shall eternally be tormented: O I am lost, I have lost my God, and I fear I am
lost, and shall be lost for ever! O I am undone! undone I vile and miserable
sinner! O woe be to me that ever I was born! that ever I sinned, and provoked
God to such displeasure! But is there no spark of hope yet? is there no
escaping, no reconciliation attainable? O what shall I do to be saved! I cannot
save my self, and no creature can help me; but is there no other way? Thus you
must see and be sensible that you are lost in your selves if you would be saved.

Direction 2. You must mourn for sin, if you would be saved; except ye repent,
says our Savior, ye shall all likewise perish, Luke 13.3. Those that laugh
and rejoice now in a way of sin, shall mourn and weep for it for ever to no
purpose, Luk 6.25. But blessed are they that mourn for sin now, for they shall
be comforted and saved, Matthew. 5.4. The seed time of repentance accompanied
with the showers of tears, will return with the harvest of salvation, and
sheaves of joy and comfort, Psalm. 126.5, 6. They that sow in tears shall reap
in joy; he that goes forth and weepeth, bearing precious seed, shall doubtless
come again with rejoicing, bringing his sheaves with him, Therefore see what
the Apostle exhorts unto, which is necessary to your salvation, Iam. 4.9. Be
afflicted, and mourn, and weep; let your laughter be turned into mourning, and
your joy into heaviness. Humble your selves in the sight of the Lord, and he
shall lift you up. Sinners, you have delighted your selves in sin, you must now
be afflicted for it; sin has been sweet in your mouth, it must now be bitter
to your heart: God calls you to salvation by his Son, but withal he calls you
to weeping, and mourning, and deep humiliation in order hereunto; not that your
tears can wash off the guilt of your sins, nothing can do this but the blood of
Christ; not that God delights in your griefs and sorrows as such, but because
mourning is needful for you to prepare you for Christ, and Salvation by him;
whilst sin is sweet unto your taste, you will roll it under your tongue, and
hug it in your bosom; you will spare it, and nothing will persuade you to part
with it; but when you taste the bitterness of sin in compunction and sorrow for
it, then you will spit it out; when you perceive the gall and the wormwood,
then your mouth will be put out of relish, then you will desire no longer to
suck at the breast of sin; whilst you are insensible of sin, you will be
insensible of your need of a Savior: None but sick persons do prize and send
for the Physician, and none but such as are sick of sin, and groan and mourn
under the burden of this sickness, do prize a Christ who is the soul-Physician,
Matthew. 9.12. Were you made sensible of sin indeed, you would eagerly enquire
after Christ, and greedily hearken unto the glad tidings of salvation which he
has purchased; what shall I do to get an interest in Christ? where is he to be
found? how is he to be received? what are his terms? what are his commands? do
any thing, part with any thing, you would not then think much to lay down your
selves, and all that you have at his feet, so you might have him; none but
Christ, none but Christ would you then desire; and if you might have all the
world without him, you would not be contented. Sinners, would you be saved by
Christ, get your hearts affected with godly sorrow for sin, and that you may
mourn deeply and kindly, you must get not only a conviction of the guilt of
sin, and the punishment which is due for it, which you cannot escape; but you
must look further into the nature of sin, and get a sight and sense of the evil
of sin; you must look not only to the consequential evil of sin, but also to
the intrinsecal evil of sin; not only to the Hell which is like to follow upon
it, but also to that Hell which there is in it; look to the evil of sin not
only as it is like to burn you, but as it has black^ and smutted you; as it
has depraved and deformed your souls, which are of heavenly original, as it
has degraded and debased yo^, polluted and defiled you. But chiefly look upon
the evil of sin as it reflecteth dishonor upon God, upon God that is so holy
and glorious, and that is so good and gracious, as it displeases that God that
made you, that has exercised so much patience toward you, when he could so
easily have cut you off in the act of sin, and appointed you your place and
portion amongst the damned in Hell long ago; and that has moreover been so
bountiful to you, though sinners and his enemies, that he has maintained you
at his cost and charges all your days; but especially see the evil of sin, as
it offends that God who is ready to be reconciled, and has made such
provision for reconciliation, which you could never have thought of, namely,
through the death and mediation of his Son, whom he has given for you, and
proffers to give to you; and in him does treat with you, and by us Ministers
does send entreaties to you, that you would accept of this reconciliation, lay
down your weapons, and be reconciled unto him, 2 Cor. 5.20. Break, break ye
rocky hearts at this, what is God willing indeed to put up such high affronts?
and to forgive such great sins? and does he stoop to entreat and beseech such
mean creatures, and wretched sinners as you to be reconciled? O be filled with
astonishment and admiration, and go cast your selves down at his feet with
self-loathing and abhorrency at the hideous nature, and monstrous ingratitude,
and baseness of your sins! let your hearts melt within you like Wax, or Snow,
when the Sun shines upon it with heat and brightness; let your eyes drop down
tears, as the morning does drop dew upon the flowers: What! have I affronted
such greatness? dared such power? trampled upon such patience? and abused such
goodness too? and after all does God beseech me to be reconciled? was it such a
God whom I offended? vile wretch! O that I had never committed such sins! O
that I had never been drunk, or unclean, or profane! O that I had never sworn,
nor lied, nor stolen, nor offended God in any of my actions! It repents me, it
grieves me at the very heart that I have sinned, and that I can grieve no more
for it.

Direction 3. You must turn from sin, if you would be saved; see Psalm. 7.11,
12, 13. God is angry with the wicked every day; if he turn not, he will whet
his sword; he has bent his bow, and made it ready; he has prepared for him
the instruments of death. And God threatens, Psalm. 88.21. that he will wound
the head of his enemies, and the hairy scalp of such as go on still in their
trespasses: Therefore men must turn from all their transgressions, otherwise
iniquity will be their ruin, Ezekiel. 18.30. They must cast away their sins as a
menstruous cloth, saying unto them, get ye hence, if they would be received
into favor, Isa. 30.22. They must not only confess their sins, but also
forsake them, if they would find mercy, Prove. 28.13. The wicked must forsake
his way, and the unrighteous man his thoughts, and turn to the Lord, and then
he shall have pardoning mercy abundantly, Isa. 55.7. When men cease to do evil,
and learn to do well, then, though their sins have been as scarlet, they shall
be white as snow; though they be red like crimson, they shall be like wo^ll,
Isa. 1.16, 17, 18. Sinners, turn from your evil ways, you have done iniquity,
do so no more; you have gone on hitherto in a way of sin, proceed no further,
it is the way to Hell, turn out of it: Let him that has stolen, steal no more;
and him that has been filthy, be filthy no more; and him that has been
unjust, be unjust no more: Drunkards, forbear your drinking; swearers, refrain
swearing; liars, teach your tongues to speak truth: Break off your course of
sin; turn from all gross sins as to the practice, and turn from all sins as to
the affection.

Direction 4. You must believe in the Lord Jesus Christ, if you would be saved:
This is the direction which Paul gave to the Jailer, when under conviction of
sin he came in to him and cried, What shall I do to be saved? he says to him,
Believe in the Lord Jesus Christ and thou shall be saved, Act. 16.30, 31. So in
Peter's Sermon, Act. 10.43. To him gave all the Prophets witness, that through
his Name, whosoever believes in him should receive remission of sins. There is
no Savior but by Christ; and there is no salvation by Christ b^t by faith, and
therefore we are said to be saved through faith, Ephesians. 2.8. As faith is the
instrument to apply the merits and righteousness of Jesus Christ. Let me then
exhort you to get faith, which is absolutely necessary unto salvation: Get
faith of the right kind; there is a general, common, historical, temporary,
hypocritical, dead and ineffectual faith; but do you labor after a special,
lively, unfeigned, eff^ctual, justifying and saving faith; and that you may not
be mistaken in this great point on which your salvation does depend, I shall
describe that faith which is of the right kind, and will certainly save you if
you obtain it.

Faith is a grace wrought in the heart by the Spirit of God, whereby a poor
sinner being made sensible of the guilt and power of his sins, and the utter
insufficiency of himself, or any creature in the world, to give him any help or
succor; and having in the G^spel a discovery and proffer made unto him of the
Lord Jesus Christ, as an all s^fficient, most merciful and faithful Advocate
and Savior, does go quite out of himself, and acc^pt, lay hold, rely, and rest
upon him, and him alone, for pardon, and grace, and e^erlasting happiness. Or
more br^efly thus, Faith is a grace of God wher^by the humil^d sinner does
accept and rely upon Christ alone for salvation, as he is held forth in the
Promises of the Gospel.

If you would attain this grace of Faith, take these Directions.

1. You must be fully persuaded that the Scriptures which reveal Christ, are
indeed the word of God; this is the foundation of all faith, therefore I shall
briefly suggest some Arguments to prove the divine Authority of the Scriptures:
As 1. Because of that majesty, purity, holin^ss, heavenliness which does app^ar
in the S^r^ptures beyond all other writings. 2. Because of the design and drift
of the Scriptures to debase man, and exalt God and his glory above all. 3.
Because of the admirable contexture, and contrivance, and sweet harmony of the
Scriptures in all the parts thereof, though written by so many several men in
several ages and places, which shows that they were all acted by the same
Spirit of God. 4. Because of the wonderful work of man's Redemption there set
forth at first more darkly, afterward more clearly, which no mortal b^ain
could have invented, much less could any created power have effected. 5.
Because of the great power which this word has to convince, convert, and
comfort. 6. Because of the confirmation of the Scriptures by miracles. 7.
Because of the acknowledgement of the Scriptures to be Gods Word in all ages.
8. Because of the many millions of Martyrs, who have sealed the Truths of the
word with their blood. 9. Because of the witness of the Spirit in and with the
word, which does bear testimony to the hearts of Gods people, that the
Scriptures are his Word, and were indi^ed by his Spirit. Whence it follows,
that the Scriptures are true, because God, the Author of them, is true, and
cannot lie; and whatever is there revealed, is as certain as those things which
are most demonstrable to sense or reason: This is the first step to your
believing in Christ who is made known in the Scriptures, to believe that the
Scriptures are Gods Word.

2. If you would attain a saving faith in Christ, you must be convinced and
fully p^rswaded of your lost estate without Christ, and your absolute need of
him, of which before.

3. You must be persuaded, that it is not in your own power to believe, that it
is not of your selves, but is the gift of God, Ephesians. 2.8. and therefore must
apply your selves to God, that he would not only give you his Son, but also
give you the hand of faith to lay hold on him, that he would work in you this
grace of faith by his Spirit.

4. You must consider those Arguments of Scripture which encourage faith: As
for instance, I shall mention four heads of Arguments for faith, from the
consideration 1. Of God. 2. Of the Promises. 3. Of Christ. 4. Of the Saints.

1. From the consideration of God, who has given his Son to save sinners; it
is an encouragement to ^aith, to consider, 1. That God is merciful, and
therefore willing to pardon and save, otherwise he would not have sent his Son;
he does not delight in the death of sinners, Ezekiel. 18.23. but delights to
show mercy; see Micah 7.18, 19. Exodus 34.6, 7. Psalm. 103.8, 9, etc. 2. That God
is faithful in his Promises of salvation, which he has made through his Son
in his Covenant of Grace: God needed not have made the Covenant, nor promised
mercy to any sinners* but having made the Covenant, he is eng^g^d to make it
good. 3. That it is for his glory to save sinners through his Son, the glory of
his free grace, yea and justice too, which has been fully satisfied by Christ's
death.

2. You have encouraging Arguments for faith, from the consideration of the
Promises, which are, 1. Large, made to all sorts of persons, and all sorts of
sinners, none are excluded. 2. Full, they extend to all sorts of sins, though
never so many and great, Isa. 55.7. 3. Free, nothing is required on your part
but accepting. 4. Sure, being the Promises of God in Christ.

3. You have encouragement to believe in Christ for salvation, from the
consideration of Christ, the proper object of faith: 1. The quality of his
person who is God and man in one person, that he might reconcile man unto God.
2. The merit of his sufferings, which (as has been shown) was of infinite
value, and sufficient for the redemption of men. 3. His alsufficient power to
save those that come to him, Heb. 7.25. 4. His mercy and faithfulness to make
reconciliation, Heb. 2.17.5. His interest with the Father. 6. His continual
intercession at the right hand of God, Heb. 7.25.

4. You have encouragement to believe in Christ for salvation, from the
consideration of the Saints, the experience which they have had of salvation by
Christ, some of whom have been as vile sinners as you: You have as good grounds
to come unto Christ, and believe in him for salvation, as the most holy men
alive before conversion.

5. If you would attain this grace of faith in Jesus Christ, you must labor to
act it, looking up to God for help herein; endeavor to cast and roll your
selves upon Christ, to apply Christ and his merits, and to rely upon him and
his righteousness: It is in your endeavor that God does work; and h^re you
must endeavor again and again against all opposition which you find from the
D^vil and your own evil heart of unbelief, which will be ready to carry you
away from Christ. So much for the 4th. Direction.

Direction 5. You must get a new Nature, if you would be saved: You must be
made partakers of the Divine Nature, if you would be made partakers of this
salvation: You have brought unholy and impure natures into the world with you,
which must be changed and renewed after the Image of God, in knowledge,
righteousness, and true holiness, before you can be in a state of salvation,
and see the Kingdom of God: This new nature, which is absolutely necessary un^o
salvation, is begun in the work of regene^ation, and carried on in the work of
sanctification: In regeneration the work of grace is begun, the habits of grace
are infused; a new principle of sp^ritual life is put into the soul; and sin
(which before l^ved, and had dominion over the man, employing all his members
as instruments of unrighteousn^ss, to make provision for the satisfaction of
its affections and l^sts) does receive its deaths wound, and loses its ^^^ce
and r^igning power: In sanctifi^ation, the work of grace is c^r^i^d on, the
habits of grace are strengthened and en^^eased; the n^w man does grow, and the
old man does decline and de^ay; there is a vivification or quickening more and
more of grace, by the influence of the Word and Spirit, and a mortification or
subd^ing more and more of ^em^^ning iniquity. What our Savior tells N^^^demus,
^^h. 3.3. Ex^ept a man be born again, he cannot see the Kingdom of God: I may
tell you, that unless ye be born again, unless ye be regenerated, ye cannot be
saved, no possibility of entering into the Kingdom of H^aven, without yo^ get
this new nature: A man must be born the first time, before he can poss^ss a
temporal inheritan^^; and a m^n m^st be born again, before he can possess the
eternal inh^ritance: You m^st be children b^^ore you can be heirs, Romans 8.17.
children not only by a^option, but also by regeneration: Ye must b^ Sun^^,
before meet to be partakers of the inheritance of the S^ints in light, Col.
1.12. You must have the new nature, before you can enter into the New
Jerusalem: You must be made like to God in holiness, before you can be admitted
to live with God in the place of everlasting happiness; God does suffer the
wicked that are unclean and unholy, to live before him in the Out-house of the
Earth; but he will not permit any except such as are sanctified to live with
him in the Palace of H^^ven. O then labor after a work of Grace upon your
heart; be persuaded of the worth of Grace, that (...) and precious J^w^l, that
the l^^st measure of Grace is of mere worth than ten thousand World^; be
sensible of your want of it, that naturally you are without it, that it does
not grow in Natures Garden, that you have no good Nature in you before God,
till your Nature i^ renewed; be ready to receive the ^eed of Grace, which drops
down from above whilst People are attending upon Gods Ordinances* be ready to
hearken and yield to the Spirits motions, whereby this work of Grace is
effected: And having the work begun, O cherish the Grace you have got, and as
newborn B^bes desire the sincere milk of the Word, that ye may grow th^reby;
and labor to cleanse your selves from all filthiness of Flesh and Spirit, that
ye may perfect holiness in the fear of God, 2 Cor. 7.1.

Dir^^^i^n 6. You must lead a new life, if you wo^ld be saved, see wh^t k^nd of
Life the grace of God which bri^^^th s^lvation does r^q^^re and (...) nam^ly*
to (...) and w^rldly (...) and godly in this present world, (...) You must d^ny
ungo illness and worldly last, you must put off concerning the (...) the old
m^n which is corrupt (...) to d^c^i^full (...). and not fashion your selves
according to the former lusts, in your ignorance and unregeneracy, 1 Pet. 1.14.
not running with others unto the same excess of riot, 1 Pet. 4.4. not walking
according to the course of a profane and ungodly world, Ephesians. 2.2. but saving
your selves from an untoward generation, Act. 2.40. as he that has called you
is holy, so you must be holy in all manner of conversation, 1 Pet. 1.15. you
must live soberly, righteously, and godly in this present world; soberly in
regard of your selves; righteously in regard of others; and godly in regard of
the Lord.

1. Soberly, in regard of your selves; which implies, 1. Temperance in eating
and drinking, you must take heed of Gluttony and Drunkenness: 2. Chastity, you
must take heed of Adultery and Uncleanness, in thought, speech, look, and act.
3. Moderation, you must be sober in your desires after these earthly things,
and take heed of inordinate affection to any thing.

2 You must live Righteously in regard of others: You must give to every one
their due, and do to others as you reasonably can desire that they should do
unto you, you must take heed of unrighteousness either in regard of Commutative
Justice in your buying and selling, borrowing and lending; and in regard of
Distributative Justice in dispensing of rewards and punishments; you must
beware of oppr^ssing, afflicting, injuring any, of going beyond or defrauding
any, of withholding dues, keeping back wages from those that have done you
service, knowing that if they cannot, God will be the avenger of all such.

3. You must live godly in regard of the Lord; you must especially show your
New Life in the immediate Worship of the Lord, and that publicly in his House,
privately in your Families, secretly in your Closets; you must worship God in
the Ordinances of his own appointment; and this you must do with reverence,
having an awe and dread of God upon your spirits, with whom you have more
immediately to do; with sincerity, having a sincere respect to Gods glory
therein, and that you might be accepted by him, and meet with him; with
vigilance watching the sit time in regard of the thing, and the temper of
your Bodies and Souls, and the breathings of Gods Spirit; with humility,
sensible of your sinfulness, unworthiness, weakness, emptiness, neediness; with
diligence, before to prepare your hearts, and in Ordinances to engage them, and
resist the Devil and the contrary workings of the flesh; with frequency, laying
hold on all the opportunities as you can, without neglecting other businesses,
which for that time you may be more necessarily called unto; with fervency,
getting your hearts if you can raised and enlarged, laboring that they may
burn within you with love to God; with delight and complacency in God, and
above all with Faith in Jesus Christ, through whom alone it is that you can
have strength to perform duties, and that you can have any acceptance in them
by the Father.

Direction 7. You must resolve upon sufferings for Christ, if called, if you
would be saved; you must bear the Cross, if you would wear the Crown,
rem^mbring that if the Cross be weighty it will work for you a far more
exceeding and eternal weight of glory, 2 Cor. 4.17. you must re^kon upon
sufferings for Christ before hand, and resolve that you will stick to him and
his ways, though you should lose esteem by it, and become the Drunkards Song,
and be reproached amongst men; though you lose liberty by it, and be thrust
into Prison; though you should lose Estate by it, and be brought to pinching
want; though you should lose Friends by it, and have none to stand by you;
though you should lose Life by it, and be cut off in the midst of your years;
otherwise you cannot be Christ's Disciples indeed, and obtain this salvation
which he has purchased. See the terms which our Savior propounds, Luke 14.26,
27. If any man come unto me, and hate not his Father and Mother, and Wife and
Children, and Brethren and Sisters, yea and his own life, he cannot be my
Disciple. This we are to understand, that a man must choose to displease
Father, Mother, Wife, Children, the nearest and dearest Relations, and part
with any thing in the world, yea with Life it self, rather than to displease
and part with Jesus Christ; and that we must resolve to bear the Cross,
whatever it be that God has allotted for us, otherwise we do not accept of
Christ upon Gospel-terms; you must resolve to be partakers of the affliction of
the Gospel, if you would obtain the salvation of the Gospel; you must resolve
to suffer with Christ, and for his sake when called, if you would reign and be
glorified together with him. Whatever profession you make of Christ and his
ways in time of peace and prosperity, when the Sun of persecution does (...)
upon you with burning heat, you will wither and fall away, and turn fearful
Apostates, and then your last estate will be worse than your first; and as your
sin will be greater here, so your punishment will be more dreadful hereafter
in Hell, where you will confess that the light sufferings which you have
declined for Christ's sake here, are not worthy to be compared with the far more
exceeding and eternal weight of wrath which you must endure for your Apostasy
unto all eternity.

Direct. 8. You must study and apply the Promises of the Covenant of grace, if
you would be saved; without the Covenant of grace there had been no possible
salvation for any of the fallen Children of Men; the Covenant of Works which
God made with Man at the first, being broken by sin, it does condemn all that
are under it, it is by virtue of the Covenant of Grace that any are brought
into a state of salvation; therefore study and apply the Promises of this
Covenant: Now you must know that all the Promises of the Gospel, which are
scattered up and down the Scripture do belong unto this Covenant; but I shall
spread before you those few more general Promises which the Apostle does make
mention of, where he treats of the New Covenant, Heb. 8 10, 11, 12. For this is
the Covenant that I will make with the house of Israel after those days, says
the Lord, I will put my Laws into their mind, and write them in their hearts,
and I will be to them a God, and they shall be to me a People; and they shall
not teach every man his Neighbor, and every man his Brother, saying know the
Lord, for they shall all know me from the least to the greatest; for I will be
merciful unto their unrighteousness, and their sins and iniquities will I
remember no more. Here are Four great Promises which the Lord has made to his
People, which I shall explain (though not in the order of the Text) that you
may the better understand and apply them.

1. God promises that he will be to them a God, and they shall be to him a
People; this includes all the rest: It is a full and sweet promise that God
will be our God, it has a great deal more in it, than we can conceive; we may
look and look again, and though our Faith have never so piercing an eye, never
so large and deep reach, yet we cannot look to the bottom, and fathom the depth
of this Promise; we may suck and suck again at this breast, and though we draw
never so hard, we can never draw forth all the sweetness that is in this
Promise. To have God to be our God, it is very great, it is very sweet: Indeed
God is the God of all his Creatures, yea of his enemies, and the vilest
sinners; but to be our God in this place sounds and signifies more than that
which is common to all; it speaks a peculiar relation, a special interest and
propriety in God; in this promise God does make over himself and all that he
has to us, so far as we are capable of receiving; he gives himself to be our
portion, he engages his Power, Wisdom, Goodness, Mercy, Love, and all his
Attributes to be employed for our good, he promises to be our God here, and to
be our God for ever; it signifies that he will be our Father to love and
cherish us, to preserve, and provide for us whilst we live, and to take our
Souls to himself when we dye, and to raise up our bodies at the last day, and
make both perfectly glorious and happy in Heaven, when time shall be no more.
He promises also that we shall be his People; we cannot make our selves so,
but he promises that he will make us so; he will make us his Children, he will
adopt us, he will regenerate us, give us the title, and give us the disposition
of Children; all this and much more is contained in this Promise, That God will
be our God, and we shall be his People, even the whole work of our salvation
from our effectual Calling unto our eternal Glorification.

2. A second great Promise of the Covenant of Grace is, That God will be
merciful unto our unrighteousness, and that he will remember no more our sins
and iniquities; it is a promise of mercy in the free pardon and forgiveness of
all our sins, this is an exceeding great and precious promise, without which
there were no access for us unto God, no attaining eternal happiness, no
escaping eternal misery, guilt would shut us out of Heaven, and sink us into
Hell without a pardon. This Promise is of vast extent, it reaches to all sort
of sins, Unrighteousness, Sins, Iniquities; no sin is too great for God to
pardon, if the sinner does believe.

3. A third Promise of the Covenant of Grace is, that God will give us the
knowledge of himself; they shall not teach every man his Neighbor, and every
man his Brother, saying, Know the Lord, for they shall all know me from the
least to the greatest; they shall not teach one another the knowledge of God,
that is, they cannot, or they shall not be able to do it; they may and ought to
teach one another instrumentally; it is the duty of some to teach, and the duty
of others, and they have need, to learn, but they shall not be able to teach
effectually; they may give instructions to one another concerning God and his
ways, but they cannot give light; they may set the light before them, but they
cannot set up the light in them; they may open Truths, but they cannot open the
Understanding; this is the work of God only to do, and this he has undertaken
by Promise to do, they shall all know me, they shall be taught of God by his
Spirit the knowledge of himself; he teaches by men instrumentally, but he will
teach us by his Spirit effectually.

4. A fourth Promise of the Covenant of Grace, is, that God will put his Laws
into our hearts, and write them in our minds: the Law was written before on
Tables of Stone, but here he promises to write them on fleshly Tables of the
heart; which is done not with Pen and Ink, but by the Spirit of the living God,
2 Cor. 3.3. this Promise is very comprehensive, it includes not only the giving
of a spiritual discovery of the mind and will of God, but also the giving of
spiritual dispositions, affections, and strength to perform it; and by
consequence the removal of indispositions, the purging out of corruptions, the
mortifying of lust, the taking away the heart of stone, and giving a heart of
flesh, the giving a new heart, the putting the Spirit within us, and causing us
to walk in his Statutes, and to keep his Judgments and do them, as this
Promise is branched forth, Ezekiel. 36.25, 26, 27.

These in brief are the chief Promises of the Covenant of Grace, labor to
understand them, and apply them that you may be saved.

Direct. 9. You must give up your selves in Covenant to God, if you would be
saved; God has put his hand and seal to the Covenant which he has made
through his Son with you, and you should put your hand to the Covenant and
engage your selves unto the Lord; you were dedicated to the Lord by your
Parents when you were b^ptized, then you understood not what was done; now you
are arrived to years of understanding, you should make it your own act, and
dedicate your selves to the Lord: and the more solemnly you enter into Covenant
with God, the more strong Obligation it may be upon you to walk closely with
God all your days: Some have directed to do it under handwriting, subscribing
the name, and some have put words into your mouths, which you may do it, in if
you are not so well able to express the terms your selves; you have this done
in Mr. Guthry and Mr. Allen's books, if those Books be not at hand, I shall set
before you this Platform, which you may make use of in entering solemnly into
Covenant with God.

I A.B. do acknowledge my self to be the Creature and Subject of the great and
glorious Majesty of Heaven and Earth, in whom I live, move, and have my being,
and from whom I receive every good thing which I receive; and therefore am
obliged to conform my mind, will and affections, to order my words, ways and
whole conversation according to his most wise and good, most righteous and
reasonable Laws: Besides which natural Obligation, however born in sin, and
thereby disenabled, yet being born in the Church, and Baptized in the Name of
the Father, Son, and Holy Ghost, and by my Parents dedicated unto God when I
was an Infant; I am further obliged by Covenant to be the servant of the Lord.
But having proved a Rebel and Traitor against the Highest Majesty, breaking his
Laws, and Covenant-ties which have been upon me, spending years of my life in a
state of strangeness and enmity to God, in the service of the Devil and my own
Lusts, I do now solemnly re^ew my Covenant with God, that the breach may be
made up which sin has made between God and my Soul.

Being in the First place convinced of the guilt of my sins, whereby I have
affronted and offended the highest Majesty, whose Justice must be satisfied;
and withal convinced of my own utter inability to make the least satisfaction
either by doing or suffering, and that my Righteousnesses are as filthy rags,
and therefore altogether insufficient to procure for me the pardon of sin, the
favor of God, and the peace of Conscience; as also fully persuaded that no
mere Creature is able to give unto me any help and relief in this case. And
being informed by the Word of God what the Lord Jesus is, has d^ne, and
suffered for poor sinners, That there is no Name under Heaven given amongst men
whereby we can be saved, but only the Name of Jesus Christ; that he is able to
save all them unto the uttermost that come unto God by him, seeing be ever
lives to make intercession for them; that he is a merciful and faithful
High Priest in things pertaining to God, to make Reconciliation for the sins of
the People; that whosoever comes unto him, he will in no wise cast out: and
finding a Promise in the Covenant of Grace that God will be merciful unto our
unrighteousness, and that our sins and iniquities he will remember no more;
which Covenant is of full force through the death of Christ the Testator
thereof: and having Christ set forth to be a propitiation through Faith in his
blood, and his Righteousness declared for the remission of sins which are past
through the forbearance of God; and this Christ freely tendered unto me, and
being invited earnestly, yea entreated that I would be reconciled unto God
through him; and by the Spirit being persuaded of the truth of these things,
and hereby encouraged to apply my self unto Christ, and the Promises through
him unto my self: I do now (grieving that I have offended God, groaning under
the burden of sin, renouncing all my own righteousness, hungring after the Lord
Jesus Christ and his righteousness) upon the bended knees of my soul come unto
him, and cast my self wholly upon him; I cho^se him for my only Advocate to
plead my cause in the Court of Heaven, to procure for me Pardon and
Reconciliation, that being justified by Faith, I may have peace with God
through my dear Lord Jesus Christ.

Next, repenting from the bottom of my heart of my sins, grieving that I have
such a sinful Nature, such a deceitful heart, that I have so adulterated my
affections, and gone a whoring from God to the Creatures, that I have so
indulged my flesh, and satisfied its irregular desires, that I have given ear
to the Devil, and complied as I have done with his temptations: I now renounce
all allegiance and service to the World, to the Flesh, and to the Devil, these
enemies of the Lord, and of my peace, which war against my Master, and against
my own soul; covenanting and promising never to give away my heart any more
from the Lord unto any person or thing in the World; to refuse the World for my
portion and chief happiness; to deny my flesh its sinful desires and demands;
to resist the Devil and his Temptations; not to live and allow my self in any
known sin, and to make use of all the known means which the Lord has
prescribed for the crucifying of the World, for the mortifying and utter
extirpation of sin, for the resisting and overcoming the Devil. And being
persuaded of the power and interest, the subtilty and deceitfulness of these
enemies, and withal sensible of my own imprudence, folly, weakness and
inconstancy, I humbly and earnestly implore and beseech the highest Majesty,
who is infinite in wisdom, power, and goodness, that he would give me counsel
and discretion in the use and management of all means and helps that I may not
neglect any, nor through sloth and imprudence s^ffer a lesser duty to justle
out a greater, that he would give me courage, strength and constancy in the
maintaining my spiritual warfare against these my spiritual enemies unto my
life's end. And if ever I should fall through unwatchfulness and weakness,
(which the Lord grant I may never do) I do promise in the strength of the Lord
to arise again by Faith and Repentance. And because of the Body of sin within
me, and remaining corruptions, I shall be subject (during my abode here) unto
daily failings and infirmities; I do promise to pray, watch and strive against
them, beseeching the Lord to strengthen me herein, and grant that my sinful
infirmities may be less every day than other; in the mean time looking upon
those disallowed miscarriages contrary to the settled bent and resolution of my
heart, as insufficient to make my Covenant void.

Furthermore, being convinced of the vanity, emptiness, and utter insufficiency
of any or all the Creatures in the World, to make me happy, had I the most
desirable enjoyment of them; and having a discovery of the infinitely blessed
God made unto me in his Works, chiefly in his Word, as being the chief good of
man, and withal a Promise in the Covenant of Grace that he will be our God,
yea our Father through Christ, and that we shall be his people, his Sons and
Daughters: I do here with deep veneration of Soul, and chief estimation of
mind, choose the thrice Blessed Jehovah for my Portion and chief good, beyond
all persons and things in this World; and do avouch him this day to be my God.
I humbly accept of the relation of a Servant and a Son, or Daughter, which he
has called me unto. I put my self under his wing, and commit my self to his
care and Tuition; and henceforth shall be bold through my dearest Lord to call
him, and look upon him to be my God and Father; and humbly shall expect from
him Protection and Provision in his way and work, Correction, Audience of
Prayer, and the fulfilling of all those Promises unto me, which he has made
unto his Children.

Moreover, being persuaded that none can come unto the Father, but by the Son;
nor share in any spiritual privilege, but through Christ's death and
intercession, and being persuaded of the infinite amiableness of Christ's
person, the greatness of his love and affection unto the children of men, as
also of his infinite desireableness in regard of those offices, and relations
which he has vouchsafed to take upon him, and enter into for the good of his
people: I do avouch the Lord Jesus Christ to be my only Savior, and choose him
in all his Offices and Relations. I choose Christ to be my High Priest, to
intercede, and procure for me daily pardon, access unto God, acceptance of my
person and service, audience of my prayers, and supply of all my wants. I
choose Christ to be my Prophet, to teach me by his Word and Spirit the will of
the Father. I choose Christ to be my King to rule and govern me, to command my
whole man into the obedience of himself. I choose Christ to be my Captain, to
go before me, and to tread down my spiritual enemies under my feet. I choose
Christ to be my Friend and Brother, to counsel and advise me, to stand by me in
all the difficulties and straights of my life. I choose Christ to be my Husband
and beloved, humbly accepting of this near and sweet Relation which he calls
me unto. I join and espouse my self unto the Lord Jesus; and do promise to be
for him only, and with full purpose of heart to cleave unto him, to love,
honor and serve him, never to deny nor leave him whatever reproaches and
distresses I may meet withal for his sake; though Persecution should arise,
and that even unto death, I do promise to own his Name, and Cause, and Truths,
and Ways, so long as I have breath in my Body: But knowing that I am utterly
insufficient to do any of these things in my own strength, therefore upon the
knees of my Soul, I earnestly beseech that I may have strength for all these
from himself alone.

Further, because God my Father is invisible to the eye of sense, and
incomprehensible by the grasp of Reason; and because my dearest Lord Jesus
Christ, who alone has declared him, in regard of his bodily presence is now in
Heaven, absent from his people; and because whatever spiritual light or life,
grace, comfort, or spiritual communion with the Father, and with his Son, is
vouchsafed unto the people of God, it is by the Holy Spirit, who is appointed
by Office hereunto, and graciously promised unto them in the Word: Therefore I
avouch and choose the Holy Ghost to be my Teacher and Guide, to be my
Sanctifier and Comforter, to help my infirmities in duties; to strengthen me
with might in my inner man against sin and Satan's Temptations; to cleanse me
from all filthiness of flesh and spirit; to heal me of all my spiritual
distempers; to revive me under all my faintings; to supply me with all Graces
as to kind and measure, as shall be needful for me in my place and work; to
testify Gods love to my Soul; to give me earnests of Glory, and to seal me up
unto the day of Redemption: And O that I might have the presence and abode of
the Spirit of God with me, and never grieve, quench, resist, and drive away the
Spirit any more!

Also, because the Holy Scriptures are the Word of God, endited by the Holy
Ghost, the Epistle of Jesus Christ, wherein he has given notice of his love
and will; because they are the only sufficient, and in themselves a perfect
Rule for Faith and a holy Life, and so fully do declare the way and means unto
everlasting happiness: Therefore I choose the Word of God to be the Rule of my
Faith and Life; and the Ordinances of God therein prescribed to be the means of
my acquaintance and converse with my God so far as I am capable of, and he
shall vouchsafe; and to be the means also of preparing of me for the full and
perfect enjoyment of him beyond my present capacity.

And, because the Ordinances are but dark glasses to see the Lord in; because
ignorance and unbelief do exceedingly vail God from mine eyes, flesh and
corruption do damp my love to God, and my spiritual Joy in him, and interrupt
my communion with him; because of the sins, sorrows, temptations, and
afflictions which I cannot be wholly free from, and therefore cannot be
perfectly happy here in this World; and having life and immortality brought to
light by the Gospel; a discovery and promise of eternal Life made unto me in
the Word, and withal a command of my Lord, to lay up my Treasure in Heaven:
Therefore I choose Heaven for my Treasure and Inheritance, for ever to live
there in the company of all the holy Angels and Saints, in the blessed sight,
love, and enjoyment of the infinitely blessed God, to see and share in the
glory of my Dearest Lord Jesus Christ, whither I hope my Soul shall be
transported by the Angels, so soon as it is separated from my Body; and that my
vile Body, when awakened and raised in the Morning of Chris^s coming, shall be
fashioned like unto Christ's most beautiful and glorious Body, and both inherit
the Kingdom prepared and promised by my Father.

Lastly, being persuaded of my Duty, and encouraged by Gods promise of
assistance and acceptance; I now dedicate and deliver up my self fully, freely,
and for ever unto the Lord; I yield and resign up my Soul with all its powers
and faculties; my Body with all its senses and members to be the instruments of
righteousness unto God: I resign up my Mind to think upon the Lord, and those
things which concern his Interest and Glory, to receive, embrace and maintain
his Truths; I resign up my Memory, to be a storehouse and receptacle chiefly
of the great things which do belong to his Kingdom, and other things of a more
inferior rank, as they may have a reference unto his Glory. I resign up my
Conscience to receive light and purity from his Word and Spirit, and desire
that it may act faithfully as the Lords Deputy. I resign up my Will unto the
Will of God, to submit to his Precepts, to embrace his Promises, to oppose what
he has forbidden, to comply with all the dispensations of his Providence
toward me, to be willing that I should be, and do, and bear, and choose and
lose what God would have me. I resign up my Heart and Affections to fear and
reverence the Lord, to believe and trust in the Lord, to desire and seek after
the Lord, to love and delight in the Lord, and desire to put them all under his
Government, and to have them exercised according to his will. I resign up my
Fancy to be governed and employed by my Reason in the service of my Master. I
resign up my Sensual Appetite after meat and drink, sleep, and any pleasures to
be subs^rvient to my Rational Appetite, and no further to have satisfaction,
than will tend to the glory of the Lord. I^ sign up my Hands to work for God,
my Feet to walk for God, my Ears to hear for God, my Eyes to see for God, my
Tongue to speak for God. I resign up all my Graces, all my Gifts, all my
Talents, to be used for the Glory of my Lord and Master; and my whole Man to be
ruled and governed by his Laws: Promising, though my Flesh do contradict and
rebel, that I will endeavor to order my whole conversation according to his
Word; humbly looking up to him for strength so to do, that I may be enabled by
him to every duty. And now I look upon my self no longer my own, or that any
thing I have is at my own dispose; but I wholly belong unto the Lord: And
therefore, blessing, and praising, and giving thanks unto the Lord, for
vouchsafing to enter into Covenant with me, and enclining my heart to enter
into Covenant with him; Bending my neck under the feet of the most glorious
Jehovah, I subscribe my self,

Witness my Hand and Seal.

The devoted Servant of the Lord, A. B.


Direct. 10. You must be steadfast, and persevere in the ways of God unto your
lives end, if you would be saved: And here you must be steadfast, 1. In the
ways of Truth. 2. In the Ways of Gods Commandments.


1. You must be steadfast and persevere in the ways of Truth; in the belief of
the Truths of the Word, without turning aside into ways of Error; there are
ways of Error which will lead you as certainly, and more securely to Hell,
than the ways of open profaneness. The Apostle tells us of damnable errors,
as well as open, damnable sins, 2 Pet. 2.1. and we read of some that are damned
for believing a lie, that their delusion has been the cause of their
damnation, 2 Thessalonians. 2.11, 12. The Devil leads as many as he can in the cords of
more gross and known sins toward the place of endless misery; but if any of
them begin to perceive their thraldom and danger, if their eyes be a little
opened, and Conscience awakened, and hearts affected, and they are persuaded to
look after their salvation, then he endeavors to draw them into ways of
Error, he has his Agents and Ministers, who are very subtle and crafty, and
lie in wait to deceive, who with good words and fair speeches insinuate
poisonous doctrines; and pretending more glorious discoveries, higher and more
excellent ways, draw them out of the way of the Word and Ordinances, into
paths of darkness, where they wander and lose themselves for ever; where they
are tossed up and down, and beaten to and fro with every wind of doctrine unto
the shipwreck of their Faith and their Souls. As you hope for salvation, you
must take heed of Error; diligently inquire after Truth; search for it as for
silver, and digg for it as for hidden treasures; digg for it in the golden
Mines of the Scriptures, let the Word of God be the only Rule of your Faith;
and having found the Truth, keep it, hold it fast, labor to fix it in your
minds, let it be as a girdle about your loins; lay it up in your heart, let it
be rooted there; apply your selves to Christ as a Prophet to lead you by his
Word and Spirit into all Truth, and to keep you from being deceived and
deluded; and keep close to the Ministry and Ordinances of Christ's Institution,
which the Lord has appointed to continue unto the end of the World, for the
edifying establishment, and perfecting of the Saints, Ephesians. 4.11, 12, 13, 14.

2. You must be steadfast, and persevere in the ways of Gods Commandments; you
must patiently continue in well-doing, if you would obtain immortal glory, Romans
2.7. you must endure to the end if you would be saved, Matthew. 10.22. you must
be faithful unto the death, if you would gain the Crown of life, Rev. 2.10. It
is absolutely necessary unto salvation, that you hold out in the ways of God;
none but such which come to the end of the race will obtain the prize; the Gate
of Heaven lies at the further not the hither end of the Holy Path; therefore
you must steadfastly persevere in this way; if you should fall down, you must
rise again, and go on; if you should fall back or through mistake turn aside,
you must return again, and make the more haste; but if you should fall off, if
you should fall away (as some have done who have seemed very zealous and
forward Christians as to the outward Profession) you are lost, you are
cast-awayes, and you will tumble and fall down into the bottomless Pit, from
whence there is no returning. Be not then followers of them that draw back to
perdition, but of them that believe to the saving of the Soul, Heb. 10.39. Be
followers of them who through faith and patience inherit the Promises, Heb.
6.12. It is a glorious Inheritance that is before you, that is promised and
prepared in Heaven, let this encourage you to diligence and perseverance unto
the end; I shall conclude with the words of the Apostle, 1 Cor. 15.58.
Therefore my beloved Brethren be steadfast, unmovable, always abounding in the
work of the Lord, for as much as ye know that your labor is not in vain in the
Lord.

Thus I have given you Directions, What things you must do that you may be
saved.

SECT. XIX.
II. THE Second and last thing for your guidance in the way of Salvation, is,
To show you what Means you must make use of to help you in these things.

There are Ten Means to be used in order to the attaining of Salvation: 1.
Self-examination. 2. Reading the Word of God, and other good books. 3. Hearing
the Word Preached. 4. Meditation. 5. Prayer. 6. Christian-conference. 7.
Watchfulness. 8. Sanctification of Fasting-dayes. 9. Sanctification of
Sabbath-dayes. 10. Improvement of Sacrament-dayes.


Means 1. Self-examination. You must examine your selves, if you would see your
selves lost; you may read the mistake of the Laodiceans, Rev. 3.17. Thou
say, I am rich, and increased in goods, and have need of nothing; and
know not that thou art wretched, miserable, and poor, and blind, and naked.
You must examine and prove your spiritual state, that you may have a right
judgment thereof, that you may perceive how poor, and wretched, and miserable
you are whilst you are in a state of Nature. You must examine your selves,
that you may get a sight and sense of sin: Ier. 8.6. I hearkened and heard, but
they spoke not aright, no man repented him of his wickedness, saying, What have
I done? every one turned to his course, as the Horse rusheth into the battle.
You must examine what you have done, if you would repent of your sins; you must
search and try your ways, if you would turn from your evil ways; you must
commune with your hearts, and come to your selves, with the Prodigal, if you
would return unto God, and turn your feet unto his Testimonies. Be serious then
in this great duty of Self-examination; and that you may be so, I would advise
that you would set apart time for it, when your thoughts are most free, and
affections most sedate and quiet; get out of the hurry of the world, and lay
aside other business for a while; and withal separate your selves from
company, and retire into secret, where you may be free from external
disturbances and interruptions; whatever indispositions and withdrawments of
heart you find, force your selves to the work; resist Satan, who will
endeavor to divert and discourage you: Set your selves in the presence of God;
desire him to search you; beg his help in the duty; labor to keep your mind
close to it; if vain thoughts arise, and would hurry you away, look up to
Christ to rebuke them, and to bring them into captivity and obedience unto
himself. And then sit down, and seriously consider what you have done ever
since you came into the World, and withal think with your selves what you will
do when your life and this world shall come to an end. Take a review of your
sins; they are noted down upon the book of your Consciences, peruse this book;
and if you extracted a Catalogue of your sins, it might be a help to you. Note
down your original sin; your actual sins; your transgressions of Gods Law, in
the first and the second Table thereof; your disobedience to the Gospel; the
aggravations of your sins.

Means 2. Reading the Word of God, and other good books. The rule whereby you
are to examine your selves is the Word; this is like a Candle, which will give
light in dark corners; this is like a Glass, which will discover spots in the
face; you must search the Word, and try your selves her^by, if you would have
knowledge of sin, and your spiritual state; and you must search the Word, if
you would have knowledge and acquaintance with God and his will. You may arrive
to some knowledge of God by reading the Book of Nature; the whole world is full
of God, and every Creature does represent him; but the world is full of sin
too, and the more immediate representations of the Creatures are sensitive
things, which our sense lays hold on first, and is apt there to stick,
without further piercing and searching to find out God; and where we have one
provocation from the Creatures to love and serve him (through the bewitching
temptations of the world, meeting with the worldly lusts of our hearts) we have
a thousand incitements and allurements from them to sin against God; but the
Word is full of God, and no incitement there to sin, full of perswasives to
holiness and obedience; God is to be seen more easily, and he sets forth
himself there most conspicuously; In the Book of the Scriptures you have the
most glorious discoveries of God, in his greatness, majesty, power, holiness,
love, mercy, and the like; and the way made known of acquaintance and communion
with him; if you would be acquainted with God in Christ, you must acquaint your
selves with the Scriptures: Read the Scriptures daily, and search them; Ioh.
5.39. read not only the history of the Word, but labor to understand the
mystery of Godliness therein revealed, 1 Timothy 3.16. endeavor after a spiritual
discerning of the things of the Spirit, 1 Cor. 2.14. when you meet with
Doctrines in your reading the Word, labor to understand and believe them; when
you meet with Precepts labor to obey them; when with Prohibitions and
Threatenings, be cautioned against sin by them; when you meet with promises,
labor to apply them, to draw virtue from them. Read this Book as the Word of
God, and hide it in your heart; lay it up there, as a choice treasure, get your
hearts cast into the mould of it; get it written upon your hearts, and let it
have an influence upon your whole conversation; and that you may the better
understand and apply the truths of the Word, read as you have time other good
books, which open the Scriptures, and treat of needful points of Religion,
especially such as direct in the great work of Conversion, and give Rules out
of the Word for the ordering of your whole conversation; but above all Books
read and study the Scriptures.

Means 3. Hearing the Word Preached. It is by the foolishness of Preaching that
God saves such as do believe, 1 Cor. 1.21. however the preaching of the Word
is to them that perish foolishness, yet unto Believers it is the power of God
unto salvation; therein God does put forth his power, and makes bare his arm,
in bringing salvation to lost souls. Hear and thy Soul shall live, Isa. 55.3.
Faith comes by hearing, Rome. 10.17. Lydia's heart was opened whilst she
attended upon the Word preached by Paul, Act. 16.14. Attend therefore
diligently upon the Word preached by Christ's Ministers, as an Ordinance of his
own institution for the working and increase of Grace: Look upon Ministers as
Christ's Ambassadors; he that hears them hears Christ, and he that turns
away his ear from hearing them, turns away his ear from Christ, who by his
Spirit in them speaks from Heaven unto men, and how impossible it is for such
to escape the wrath of God, see Heb. 12.25. Much more shall not they escape
that turn away their ear from him that speaks from Heaven. Hear the Word with
reverence, as the Word of God, as if the Lord should speak to you from Heaven
with an audible voice; hear the Word with diligence and attention as for your
lives, as for the salvation of your Souls; hear the Word with faith and love,
without which it will not profit and work effectually in your hearts; and in
hearing look not so much for those things which may please, as for that which
may edify; I mean, do not regard so much men's fancies, as the wholesome Truths
of the Word, which tend most to conviction, edification, to the killing of sin,
quickening and increase of Grace, and nourishment of the spiritual life.

Means 4. Meditation. The Word like Food must be digested by Meditation, that
it may turn to spiritual nourishment; you must ponder and consider in your
minds the Truths of the Word, that you may both understand them, and get your
Hearts affected with them, and your Lives ordered by them. Meditation is a
great help in Heavens way, such as are remiss herein cannot walk so steddily,
nor cheerfully; accustom your selves unto this duty, set apart time for it; I
know that some complain of barrenness in their thoughts, when they endeavor to
meditate; such I would advise, if they have not that fruitfulness of thoughts
themselves to supply them with matter, that they would make use of others help;
let them meditate on the Scriptures they read, on the Sermons they hear;
moreover I would offer some general heads for Meditation, which you may make
use of. 1. Sometimes meditate on God, his Attributes, his infinite Majesty,
power, holiness, omnipresence, omniscience, eternity, unchangeableness, his
infinite wisdom, truth, faithfulness, justice, goodness, mercy and
loving kindness; his Councels, especially his eternal decree of Election, which
is of most sweet consideration to Believers; his works of Creation and
Providence. 2. Sometimes meditate on Christ; his near relations, of Friend,
Brother, Husband; his needful Offices of Priest, Prophet, and King. 3.
Sometimes meditate on the Spirit, his way and workings on the mind and heart,
how he enlighteneth, enliveneth, strengthens, comfort, etc. 4. Sometimes
meditate on the Covenant of Grace, and the rich, free, suitable, sure Promises
of pardon, grace, salvation therein. 5. Sometimes meditate on the Gospel, and
its privileges, Justification, Adoption, Sanctification, Assurance of Gods
love, peace of Conscience, Joy in the Holy Ghost, communications of grace, etc.
6. Sometimes meditate on the four last things, namely, Death, Judgment, Heaven
and Hell. 7. Sometimes meditate, and that frequently, daily, of such Arguments
as tend to the mortifying of your particular sins, which are most strong and
prevalent, and to the strengthening of your graces which you find most weak
and deficient.

Means 5. Prayer. Pray secretly; retire your selves from company into your
Closets, or some private place, and there confess your sins, and make known
your requests to God, that sees and hears in secret, and has promised an
open reward to such as secretly and sincerely seek him. Pray frequently, be
often upon your knees, give your selves unto Prayer; begin the day, conclude
the day with Prayer, and recover some other time to visit and speak to God; at
least mingle ejaculatory Prayer with every other work; and labor that your
minds may be always in a praying frame; and do not withdraw, but be glad when
an opportunity offers it self to come to the throne of grace. Pray fervently,
pour forth your hearts before God in the duty; wr^stle with God in Prayer like
Jacob, be earn^st in your Petitions as for your lives, be instant and
importunate, take no denial, follow hard after God; stir up your selves to take
hold on him, use arguments in Prayer, to plead with him. Pray believing^y,
mingle your prayers with Faith; make use of the name and mediation of Jesus
Christ; and make application of the Promises which God has made to his People,
which he has made to Faith, and which he has made to Prayer.

Means 6. Christian Conference. Take heed of the company of the wicked; from
such turn away; if ^^ and when you are there, labor to mourn for sin, which
has pierced the Lord; to hunger after his righteousness; to receive him by
Faith; to apply the Promises of the Covenant of Grace, whereof the Sacrament is
a Seal; endeavor after a burning love to him whose love has been so great as
to dye for you; and let your hearts be filled with joy, and your mouths with
Praises, and deliver up your selves in Covenant unto the Lord in this
Ordinance; After you come from the Lords Table, reflect upon your carriage
toward the Lord; if you have been straitened, endeavor to find out the cause,
mourn, and by after-pains and application of Christ, endeavor to get some
benefit, and prepare better against the next time; if you have been enlarged,
be humble, be thankful, be watchful, live up to Obligations; draw virtue from
Christ's death for the cr^^cifying more and more of your flesh, with its
affections and lusts; and fetch influences of grace and spiritual nourishment*
that you may increase with the increases of God.

Finally, be diligent in the use of these, and all other means and helps, and
so at length you shall attain the ultimate end, for which they are appointed,
even your Salvation and Eternal Happiness.

FINIS.

