THE CURE OF DISTRACTIONS IN Attending upon GOD: In Several SERMONS Preached
from 1 Cor. 7. 35. That you may attend upon the Lord without Distraction.

By NATHANAEL VINCENT, M. A. Minister of the Gospel.

Psalm. 27 8. When thou said, seek ye my face; my heart said unto thee, thy
face, Lord, will I seek. (...) (...) Deus non vocis, sed Cordis auditor. Cypr.
Primum argumentum compositae mentis existimo^ posse consistere, and secum
morari. Seneca Epist. 2. LONDON, Printed for Brabazon Aylmer, at the Three
Pigeons over against the Royal Exchange in Cornhill, 1695.

To the Truly Honorable Sir WILLIAM ASHURST, Knight. AND Alderman of the City of
London.
Much Honored SIR,
I Did not Address to you when you were like the Rising Sun, and made the Chief
Seat in this City, where you were deservedly placed, to shine with more than
ordinary Luster; when you discovered and were severe against the Works of
Darkness; and your Influence was so benign and kind, for the Sustentation and
Benefit of London; but now you have run your Course so well, and have set
without the least Cloud; nay, with so much Clearness and Glory, I make this
Dedication to you, desiring your serious Perusal of a Treatise, the Subject of
which is of such great importance. And indeed now you have quitted the Chair,
and have less of public Business to manage, and may have more leisure to
retire into your Self, and from Company, and from Civil Affairs; this Cure of
Distractions in Religious Duties, knocks at your Door, the Author desiring it
may be helpful to your Meditations and Devotion.

It Is a great Respect and Honor that is due to the God's on Earth, so
Magistrates are called, and Inferiors should apply to Them accordingly, with a
great sense of their distance. With what Reverence then are we to approach the
Supreme Majesty! The Lord of Hosts, the King of Glory! Our highest
Apprehensions are infinitely below him. And the best of Saints do rather wish
to Worship him, than perform any thing that is worthy of the Name of Worship.

Among the many Faults in Holy Duties, there is one that will never be quite
mended in this World, and that is Distraction; but yet more and more help may
be still attained against it: And these Sermons mhich I now present you with, I
hope with a Blessing from Heaven may contribute somewhat, and be successful
this way.

If Religious Duties were but well done, every thing else would be done the
better; for it is from God alone that we have ability to do as we ought in any
matter whatsoever. The Lord gives Wisdom and Grace most liberally to them who
most sincerely seek him. And such as have most help from God, will best perform
their Duty toward Man; and both Church and State will find them the most
useful Members. Religion is certainly the truest Policy. The Wisdom of this
World, says the Apostle, and of the Princes of this World comes to naught, but
Godliness in the power of it, makes Men better in every Capacity and Relation.
How does it alter and amend Persons, Families, Nations, where it is encouraged
and prevails! Righteousness and Peace, Joy, and Love, are found to be the
blessed effects of true Religion! It tames the fierceness, and subdues the
malignity of corrupt Nature! And makes Man to look something like what he was
in the state of Innocence!

All that wish well to this City and Nation, must needs desire that God may be
better served, and that Men by his Service may be bettered. How happy should we
be if People were all Righteous! Violence then would be no more heard in our
Land, nor wasting and destruction within our Borders; our Walls would be called
Salvation, and our Gates Praise, and the Lord himself would be to us an
everlasting Light, and our God our Glory!

I wish that all Lord Mayors for the future may follow your Example, and
endeavor to suppress Wickedness, and may never be ashamed of Holiness, which
is the Glory of God, and is most unreasonably looked upon as matter of Disgrace
to any Man. Sir! You are descended from Religious Ancestors, and Religion is
that which does truly ennoble your Blood and Family. An increase of this
Nobility and of all other Blessings, is wished to your self and Yours. By,

Honored SIR, Your Most Humble Servant, Nathanael Vincent.

TO THE READER.
Reader!
IT is a Subject of the highest consequence, and in which all are concerned,
that I Discourse of in this Treatise; and I design some relief against that
which is the general Complaint of serious Christians, who would fain offer to
God more Spiritual and well pleasing Sacrifices, but are hindered by the
remaining Sin and Vanity of their own Minds. They are called indeed the
Habitations of God through the Spirit; but these Habitations are haunted with
distracting Thoughts, and vain Imaginations, to their great grief and
disturbance. The Work and Service of the God of Heaven, is the (...), principal
business every one has to do in this World; and though no Duties are to be
slightly done to Man, which are done for the Lord's sake; yet in attendance
upon himself, and in those Duties which more immediately we perform to him, an
holy Awe becomes us; our Hearts should be immoveably fixed, and we should exert
the utmost Vigor of our Spirits. To trifle with a Jealous God, whose
All-seeing Eye strictly observes the whole we do, and wherein soever we fail,
is to despise him to his Face, and to act to the great peril of our own Souls.

Our God, says the Apostle, is a consuming fire; and Nadab and Abihu, the Sons
of Aaron, sound him so, to their cost and sorrow, when they offered strange
fire, such as he commanded, them not. We must do what God commands, and as he
commands, else what we call our Religious Duties, will be looked upon by him as
acts of Disobedience.

The Mind of Man ever since the first Man parted from God, is notoriously
fickle and wavering, being unsettled by Sin, it roves up and down the Earth from
one Vanity to another; but how hardly is it brought back to God! And though it
is engaged to approach near to him, yet if it be not narrowly watched, in the
twinkling of an Eye, it starts back and is gone away from him. To keep our
Hearts with all diligence, is our Duty, but they will not be held in from
wandering by our most careful Custody. It is the Hand of that God alone, by
which the whole Universe consists, and is kept from dissolution, that can fix
the Mind of Man, and hinder its being distracted in his Service.

There is a great deal of Pains taken in the World to little purpose: All
things, says Solomon, are full of labor, Man cannot utter it; and yet he
affirms that there is no profit under the Sun* But it is lamentable to think
that in the Church, there should be so much labor in vain. Distraction of Mind
keeps the Heart away from God and from the Duty that seems to be performed to
him; it hinders the stirring of holy Affections, the acting of saving Grace;
and turns Religion into a mere (...), Bodily Exercise: and how can that be
profitable to the Soul, which is a great way off, and so little regards what is
done? How can it be acceptable to God, who is a Spirit, and will be worshipped
in Spirit and in Truth?

The Church of Rome is for implicit Faith, for blind Obedience, and for Worship
in an unknown Tongue. How distracted must that Worship needs be? How can the
Peoples Thoughts be intent upon what they do not understand? Too many
Protestants in their Devotions mind what themselves say, as little, as if they
did not understand the words they spoke; and truly the latter sin with greater
aggravation, because having means of better instruction, their Duties are no
better performed.

The Cure of Distraction in Religious Services, is very difficult; some think
light of the Disease, and imagine the Cure needless; others are discouraged
from striving against Distraction, as if it were impossible to overcome them,
but nothing is too hard for the great Physician, he can heal the Mind's Vanity,
bring the Heart into God's Presence; he is able to cast down Imaginations, and
to hinder them from rising again, and to bring Thoughts into Captivity and
Obedience.

A Sense of my own Wanderings in those Ordinances I administer, and engage in,
has put me upon a more serious study how to prevent them. And I would be the
first and best Follower my self, of that Counsel, which I give to others. And
if the Lord is served with greater Attention and Spirituality; and if the
Hearts of those who shall read this Treatise, are more than ever in the Work of
God, and more benefited by doing it, the great End is obtained, which is
designed by

Nathanael Vincent.

The CONTENTS of the ensuing Treatise.
THE Context considered. Page 2. The Text opened and divided. p. 5. Three
Doctrines raised. p. 7. D. 1. The Children of Men ought to attend upon God.
ibid. Ten things supposed as pre-requisite unto Man's attending upon God. p. 8.
Ten things implied in this attendance upon him. p. 22. Several sorts of
attending upon God. Distinction 1. Attendance upon God with the Lips and Body
only, and that which is with the Heart also. p. 36. Did. 2. Attendance upon
God which is voluntary, and which is through constraint and forced. p. 39.
Did. 3. Attendance upon God, which is ordinary, and which is extraordinary. p.
41. Did. 4. Attendance which is secret in the Closet, private in the Family,
and public in the Congregation. p. 45. Did. 5. Attendance upon God on his own
Day, and upon other Days. p. 50. Did. 6. Attendance upon God in a time of
Liberty, and in a time of Persecution. p. 54.
Reasons assigned why the Children of Men ought to attend upon God, which are
nine. p. 56. Use 1. Of Reproof applied to eight sorts of Persons. p. 67. Use 2.
Of Exhortation to all to attend upon God, and backed with nine Arguments. p. 77.
Use 3. Of Direction how God is to be attended upon, in nine particulars. p. 90.
Use 4. Of Consolation to them that in due order attend* on God, five grounds of
Comfort. p. 104.
D. 2. In attending upon God, we should look upon him as the Lord and serve him
accordingly. p. 109. How God is the Lord, showed in ten particulars. p. 111.
What influence and effect the apprehensions of God's being the Lord should have
upon us, when we attend upon him, in eight particulars. p. 126. Use 1. Of
Reproof, four sorts of Persons concerned. p. 135. Use 2. Of Advice in five
things. p. 140.
D. 3. Attendance upon the Lord should be without distraction. p. 143. What
distraction in attending upon God, is. p. 145. Four things premised. When the
Heart may be said to be distracted in attending upon the Lord, this showed in
eight particulars. p. 148. What it is to attend upon the Lord without
distraction, showed in nine particulars. p. 158. Reasons produced, why with
such care we should take heed of distraction. These of two sorts. Eight Reasons
drawn from the Evils of distraction in attending upon God. p. 166. Seven
Reasons more from the benefit of attending upon the Lord without distraction.
p. 173. Several Cases of Conscience answered, relating to distraction in
attending on God. Case 1. Whether our Thoughts cannot be off from God in the
least when we attend upon him, but there must be a sinful distraction? Answered
in three particulars. p. 180. Case 2. Whether it be distraction and withdrawing
from God, at all to think of our Worldly Affairs? Answered in three
particulars. p. 182. Case 3. Whether the best of Men while in this World can be
totally free from distraction in Holy Duties? Answered in three particulars. p.
184. Case 4. Whether a true Believer may not sometimes perform Duties so
distractedly, as to reap no benefit at all by them? Answered in three
particulars. p. 185. Case 5. What Distractions are they which are mercifully
overlookt, and hinder not the success of our Duties? Answered in six
particulars. p. 188. Case 6. What course are Melancholic Persons to take in
their attendance upon God, when distraction arises from the prevalency of that
Distemper? Answered in five particulars. p. 192. Case 7. What are those
Distractions that make our attendance upon God altogether unacceptable to him,
and unavailable to our selves? Answered in five particulars. p. 196.
Use 1. Of Caution against the Causes of Distraction. Eight Causes specified.
p. 200. Use 2. By way of Expostulation about the unreasonableness of
Distraction. p. 218. Use 3. Of Direction. Nine Remedies prescribed against
Distraction in attending upon God. p. 221. Particular Duties mentioned. How
Reading the Scripture may be with less distraction? p. 233. How with less
distraction you may attend on the Word preached? p. 237. How with less
distraction you may call upon the Name of God in Prayer. p. 241. How with less
distraction you may Communicate at the Lord's Table? p. 245.
Use 5. Of Terror to Sinners and Hypocrites, all whose attendance upon God is
full of allowed distraction. p. 250. Use 6. Of Comfort to Believers, who desire
to do still better, and with less distraction to attend upon God. p. 253.


THE CURE OF DISTRACTIONS IN ATTENDING upon GOD.
1 Cor. 7. 35. lat. part. That you may Attend upon the Lord without
Distraction.
THE Apostle Paul had a great and fervent zeal for the honor of God, that he
might have such attendance as he Commands; and which most rightfully appertains
to a Lord so great, and good; unto whom, both Heaven and Earth do owe all
Service and Obedience. The Apostle also manifests an extraordinary care of the
Souls of Men; that they might not fail to give that Attendance which is
enjoined them as their Duty: and is also their advantage, honor, and security.
The thoughts, the hearts, the endeavors of all, should run this way; as to a
matter of the mightiest importance and concernment. Here if we are
undistractedly serious and sincere, all is safe; and that both throughout time,
and to Eternity. But if Attendance upon God be either neglected, or negligently
given, though we are never so intent and industrious about other things, our
Souls and all our labor will be lost together.

In this Chapter a little before the Text, the Apostle admonishes the
Corinthian Saints of the shortness of time, of the transitoriness of this
present World; and then informs them, what kind of Attendance upon himself, God
required, and expected from them.

1. His Admonition concerning Time is startling, (...), Time is contracted to a
little space. An allusion here is to Sails, which are no longer spread, but
bound up when the Ship is just come to the Harbor. The word (...) also
signifies to wind up a Body in Grave clothes, that it may be fit for the
Sepulcher. Time is thus ready to be wound up continually, and to be buried as
it were in Eternity: compared with this, it is but as a drop to the whole Ocean:
and this very drop is ever wasting. Time is a short thing; in a continual Flux;
and every moment growing shorter. Other things are of the less value, because
they can be enjoyed but a little while: the Epithet Temporal, or lasting only
for a season, being added to the greatest Wealth, the highest Pleasures, nay,
to Diadems and Kingdoms, makes them fall in the esteem of a discerning
Judgment. But the worth of Time is enhanced by the brevity of it. The day of
Salvation, the accepted time in which we, and our attendance upon God, may be
accepted of, cannot extend beyond the limits of the time of life. Now we must
make Peace with God, work out our own Salvation, and provide for Eternity; this
must be done now or never: There is not a moment of time but is too good to be
lost; there is Service and work enough to do in it: and to lose all our time,
is everlastingly to lose our selves.

2. The Apostle speaks of the Worlds transitoriness, (...), the fashion of the
World passes away. Mammon is but a sorry Master; and really is unworthy of that
numerous attendance, and mighty respect which is given to him. Sin has made man
foolish, and the world vain. And it is an undeniable argument of Man's Folly
that a vain World is so much minded; which is so apt to fade and change. As
Scenes in a Comedy or Tragedy alter, and quickly I borrow a similitude from
what I am far from approving.
the last Act comes; and the Play is at an end: so this World is continually
varying. Now there appears one, and a little after, quite and clean another
Face of things. The Face of the Sky is not more mutable, than the state of
humane Affairs. And thus it is likely to be to the World's End, when the Earth,
and the works that are therein, shall be burnt up.

That God whom Christians attend upon is unchangeable, and so is his love to
them; and the inheritance they expect hereafter is incorruptible, and fades
not away. But they themselves are Strangers and Pilgrims in this World; and
should behave themselves as Passengers that are traveling toward a better
World. And as for their Enjoyments by the way, they should love them, as being
about to leave them. Joy should be moderate in the fruition of them; and when
they are taken away, Sorrow should not be excessive, nor transgress the Bounds
of Grace and Reason.

3. The Apostle, as a Man well acquainted with the Court of Heaven, directs
Believers Attendance upon the Lord, who dwells and reigns there. He is very
careful not to cast a Snare upon the Corinthians; nor to impose upon Conscience
what God does not. Papal Authority is Audacious and Antichristian, and makes
bold to Command, and that upon the highest Penalty, what the Lord never
required. But the Apostle abhors spiritual Usurpation: He would have all
observe what God called them to; and in every condition to abide with God, and
to attend upon the Lord without Distraction.

In the words take notice,

1. Of the Lord with whom we have to do. The Eyes of Servants are to their
Masters; and the Eyes of Worshippers should be to the Lord whom they adore; and
if they had a greater respect to this holy One, what an influence would it have
upon their Lives and Services! The word (...) Lord, in the New Testament, is
put for Jehovah in the Old. The God whom Christians acknowledge, is the Lord
Jehovah, who has his Being of himself, and has Dominion over all.

2. Observe what this Lord requires and calls for, and that is attendance upon
him. The Greek word which the Holy Ghost uses is very significant and
emphatical, (...), implies, access unto God, and abiding with him; and being
sit for, and well-pleased with, both the one and the other.

3. Who are to attend upon the Lord? All Men do owe Homage and Service to him;
which is their Honor and Interest to pay: But those who are his own Children
and People, are by special obligations and favor called to this duty and
privilege of attending upon their God; and they have a new Principle and
Nature which inclines them to it.

4. Here is a direction as to the manner of attending on the Lord, it must be
(...), without distraction. Plutarch calls that Studium sapientiae, (...), the
study of Wisdom without Distraction, when nothing is able to call away the
Mind, and make it cease that study. In attending upon God, there must be
intention in the mind, a full bent of the heart; with strength of affection and
desire; not to be diverted, much less to be extinguished. All other business,
comparatively, must be looked upon as trivial; attendance upon the Lord must be
with the greatest seriousness.

I raise three Doctrines from the words. First, The Children of Men ought to
attend upon God; this the Text plainly supposes. Secondly, In attending upon
God we should look upon him as the Lord; and serve him accordingly. Thirdly,
Attendance upon the Lord should be without Distraction.


Doct. I. I begin with the first of these Doctrines: The Children of Men ought
to attend upon God. The Heaven of Heavens is his Throne; and he is attended on
by thousands and ten thousands of glorious and holy Ones, who minister unto
him, and stand before him. And yet upon Earth, which is his Footstool, he calls
for Attendance too; for he rejoices in the habitable parts of the Earth, and
his delights are with the Sons of Men; who understand him and themselves so
well, as to seek after him. He requires continually to be waited on, Hos. 12.
6. Therefore turn thou to thy God, keep Mercy and Judgment, and wait on thy God
continually. Injunctions to wait are reiterated, with the encouraging promise
of Divine Aid and strengthening Grace, Psalm. 27. 14. Wait on the Lord, be of
good Courage, he shall strengthen thy Heart; wait I say on the Lord. Psalm. 37.
34. Wait on the Lord, and keep his way; this way is true; walking in it, is
holy and safe; and the end is Peace.

In the handling of this Doctrine I shall First, Show you what is supposed in
Man's Attendance upon God. Secondly, I shall tell you what is implied in this
Attendance. Thirdly, I shall speak of several sorts of Attending upon the Lord.
Fourthly, I shall assign the Reasons why the Children of Men ought to give
their Attendance upon God. Fifthly, Make Application.


In the first place, I am am to show you what is supposed in Man's Attendance
upon God. There are several pre-requisites unto this; for Man is not easily
persuaded to this Duty; though the performance of it prove never so beneficial
to him. Now that there may be this Attendance:

1. Man must firmly believe that there is a God, Heb. 11. 6. But without Faith
it is impossible to please him; for he that comes unto God must believe that He
is. As God is to everlasting, so he is from everlasting. If he had not ever
been, and that of himself, he would never have been; neither could any thing
else ever have had a Being. Creatures Existence supposes there is a Creator;
and Attendance upon God supposes there is a God to be attended on. The stronger
the Assent to this, is, the greater will be the care to understand how the
Attendance may be acceptable. The Being of a God, there are few that deny in
words; but there are abundance who deny him in their works; even among them who
profess to know him, Tit. 1. 16. And being so foolish as to say in their Hearts
there is no God: No wonder that with their hearts they refuse to seek him.

Man should look upward, and see how the Heavens declare the Glory of God, and
the Firmament shows his handiwork, Psalm. 19. 1. The Visible Creation is not
more obvious to the Eye, than the Eternal Power and Godhead of him who made all
things, is clearly to be seen by the Mind of Man, Romans 1. 20. And if (...).
Man will but look into his own Heart, he may find this Truth deeply engraven
there, that God is; therefore the Apostle speaks thus of the Gentiles, who had
only the Light of Nature, Romans 1. 19. for that which may be known of God, is
manifest in them; for God has showed it unto them. Let not any go about to
obliterate this Truth concerning the Being of a God, but undoubtingly credit
it; for it is the first Stone in the Foundation of all truly Religious Service
and Obedience.

2. Man must have a sense that he had his Being from God, and was made for him;
and truly he is made such a Creature, that he will never be quite unmade, so as
to become nothing. He is capable of knowing and serving his Maker; and enjoying
him for ever; God has made all Men for himself; and some way or other he will
secure his own Honor, and have Glory from the very worst. But as for his own
People, he has formed, bought, and new made them for himself, that they might
show forth his Praise, Isa. 43. 21. Man should Eye the Hand that made him, and
the End for which he was made. Our Bodies will be found a curious piece of
Divine Workmanship, if the contexture, variety, and use of their parts are
considered: But though our Flesh is of God's Forming, yet in a more immediate
manner, he is called the Father of our Spirits. And wherefore have our Souls a
thinking Faculty, but that God may be thought of? Wherefore have we Memories,
but that our Creator from our Youth may be remembered? And if we live to
Gray-hairs, he in no wise is to be forgotten. Wherefore are we capable of
loving, desiring, and taking delight; but that God may be the chief Object of
these Affections? In him we live, and move, and have our Being, Acts 17. 28.
that we might live to him, move according to his Will, and be indeed his
Servants.

3. Man must be persuaded that God is rightfully his Ruler, and has given him a
Law and Commandments, by which he is to be governed. Mammon and Satan are mere
Usurpers, and where they reign they ruin. The evil One is to be resisted, not
obeyed; and Man was made to have Dominion over the Creatures, not to be
enslaved by them. But God is Man's Sovereign by Right, and may lay upon Man
what Commands he pleases, but has given them none but what are holy, just and
good, Romans 7. 12. And the better these are obeyed, Man becomes more holy, just,
and good himself, and partakes more of the Divine Nature. Would we attend upon
God? We must have respect unto his Commands. David plainly intimates the gain
of Obedience; when he says, more are they to be esteemed than Gold, yea, than
much fine Gold. He signifies the pleasure of Obedience, when he adds, sweeter
also than the honey, and the honey comb, Psalm. 19. 10.

4. Man must be convinced, that by sin he has departed from God, and has justly
incurred his displeasure. The natural distance between God and Man as a
Creature, must ever remain: God is, and will be for ever, infinitely above, and
superior even to those that are in Heaven: he humbles himself to behold the
things that are there, Psalm. 113. 6. But the moral distance that is between God
and Man, or the enmity that Sin is the cause of, may be made to cease. When Man
attends upon God, he should come with deep sense how he has provoked him: that
he is by Nature a Child of Wrath, Ephesians. 2. 3. and in his practice a Rebel; and
as he has acted like one, so he deserves to be dealt with as an Enemy. When the
Syrians came to the King of Israel, they had Sackcloth on their Loins, and
Ropes on their Heads, 1 Kings 20. 32. They had newly been in Arms against him;
and now they declare how ill they deserved to be treated by him. For offenders
to approach unto God without any trouble for their offenses, it is not to Attend
upon him, but to Affront him. Those are his own words, Woe to them for they have
fled from me; destruction unto them, because they have transgressed against me,
Hos. 7. 13. And hear the Language of the penitent Church, Lam. 5. 16. The Crown
is fallen from our Head; woe to us that we have sinned. When we come for Mercy,
we must be sensible that Mercy is undeserved, and that confusion of Face
belongs to us, Dan. 9. 8. A penitential Acknowledgment there should be, that we
have been foolish, disobedient, decei^ed; that we have served diverse Lusts and
Pleasures; and in our selves are so hateful to God, that we are unworthy to be
admitted into the number of his Attendants.

5. Man must hear the Call of God; to return to him; and to Obedience and Duty.
The Angels that sinned were not spared, nor called to attend upon God in order
to their recovery after their Apostasy. Indeed we find Satan an Intruder among
the Sons of God, who came to present themselves before the Lord, Job 1. 6. but
it was not to beg Grace for himself; his Chains of Darkness hindered his Hope
of finding any; he comes as an Accuser of Job, and with a desire of a
Permission to do him a Mischief. But Man, though departed from God, is called
to come backagain, Hos. 14. 1. O Israel, return to the Lord thy God, for thou
have fallen by thy Iniquity. Man is sought after as well as saved, or sought
that he may be saved: And if the Lord did not seek him, but leave him to his
own Imagination and Inclination, his Imaginations are so vain, his Inclinations
so perverse and wicked, he would never cease going astray, till he died without
Wisdom. The Call of God is loud and earnest, that Man would turn from his
Disobedience, and do his Duty, Prove. 8. 4. Unto you, O Men, I call, and my
voice is to the Sons of Man. Prove. 1. 23. Turn you at my reproof, behold, I
will pour out my Spirit unto you, I will make known my words unto you. Prove. 8.
34. Blessed is the Man that hears me, watching daily at my gates, waiting at
the posts of my doors.

6. Man must look upon God as accessible in Christ. When Adam fell into the
first Transgression, showing a Contempt of God, and of his Covenant, and the
Life that was there promised; he was turned out of Paradise, and a flaming
Sword was placed to hinder his re-entring, and access to the Tree of Life. Life
was impossible to be had by the first Covenant; therefore he and his Faith were
directed to the promised Seed, who should bruise the Serpents head; and in time
would be manifested to destroy the Works of the Devil, 1 John 3. 8. This Work
of the Devil was Sin, whereby Man had departed from his Maker: Now Christ the
second Adam, suffered once for Sins, the Just for the Unjust, that he might
bring Man to God, and make up the Breach that Sin had made between them, 1 Pet.
3. 18. As God is but One, so there is but One Mediator between God and Men, the
Man Christ Jesus; Who gave himself a Ransom for all, 1 Timothy 2. 5, 6. no access
to God by any other: But says the Apostle, In Christ Jesus our Lord we have
boldness, and access with confidence by the Faith of him, Ephesians. 3. 12. Under the
Old Testament there was but one Temple, one Altar for Burnt* offering and Sin*
offering to make an Atonement: An Heathen thought it a dishonor to the Lord
Jehovah; that Hezekiah had taken away his high Places and his Altars, and had
commanded Judah and Jerusalem to Worship before one Altar, 2 Chronicles. 32. 12. But
the mystery and meaning of this was, that Jesus Christ alone is the Way, the
Truth, and the Life; and that no Man comes to the Father but by him.

7. Man must plainly discern his Ignorance and Impotence to give a right
Attendance upon God, without the Direction and Aid of his Word and Spirit. Nay,
as Man does want both Skill and Strength to serve the Lord, so he has no Will
to it; there is an Indisposition and an Ill disposition in him; which plainly
shows that the Light and Grace of the Word and Spirit is of absolute necessity,
unto an Attendance upon God that is acceptable to him. When Man is off from
God, and betakes himself to himself in Matters of Religion, he rangeth
infinitely, like a Seafaring Man who has lost his Compass in a Mist, moving
swiftly but to no purpose. Now there shall be more words than that which is
written, more Articles than what God has put into our Creed, more Commands than
the Lawgiver ever gave; nay, more Gods and more Mediators than One: Man's
Invention will be fruitlesly Fruitful, and himself restless and endless in his
own ways. We should see our need of Instruction and Help from the Spirit of the
Lord: Both Light and Liberty, Strength and Liveliness in all Holy Duties, is
from Him.

It Is through the Son as Mediator, and it is by the Spirit as our Helper, that
we have access to the Father, Ephesians. 2. 18. The Apostle acknowledges, We know not
what we should pray for as we ought; but the Spirit helps our infirmities; the
holy and gracious desires of the Saints, are the breathings of this spirit in
them; acceptable Petitions that will find Audience, are of his drawing up, and
enditing. He makes intercession for the Saints according to the Will of God,
Romans 8. 26, 27. He is the instructor of all those who are taught to profit.
Ordinances, Gifts, Administrations which are so useful, are from the Spirit,
and the benefit and success of them is owing to him; his Aid is earnestly to be
implored, and thankfully to be accepted. Preparation to Attendance upon God is
necessary, Psalm. 10. 17. Thou will prepare their Heart, thou will cause thine
Ear to hear; and this preparation is the work of the Spirit.

8. Man must not doubt, but be thoroughly persuaded that God is ready to be
found of such as attend upon him, and is a rewarder of them that diligently
seek him, Heb. 11. 6. Satan affects to be the Representer of God to Man; and he
represents him contrary ways; and both are false, and indeed
misrepresentations; from secure Souls, he does endeavor to hide the Wrath of
God, his Holiness, Justice and Jealousy, that he may heighten presumption;
from awakened and humble Hearts, he does endeavor to conceal his Mercy and
Grace in Christ, that he may kill their Hope, and discourage them from engaging
in the work of God. But it is Wisdom in Man to hear what the Lord speaks of
himself; for he best knows himself, and the Revelations he makes of himself are
most certainly true. Now as he has told us, that he will wound the Head of his
Enemies; and be accounts those Enemies who go on still in their trespasses,
Psalm. 68. 21. so he has assured us that he is good and ready to forgive those
who are troubled because they have offended, and see their need of pardon; and
he is plenteous in Mercy unto all that in Truth do call upon him, Psalm. 68. 5.

It Is a mighty encouragement to attend upon God, when we see the door of Hope
standing open, and that the Lord takes pleasure in those who fear his
displeasure, and hope in his mercy together. Psalm. 147. 11. The Tables of the
Law were put into the Ark, and the mercy-seat was above it; a plain intimation,
that the Lord who sits upon this mercy-seat, will not enter into Judgment with
his Servants, nor mark the iniquities; but be merciful to the unrighteousness
of them that turn to him; this should raise Hope in dejected Spirits, and cause
it to abound. Psalm. 130. 7, 8. Let Israel hope in the Lord, for with the Lord
there is Mercy, and with him is plenteous Redempption, and he shall redeem
Israel from all his Iniquities.

9. Man must not think to divide his Service between God and Mammon. Our Lord
himself tells us, that no Man can serve two Masters; for either he will hate
the one and love the other, or else he will hold to the one, and despise the
other; ye cannot serve God and Mammon. To mind the World as if it were the most
desirable thing, and to serve the Lord, only for the World's sake; this is
hateful earthlimindedness, and Hypocrisy. When the Children of Israel
assembled themselves before God, only for Corn and Wine; their Cries were but
howlings in his Ears. Hos. 7. 14. If we would attend upon God, we must come out
from the World. Conformity to the World, and walking after the course of it,
must cease. The most desirable good things of it must be contemned in
comparison with God, and the better and enduring substance. We shall never look
and aim at, so as to obtain the things that are unseen and eternal; unless the
Eye be shut against the things that are seen and temporal, 2 Cor. 4. 18.

Not but that Attenders upon God may and ought to mind their secular business
which their particular Callings lead them to. Christians are cautioned against
idleness as great disorderliness; and are commanded and exhorted by our Lord
Jesus Christ with quietness to work, and to Eat their own Bread, 2 These. 3. 11,
12. This notwithstanding must ever be remembered; that the things of this World
are to be regarded so far as God has commanded, that they must be begged of
him, they must be kept, used, and improved for him; they must not be liked for
themselves, but so far as God is enjoyed with them, and in them. And in the
greatest abundance of them, this should be the Heart's Language, which came
from the Heart and Mouth of Luther; Noli his satiari; Lord I will not be put
off with such things as these! The Lord is my Portion says my Soul; and I have
looked and longed, and wait for thy Salvation!

10. Man must consent to cast away whatever may separate between the Lord and
him. And what that is, the Prophet plainly tells us, Isa. 59. 1, 2. Behold the
Lord's Hand is not shortened, that it cannot save; neither his Ear heavy that it
cannot hear; but your Iniquities have separated between you and your God; and
your Sins have hid his Face from you, that he will not hear. Separation from
God is the Hell of Hell; and this Hell upon Earth, Sin is the cause of. Sin is
that which provokes the Lord to be angry with Man, and with his Soul to hate
him; to behold him afar off: so that he is not admitted unto his Favor, or
unto Fellowship and Communion with him. To talk of Fellowship with God, and to
walk in this darkness of Sin, is to lie to others, and to deceive our selves.
This middle Wall of Partition must be thrown down, else there can be no drawing
nigh to God* Jam. 4. 8. Draw nigh to God, and he will draw nigh to you: Cleanse
your hands ye sinners, purify your hearts ye double-minded. The Hand must not
practice and work wickedness; the Heart must not regard and like it. The more
the Heart is desirous of Purity, the fitter it is to attend upon the Lord, to
serve him and to see him. Therefore you read Mat. 5. 8. Blessed are the pure in
heart, for they shall see God; and 2 Cor. 6. 17, 18. Wherefore come out from
among them, and be ye separate, says the Lord, and touch not the unclean
thing, and I will receive you; and will be a Father unto you, and ye shall be
my Sons and Daughters, says the Lord Almighty.

In the second place, I am to tell you what is implied in Man's Attendance upon
God. This Attendance is of large extent, and takes in all the Service he
Commands: In Scripture it is expressed sometimes by following of God, sometimes
by waiting upon the Lord; and in the Text by Attending. I shall explain what
this is in several particulars.

1. Attending upon God implies enquiring of God. He is (...), only Wise, the
Father of Lights, from whom all true Wisdom, and every good and perfect gift
comes down, Jam. 1. 17. The Wisdom of this World, and of the Princes of this
World, however it is magnified as the most profound Policy, cannot secure them
that are most excellent this way, but they and their Wisdom come to naught, and
perish together; but spiritual Wisdom which is hidden from the prudent of the
World, and is the especial gift of God, is ordained to the Glory of them that
have it, 1 Cor. 2. 6, 7. Wisdom to Salvation and everlasting Glory; deserves
the name of Wisdom, sound Wisdom it may well be called. Prove. 2. 6, 7. For the
Lord gives Wisdom, out of his mouth comes knowledge and understanding, he
lays up sound Wisdom for the Righteous, he is a Buckler to them that walk
uprightly.

Our inquiry must be of God for Wisdom of this Nature. He gives it to all that
desire and ask it, and that liberally without upbraiding, Jam. 1. 5. He
upbraids not any with their former hatred of knowledge, or contempt of Wisdom;
neither does he upbraid them with their natural dullness and unaptness to learn,
but both instruction, and also the very heart and ability to receive it, are
from him, Prove. 20. 12. The hearing Ear and the seeing Eye, the Lord has made
even both of them. The Psalmist thus; desired to attend upon God, all the days
of his life, that he might enquire in his Temple, Psalm. 27. 4. They are well
counseled, and are led safe to Glory; who have God to be their guide even unto
death, and still follow on to know the Lord.

2. Attending upon God implies harkening, and heeding what God speaks. Psalm.
85. 8. I will hear what God the Lord will speak; and what Attention does such a
speaker deserve, who speaks from Heaven; and whose Word shows the way to
Heaven! who speaks peace, and publishes glad-tidings of great Salvation! When
Lydia her heart was opened, that she attended unto those things which were
spoken of Paul, Acts 16. 14. She heard Paul's Voice, but believed the Lord
spoke by him to her; and she regarded the message accordingly. We attend upon
God in the Ministry of the Word, when our Eye looks beyond the Ministry unto
the Lord himself; and our Ear is attentive that we may understand his Truths
which are to be believed, his Precepts that are to be obeyed. Now the Word
comes with a Divine Power and Efficacy, when God is heard speaking in the Word,
1 These. 2. 13. For this cause also thank we God without ceasing; because when
ye received the Word of God which ye heard of us, ye received it not as the
word of Men, but, as it is in truth the Word of God; which effectually works
also in you that believe. It concerns us to take heed what we hear, and how. We
should be forward to be made acquainted with God's Truth and Will; and neither
should be held in unrighteousness; for to hear what God speaks, and not to mind
it, but to act quite contrary, is disobedience with an high aggravation.

3. Attending upon God implies returning and yielding our selves unto God. Man
is naturally Contentious, and struggles hard about this point; and will not
yield that God should direct and rule; and that it is reasonable, that he in all
things should submit and obey. Man till he is instructed and enlightened from
above, will be still murmuring and disputing against his Duty, and will not
come to God, though God is Light, and can shine into his Mind; though Divine
Goodness can satiate Man's Soul, though the Lord has supreme and sufficient
Authority to Command the Conscience, and to lay the whole Man under obligation
to Obedience. But when we attend upon God indeed, we hearken to his Call to
return, and we return at his Call.

There cannot be a right Attendance without sincere Conversion; and this
Conversion is Man's yielding of himself to his Lord. Romans 6. 12, 13. Let not
sin reign in your mortal Bodies, that ye should obey it in the Lusts thereof,
neither yield ye your Members as instruments of unrighteousness unto Sin; but
yield ye your selves unto God, as those that are alive from the Dead, and your
Members as instruments of Righteousness unto God. The Body must be yielded,
that the Holy Ghost may Consecrate it to the Lord's Service; that Eyes and
Mouth, and Hands and Feet, and all may be at God's Beck, and ready to fulfill
his Pleasure. And especially the Heart must be yielded, nay, the whole heart,
else returning is but feigned. Jer. 3. 10. Her treacherous Sister Judah, has
not returned to me with her whole heart, but feignedly says the Lord. The Soul
must consent to have all its powers renewed and sanctified, that with them all
it may give Attendance upon God; the Heart without any reservation must yield,
that God should work out of it whatever is offensive, that he should work in it
that which is pleasing in his sight.

4. Attending upon God implies seeking and desiring after God. Isa. 26. 9. With
my Soul have I desired thee in the Night, yea with my Spirit will I seek thee
early. The bent of the very Soul was toward God, and the desires are kept up
in vehemence both Night and Day. The Lord humbles himself to behold things done
in Heaven; yet he looks down upon the Children of Men upon Earth, to see if
there be any that understand and seek him. And if he seeks after these seekers,
how ready is he to be found of them! The Command is, that we should seek the
Lord and his strength, and his Face evermore, Psalm. 105. 4. God is to be sought
unto for himself, when the all-sufficient Jehovah gives himself to any; he
gives infinitely more than if he gave them many thousand such Worlds as this
is. His strength is of absolute necessity, to secure us from evil, and to
assist us in the doing of good; and the shining of his Face makes our work
easy and pleasant, it makes our Life, and even Death it self comfortable. No
wonder therefore, when God said, Seek ye my Face; one of his Attendants heard
presently, as the Echo answers the Voice, said, Thy Face Lord will I seek,
Psalm. 27. 8. To seek to any else is vain; it is seeking for Water in a broken
Cistern that can hold none. Men of low degree, though never so great a
multitude, are vanity; and Men of highest degree are a ly, Psalm. 62. 9. But
God's Power, Mercy and Truth are an evident proof that he is forward and
sufficient to satiate the Souls of all, that charge their Souls to wait only
upon him, and to have their expectations from him.

5. Attending upon God implies waiting upon him in his own House and Sanctuary.
Every Christian's House should be an House of Prayer; but the place of public
assembling to Worship should be highly prized, and frequented for the work sake
that is performed there. The living, the true, the eternal God is here
publicly owned and acknowledged, and so is the only Mediator Jesus, as also
the Holy* Ghost; whose Aid and Grace is all in all, as to the efficacy and
success of those Ordinances which are administered. Saints that have seen God's
Power and Glory in his Sanctuary; it is no marvel that their Souls thirst for
God, for the living God; and that is the Language of their Hearts, When shall we
come and appear before God, Psalm. 42. 2. As the Sanctuary was next to the
holiest of all, so the House of God on Earth, is as it were, the Suburbs of the
City of God in Heaven. The Sanctuary is the place where the Light of holy and
heavenly Doctrine shines. Here the Psalmist understood the end of the ungodly,
and that all their prosperity was but a Dream and Image, being abused by
themselves, to further and hasten their destruction; for they are quickly cast
down from their greatest height, and brought into Desolation as in a moment,
and utterly consumed with Terrors, Psalm. 73. 17, 18, 19* Here also he
understood how good God is to Israelites indeed; when he does afflict them; his
Rod guides them* purges their Hearts; he upholds them with one hand, when he
corrects them with another; he makes earthly things more contemptible in their
Eyes, and sets their Affections more upon himself, who is their Portion for
ever. In the Sanctuary Believers are quickened, strengthened, comforted and
settled: And this one thing they desire* of the Lord, and that they seek after,
that they may dwell in the House of the Lord all the days of their life, that
they may behold the Beauty of the Lord, his Holiness and Grace in Christ, with
the admirable Harmony of all his Attributes; and that they may perpetually be
enquiring in his Temple; until being guided unto Death, and brought safe to
Glory, they are past all danger, Psalm. 27. 4.

6. Attending upon God implies not only keeping the way of his Ordinances and
Institutions, but minding his Dispensations, and the manner of his dealing with
us. The Ordinances of the Gospel are from Heaven, and not of Men. Men have no
right to institute, who have no power to bless. Men's Inventions in Religion,
though often followed with great eagerness, are found unprofitable and vain to
them that have been Zealous for them* But the Ordinances which the Lord himself
has appointed, he is ready to own and make effectual to them that attend upon
him in the use of them: so that they shall have reason to say, they have sought
the Lord and have found him; and have tasted and seen that he is gracious:
Ordinances are Feasts with which Saints are entertained, called by the Prophet,
Feasts of fat things full of Marrow, and of Wine on the Lees-well refined, Isa.
25. 6. And the People of God are so strengthened, revived and delighted, and
have such sensible Communion with him, as that they speak out their Joy and
Satisfaction, v. 9. Lo this is our God, and we have waited for him, he will
save us; this is the Lord, we have waited for him, we will be glad and rejoice
in his Salvation. Those are dangerously pufft up with Pride and Self-conceit,
that think themselves above Ordinances; and it is not a commendable Humility for
them that desire the spiritual Benefit of Ordinances, to imagine that
Ordinances are above them. They are in no wise to be neglected; for they are
the golden Pipes, Zach. 4. 12. which convey the Grace of the Spirit, compared
to Oil, into the Hearts of Men.

And as Attenders upon God are found in the way of his Ordinances, so they
observed diligently God's dealing with them. They take notice how he looks upon
them, whether there are Smiles, or Frowns in his Face; they regard what God
speaks, whether it be by way of Counsel, Caution, Rebuke, or Comfort; they heed
what the Spirit says to them, and what Communications of Grace are vouchsafed.
They are attentive to regard the works of the Lord, and to consider the
operation of his hands. Does he afflict? they turn to him that smites them, and
desire to be more fully instructed, and more thoroughly purged, Isa. 27. 9. Does
he load them with Benefits? they are affected with his lovingkindness, and
sensible how obligations grow stronger to praise and please him.

7. Attending upon God implies expecting all from him. From this one Fountain
flow the Streams of all sorts of Blessings. In our Father's House there is
Bread enough, and to spare; and how many soever are received and attend there,
there is room for more; and not only room, but Entertainment. The Apostle
though he was as having nothing, yet had such a confident expectation from God,
as if he had all things in possession. 2 Cor. 6. 10. as having nothing and yet
possessing all things. He assures the believing Philippians, that God would
supply all their needs according to his Riches in Glory by Christ Jesus, Phil.
4. 19. The Psalmist in danger and calamity, betakes himself to the mercy of
God, and the shadow of his Wings for refuge, and cries unto him as the most
High, who performed all things for him, Psalm. 57. 1, 2. Who questions whether
the Sun be full of Light? whether the Ocean abound with Water? Much less reason
is there to question God's Power and Will to answer the expectations of his
People that attend upon him. It is his pleasure that they should wait upon him
for every thing; and knock at his door, whatever they have to ask. Abounding in
hope is acceptable to God, and will not issue in disappointment. Therefore says
David, Psalm. 71. 14. But I will hope continually, and will yet praise thee more
and more.

8. Attending upon God implies readiness to do whatever he Commands; and to
engage at his bidding in any Service. Nominal Attendants will cry Lord, Lord;
but real ones will do the things which he says. There are an innumerable
company of Angels who excel in strength, who wait on God, and those do his
Commandments, harkening to the Voice of his Word, Psalm. 103. 20. That they may
fulfill their Maker's Pleasure, they minister to them that shall be Heirs of
Salvation, Heb. 1. 14. Attendance includes a disposition to yield Obedience.
It Is thus expressed Psalm. 119. 48. My Hands will I lift up to thy Commandments
which I have loved. The lifting up the Hands, shows a forwardness to receive
whatever Command God shall give; and a readiness to set about the doing
whatever he requires. That Is becoming Language, Speak Lord, for thy Servant
hears; and he that is truly a Servant, will act according to what he hears
his Lord speaking; and he will not give back, though he is put upon the hardest
and hottest Service. Abraham rose early in the Morning to obey God's Command,
to offer up his Son Isaac. And the Lord swear to him by himself, because he had
not withheld his Son, his only Son from him; that in blessing he would bless
him, Genesis 22. 16, 17. It Is a temper of Mind in which God delights, when his
Attendants resolve to Obey without any exception, 1 Samuel 15. 22. Has the Lord
as great delight in Burnt-offering and Sacrifices; as in obeying the Voice of
the Lord? Behold to Obey is better than Sacrifice; and to hearken, than the Fat
of Rams.

9. Attending upon God implies giving Glory to his Name, and acknowledging that
his is the Kingdom and the Power. Though the Offerings and Sacrifices enjoined
by the Law are to be offered no more; Christ who was typified by those
Sacrifices, having offered up himself once for all, and put away Sin by the
Sacrifice of himself; yet under the New Testament Dispensation, Attendants upon
God have their Sacrifices to offer: they must present themselves a living
Sacrifice, holy, acceptable to God, which is their reasonable Service, Romans 12.
1. and says the Apostle, Heb. 13. 15. By Him therefore, by Christ Jesus, let us
offer the Sacrifice of Praise to God continually; that is the fruit of our
Lips, giving thanks to his Name. Those glorious Spirits which attend above, and
surround the Throne in the Heavenly Kingdom, Praise is their perpetual
employment: and to their Eternal Joy and Delight, they find perpetual reason
for it. Worthy is the Lord to receive Glory and Honor, and Power; for he has
created all things, and for his Pleasure they are and were created. Worthy also
is the Lamb that was slain, to receive the same; and therefore Blessing, and
Honor, and Glory, and Power, be unto him that sits upon the Throne, and to the
Lamb for ever, Rev. 4. 11. and 5. 13.

This Service of Thanksgiving, the Lord much insists on, is well-pleased with,
and accounts himself glorified by. Psalm. 113. 1, 2, 3. Praise ye the Lord;
Praise, O ye Servants of the Lord: Praise the Name of the Lord: Blessed be the
Name of the Lord from this time forth, and for evermore; from the rising of the
Sun to the going down of the same, the Lord's Name is to be praised. Behold
also, how acceptable thankful Attendants are. Psalm. 69. 30, 31. I will praise
the Name of God with a Song, and will magnify him with Thanksgiving; this also
shall please the Lord better than an Ox or Bullock that has Horns and Hoofs.
And this is our way of Glorifying God, who is so infinitely Glorious, that to
his Glory no addition can be made, but only a Declaration and Acknowledgment
made of it: and when these Acknowledgments are largest, it must be confessed,
that he is exalted above all Blessings and Praise.

10. Attendance upon God implies a continuing to follow him. Holy David says,
his Ears were opened, or boared, to hearken to God's Voice, Psalm. 40. 6. Here
is an Allusion unto the Israelitish Servant, who was so well in his Master's
House, that he refused to go out free at the year of release; and had his Ear
boared with an Awl to the Post of the Door, to signify his resolution to serve
his Master continually. To profess Service to the Lord, and then to depart from
him, is highly to reproach and dishonor him, and in effect to say, that
fleshly and worldly Lusts are better Lords than He; it is more notoriously to
despise him, and to harden others in their contempt of him, and of his Word and
Commandments. Attenders upon God give not over following him in all those ways
he has commanded them to walk in. They follow on to know him, they follow him
fully, and being upheld with the right hand of his Righteousness, their Souls
follow hard after him, Psalm. 63. 8. And whom should they follow? to whom else
should they go? The Lord has the words of Eternal Life, He alone has Grace, and
Honor, and Glory, and all good things else to give; and to go away from him is
to lose all this, and to tread the path which leads to Eternal Death. Attenders
upon God cannot change their Lord, but they must change for the worse; nay, the
very best for the very worst of all: therefore they are unchangeably his,
steadfast and unmovable, always abiding, and abounding in his Work and Service.

In the third place, I am to speak of several sorts of Attending upon God. It
will be needful to insist particularly on these, that you may have a more
distinct understanding of your Duty in the Extent and Latitude of it. The
Scripture makes a great difference between Attendance, and Attendance upon God;
so that there are diverse kinds of it, as shall be manifested in these
following Distinctions.

I. There is an Attendance upon God which is with the lips and body only; and
that which is with the Heart also. I begin with this distinction to prevent
Hypocrisy and Formality in Religious Duties, whereby the Jealous God is so
much provoked, and Professors deceive others, but principally cheat and ruin
their own Souls.

1. An Attendance which is with the lips and body only. God by the Prophet
spoke against this, and by his own Son shows the vanity of it, and how
displeasing it is to him, Mat. 15. 7, 8. Ye Hypocrites, well did Esaias
prophecy of you, saying, This People draws near unto me with their mouth,
and honors me with their lips, but their heart is far from me. The body
indeed is to give Attendance, as being the Temple of the Spirit. The Tongue is
then most Angelical, and Man's Glory, when most enlargedly it does confess to
God, call upon, and praise and magnify his Name. But if when the eyes are lift
up toward Heaven, the hands are stretched forth with great eagerness, the
knees bow with seeming Humility and Devotion, and the words of the mouth are
serious and holy, and with appearing fervency; all this while the heart keeps
aloof, and at a distance from God; values not his love, his grace, or Communion
with him; but goes after its pleasures, lusts and covetousness: Alas! Here is
only a dead and rotten carcass of a Duty without a Soul; and it is very loathsome
and abominable. In all Religious Performances, if the heart does not at all
care to draw near; it is certain the Lord will not draw near neither as to his
gracious presence: And if God be not found in the Duty, nor the Heart of the
performer found there, how unprofitable must the performance needs be!

2. There is an Attendance upon God not with the Body only, but with the Heart
also. He speaks unto us as unto Children, and says, My Son give me thy
heart, Prove. 23. 26. Give him never so much without this, you give him nothing
that he cares for. The Heart does the chief part in the pure and acceptable
Worship of God. The Heart must keep his Commandments, else they are not kept.
Prove. 3. 1. My Son forget not my Law, but let thy Heart keep my Commandments.
The Psalmist lifted up his very Soul to God, Psalm. 25. 1. this the Lord looked
at, and liked. Those Graces which are to be acted in Attendance upon God, as
Faith and holy Reverence, Love, Desire, and Hope, and such like, the Heart is
the Seat of them; and it is by the Heart that they are exercised. And when the
Heart being cleansed from its Defilements, and weaned from the Allurements of
this World, draws very near to God; and God also draws very near; these his
nearer approaches, how reviving, how healing and confirming are they! When the
Spirit of a Saint does before the time, in a sense return to God who gave it,
and converse with him in the heavenly places, that converse how high, and
joyful, and beneficial is it found! When Moses came down from the Mount where
he had been with God, his Face did shine; and when the Heart has been above in
Heaven, a clearer light does shine into it, and it is more gloriously
transformed into the Divine Image and Nature.

II. There is an Attendance upon God which is voluntary, and which is through
constraint and forced.

1. An Attendance which is voluntary; When God by his powerful Grace inclines
and determines the Will to himself; so that He is chosen, and his special
Favor and Blessings are valued above all things. A mighty strength is put
forth, and yet without coaction, in bending the Will of Man toward God, and to
his Will, which naturally is so perverse and obstinate in Evil, that it is fitly
compared to an Iron Sinew. What a Power is it which makes it pliable! Psalm.
110. 3. Thy People shall be willing in the day of thy Power. And when to will
is thus wrought, the Heart is then enlarged, and at liberty to come to God, and
to do its Duty. There is a renewed Nature, which is principium motus, a
principle of spiritual Motion. This is notably expressed. Zach. 8. 21. And the
Inhabitants of one City shall go to another, saying, let us go speedily to pray
before the Lord, and to seek the Lord of Hosts. I will go also. The like temper
we find, Jer. 50. 5. They shall ask the way to Zion with their Faces
thitherward, saying, come and let us join our selves to the Lord in a perpetual
Covenant that shall not be forgotten.

2. There is an Attendance which is through constraint, and forced. The Heart
is not right with God, nor taken with himself at all. But pressing necessity
drives the Soul to him, for some benefit which none but he can bestow. Or there
are some indications of God's Anger and Displeasure. The effects of which, they
which attend upon him, feel or fear; whereupon they are forced to cry for
mercy. Such kind of Attenders were those, Psalm. 78. 34, 35, 36, 37. When he
slew them then they sought him, they returned and enquired early after God;
they remembered that God was their Rock, and the high God their Redeemer.
Nevertheless they did flatter him with their Mouth, and lied unto him with
their Tongues; for their Heart was not right with him, neither were they
steadfast in his Covenant. Had they not felt God's Hand, he had not heard their
Voice; had not peril been extreme, they would not have run to this Rock for
refuge: had not enemies pressed hard upon them, they would not have cried to this
high Redeemer for deliverance. But their cries were lies and flatteries. As
soon as the danger was in their apprehension over, their naughty Hearts started
aside like deceitful bows, and they soon returned to their corrupt way. In
Attending upon God let not Affliction, Conviction, and fear of punishment, be
the only cords that hale you to your Duty. The more there is of God's Servants
wills in his work, the more acceptable and well-pleasing is the Service.

III. There is an Attendance upon God which is ordinary, and extraordinary.

1. An Attendance upon God which is ordinary. As we are ordinarily to be
employed in the works of our particular Callings, so the works of our general
Calling as we are Christians, must in no wise be neglected. As we have Bodies
to feed and to cloth, and some business about the World to mind and manage. So
we have Souls to look after, and a God to serve; and this is the main business
of all. To work out our Salvation with fear and trembling, is that which should
always be upon our Hearts. That Man may truly say, Diem perdidi, I have lost a
day, if a day is gone, and nothing at all of this work done. Mary is commended
who heard and heeded Christ's word, and according to the direction of it,
minded the one thing needful, and chose the good part which could not be taken
away from her. Whereas Martha is taxed and reproved, for being careful, and
troubled about many things, Luke 10. 41, 42. All the Lord's Servants are to be
Attendants in ordinary. Religion is to be the constant business of their lives,
as being of greatest concern, and most worthy of their time and labor.

2. There is an Attendance upon God which is extraordinary. When he goes out of
the common way and course of his Providence; his Servants ought to follow him;
and as He acts extraordinarily in a way of Judgment, or of Mercy. They are to
do something extraordinary in the Duties they have such a signal and loud Call
to.

Acts of severity are styled, God's strange Acts, Isa. 28. 21. The Lord will
rise up as in Mount Perazim, that he may do his work, his strange work; and
bring to pass his act, his strange act. Affliction is said to be strange,
either because his ordinary course is otherwise: Kindness and Mercy is that
which he delights in showing; or it may denote Judgments that are unusual, and
that have something more than ordinary of terror and instruction. When the Lord
is thus raised up out of his holy Habitation, and comes forth to visit and
punish Iniquity, there should be great preparation to meet him, Amos 4. 12.
Because I will do this unto thee, prepare to meet thy God O Israel. There
should be deep Humiliation before him. 1 Pet. 5. 6. Humble your selves
therefore under the mighty hand of God, that he may exalt you in due time.
There must be strong cries unto him for pity, favor, and a spirit suited to
his dealings. Psalm. 18. 6. In my distress I called upon the Lord, and cried
unto my God, he heard my Voice out of his holy Temple; and my cry came before
him, even into his Ears. Sin must be forsaken with more than ordinary sorrow
and hatred; as that which has provoked the Lord to be so very angry; and
Righteousness must be followed after with greater zeal and diligence. Isa. 26.
9. When thy Judgments are in the Earth, the Inhabitants of the World will learn
Righteousness.

On the other side, when God does act extraordinarily in deliverance and
salvation, Songs suitable to Deliverance should be loud; the Heart should be
exceedingly well tuned to praise his Name. His Attendants should call upon
their Souls, and all that is within them, to bless him, Psalm. 103. 1. Love
should be extraordinarily ardent unto God the deliverer, when extraordinary
deliverance has been wrought. And he that is so mighty to save, should be both
feared and believed in together. Exodus 14. 31. And Israel saw that great work
which the Lord did upon the Egyptians, and the People feared the Lord, and
believed the Lord and his Servant Moses.

I might also add, that when Falls have been foul, and scandalous sins have
been committed, then there should be extraordinary contrition and supplication
unto God for Pardon, Healing, for Establishment by his Spirit, and for the Joy
of his Salvation. When David an eminent Saint and Prophet, was of a sudden
turned black as Hell, and become a Monster of Ingratitude, Impurity and
Cruelty, he comes unto God being awakened by Nathan's Ministry, with great
shame and brokenness of Heart, Psalm. 51. 16, 17. he implores mercy, begs Ease,
and the healing of his wounded Conscience: He cries for a clean Heart, and a
right Spirit: and being sensible of his own weakness, nay, treacherousness and
unfaithfulness to himself, he entreats that the Lord would undertake for him,
and by his own free Spirit continually uphold him.

IV. There is an Attendance upon God which is Secret in the Closet, Private in
the Family, and Public in the Congregation.

1. An Attendance upon God that is Secret in the Closet. Our Lord was much in
Prayer alone by himself; sometime a great while before Day; and sometime he
continued in it all Night. He commands and urges secret Prayer, upon every one
of his Disciples, Mat. 6. 6. But thou when thou prayest enter into thy Closet;
and when thou have shut thy Door, pray to thy Father which is in secret; and
thy Father which sees in secret shall reward thee openly. God sees in secret,
and hears even whispered Confessions and Petitions. And when it is said that He
is in secret, it seems to intimate a special gracious presence, that is
vouchsafed to them that are often alone with him. In this secret Attendance
upon God, we may use a greater (...) freedom of Speech, and tell him all that
we fear and feel, and ayle and desire. Secret Duties which Man can take no
notice of, have not those motives which are very prevalent with Hypocrites; who
loved to Pray standing in the Synagogues, and in the Corners of the Streets;
where two Streets met, that those in the one Street and in the other, might
behold their Devotions, and applaud them. God is pleased to listen and hearken
after Prayer, and there is not the closest homeliest Corner, where there is a
sincere Supplicant, but God is really there to fulfill and grant the desire; and
to support the burdened, if not to remove the burdens that are groaned under,
Psalm. 38. 9. All my desire is before thee, and my groaning is not hid from
thee. As according to Solomon, A gift in secret pacifieth Anger; and a reward
in the bosom strong wrath, Prove. 21. 14. so secret confession of sin, bitter
mourning for it, and begging forgiveness in the Name of Jesus will prevail for
the pacifying of God's fiercest displeasure; and the obtaining of his Love and
Grace.

2. There is an Attendance upon God that is Private in the Family. This has
been woefully, sinfully, shamefully neglected not only by the profane, but by
them that call themselves Professors, though hardly worthy of that Name. Family
Worship has been much pressed from the Pulpit; Oh when shall it once be, that
every ones practice will be answerable! I read not only of a Dedication of the
Tabernacle and Temple; but also of the Houses of the Israelites, Deuteronomy. 20. 5.
Psalm. 30. was composed at the Dedication of the House of David. The Israelites
justly called their Houses God's Houses. And those tumultuous combined, and
insulting Enemies of theirs in Pride, Scorn and Derision said, Let us take to
our selves the Houses of God in possession, Psalm. 83. 12. Houses were dedicated
to the Lord's Service. Joshua says, I and my House we will serve the Lord; and
all Israel promise the same, Josh. 24. 15, 21. David says, he will walk within
his House with a perfect Heart, Psalm. 101. 2. there be Songs of Mercy and of
Judgment. Indeed the voice of rejoicing and Salvation is in the Tabernacle of
the Righteous, Psalm. 118. 15. The Lord is adored and praised in the Tabernacles
of them to whom he has showed himself a God of Salvation.

Cornelius one of the first fruits of the Gentiles, was a devout Man, and he
feared God with all his House, and prayed to God always, Act. 10. 2. And fearing
of God implies calling upon his Name, as casting off fear, and restraining of
Prayer are joined together, Job 15. 4. so that he prayed unto God with all his
House; and there is not the least reason to think that they did not pray
altogether, unless such kind of praying had been any where forbidden. We read
of a Curse and a Blessing not only upon Persons, but upon Families. Prove. 3.
33. The Curse of the Lord is in the House of the wicked, but he blesses the
Habitation of the Just. Surely Families have reason to Pray against the one;
and that the other may rest on them. And truly our Lord Jesus in that Prayer of
his own making, which is the great Directory for Prayer; when he does instruct
us to say, Give us this day our daily Bread, very plainly signifies, that those
in Families that daily Eat together, ought also daily to pray together. And are
they only to pray together for daily Bread? no; they are also to Pray for the
hallowing of God's Name, the coming of his Kingdom; and that his Will might be
done on Earth as it is done in Heaven. They are to pray for the forgiveness of
past trespasses; and that Grace may prevent their being led into Temptation,
and may deliver them from Evil.

You see here is ground enough for Families to give their Attendance upon God.
Families are the Seminaries from which both Church and State are furnished; and
if there were more of Devotion and Instruction, and Discipline there, the
Church in all probability would be more pure; and the State more righteously
and better ordered. Whereas, if Families live without God in the World; the
Governors, the Children and Servants are all usually wicked, and likely to
become worse and worse: and the Churches Face is foul'd with odious spots and
stains; and the State grows more corrupt, till at length it is ripe for ruin.

3. There is an Attendance upon God that is public in the Congregation. In
public Assemblies the true God is owned and honored in the Face of the Sun;
and the Lord Christ is glorified; Christians Assembling in his Name, depending
upon his Promise to be in the midst of them, and to bless them. He walks in the
midst of the Golden Candlesticks, Rev. 1. 13. He blesses the Ordinances himself
has instituted, to the enlightening, purifying, and Consolation of sincere
Attendants on him. In these Public Assemblies, Saints unite their spiritual
strength in wrestling with God; the Faith and holy Desires of a great many
Believers together being conjunct, are likely to be the more prevailing. These
Assemblies ought to be valued and frequented; to forsake them, is ill to the
forsaker: Hence that caution, Heb. 10. 25. Not forsaking the Assembling of our
selves together, as the manner of some is; but exhorting one another, and so
much the more as ye see the day approaching. The breaking of solemn public
Assemblies, should be an Heartbreaking thing to us; and the Lord has promised
to gather those that are sorrowful upon this score. Zeph. 3. 18 I will gather
them that are sorrowful for the solemn Assembly, who are of thee, to whom the
reproach of it was a burden.

V. There is an Attendance upon God on his own day, and upon other days.

1. An Attendance upon God on his own day. A seventh part of our time is
hallowed by the fourth Commandment. Six days are for Labor, a seventh for Rest
from that Labor; and that we may have leisure, with greater seriousness to
attend upon God. The great Creator having made the World in six days, rested on
the seventh, and appointed it for a Sabbath, and blessed it. And the Apostle
tells us that our Lord Jesus Christ the great Redeemer, is entered into his
Rest, having ceased his own works, as God did from his; and therefore there
remains a rest (...), a keeping of a Sabbath to the People of God, Heb. 4. 9,
10. As the Jewish Sabbath was kept in Commemoration of the Lord's resting from
Creation, so the Christian Sabbath is to be observed in Commemoration of
Christ, who is over all God blessed for ever, his resting from the work of
Redemption; it is in him that we have rest by Faith at present, and hope for a
blessed, glorious, and everlasting Rest in Heaven. The day that Christ rose,
was the day on which he rested; for his lying in the Grave was not his rest,
but part of his Humiliation; and that was the first day of the Week. On this
Christian Churches assembled for Worship, Acts 20. 6, 7. The Apostle was at
Troas seven days. We read not a word, being among Christians, that he solemnly
Worshipped on the seventh day, but upon the first day of the Week the Disciples
came together to break Bread. Upon this day Christians being assembled
together, Collections were made for good Uses at Corinth, and in the Churches
of Galatia, 1 Cor. 16. 1, 2. Nay, this is called the* Lord's Day, Rev. 1. 10.
Now as the Lord's Supper is a Supper of the Lord's Institution; so the Lord's
Day, (...), is a day of the Lord's appointing and ordaining. The profanation
of this Christian Sabbath has been punished with remarkable Judgments; The
Ordinances administered thereon have been owned and blessed to the Conversion
and Confirmation of Thousands and Millions of Souls.

On this Christian Sabbath, what kind of Attendance on God should ours be!
Before the day comes it should be longed for; and when it is come, it should be
most welcome. As Soon as our Senses are unlock't in the Morning, our Souls should
be as it were, caught up to the third Heaven, and there continue until Night.
Our Lord is risen indeed, and we should rise with him, and seek those things
which are above, where he sits at the right hand of God, Col. 3. 1. Things on
Earth will be intruding into our Hearts and Thoughts; but no Entertainment must
be given them. A Desire or Wish must not be allowed them, unless it be, that we
may not be distracted with them. When Abraham was just come to Mount Moriah, he
says to his Servants, Abide you here, and I and the Lad will go yonder and
Worship, Genesis 22. 5. So when the Lord's Day comes, we should say to all our
Worldly Businesses and Concerns, Abide as you are; cease from our Care and
Thoughts, whilst we and our Hearts ascend unto the Hill of the Lord and
Worship. This day is appointed for our more solemn approaches unto God, and
that we may have more intimate Fellowship with him; and if Communion with him
be enjoyed, we shall find so much Grace and Strength, and Peace therein, that
we shall be perfectly of the Psalmist's mind, That a day in God's Courts is
better than a Thousand, Psalm. 84. 10. The very Palaces of the wicked are
contemptible. No place under Heaven is so desirable as the Sanctuary.

2. There is an Attendance upon God on other days. He is the Lord of our time,
and therefore every day, he should have some part of it. We should be careful
to know how he would have us to employ that time which himself gives, and will
call us to account for. We should live the rest of our time in the Flesh, to
the Will of God, not to the Lusts of other Men, or our own, 1 Pet. 4. 2. and we
should grieve, that so much has been wasted to his Displeasure and Dishonor.
David was glad to go up to the House of God on the Sabbath; but he was also a
daily Attender on him. Psalm. 86. 3. Be merciful unto me, O Lord, for I cry unto
thee daily. So Heman, Psalm. 88. 9. Lord, I have called daily upon thee, I have
stretched out my Hands unto thee. And Daniel rather than omit praying daily
unto God, ventured to be cast into the Lion's Den; and God miraculously appears
for him, his Mouth having been open so often in fervent Supplication; God shuts
the Lions Mouths, that though in the Den among them, they did not make a Prey
of him. Every day we should be in the Fear of God, and have Faith in him; and
if in the midst of our Worldly Business, our Hearts frequently step aside to
attend on God in mental Applications to him; that attendance will be both
acceptable and profitable. But some times every day we should sequester our
selves from other business; that this greatest and best business may be minded;
which is to draw near to God.

6. There is an attendance upon God in a time of Liberty and a Calm, and an
attending upon him in a time of Persecution and a Storm. In a time of Liberty
the Lord has many Followers, who leave him when a Storm of Persecution beats in
their Faces. When the King of Navarre was about to Apostatize to Popery, and
Beza came to confirm him in the Truth, he made this Answer, That he would never
go so far to Sea as not to be able to put to Shore when he pleased; He showed
plainly, that he could turn Papist to get the Kingdom of France; but he was
resolved not to go through much Tribulation to enter into the Kingdom of
Heaven. The Hearers compared to stony ground heard the Gospel with forwardness
and joy, while the Gospel and Prosperity were conjoined; but when Persecution
and Tribulation arose because of the Word, they were offended, they kept not
their standing, but in that time of Temptation fell away, Mat. 13. 20, 21. We
should be other kind of attendants than so. Let us count the cost of being
Disciples, and conclude that Grace and Glory will quit the cost. Our Lord was
offended at nothing that was to be done or suffered for our Redemption; surely
neither his Commands nor his Cross should be matter of offense to us, but still
we should remain his followers.

I might also add another distinction: There is an attendance upon God in Earth
and in Heaven; the one is Duty, the other is Reward; the one is short, the
other is endless; and yet in that Service there shall not be the least
weariness; nay, so far from that, that there will be fullness of Joy and
everlasting Pleasure. Thus I have spoken of the several sorts of attending upon
God.

In the fourth place I am to assign the reasons why the Children of Men ought
to give their attendance upon God.

1. The Command to attend upon God is written on the Heart of Man by Nature.
There is both the Creed, and the Law of Nature. There are several Truths that
are apparent without a supernatural Revelation; as that there is a God; that he
rules the World; that he sees all the works of the Children of Men; and that he
will call them to an account for all that they have done. There are also
Commands which are written in the Hearts of Men. Romans 2. 14. For when the
Gentiles which have not the Law do by Nature the things contained in the Law,
these having not the Law, are a Law unto themselves; which show the work of the
Law written in their Hearts; and among these Commands, this is as plain as any,
That God is to be worshipped. The Gentiles therefore are blamed because this
Command was not observed, Romans 1. 21. Because that when they knew God they
glorified him not as God, neither were thankful: but became vain in their
imaginations, and their foolish heart was darkened. Now as sins have their
peculiar aggravations that are committed against the Light of Nature, so
neglect of Duty is highly aggravated, when it is evident by the Light of Nature,
that such Duty ought to be performed.

2. Attendance upon God is frequently called for and urged in the Scripture.
The Lord spoke this with his own Voice from Heaven, and afterward wrote it
with his own Hand upon the Tables of Stone, that we should have no other Gods
before him, that we should not Worship Idols, that we should not take his Name
in vain, Exodus 20. Our Lord repeats what was enjoined long before, Mat. 4. 10.
It is written, thou shall Worship the Lord thy God, and him only shall thou
serve; and he says Joh. 4. 24. God is a Spirit, and they that Worship him, must
Worship him in Spirit and in Truth. So Psalm. 22. 23. Ye that fear the Lord
praise him; all ye the Seed of Jacob glorify him; and fear him all ye the Seed
of Israel. See also Psalm. 105. 3, 4. Glory ye in his holy Name, let the Heart
of them rejoice that seek the Lord: Seek the Lord and his Strength, seek his
Face evermore. And as the word of God calls for this, so the Providence of God
seconds his Precepts. The dispensing of mercies calls upon us to attend the
Father of them with our Praises. And afflictions should quicken us in our
seeking God; he requires this, Psalm. 50. 15. Call upon me in the day of
trouble, I will deliver thee, and thou shall glorify me. And he reckons upon
it that he should hear from his People, when his chastning was upon them, Hos.
5. 15. I will go and return to my place, till they acknowledge their offense,
and seek my Face; in their affliction they will seek me early.

3. God sees whether there be an attendance upon himself, and after what
manner, and that with a jealous eye. And this is another strong reason for our
attending on him. The Lord looks down from Heaven upon the Children of Men, to
this very end, that he may see if there be any that understand and seek God,
Psalm. 53. 2. so that he very strictly observes, how Men's Hearts are affected
toward him and his Service; and he cannot but be very much displeased with the
whole Race of fallen Man, because Romans 3. 10, 11. There is none Righteous, no
not one; there is none that understands, there is none that seeks after God
The Lord takes notice how Days and Weeks, and Months and Years go over Men's
Heads, and yet that God from whom they have their all, they seek not to for any
thing; neither return they any thanks to him, how much soever they receive from
him. And those who attend upon God, he observes the manner how they do it; and
heartless Duties, doing the work of the Lord deceitfully, provokes and kindles
the Fire of his Jealousy. Mal. 1. 14. Cursed be the deceiver, who having a
Male in his Flock, voweth and sacrifices to the Lord a corrupt thing. The
second Commandment which directs us as to Divine Worship, makes mention that
the Lord is a jealous God. He cannot endure to have his Service neglected, as
if there were no profit or reward in seeking him: He cannot endure a negligent
Service. As if he were an Idol, as if he had Eyes, but did not see or take
notice who they are that mock him. God's Omniscience and all-seeing Eye, struck
a great awe upon the Apostle, it made him draw near to God; and it made him
very serious when he had to do with him. Heb. 4. 13. Neither is there any
Creature that is not manifest in his sight; but all things are naked and opened
unto the Eyes of him with whom we have to do.

4. Man's necessities should constrain him to attend upon God. Sin has made the
Children of Men in the worst sense poor and needy; they fancy themselves rich,
and dream of fullness; but behold it is only a dream; for they are wretched, and
miserable, and poor, and blind, and naked. Now for the supply of their needs,
it is in vain to have recourse to any but God. The broken Cisterns can hold no
Water: and cannot furnish them with any that run to them; but there is enough
in the Fountain of living Waters for all that repair to it. An experienced
attender upon God, knew how to be furnished with every thing, Psalm. 57. 2. I
will cry unto God most high; unto God, who performs all things for me. And
the Apostle speaks with a most reasonable confidence, Psalm. 4. 19. My God shall
supply all your needs according to his riches in glory by Christ Jesus. The one
thing needful is alone from God; and from him are all things else: His Kingdom
and Righteousness he bestows on them that seek him; and all things else shall
be added, Matt. 6. 33. Man has beggared himself; as to the true Riches he is a
mere Bankrupt: In him, that is, in his Flesh dwells no good thing, Romans 7.
18. and that which is born of the flesh is flesh, wholly carnal, till there be
a regeneration by the Spirit. How shall Man, who is so very evil, be made truly
good? All true Grace and Goodness is from God, who is therefore called the God
of all Grace, 1 Pet. 5. 10. and it is through Christ that it is all communicated:
Therefore every good thing in Believers, is said to be in them in Christ Jesus,
Philem. ver. 6. Man has need to come to God, for he has ruined himself, and
it is the Lord alone to whom Salvation belongs. Man has destroyed himself, in
God is his help found, Hos. 13. 9. Those whom the Lord saves not, must needs
perish.

5. Man's Obligations to attend upon God, are still increasing. The Lord causes
his Sun to arise upon the evil as well as the good, upon the unrighteous as
well as the righteous, Matt. 5. 45. He is kind to the unthankful and the evil,
Luke 6. 35. God's Bounty calls for a return of Duty, and should quicken Man to
seek the Lord who is so abundant in Goodness. In God's hand Man's breath is,
and every time he breaths God saves his Life; from God's hand he receives
whatever he has. How strictly is Man engaged to acknowledge God in all! to
serve him, and to glorify his Name! Even those that are bad, have experience
of the riches of Divine Goodness, and Forbearance, and Long-suffering; and
though this goodness is but common, yet offers are made to them of special
Grace. All the day long the Lord stretches forth his hand to the disobedient
and gainsaying; and in that hand are no less than the good things of Time and
of Eternity. The wickedest and worst of Men, if they consent to leave their
wicked ways, and to have their wicked hearts changed, and come to God, they
shall graciously be accepted, be abundantly pardoned, and have the best things
bestowed on them. God is ready to give Grace to them that have none; and to
give more Grace where he has already wrought it.

6. Promises are precious that are made to attenders upon God, and threatenings
are terrible against Contemners of God, who refuse to attend upon him. Thus the
Lord works upon those two great commanding things in the Soul of Man, his Hope
and his Fear, that he may have Service from him. If we draw near to God, he
promises to draw nigh to us, James 4. 8. and his approaches to his People are
the manifestations of his Pity and Power for their help and supply; the
communications of that Grace which may be suitable and sufficient in the time
of need: He says not to the Seed of Jacob, seek ye me in vain. Moses supposes
Israel apostatizing from their God by Idolatry, and his anger waxed hot against
them, and themselves scattered among the Nations: Yet says he, If from thence
thou shall seek the Lord thy God, thou shall find him, if thou seek him with
all thy heart and with all thy soul, Deuteronomy. 4. 29. Gracious words to the same
purpose are sent in a Letter to the Captives in Babylon, Jer. 29. 11, 12, 13.
For I know the thoughts that I think toward you, says the Lord; thoughts of
peace, and not of evil, to give you an expected end; then shall ye call upon
me, and ye shall go and pray unto me, and I will hearken unto you; and ye shall
seek me and find me, when ye shall search for me with all your heart.

On the other hand, the God of truth and justice breathes out threatenings and
wrath against them that despise him; that instead of seeking him, turn their
backs upon him and forsake him. Isa. 1. 24, 28. Thus says the Lord, the Lord
of Hosts, the mighty one of Israel. Ah! I will ease me of my adversaries. They
were a burden to him, which at last he grew weary to bear; and revenge me of
my Enemies; and the destruction of the transgressors, and of the sinners, shall
be together; and they that forsake the Lord shall be consumed. Sometimes God
promises and threatens in the same breath, that he may prevail with Man to come
to him, and make him afraid to refuse. 1 Chronicles. 28. 9. The Lord searches all
hearts, and understands all the imaginations of the thoughts, if thou seek
him he will be found of thee; but if thou forsake him he will cast thee off for
ever. So Ezr. 8. 22. The hand of our God is upon all them for good that seek
him, but his power and his wrath is against all them that forsake him. And the
promised good, and the threatened evil, being thus presented together to our
view, our Hearts are the more likely to be affected with the dreadfulness of
the one, and with the desirableness of the other.

7. The time will not last much longer, in which God will be attended upon.
Life is short, and Death, which puts an end to Man's Life in this World, will
bring the Season of Mercy and Grace to a full period: There is no passing
through that (...) great gulf which is fixed in the other World, Luke 16. 26.
Prayers in Hell have no Audience, but a Denial, though but a drop of Water is
asked: Nay, as the rich Man could not prevail for any ease for himself, so
neither for a Messenger to be sent to his surviving, secure, and sinful
Brethren, to prevent their coming into the place of Torment. Our Lord by his
Spirit in the Patriarchs, went and preached to the Spirits in Prison; but it
was before they came to that Prison; even when the long-suffering of God waited
in the days of Noah, 1 Pet. 3. 19, 20. When we read that admonition, Seek the
Lord while he may be found, and call ye upon him while he is near, Isa. 55. 6.
there is a plain Intimation, that quickly it may be impossible to find him; and
that to call upon him, may be too late and to no purpose. Despair hereafter
will stop Sinners Mouths, and utterly discourage their crying unto God: Then
they will rather call to the Rocks and Mountains to fall upon them, and hide
them from the Face of him that sits upon the Throne, and from the wrath of the
Lamb.

8. If Man attend not upon God, how much evil will he do, and whither will he
go! If God has no Service from him, Sin and Satan will have a great deal. Those
who are not well employed in holy Duties, are likely to be very ill employed in
the unfruitful works of Darkness. The Nature of Man is so depraved, that it has
a mighty propension to wickedness. And were it not for the Grace of God, which
does either change corrupted Nature, or chain it, what a universal running out
would there be into all Excess of Riot, and with what greediness would Iniquity
be committed? But if God be not attended on and sought unto, and proud scornful
Sinners had rather he would keep his Grace to himself, than bestow any of it
upon them; he may justly leave them to the perverse bent of their own Nature:
and how will Sin abound then? how will a wicked Heart be perpetually sending
forth polluted Streams? Jer. 6. 7. As a Fountain casts out her Waters, so she
casts out her wickedness. The Lord punishes neglect of himself and of his
Service, this way. He leaves Men to themselves: and it is a very righteous and
proper punishment, Psalm. 81. 11, 12. But my People would not hearken to my
Voice, and Israel would none of me; so I gave them up to their own hearts
lusts, and they walked in their own Counsels. And Man being thus left to follow
the counsels of a Carnal Mind, and to fulfill the Lufts of a wicked Heart; what
a Child of Hell may he quickly become; and what haste may he make thither? he
may ripen apace for ruin, and be suddenly destroyed, and that without remedy.

9. Attendance upon God is not profitable to God in the least, but Man has the
benefit and advantage by it. He was a Man of eminent goodness, whose Soul said
unto the Lord, Thou art my Lord, my goodness extends not to thee, Psalm. 16.
2. But though David's goodness extended not to God, to draw near to God was
good for David. Saints and Angels by their highest Services can add nothing to
the Lord whom they serve. Their sublimest praises are an acknowledgment that
they have their all from him, and in him. The better we are, the better
Obedience we yield; but the Lord is not bettered by our best Obedience. It is
highly reasonable we should attend upon God; for though he can receive nothing
from us; yet he is ready to give himself and all things to us, if we seek him
diligently. He consults our interest in his Commands to come, to fear, to love,
and cleave to him, Deuteronomy. 10. 12, 13. And now Israel, what does the Lord thy God
require of thee, but to fear the Lord thy God, and to walk in all his ways, and
to love him, and to serve the Lord thy God with all thy Heart, and with all thy
Soul; to keep the Commandments of the Lord, and his Statutes which I command
thee this day for thy good? Man's good you see, is aimed at; and that in
fearing of God and keeping his Commandments, it may be well with Man for ever.
Deuteronomy. 5. 29.

I come in the last place, to the Application of the Doctrine; the Uses of it
may be several.

USE I. Shall be of Reproof. Many sorts of persons deserve reprehension, and
need it.

1. They are to be reproved who are haters of God, and hate to attend upon him.
It Is prodigiously unreasonable, that the gracious God, who fills the Earth with
his goodness, Psalm. 33. 5. and is most worthy of the Love of all, should be
hated by any: yet though strange, it is too true, that God is hated by many,
nay, by most of the Children of Men. Most are of their Father the Devil, and
the lusts of their Father they will do: He is an hater of God, and so are they.
All wicked Men are alienated from God, and Enemies in their Minds by wicked
works: they dislike him and his Service; they get out of his ways, and turn
aside out of his paths, and say, Cause the holy One of Israel to cease from
before us, Isa. 30. 11. they care not to hear, to think of this holy One; they
cannot abide to walk in his holy ways. Now if love to God be the first and
great Command, how great a sin must the hatred of God be called! and how unfit
are they to be admitted hereafter into his glorious Presence and Kingdom; who
now say unto God depart from us! Most worthy they are to be sent away from him
with his Curse, and to be sentenced to that everlasting Fire prepared for the
Devil and his Angels, whom they resemble in hating of God, and with whom they
have joined in rebelling against him.

2. They are to be reproved who account Attendance upon God needless. The Mind
of Man appears to be (...), void of Judgment, in determing what things are
mainly to be minded. Things that are vanity and vexation of Spirit; what pains
are taken to get them; what care is taken to keep them! The one thing needful
is neglected, as if it were the only thing unnecessary. The Heathen Poet cried
out,

O curas hominum! O quantum est in rebus inane! The Care of Man about empty
things, how injudicious is it? Time can be found for every thing, but the
making provision for Eternity; and yet the providing for Eternity is the main
thing to be done in time; and time was given chiefly for the doing of this. Are
these to be our great enquiries, What shall we eat and drink, and wherewith
shall we be clothed and adorned? How shall we heap up wealth, and gratify our
selves with sensual pleasures? How shall we live plentifully our selves, and
leave abundant substance to Posterity? Certainly there are matters of far
greater importance and necessity to be regarded. The truly grand Enquiries are
of another Nature. How shall sin be pardoned, and the Wrath of God appeased?
How shall the Heart be changed, and made a new one, and the Soul that is so
precious saved? How shall God be attended on, and served, and glorified, so as
to be enjoyed, and eternal blessedness attained in the Enjoyment of him?
Attendance upon God is no more to be accounted needless, than eternal happiness
is needless, than the loss of a Soul more valuable than the whole World, is to
be esteemed a small matter.

3. They are to be reproved who look upon attendance on God as a weariness, and
grievous. In following and trudging after Mammon, they are unwearied. How swift
and many are the steps in the way to Earthly Delights and Treasure! They rise
up early, sit up late, rack their Wits, grow Lean with Care for the things of
the World; and they are not grudging at all this Toil and Labor. But when they
come to wait upon God, time moves very slowly; a quarter seems longer than an
hour. Duties are tedious to them; they are loath to begin; and as soon as they
have begun, they do not wish for Communion with God, or that they themselves
might be bettered; but that their Duties were at an end. The Prophet is very
sharp against them who despised the Table of the Lord, and looked upon the
fruit and meat of it contemptible; and they said, behold what a weariness it
is! Mal. 1. 12, 13. God is weary of such unwilling Services as yours are. Isa.
1. 13, 14. Bring no more vain Oblations, they are a trouble to me, I am weary
to bear them. And as he is weary of your services, so he quickly may be weary
to bear you; and he may count it a comfort to be rid of you. Ezekiel. 5. 13. Thus
my anger shall be accomplished, and I will cause my Fury to rest upon them, and
I will be comforted, and they shall know that I the Lord have spoken it in my
Zeal, when I have accomplished my Fury in them. We read of some that were weary
of Sabbaths, the Ordinances then administered were to them no privileges; and
when will the Sabbath be gone? was their Language, Amos 8. 5. but ver. 7. the
Lord swares he would not forget their works, and he threatens ver. 11. to send
a Famine in the Land; not a Famine of Bread, nor athirst for Water, but a
Famine of hearing the words of the Lord: And how unlikely were they ever to be
saved; from whom even the means of Salvation were taken away!

4. They are to be reproved who are sinfully ashamed, or afraid to attend upon
God. Some Ages are so degenerate, that Religion grows exceedingly out of
fashion, and contempt of God and profaneness, is the thing that is al-a-mode.
When great Men think it below them to be good, and Policy contemns Piety; when
the vilest Men are exalted, and wickedness grows into credit; when Judgment is
turned away backward, and Justice stands afar off; when Truth is fallen in
the Streets, and Equity cannot enter; and he that departs from evil makes
himself a Prey, Isa. 59 14, 15. then this fear and shame that I am speaking
against is apt to prevail. But why should any be ashamed to own themselves
Servants to the greatest and best of Lords? Is not he glorious in Holiness? Are
not his Precepts concerning all things to be esteemed right? Are not all those
ways false that lead from him? Has he not said, Those that honor me I will
honor, and those that despise me shall be lightly esteemed? 1 Samuel 2. 30.
Christ will be ashamed of them at the great day, who are ashamed of him and of
his Word, before a perverse and wicked Generation. And why should any be afraid
to attend upon that mighty Lord, who does according to his Will in the Armies
of Heaven, and among the Inhabitants of the Earth; and all the Inhabitants of
the World are reputed as nothing before him? Dan. 4. 35. Attenders upon God
should banish the fear of Man, for God has evil Men and evil Angels in a Chain,
and his sincere Servants under his own keeping. Those who are afraid of Man
that shall dye, forget the living God, and their Duty toward him, and how able
he is to protect them in the faithful discharge of it.

5. They are to be reproved who attend upon God, that they may cover and cloak
their wicked and worldly, and selfish designs. They put on a form of Godliness,
but it is the better to hide their wickedness. They are for external Worship;
but when they seem to seek after God most of all, they are nothing at all but
self-seekers; and Religion is most unworthily made subservient to secular
Interest. Thus the Birds of Prey when they soar highest toward Heaven, have
their Eyes still downwards toward the Earth, to see what they may seize on
there. But what abominable Hypocrisy is this, when love to the Father is
pretended, but the thing intended is the gratifying the lusts of the flesh, the
lusts of the Eyes, or the pride of life; which are not of the Father, but are
of the World! 1 John 2. 16. A Cloak of Religion is a specious, and goodly thing
to look upon. Praying, Hearing, Professing, Singing of Praises, Presence at
other Ordinances, looking upwards toward Heaven, and speaking like Saints,
make the outside of this Cloak; and, Come see my Zeal for the Lord of Hosts;
and, The Temple of the Lord, the Temple of the Lord are these; make the Cloak
look still the better outwardly. But the inside is most foul and filthy; there
is Ambition, reprobate Concupiscence, insatiable Covetousness; the Purse must
be filled; the Palate must be pleased; the Senses must be delighted; and Pride
gratified with Applause and Preferment: But certainly the Lord will not hold
such dissemblers guiltless, who with such carnal designs do take his Name in
vain.

6. They are to be reproved, who are temporary Attenders upon God; but in time
of trial and temptation, apostalize and depart from him. Some kind of faint
wishes they have, that they might be saved; and with some kind of Joy they
entertain the gladtydings of Salvation; but whatever becomes of their Souls,
their resolution is to sleep in a whole Skin; and they will not hazard what
they possess on Earth, for the sake of a Treasure in Heaven. The heat of
Persecution scorches such Attenders as these, and causes all that is good in
them to wither away, Mat. 13. 6. They can by no means be reconciled to the
Cross of Christ, though the Spirit of Glory and of God does rest upon those
that take up this Cross, and gives them a Mouth and Wisdom to confound and
silence the enemies of the Truth; and strength to bear whatever wicked and
unreasonable Men can inflict: Nay, abundant Consolation, when Sufferings most
abound, 2 Cor. 1. 5. For as the Sufferings of Christ abound in us, so our
Consolation also abounds by Christ. When these temporary Followers of the
Lord hear him say, If any Man come to me and hate not, i. e. less love, his
Father and Mother, and Wife and Children, and Brethren and Sisters, and his own
life also, he cannot be my Disciple: Their answer is, This is an hard saying,
who can hear it? And not enduring the Trial and Furnace, it is a sign they are
but reprobate Silver which the Lord rejects; and their utter Apostasy in the
time of Temptation, shows they never had root in themselves, Matt. 13. 21. If
they had been of us, says the Apostle, they would no doubt have continued with
us, but they went out, that they might be made manifest that they were not all
of us, 1 John 2. 19.

7. They are to be reproved, who rest in the bare formality of attending upon
God; but it is not their desire or aim to reap any Spiritual Benefit thereby.
Education, Custom, and a regard to their Reputation, makes them to go in a road
and round of Duties; and hereby an ignorant natural Conscience has some kind of
Peace: But in all they do they have no eye on God, nor any sincere desires
after him. So ignorant they are of themselves, that they are unsensible of any
Spiritual Necessities to be supplied; they are unsensible of any Lusts and
Passions to be mortified; of any Plagues in their Hearts to be healed. In
attending upon God, His Approbation is principally to be minded; He is a Jew
that is one inwardly, whose praise is not of Man but of God, Romans 2. 29. And
God himself is chiefly to be longed after, Psalm. 42. 1. As the heart pants
after the waterbrooks, so pants my Soul after thee O God. But these formal
Attendants mind not God's approving of them, neither do they desire Communion
with him. So the Work be but done, they care not how, nor how little themselves
are Spiritually advantaged. The Door turns upon the Hinges too and fro; but
still is where it was many years ago. So these Professors come to Ordinances,
and from them, no better than they were: They were many years ago, proud,
worldly, selfish, passionate, sensual, slothful; and oh their Sin and Shame!
that so they are still, or more so than ever; notwithstanding all their
Religious Services!

8. The very best are to be reproved, That there are so many sins in their
holiest things, and when they give their best attendance upon God. Though they
are new Creatures, yet there is much of the old man remaining; though they are
born of the Spirit, yet in part they are still carnal. And this flesh lusts
against the Spirit, so that they cannot do the things that they would, Gal. 5.
17. and what they do, they cannot do so well as they desire to do it. They are
to be pitied indeed under their groaning, because of indwelling Sin. And the
Apostle calls himself wretched because of this, who was joyful under the
heaviest Cross he ever bore. And yet Saints are to be reproved too; because
were it not their own fault, they might still do and be better. They might have
more Grace from Christ, Life more abundantly from him; they might have more Aid
from the Spirit; they might be more enlarged in Ordinances, and with greater
Swiftness run the ways of God's Commandments. Though when they have done all, all
is so defective, they have need of the perfect Righteousness of Christ, to
cover their Failings and Imperfections.

USE II. Of Exhortation to you all to attend upon God. Let not the World, and
the God of this World, have you at command; the things that their attendants
take up withal, are a mere show, and are gone presently. The Psalmist speaking
of those who only mind such things as these, with great Asseveration tells us,
Psalm 39. 6. Surely every Man walks in a vain show; surely they are disquieted
in vain; and then adds, v. 7. And now, Lord, what wait I for? My hope is in
thee. Expectation from the Creature, he knew would be frustrated; but hope in
God, he was well assured, would never make him ashamed.

The Arguments to persuade to attend upon God, are these.

1. It Is wonderful Condescension and Compassion in God, that he will admit of
attendance by such as you are. Whose Eye, but Gods, sees the whole of Sins
evil? The Lord alone does fully understand his own goodness, and glorious
Perfections and Excellencies, therefore he alone fully understands Sins
sinfulness, which is so contrary to him. The Psalmist tells us, He is not a God
that has pleasure in wickedness, neither shall evil dwell with him, Psalm. 5.
4. When he prohibits Sin, he speaks with great concernedness, Jer. 44. 4. Oh do
not this abominable thing which I hate. You may perceive by his words, that his
very Soul does abhor Iniquity; it is therefore matter of Astonishment, that God
should have any thing to do in a way of Mercy with Man who is so abominably
guilty and defiled. What is there in Man by Nature to commend him to God? The
Apostle charges the whole World as guilty before God, and proves Heart and
Tongue, and Hands and Feet of Man to be corrupt; and that the way of Peace he
knows not, Romans 3. 17. Why should such a Wretch be looked upon, and graciously
called upon to return? Here is indeed Eternal Misery that Man is in danger of,
for Divine Mercy to prevent? Here is a great deal of Sin for the justifying
Righteousness of a Mediator to cover: Here are Heart-Plagues for Christ the
Physician of Souls to heal: Here is Stubbornness and Obstinacy in evil, for the
Spirit of Grace to overcome: Here are innumerable wants, for the All-sufficient
God to supply: But not the least jot of meritorious Worthiness. Will the Lord
admit such as we are, indigent, worthless, vile? Let us wonder that he will do
it, and keep no longer at a distance from him.

2. Remember God refuses to be attended upon by multitudes of fallen Creatures,
which at first were better than Man. We read that Man was made a little lower
than the Angels, Psalm. 8. 5. so that the Angels were in degree higher than Man
in their first Creation: Now a great Host of these Angels sinned, and when they
sinned they were not spared, 2 Pet. 2 4. as soon as they fell into Sin, they
were thrown down and fell into Hell. The Lord calls not to the Apostate Angels
to repent of sin and return to himself: There is no Throne of Grace for them to
come to, no Mercy offered, the door of hope is locked up and fast barred
against them for ever. Our Lord took not on him the Nature of Angels, Heb. 2.
16. The good Angels were indeed confirmed in their good State, in their
original Integrity, by the Son of God, who is the Head of all Principality and
Power, Col. 2. 10. But the Son of God redeemed and recovered not so much as one
of the bad Angels, but they are all in Chains of darkness reserved unto
Judgment. These reprobate Angels are of very great Capacity, they excel in
strength, yet the Lord will accept of no service at their hands: He forces them
against their wills to be subservient to his purposes and pleasure, but Worship
and Obedience from them he admits not of. But he calls after Man to return,
though fallen by his iniquity, Hos. 14. 1. He puts words into Man's Mouth, and
tells him what he should say, and what he himself is ready to hearken to and
grant, Hos. 14. 2. Take with you words, and turn to the Lord, say unto him,
Take away all iniquity, and receive us graciously: So will we render the calves
of our lips. This great difference which Grace does make between fallen Man,
and fallen Angels, should be a mighty Inducement and Encouragement to Man, to
give most ready attendance upon God.

3. It Is the great endeavor of your Spiritual Enemies to hinder your
attendance upon God, or to disturb you in it: Which shows they are well aware
how beneficial this attendance, if serious, would be; and they envy you the
benefit of it. It Is Wisdom [ ab horte doceri] well to mark, and to receive some
instruction from an Enemy. What Satan urges you to pursue, you may conclude is
of little worth; his Malignity is such, that he will not truly consult your
interest. And since he uses so many Methods, and so much Subtlety, to stave you
off from God, you may reasonably argue, that in coming to God, lies your Duty
and your Blessedness. The Enemy of our Salvation has false glasses, through
which he misrepresents the Lord and his Service to us. Sometimes he represents
him as so High, that he minds not what we do, whether it be good or evil:
Sometimes he sets him forth as so indulgent, that any careless Duties will
please him; and neglect of his Service will not much, if at all, provoke him.
Sometimes he sets before Man's Eyes God's Wrath and Jealousy, and says, that
delays to serve him, have rendered him unintreatable; and that to seek him, is
now too late and in vain. Thus he would obstruct Man's attendance on his Maker,
for he knows that the Lord is good to them that wait for him, to the Soul that
seeks him, Lam. 3. 25. and those that are far from God shall perish, Psalm.
73. 27.

But if by all these ways he cannot hinder attendance upon God, he will
endeavor to disturb them that do attend, Zach. 3. 1. And he showed me Joshua
the high Priest standing before the Angel of the Lord, and Satan standing at
his right hand to resist him. How busy is Satan about us, when we come to
appear before God! He endeavors to fill the Mind with vain Imaginations; to
thrust violently the World into the Heart; to make indwelling sin active; to
hinder the actings of Grace; He endeavors to batter Faith, to beat down Hope,
and to damp holy and spiritual Affections: He cannot endure the Soul should
meet with God in Duties, he is troubled at its Communion with God, and being
blessed with Spiritual Blessings. But all this should but quicken your desires
and diligence in seeking; for what you seek after, you may conclude is highly
worth finding.

4. How empty are all things that are apt to draw you away from attending upon
God! The Egyptians of old were derided by the Poet, because they made Gods of
every thing.

O Sanctas Gentes, quibus hoc nascuntur in hortis. Numina. The very Herbs and
Plants that grew in their Gardens were deified. And truly among many that are
called Christians, a multitude of things that are very mean and low are
idolized: Some make Idols of their Garbs, by affecting and being proud of them:
Some idolize their earthly Treasures, and sensual Pleasures, by loving those
more than God, 2 Timothy 3. 4. Some make their Belly their God, and how many
Meatofferings, and Drink Offerings are sacrificed to this base Deity by the
Wine-bibbers and riotous eaters of flesh! How low is Man fallen! How has he
lost his Dominion over the Creature! They make him not only their Slave, but
their Worshipper. But pray bethink your selves, and take notice what things
they are that thus captivate, and draw you away from God. Such is the immensity
of God, that the whole World compared with him, is not so much as the smallest
Dust to the Globe of Earth, not so much as a drop of Water to the whole Ocean.
And as the Being of God transcends all other Beings, so his goodness excels all
created goodness. So that our Lord speaking in the highest sense, affirms, That
there is none good but one, that is God, Matt. 19. 17. What then are the good
things of this World, which Sin has brought a Vanity, nay a Curse upon? and
which are used by Satan as his great Baits to catch inconsiderate Souls, that
they may be lost and ruined?

5. Be prevailed with to attend upon God, who is the strongest Rock, the surest
Refuge. Safety is desirable, considering what precious Souls all are entrusted
with; and how full of Enemies and Snares this World is, in which we live: But
the Lord alone is he, of whom Safety is, Psalm. 18. 31. Who is God save the
Lord? and who is a Rock save our God? Sincere attenders upon God are very dear
to him, they are called his peculiar Treasure, Exodus 19. 5. Now therefore if ye
will obey my voice indeed, and keep my Covenant, then shall ye be unto me a
peculiar Treasure above all People. They are called his Jewels, Mal. 3. 17.
They shall be mine says the Lord of Hosts, in that day when I make up my
Jewels, and I will spare them, as a Man spares his own Son that serves him.
Nay, he that touches them, touches the apple of his Eye, Zech. 2. 8.
Therefore he will keep them as the apple of the Eye, he will hide them under
the shadow of his wings, Psalm. 17. 8. When you attend upon God, you repair to a
Rock of Salvation, to an high Tower of defense: With his favor he will compass
you as with a Shield, Psalm. 5. 12. He will cover you with his feathers, and
under his wings you may securely trust; for his truth shall be your buckler,
Psalm. 91. 4. In the hollow of his hand you shall be hid; and the same hand
shall beat down all your Enemies that design your Destruction: You shall dwell
on high, your place shall be the munitions of Rocks, Isa. 33. 16. No Rock so
high, so firm as God; no Munition so safe, the Refuge is eternal. When David
says, Unto thee will I cry, O Lord my rock, be not silent to me, Psalm. 28. 1.
It Is signified that this Rock can hear, and answer, and help abundantly, and
afford abundant matter for thanksgiving, Psalm. 18. 46. The Lord lives, and
blessed be my Rock, and let the God of my Salvation be exalted.

6. That God whom you attend upon, can abundantly satisfy the very Soul of
Man. When the Soul has wearied it self with seeking satisfaction from the
Creature, and is sorrowful because its labor has been in vain. God can say and
do what Creatures cannot. Jer. 31. I have satiated the weary Soul, and I have
replenished every sorrowful Soul. The Negative Happiness is considerable, in
being secured from Evil and Misery; but positive Blessedness is more, in being
satisfied and delighted with Divine Goodness, Psalm. 65. 4. Blessed is the Man
whom thou choosest, and causest to approach unto thee, that he may dwell in thy
Courts: we shall be satisfied with the goodness of thy House, even of thy holy
Temple. That rich Man in the Gospel, speaks as if he had, like Nebuchadnezzar,
the Heart of a Beast, rather than the Soul of a Man: When he says, Soul thou
have Goods laid up for many years, take thine ease, eat and drink and be merry,
Luke 12. 19. This was but sorry provision for an immortal Soul, that was just
ready to be required at his hand; to leave all these things behind it, and to
go into Eternity. Attenders upon God find that in him, with which their Souls
are satisfied indeed: They are satisfied with his Mercy and Love in Christ:
They are satisfied in Christ's Sacrifice, and the Satisfaction he has made for
Iniquity: They are satisfied when they perceive themselves changed more and
more into the Image of God; and what a Satisfaction is it to converse above,
and to sit in heavenly places! Ephesians. 2. 6. And has raised us up together, and
has made us sit together in heavenly places in Christ Jesus. And what a
Satisfaction is it at present, to be assured of a far fuller Satisfaction
hereafter! Psalm. 17. 15. As for me I shall behold thy face in righteousness, I
shall be satisfied when I awake with thy likeness.

7. Attend upon God, for he has long waited that he might be gracious to you.
How has that Scripture been fulfilled, Isa. 13. 18. And therefore will the Lord
wait, that he may be gracious unto you; and therefore will he be exalted, that
he may have mercy upon you. He has stood at the door, and has knocked for
entrance, and though that has been denied him, he has not gone away as he
might, in just Anger, but behold he stands at the door still, Rev. 3. 20. If
you hear his voice, and open the door, he will enter and dwell with you, and he
and his Benefits shall be yours. It is well for sinful Man, that God is Patient
and Long-suffering, he does not cease calling at Man's first Deafness to his
call; he does not cease offering Grace, Mercy and Life, upon Man's first
refusing to accept what is offered. He told the old World, that his Spirit
should not always strive with Man, Genesis 6. 3. yet it is added, his days shall be
an hundred and twenty years. All that time the Long-suffering of God waited in
the days of Noah, while the Ark was a preparing, 1 Pet. 3. 20. to see if the
Disobedient would return to him. The Lord comes year after year to the barren
Fig Tree seeking Fruit, but he found none; whereupon he says, Cut it down, why
cumbereth it the ground? Yet upon Intercession made, he is prevailed with to
spare it longer, to see if means that were used, might be effectual to make it
fruitful, Luke 13. 6, 9* The Apostle tells, that the Lord is long*suffering to
usward, not willing that any should perish, but that all should come to
repentance, 2 Pet. 3. 9. Oh repent of your forgetting God, and your duty
toward him days without number, attend and seek unto him in Sincerity, who has
had many a long look for you, and has waited so great a while for your return.

8. Consider seriously how God is attended upon in Heaven, and what an Honor
it is to you to wait upon him. He has thousand thousands that minister unto
him, ten thousand times ten thousand that stand before him, Dan. 7. 10. He has
Angels that excel in strength, who surround his Throne, that are ready to do
his Commandments, hearkening to the voice of his word, Psalm. 103. 20. The
Seraphims worship him with covered faces, to show their great reverence of God,
and how they are ravishingly overcome with the brightness of his Majesty; and
they cry out one to another, Holy, Holy, Holy, is the Lord of Hosts, the whole
Earth, as well as Heaven, is full of his Glory, Isa. 6. 2, 3. These Angels are
Spirits, these Ministers likened to a flame of fire, Psalm. 104. 4. How Sublime
and Spiritual are their Praises! How ardent their Love to the Lord whom they
praise and serve! And yet the Lord is said to humble himself, when he takes
notice of such Attendants as these. It Is certainly an high Honor that is done
you, when you are admitted into the presence of such a glorious Majesty; he
that sits upon a Throne of Grace, and is so ready to pity, pardon, heal, help
and save, is the blessed and only Potentate, the King of Kings and Lord of
Lords, who only has Immortality, dwelling in that light which no Man can
approach unto, whom no Man has seen, nor can see; to whom be Honor and Power
everlasting, Amen, 1 Timothy 6. 15, 16. If this glorious God will accept of
Service from such as you, how readily should you give it! How highly are you
favored when you come into his Presence, and have Communion with him!

9. Lay this to Heart, that Not to attend upon God, is wickedly to contemn him,
and to rebel against him. It Is in effect to say, He is not worthy of your
Service; and that the Service of your Lusts, and of the World, is more
beneficial. Thus God was despised by those wicked Men that were infatuated by
Prosperity in an evil way. They said Job 21. 15. What is the Almighty that we
should serve him? And what Profit should we have if we pray to him? When Saul
refused to obey the Command of God, Samuel rejects his Sacrifices, and charges
him with Rebellion, which is as Witchcraft, 1 Samuel 15. 22, 23. Behold, to obey
is better than Sacrifice; and to hearken, than the fat of Rams; for Rebellion
is as the Sin of Witchcraft, and Stubbornness is as Iniquity and Idolatry. When
thou castest off the Service of God, thou castest off his Fear, and disownest
God himself: This is Rebellion, and this Rebellion is thy Witchcraft, thy
Confederacy with the Devil; thou make a Covenant with Death, and with Hell
thou art at an Agreement.

USE III. Shall be of Direction, How God should be attended upon. There must
not be only a seeking of God, but a due Order in seeking him; if this be
wanting, instead of receiving Benefits from his hand that hand may make a
breach upon us, 1 Chronicles. 15. 13. The Lord our God made a breach upon us,
because we sought him not after the due order. If we have no care, as to the
manner of our Services, the Lord will care as little for the matter of them.
Now the right manner of attending upon God, is to be declared in these
particulars.

1. Our attendance upon God must be present; our living without God so long,
and contemptuous neglect of our required Duty toward him, should be matter of
deep Humiliation; and it is but reasonable to judge our selves worthy of Frowns
and Rejection, because we sought his face no sooner. But now immediately we
must gird up the loins of our Minds to his Work. The Holy Ghost bids us hear
his voice to day; he tells us, that the accepted time is now. The Psalmist is a
Pattern worthy of Imitation, for his present harkening to the Voice of God, and
his speediness in yielding Obedience, Psalm. 119. 60. I made haste and delayed
not to keep thy Commandments. Delays are displeasing to God, for they argue the
Heart not so well reconciled to Him and to his Precepts, and that some other
business is liked and preferred before his work. And these delays are
dangerous, considering the uncertainty of our life's continuance, and how soon
and suddenly the Spirit of the Lord being grieved by our deferring to obey his
motions, and accept of his gracious Aid, may totally and finally withdraw from
us.

2. Our Attendance upon God must be instant, Romans 12. 12. continuing instant in
prayer. So Act. 26. 7. Unto which promise our twelve Tribes instantly serving
God day and night, hope to come. When we are thus instant in our attending, it
implies a sense of the great importance of those things we come to God about;
and that we are very urgent with him, that we may not miscarry in our
everlasting concernments. Matters of Life and Death temporal, are managed with
great seriousness. But when we attend upon God, Eternal Life is before us, to
be laid hold on; and Eternal Death is before us to escape. Our intenseness and
urgency here, should if it were possible, as far exceed our seriousness in
other matters; as Time in length is exceeded by Eternity. As the loudest
Thunder drowns a whisper, so should the grand concerns of the unseen Eternal
World, when we come before God, be carefully regarded before the petty matters
of this present Life, which are but for a moment.

3. Our Attendance upon God must be constant. Paroxisms and Fits in Religion
argue an unhealthy Soul; to be sometimes hot, and sometimes cold, is a bad
temper. They that grow weary of God and of his Service, God is weary of them
and their Duties. The Lord speaks to Ephraim and Judah, as one wearied, because
all the means and methods he had used, had been ineffectual unto any lasting
Reformation; if at any time they seemed inclinable to what was good, the
inclination was very short-lived, and they soon returned to their natural bent
and inclination to Evil, Hos. 6. 4. O Ephraim what shall I do unto thee? O
Judah what shall I do unto thee? for your goodness is as a morning Cloud, and
as the early Dew it goes away. It Is not enough to begin well. The same
argument that persuaded you to begin, will become stronger for your holding on.
It were better not to have known the way of Righteousness, than having known
it, to turn from the holy Commandment delivered to you, 2 Pet. 2. 21. All that
come to God should cleave unto him; all that embrace his Testimonies, should
stick unto those Testimonies: I have stuck unto thy Testimonies, says the
Psalmist, Psalm. 119. 31. and ver. 112. I have inclined my Heart to perform thy
Statutes always, even unto the end.

4. Our Attendance upon God must be cordial and hearty, 1 Chronicles. 22. 19. Now
set your Heart and your Soul to seek the Lord your God. The full bent of the
Mind must be this way. The Lord will not be found, unless the Heart and Soul be
set to seek him. Naturally the Heart of Man is set another way, being of a
corrupt Original, from the Womb it is estranged from God, and still it is farther
alienating and estranging it self: it is not easy to have such a Heart
reconciled to God, and to the Will of God: But when the Heart is renewed, the
enmity is in a great measure cured; the Heart is now willing to come into the
Lord's Presence; for when the Heart serves him, it is in the way to be satiated
by him. The Heartsearcher cannot bear the Heart's absence; for if He has not
the Heart, something else has it, which provokes him unto Jealousy. But the
more there is of the Heart in Duties, God is the better pleased with them, and
the performers find them in a spiritual sense more advantageous. When Hearts
knock at Heaven gate, the Gate shall certainly be open. When Souls Thirst for
God they shall not fail of satisfaction, Psalm. 63. 5. My Soul shall be
satisfied as with Marrow and Fullness, my Mouth shall praise thee with joyful
Lips.

5. Our Attendance upon God must be with clean Hands and a pure Heart. Jam. 4.
8. Draw nigh to God, and he will draw nigh to you; Cleanse your Hands ye
sinners, purify your Hearts ye double-minded. So Psalm. 24. 3, 4. Who shall
ascend into the Hill of the Lord? and who shall stand in his holy place? He
that has clean Hands, and a pure Heart. The Gospel strictly commands good
works, without these Faith is dead and vain, and Love is only a seeming Fire.
The Apostle speaks with great vehemence, Tit. 3. 8. This is a faithful saying,
and these things I will that thou affirm constantly; that they which have
believed in God might be careful to maintain good works. Our Lord owns them for
his near and dear kindred, who are doers of his Father's Work and Will, Mat.
12. 50. He stretched forth his Hand toward his Disciples, and said, behold my
Mother and my Brethren. For whosoever shall do the Will of my Father which is
in Heaven, the same is my Brother, and Sister, and Mother. Attenders upon God
must not allow themselves in the doing of Evil: Fellowship with the unfruitful
works of Darkness, and Fellowship with God, are inconsistent, 1 John 1. 6. If
we say we have Fellowship with him, and walk in Darkness, we ly, and do not the
truth. Unless there be a living to God, serving of him in Ordinances is of no
account with him.

And as Hands must be cleansed, so the Hearts of Attenders on God must be pure.
The Heart must not defile it self by regarding any iniquity, so as to be
unwilling to have it subdued. Psalm. 66. 18. If I regard iniquity in my Heart,
the Lord will not hear me. Regarded iniquity will cry so loud for a denial,
that Prayer will find no Audience. The Heart must not pollute it self by love
to the World; for if this love prevail, there can neither be any true love to
the Father, nor any Interest in the Father's love, 1 John 2. 15, Love not the
World, neither the things that are in the World; if any Man love the World, the
love of the Father is not in him. The Heart must consent to the crucifixion of
all the affections and lusts of the Flesh. It must not be (...), double-minded,
on and off with God; but steady and right with him. Its resolution must be to
be holy still, and its desire to be still holy more and more, to have holiness
perfected in the sear of God.

6. Our Attendance upon God must be with Humility, Fear, and Faith, without
wrath and doubting. Humility becomes the very Angels, for all their excellency
is derived; and they are charged with possible folly, Job 4. 18. it is owing to
the Election and confirming Grace of God, that some Angels stood, when others
being left to the freedom of their own Will, apostatized. How humble should the
Children of Men be, who are fallen by their Iniquity! The best of Saints have
reason to be low in their own Eyes, considering how many Talents they owed
before they were satisfied for, and paid by their Surety; and how apt they are
still to trespass. It may be said of the strongest Christian, stand he could
not, stand he would not, were he not upheld by the Lord's free and mighty
Spirit.

But an humble Sense of our Worthlesness and ill-deserving, should not hinder
the acting of our Faith in Jesus when we come before the Lord. Our great
Redeemer has bought us with a Price, and he has bought all things for us: We
our selves are his Purchase, and so is all that Grace we need, and all that
Glory we hope* for. God has made a Covenant with Christ, and has promised to
give us to him for his Inheritance and Possession. Psalm. 2. 8. Ask of me, and I
shall give thee the Heathen for thine Inheritance, and the uttermost parts of
the Earth for thy Possession. And to be Christ's Inheritance and Possession,
implies our being separated from the World, our being secured, our being made
fruitful, and our eternal continuing to be enjoyed by him, and to enjoy him.
Promises of all, and especially of the best Blessings, are made to us for
Christ's sake, and he will see to the making of them good; because the
accomplishment of them, is so much for the Father's Glory* as well as our
truest Welfare. All this may exceedingly strengthen and raise our Confidence
and Hope when we attend on God.

Doubts concerning our speeding should be looked upon as unreasonable, when we
come in such a prevailing Name as Christ's, unto his Father and our Father, his
God and our God, and we ask only for things agreeable to his Will, 1 John 5.
14, 15. And this is the confidence we have in him, that if we ask any thing
according to his Will, he hears us; and if we know that he hears us, we
know that we have the Petition we desired of him.

And as Faith is opposed to doubting, so to wavering, James 1. 6, 7. But let
him ask in Faith nothing wavering, for he that wavereth is like a Wave of the
Sea driven with the Wind and tossed: For let not that Man think that he shall
receive any thing of the Lord. He is the wavering Man, whose Mind hangs
doubtful and unresolved, between God and the World, Christ and Satan, Sin and
Holiness: Such an Attender upon God, who is more inclined to serve other Lords,
shall certainly be rejected.

Finally, The Apostle forbids not only Doubting but Wrath also, 1 Timothy 2. 8. I
will therefore that Men pray every where, lifting up holy hands without Wrath
or Doubting. The Wrath of Man works not the Righteousness of God; nay, it
causes an abounding in Transgression. The Leaven of Anger and Malice is
diligently to be searched for, and purged out, as that, which if it remains,
will prove us carnal, 1 Cor. 3. 3. For whereas there is among you Envying and
Strife, and Divisions, Are ye not carnal and walk as Men? Civil Discords,
Church-Divisions, unruly Passions, should be avoided with Care and Fear; we
should be full of Holy Love to all our Brethren; ready to forgive the greatest
Injuries and Enemies; forward to pursue and promote Unity and Peace, whenever
we attend upon Him who has called himself the God of Love and Peace.

7. Our Attendance upon God should be with Gladness and Delight, and a sense
how good it is for us to approach* his presence. Where the Will of God is best
done, and that is in Heaven, there is the greatest Joy in the doing of it. The
cheerful joyful Servant is a Credit to his Work, honors his Lord, and is a
great Eyesore to the evil one; for Satan is very much afraid, lest the
Attenders upon God being full of Gladness, others should be induced to try that
Work and Service, which these find so exceeding comfortable. Hypocrites, that
go no further than the outside of Religion, count it wearisome because they do
not understand it. But as God takes pleasure in the Upright, so the Upright
find the truest Pleasure in God, and in his Ways. The Psalmist speaks upon very
good ground, Psalm. 32. 11. Be glad in the Lord, and rejoice ye Righteous, and
shout for joy all ye that are upright in heart. The Man after God's own Heart
said, that the Meditations of God are sweet, Psalm. 104. 34. He was glad when
they said to him, let us go into the House of the Lord, Psalm. 122. 1. He tells
us who is the Man that may have what he will, all his desire granted; it is he
whose delight is in God, Psalm. 37. 4. Delight thy self in the Lord, and he
shall give thee the desire of thy Heart. He is the blessed Man who takes no
pleasure in the counsel, way, or seemingly easest Seat of the Wicked; but his
delight is in the Law of the Lord, Psalm. 1. 1, 2. And why should he not with
delight be served at present? since in his Kingdom, by all he will be praised
with the highest Rapture of Joy for ever!

8. Our Attendance upon God, should be in all Ordinances. It is produced as an
Argument, that that excellent couple mentioned Luke 1. 6. were both righteous
before God, because they walked in all the Commandments and Ordinances of the
Lord blameless. Under the Old Testament there was an Ordinance of God that was
to be administered betimes, even to the Infants, and that was Circumcision; and
though Abraham, at the first Institution of this Ordinance, believed and was
circumcised at Age, as also were the Men of his Household; and though
Circumcision is called a Seal of the Righteousness of Faith, Romans 4. 11. Yet
Infants also were circumcised, these little ones are said to enter into
Covenant with the Lord their God, Deuteronomy. 29. 11, 12. Under the New Testament our
Lord Jesus does not cast these Infants out of his Church and Covenant, but
says, Suffer little Children to come unto me, and forbid them not: for of such
is the Kingdom of God, Mark 10. 14. The Apostle Peter, after he had exhorted to
Baptism, says, The Promise is unto you and to your Children, Acts 2. 39. And
the Apostle Paul affirms, That the Children of Believing Parents are Holy, 1
Cor. 7. 14. they are therefore Members of the Body of Christ. Now it is plainly
signified, that Baptism is the Privilege of all in that Body, 1 Cor. 12. 13. We
are all baptized into one Body.

Indeed some that mind the Sound of Scripture more than the Sense of it, when
they read, Repent and be baptized, Believe and be baptized, conclude that none
but those that are at Age, and capable of professing their Faith and
Repentance, ought to partake of this Ordinance. But they would do well to
consider, who these were that in Scripture repented, believed, and were
baptized, they were either Under the Name of Jews, I take in all Proselytes to
the Jewish Religion.
Jews or Heathens that were converted to the Christian Faith at Age; and if
thousands of such should be converted now, now also at Age Baptism ought to be
administered to them, upon their repenting and believing. But in the whole New
Testament we do not find any baptized at Age, whose Parents were Christians at
their Birth: Yet several without Scripture warrant are thus baptized at this
day.

Oh that there were less disputing about Infant Baptism, and more care to
improve it! All Infants that go to Heaven, are baptized with the Blood and
Spirit of Christ, they are justified and sanctified thereby. This Justification
and Sanctification, all that have been baptized, should desire to partake of.

Other Ordinances also should be engaged in, for the Lord who has instituted
them, is ready to own and bless them, and himself to be found in them. Who that
is wise, would neglect any one of them, since none of them are appointed in
vain; nay, every one of them to serious engagers has been experienced
abundantly Beneficial? The Lord is to be atte^^^ed upon, how and in what way
soever he pleases; in the Closet, in the Family, in the Sanctuary, at the
Table, or any other way that he has ordained; Blessed are all they that wait
for him.

9. Every Attendance upon God should make every Attender better. It Is thought
by some, that Creatures in the Waters, as long as they live, they grow still
greater; Saints, as long as they live, should still be growing in Grace, and be
more full of all Goodness; They should grow as the Lilly, cast forth their
roots as Lebanon, their branches should spread, and their beauty be as the
Olive Tree, Hos. 14. 5, 6. God is ready to be as the dew to them, that from Him
their Fruit may be found. It is really a fault in Believers, if every time they
wait upon the Lord, they come not away from him with more Wisdom, Strength, and
Grace, and Peace, than they had, since he is ready to impart such Blessings as
these, and gives them Liberally without upbraiding.

USE IV. Shall be of Consolation to them, that thus, as I have directed, do
attend upon God, Isa. 40. 1. Comfort ye, Comfort ye my People, says your God;
with Joy you may come and draw most pure and refreshing Waters out of the Wells
of Salvation: You are the Children of Peace, and the Peace of God is to rest
upon you. For your Comfort take notice of these things following.

1. God puts an high value upon his sincere Attendants. He had a special
respect to Abel, and that excellent Sacrifice that he offered. Though the
Heaven be his Throne, and the Earth his Footstool; yet to that Man will he
look, as being well pleased with him, that is, Poor, and of a contrite Spirit,
and that trembles at his Word, Isa. 56. 1, 2. He remembers the kindness of
their Youth, the love of their Espousals, Jer. 2. 2. and their willing
Consecration of themselves to be Holiness to the Lord. He has taken notice of
all their Desires and Groans, and their Cries to himself, and their frequent
speaking one to another, that they might confirm and encourage one another in
the worst of Times and Trials, to continue his Attendants still. Mal. 3. 16.
Then they that feared the Lord, spoke often one to another, and the Lord
hearkened and heard, and did so well approve them, that a Book of Remembrance
was written before him, for them that feared the Lord, and that thought upon
his Name.

2. God delights over his sincere Attendants to do them good. He takes pleasure
in the Prosperity of his Servants, they are in Heaviness by Affliction, only
when there is need of it; he delights especially to see their Souls prosper: As
he opens his Armory, and brings forth the Weapons of his Indignation against
the Wicked; so he opens his Treasures of Bounty and Goodness to his Servants,
that they may be supplied abundantly. He does them good with a good Will, his
whole Heart and Soul is with them, Jer. 32. 41. when his hand is open to them.
He is ready to fulfill their Desires, to grant their Requests: Nay, when their
Thoughts are most Comprehensive, and they crave never so much; he is able and
ready to do for them (...), exceeding abundantly more, Ephesians. 3. 20. Who can
conceive how beneficial waiting upon God is! That passage is both encouraging
and amazing, Isa 64. 4. For since the beginning of the World, Men have not
heard, nor perceived by the Ear, neither has the Eye seen, O God, besides
thee, what he has prepared for him that waits for him.

3. God is ready to cover a multitude of Infirmities in them that sincerely
attend upon him. He mercifully observes how willing their Spirits are, when
their Flesh is weak, and cannot keep pace with their renewed Minds. When our
Lord was in an Agony, his Disciples could not watch with him one hour, but were
fallen asleep; yet he himself graciously excuses it, Matt. 26. 41. The Spirit
indeed is willing, but the Flesh is weak, and passes it by. He takes notice of
the Lustings of the Spirit against the Flesh, the Strivings of Grace against
Sin and Corruption; and passes by the Lusting of the Flesh against the Spirit,
the Strivings of Sin against Grace. The Lord does not enter into Judgment with
his Servants, nor deal in Rigor with them; but he expresses Fatherly
Tenderness and Compassion toward them, Psalm. 103. 13. Like as a Father
pittieth his Children, so the Lord pittieth them that fear him. We are directed
to beg for the Forgiveness of Trespasses daily, which shows, that as the
Disciples of Christ daily offend, so their Heavenly Father is ready to grant
forgiveness daily to them: Nay, Iniquity cleaves unto our holiest things; our
best D^ties should and might be done a great deal better. These Infirmities
then are much to be lamented, more and more striven against; and seeing our
selves compassed about with them, we should banish all Self-confidence, and
look into Jesus, that in him we may find acceptance; and certainly the
Righteousness of Christ the Son of God, and the Father's love in him, will
cover the greatest multitude of bewailed Infirmities and Offenses.

4. It may be also Comfort to Attenders upon God, to think whom they have
attending upon them. Saints on Earth have the Angels in Heaven to be their
Guardians. Christ is signified by Jacob's Ladder; the Angels of God are said to
ascend and descend upon the Son of Man, John 1. 51. It Is owing to our Lord
Jesus, that Believers have the Benefit of the Angels Ministry; and the Apostle
signifies, that all of them are thus employed for the Saints Protection and
Security, Heb. 1. 14. Are they not all ministering Spirits, sent forth to
minister for them that shall be heirs of Salvation? The reprobate and evil
Angels resist Attenders upon God; but the elect and good Angels are their
Friends: These Angels that excel in strength, How do they rejoice when any
repent and are converted! And they have a Charge over Converts to keep them in
all their ways, Psalm. 91. 11. and when it is added v. 13. Thou shall tread upon
the Lion and the Adder; the young Lion and the Dragon thou shall trample under
feet. It may be intimated, that Satan's Force, and Fury, and Subtlety, shall be
ineffectual, and that by his Temptations he shall not prevail. But though
Angels attend the Servants of God, they are not wholly trusted to the Angelical
Care. The Lord himself is their Keeper: The Father and the Son come to them and
make their abode in them, and will secure their own Mansions, till they are out
of the reach of Enemies, and past all danger.

5. Sincere Attendance upon God, shall attend upon him after another and better
manner, in another World. They shall be sitted for, and admitted into the
presence Chamber of the King of Glory. In Heaven there will be no need of the
Sun or of the Moon to shine in it, for the Glory of the Lord does lighten it,
and the Lamb is the light thereof, Rev. 21. 23. and Rev. 22. 3. And there shall
be no more Curse, but the Throne of God, and of the Lamb, shall be in it, and
his Servants shall serve him. They shall serve him, so as never in the least to
disserve him; they shall do his Will, and nothing at all contrary to it; there
will be a Perfection of Delight, and Rest, and Peace; in the Obedience they
shall yield, when they rest not day and night, saying, Holy, Holy, Holy Lord
God Almighty, which was, and is, and is to come, Rev. 4. 8. and Rev. 5. 13.
Blessing, and Honor, and Glory, and Power, be unto him that sits upon the
Throne, and to the Lamb for ever and ever! All God's sincere Attendants, are
now advanced to Priestly, nay to Kingly Dignity; therefore they are called
(...), a Royal Priesthood, 1 Pet. 2. 9. Christ has loved them and washed them
from their sins in his own Blood, and has made them Kings and Priests unto God
and his Father, Rev. 1. 5, 6. But hereafter they shall inherit and possess the
Kingdom prepared for them, they shall all of them be actually crowned with a
Crown of Life and Righteousness. And Oh what a joyful sight will it be to
behold the Lord, and all his Saints glorified together with him, Col. 3. 4.
When Christ who is our Life, shall appear, then shall ye also appear with him
in Glory. Thus of the first Doctrine.

Doct. II. The second Doctrine is this. In attending upon God, we should look
upon him as the Lord, and serve him accordingly. When God pronounced his own
Laws with his own Mouth upon Mount Sinai, He thus begins, I am the Lord, Exodus
20 2. and this was to awe Israel into Obedience. We read Deuteronomy 6. 4. Hear O
Israel, the Lord our God is one Lord. No other Lord is his equal; no Commands
to be regarded like his Commands. None so worthy of service as He; He must have
attendance, who, or whatever is neglected, Psalm. 89. 6, 7. Who in Heaven can be
compared to the Lord? who among the Sons of the Mighty can be likened unto the
Lord? The mightiest Monarchs upon Earth, the highest Angels in Heaven, are
infinitely below him; therefore it follows, God is greatly to be feared in the
assembly of his Saints, and to be had in reverence of all them that are about
him. Holy David cries out, Psalm. 8. 1. O Lord our Lord, how excellent is thy
Name in all the Earth! who have set thy Glory above the Heavens! He worshipped
and praised him, as the highest Sovereign, who excelled all things on Earth;
and whose Glory the Heaven, though full of it, was not able to contain; and
when he says our Lord, it is intimated that he was truly his Servant and
Subject, and that he gloried in subjection to him.

In the handling of this Doctrine I shall

First, Show you how God is the Lord.

Secondly, Manifest what influence and effect the apprehension of his being
Lord, should have upon us when we attend upon him.

Thirdly and Lastly, make Application.

In the first place, I am to show you how God is the Lord. His Majesty may
amaze us; when we think or speak of his Dominion, we should be struck with
godly Fear: Thus was the Psalmist, Psalm. 104. 1. O Lord my God, thou art very
great, thou art clothed with Honor and Majesty, who coverest thy self with
light as with a Garment, Psalm. 96. 4, 6, 9. For the Lord is great, and greatly
to be praised; he is to be feared above all Gods. Honor and Majesty are before
him, Strength and Beauty are in his Sanctuary. O worship the Lord in the Beauty
of Holiness, fear before him all the Earth. Now that you may the better
understand with whom you have to do when you attend upon God. You must know,

1. God is Lord Creator; of whom are all things. The Man of God, Moses, with
wonder and adoration cries out, Psalm. 90. 2. Before the Mountains were brought
forth, or ever thou had formed the Earth or the World, even from everlasting
to everlasting thou art God. The Lord was before all, and he was all* of, and
in, and to himself from Eternity. The Father is of himself alone, the Son is
necessarily and eternally of the Father; and the Holy Ghost as necessarily and
eternally from both the Father and the Son. And these Three are that one living
and true God whom Christians believe in, and in whose Name they are baptized.
But though God necessarily is, yet Creatures are not so; but have their being
at his pleasure, Rev. 4. 11. Thou art worthy O Lord, to receive Glory and
Honor, and Power, for thou have created all things, and for thy pleasure they
are and were created.

It is the Lord, whose Word of Power and Command brought all things out of
nothing at first, Heb. 11. 3. Through Faith we understand that the Worlds were
framed by the Word of God. Though some have imagined that Angels were created,
and many of them fell, long before this visible World was made; in Scripture
there is not sufficient ground for such an Imagination. It is probable those
excellent Creatures were made the first day; when it is said Genesis 1. 1. In the
beginning God created the Heaven: The Heaven may take in the highest Heaven,
and the Host of Angels there. Oh what a powerful Word was that which commanded
Angels to be, which before were nothing, and gave them Spiritual and Immortal
Natures, endued with such mighty Strength and Understanding? And when the Lord
laid the Foundations of the Earth, and stretched the line upon it; these
glorious Angels, called Morning Stars, sang together, and all these Sons of God
shouted for joy, Job 38. 4, 5, 7.

This Lord Creator did but say, Let there be Light, and there was Light: The
Sun, the Moon, the Stars, the Earth and Seas, and all their Hosts, were what
his Word made them. And Man, who was to have Dominion over this lower World,
God did make in his own Image, his Body indeed was formed of the Dust of the
ground; but to show that his Soul was not of earthly Original, God is called
the Father of Man's Spirit, he breathed into his Nostrils the Breath of Life,
and Man became a living Soul, Genesis 2. 7. This great Creator whom we attend
upon, made all things very good, Genesis ^. 31. and though Sin entering into the
World, spoiled much of his Workmanship; he can easily new make what Sin has
marred, and he can easily, and will certainly destroy those who are finally
unwilling to be made new Creatures.

2. God is Lord, Preserver of what himself has made. The word of his power
sustains all things, Heb. 1. 3. it continues things in those beings into which
at first it brought them, Psalm. 148. 5, 6. Let them praise the name of the
Lord, for he commanded, and they were created. He has also established them
for ever and ever: He has made a Decree which shall not pass. The same Lord
who called things out of nothing by his word, hinders their returning into
nothing by the same word of command, Psalm. 33. 9. For he spoke and it was done,
he commanded and it stood fast. There is so much power exerted in upholding the
Creation, that the Preservation of the Universe is rightly called a continued
Creation of it. If God should totally draw back his supporting hand, all the
Luminaries in Heaven would presently lose their Light, the Earth and Seas would
become a Chaos of Confusion; nay, Men and Angels, and all things else would
immediately lose their beings and become nothing.

As the Creation, so the Preservation of all things is of the Lord alone, Neh.
9. 6. Thou, even thou art Lord alone, thou have made Heaven the Heaven of
Heavens with all their Host, the Earth and all things that are therein, the
Seas and all that is therein, and thou preservest them all. How worthy is he to
be worshipped by the Host of Heaven, and by the Sons of Men the Inhabitants of
the Earth! God is called (...) Almighty or All-sufficient, and (...) signifies
Mamma, a Pap or Breast; all Creatures, from the mightiest to the very meanest,
do hang and depend upon God, as Children do upon the Breasts, that he may
nourish and sustain them. And if God thus upholds all things, surely he will
not fail to preserve his Church and Saints, they may with Confidence attend
upon him for defense, no Humane nor Hellish Force shall prevail against them.

3. God is Lord Proprietor and Possessor of Heaven and Earth. So Melchizedek
called the most high God, when he blessed Abram the Father of the Faithful,
Genesis 14. 19. Blessed be Abram of the most high God, the Possessor of Heaven and
Earth. Psalm. 24. 1. we read, The Earth is the Lord's, and the fullness thereof;
the World, and they that dwell therein. All Persons and things are properly
God's own, and he may do with them what he pleases. By Creation the Lord began,
and by Preservation he continues to be the Proprietor of all things. Propriety
is the ground of Power, and Power of Government; now a most absolute and
universal Propriety and Power, the Lord does rightly challenge to himself; he
is accountable to none, not to be resisted by any; none can stay his hand, or
say to him, What do thou? It was a good answer that Elihu made to Job, Chapter
33. 12, 13. God is greater than Man, Why do thou strive against him? For he
gives not an account of any of his matters.

It is a wise part to attend upon God, who has a Propriety in us and in all
things besides, and all things are really in his Hands and Possession; so that
he can withold or bestow them according to his own Will. If God be for us, he
can make all things for us; if he be against us, nothing shall be for our help
and benefit. There is nothing which we need, but a superabundance of it, is in
God's hand. The Possessor of Heaven and Earth has the Blessings of Heaven and
Earth to give forth. Every Beast of the Forest is his, and the Cattle upon a
thousand Hills, Psalm. 50. 10. All Sheep and Oxen, yea, and the Beasts of the
Field, the Fowl of the Air, and the Fish of the Sea, and whatever passes
through the paths of the Seas. How easy is it for him to provide things of
this nature, who has so much, who has all of them in his own keeping? But far
better Blessings than these he has in his hand to bestow; and of the best
Blessings he is most liberal: When we knock at his door, we should remember how
rich he is, whose all things are; and that this Lord over all, is rich unto all
that call upon him, Romans 10. 12.

4. God is Lord Redeemer of his People, and a mighty Lord indeed he shows
himself in the Redemption of them, Jer. 50. 34. Their Redeemer is strong, the
Lord of Hosts is his Name, he shall thoroughly plead their cause, that he may
give rest to them. Redemption supposes that redeemed ones were enslaved, lost,
and under a Curse: To redeem must needs be granted an high act of Mercy and
Grace, and of force and might likewise: The Lord is a Redeemer by Power and
Conquest, he throws down the Dominion of Sin, demolishes its strongest holds,
he thrusts Mammon out of the Throne of the heart, he treads Satan under his
Peoples feet; in a Sense also he is a Redeemer by Commutation, God became Man,
that he might stand in Man's room, suffer in Man's nature; and be Man's Surety
and Savior: And he redeems by paying a price, and that the Price might be of
infinite value, he gave no less than himself for those whom he has redeemed, 1
Cor. 6. 20. Ye are not your own, for yea are bought with a price, therefore
glorify God which bought you, in your Body and in your Spirit which are Gods.
And in Gal. 2. 20. He loved me, says the Apostle, and gave himself for me. The
Prey and the Captives are delivered out of the hands of that terrible Enemy the
Prince of Darkness. Believers are redeemed from the Curse of the Law by him who
was made Flesh, Sin, and a Curse for them. They may triumph indeed, because the
first death is unstung, the Grave has lost its Victory, and none of them shall
be seized and hurt by the second death. This Lord Redeemer, How should he be
attended upon! How should sinful and lost Souls, before they are lost past
recovery, being sensible of their danger, come flocking to him in great
numbers, flying as a Cloud, and as Doves to their Windows!

5. God is Lord and Lawgiver, and all are bound to obey those Laws he gives
them. His Laws are the best that ever were given. In the keeping of these Laws
lies true Goodness, and Sin, which is incomparably the foulest, and most
pernicious, and worst of all Evils, is a Transgression of these Laws which God
has delivered to us. How often in the New Testament do we read of the Kingdom
of God! And Kingdom implies a King and Laws; and that there are Subjects who
must obey the one and the other: The Cross of Christ excludes not Christians
Sufferings, but their Sufferings are not expiatory of Sin, as his were; and the
Obedience of Christ excludes not Christians Obedience; but his was meritorious,
theirs is not. How strictly soever some may take the Gospel, and say it is all
Promises; I am sure the Gospel, as it represents it self, takes in Commands.
Christ is a King to be obeyed, as well as a Propitiatory Sacrifice to be rested
on; and he is the Author of Salvation to all them that obey him; and they that
obey not the Gospel, which shows it has Laws to be obeyed, shall be punished
with everlasting Destruction, from the presence of the Lord, and from the glory
of his power, Heb. 5. 9. 2 Thessalonians. 1. 8, 9.

Faith in Christ does not make Believers lawless; nay, the Apostle speaks with
some vehemence, Do we then make void the Law through Faith? God forbid; yea, we
establish the Law, Romans 3. 31. Indeed we are not under the Law, i. e. under the
Curse of the Law, if we are true Believers; nor under it as a Covenant, Do this
and live; we are not to hope for Justification, nor to fear Condemnation by it.
But the Law is a Rule which we are bound to act and walk according to; and unto
this Rule our Hearts and Lives, with great Care and Conscience, should be
conformed. And that these Laws may be the better observed, the Lord and
Lawgiver must be more eyed. He takes notice whether we yield Obedience, and is
most ready to assist us to obey: And he should always be set before us, both as
our Observer and our Helper too. Psalm. 16. 8. I have set the Lord always before
me, because he is at my right hand, I shall not be moved.

6. God is Lord, who has power to save and to destroy. James 4. 12. There is
one Lawgiver who is able to save and to destroy: Who art thou that judge
another? He has the power of Life and Death; Death that is eternal, Life that
is everlasting: He is the Lord of Hosts; all Creatures are at his command and
beck, and are ready either to be the Executioners of his Wrath, or to serve him
in his gracious purposes and pleasure: He is that mighty God who lifts up his
hand to Heaven, and says, I live for ever. I kill, and I make alive; I wound
and I heal: neither is there any that can deliver out of my hand, Deuteronomy. 32. 39,
40.

All sorts of Life are from God, that of Nature, Grace and Glory: He can raise
those that attend upon him from the brink of the Grave, and rescue them out of
the very jaws of Death, Psalm. 30. 2, 3. O Lord my God, I cried unto thee, and
thou have healed me. O Lord thou have brought up my Soul from the Grace, thou
have kept me alive that I should not go down into the Pit. 2 Cor. 1. 9, 10. We
had the Sentence of Death in our selves, that we should not trust in our
selves, but in God who raises the Dead; who delivered us from so great a
death, and does deliver; in whom we trust, that he will yet deliver us. God is
he who quickens and makes those Spiritually alive, that were dead in sins and
trespasses. He reverses the Sentence of Death which the Law had passed upon
them; gives them a new Life and Nature, and inables them to walk in newness of
Life. It Is a mighty Voice, attended with his powerful Spirit which raises the
Dead in sin, and makes them live to God, John 5. 25. Verily, verily, I say unto
you, the hour is coming, and now is, when the Dead shall hear the Voice of the
Son of God, and they that hear shall live. And when this Spiritual Life is
wrought, it is really eternal Life in the Seed and Blossom; and into eternal
Life at length it shall be ripened and perfected. The sanctifying Grace of the
Spirit is likened unto water, because it is of a cleansing, refreshing, and
fructifying nature; and this Grace shall still be acting and increasing, till
it issue in glory, John 4. 14. But the water that I shall give him, shall be in
him a Well of water springing up into everlasting Life.

And as all sorts of Life are from God, so all sorts of Death he has power to
inflict: All Afflictions and Plagues, when this Lord sends them, do say, Here
we are: The King of Terrors, Death, is God's subject, and says, I am ready to
strike, young or old, high or low, few or many, as the Lord of all, does give
me Commission and Command. And the second Death at God's righteous pleasure
opens its everlasting doors, to receive and eternally to swallow up all that he
sentences thither, Isa. 5. 14. Therefore Hell has enlarged her self, and
opened her mouth without measure, and their glory, and their multitude, and
their pomp, and he that rejoices shall descend into it. Such a Lord, the
effects of whose love and anger are felt not only in this World, but also in
the other, and indeed run parallel with Eternity, should certainly be attended
on with a great dread of offending him, with the exactest care in every thing
to please him.

7. God is a Lord, obeyed by the whole Creation, but only Men on earth, and
Devils and damned Spirits in Hell. These greater lights, the Sun and Moon, that
rule the day and night, are perfectly ruled by their Maker, and rise and set at
his command: And to show that he can stop the Sun in its swift motion, at
Joshua's entreaty, he commanded it to stand still in Gibeon, and the Moon in
the Valley of Ajalon, Josh. 10. 12. Nay, in the days of Hezekiah, he makes the
Sun to move backward, and to return no less than ten degrees by which it had
gone down, Isa. 38. 8. All the Stars of Heaven he calls by their names, and
they observe their courses according to his Ordinances. The Sea does ebb and
flow according to his appointment, and keep within the bounds that he has set
it when it roars and is most tempestuous: The Storms and Winds fulfill his word,
and if he do but say to them, Peace be still, presently there is a great calm.
He calls for the Thunder and the Lightning, and how terrible is the Voice of
the one, and the flashing of the other! The Thunder is silenced, and the
Lightning extinguished at his pleasure. All Creatures that glide through the
Air, or slide through the Ocean, that feed and grow upon the Earth, in their
way and manner obey their Maker and Preserver's Will. Fie, Oh Fie upon Apostate
Angels and Men, that they should be the only Rebels! Look upward, downward, on
the right hand and on the left, and the many Thousands of Creatures which your
Eyes behold, are so many instances of Obedience to God. Why, Oh why should not
all we be ready to yield our utmost Service?

8. God is a Lord who overrules them that rebel against him, though they break
his Commands; they cannot get from under his power, but he can check, restrain,
disappoint, and destroy them at his pleasure. The Seed of the Woman has been
hated by the Serpents brood, and they that have been born only after the Flesh,
have been strongly inclined to persecute such as have been born after the
Spirit, Gal. 4. 28, 29. Now we, Brethren, as Isaac was, are the Children of
Promise. But as then he that was born after the Flesh, persecuted him that was
born after the Spirit: even so it is now: And so it is likely to be still. When
Heathen Emperors and Kings were Converts to the Christian Faith, the Prince of
Darkness did not turn and change. He always was, and is, and will be full of
Malice against Christ the Head, and against his true Members. And those who are
of their Father the Devil, the Lusts of their Father they will do; and they
that are Saints must expect find their Hearts set against them, and as far as
they can, their hands too.

But that Lord who is with his People, is greater infinitely than the evil one,
1 John 4. 4. Ye are of God, little Children, and have overcome them, because
greater is he that is in you, than he that is in the World. As Satan's Subtlety
is nothing to God's Wisdom; as his Power is small to God's Almightiness, so his
Wrath, though never so great, is a little and contemptible thing, when the Love
which God bears to his People is believingly considered. The mightiest Men whom
Satan employs to run down the Church of the living God, shall never affect
their wicked purpose; the Church triumphs over her most surious Enemies,
looking unto her Mighty Helper, Psalm. 46. 5, 6, 7. God is in the midst of her,
she shall not be moved: God shall help her, and that right early. The Heathen
raged, the Kingdoms were moved. They stirred up themselves with their united
force, and in their rage they would have devoured the Israel of God; but He
uttered his Voice, and the Earth melted: All these Enemies were dispirited and
came to nothing, and no wonder, for it follows, The Lord of Hosts is with us;
the God of Jacob is our refuge. Selah. Well may the voluntary Subjects of such
a Lord attend upon him with forwardness and Faith, since he has such an
absolute uncontrolable Dominion over all his and their Enemies!

9. God is a Lord infinitely above and better than any other Lords whatsoever.
As he is infinitely superior to all in Majesty and Greatness, so also in Mercy
and Goodness: The whole Earth is full of Divine Goodness, Psalm. 145. 9. The
Lord is good to all and his tender Mercies are over all his works: It is
special and peculiar Kindness which is shown to his Saints, Psalm. 103. 11. As
the Heaven is high above the Earth, so great is his Mercy toward them that
fear him. What are other Lords if compared with God? As for Mammon, who has
most of Mankind to be his Vassals, his delights are low, his Riches uncertain,
his all is Vanity. Satan is a cruel Lord, he is a Liar who deceives, a
Murderer who destroys all whom he can keep under his Power and Dominion. And
the Wages which Sin does give to them that serve it, is eternal Death; and the
more diligent they have been in the Service of Sin, and the more laborious
Workers of Iniquity, Hell will be so much the hotter, their Sorrow and Misery
so much the greater.

Are such Lords as these, comparable to the Lord Jehovah, whose Strength, whose
Love is everlasting? What care does he take of all that are truly his Servants!
How mild and gentle is his Government! His Kingdom is Righteousness, and Peace,
and Joy* It was a Pious Ejaculation of one of the Ancients, Da Domine quod
jubes, O Lord give that which thou command. His Servants are by himself
created in Christ Jesus unto the good works in which he has commanded them to
walk. He teaches them by his own Spirit to do his Will, Psalm. 143. 10. Teach me
to do thy Will, for thou art my God, thy Spirit is good, lead me into the Land
of Uprightness. He works in them to Will, inclining their Hearts unto his
Testimonies; and he works in them to do of his own good pleasure, Phil. 2. 13.
And directs their ways to keep his Statutes All the good, that good Men do, God
is the doer of: his Preventing and Assisting Grace, is, and does all in all And
after all Dona sua coronat, he crowns that Grace which himself has wrought, and
made active with an eternal weight of Glory. Well may his attendants Glory in
such a Lord as peerless! Psalm. 34. 2, 3. My soul shall make her boast in the
Lord: the humble shall hear thereof, and be glad. O magnify the Lord with me:
and let us exalt his name together.

10. God is the Lord and Judge of all, at whose Bar Angels and Men, the Quick
and the dead must at last stand. Apostate Angels believe and tremble at the
foresight of future Judgment. Satan's time is short, his Wrath great; but his
Dread is greater of that great day of reckoning and retribution. And as for the
Children of Men, all must be judged; the Day is appointed, and is hastening:
Every one of us, says the Apostle, must give account of himself to God, Romans
14. 12. And an account will be taken of all that has been done while we were in
the Body, Eccles. 12. 14 For God will bring every work into Judgment, with
every secret thing; whether it be good, or whether it be evil. How should this
Lord and Judge be feared! With what diligence should his Commandments be kept!
Since this is (...) the whole of Man. Man's Duty, Safety, grand Concern and
Interest lies here. He that will Judge all at last, with his own Eyes observes
and sees all at present, Psalm. 11. 4. The Lord's Throne is in Heaven, his Eyes
behold, his Eyelids try the Children of Men, Job 31. 4. Does not he see my
ways, and count all my steps? And when all the Children of Men, that ever were
or shall be do appear before him, his faithful Attendants he will own and put
great Honor upon; and will say, Well done good and faithful Servants; you have
been faithful in a few things, I will make you Rulers over many things, enter
you into the Joy of your Lord: But how shall the Children of Disobedience stand
before him! who lived and died in their Rebellion and Wickedness, and did
nothing but treasure up wrath against the day of wrath, and the revelation of
the righteous Judgment of God!

In the second place I am to manifest what influence and effect the
apprehension of God's being the Lord, should have upon us when we attend upon
him.

1. When we look upon God as Lord, we should be sensible of our distance, and
how we are infinitely below him. What a sense was there of the Divine Majesty,
and of his own meanness, in the Patriarch Abraham when he spoke those words,
Genesis 18 27. Behold now I have taken upon me to speak unto the Lord, who am but
Dust and Ashes. We read that Dominion and Fear are with him, that the brightest
Stars are not pure in his sight; how much less Man that is a Worm, and the Son
of Man that is a Worm? Job 25. 2, 5, 6. The Grace of the Gospel does not
exclude an holy Awe and Reverence of God, but include it. And the more there is
of grace, the more there is also of this godly fear, and the Service is the
more acceptable, Heb. 12. 28, 29. Wherefore we receiving a Kingdom that cannot
be moved, let us have Grace whereby we may serve God acceptably with reverence
and godly fear; for our God is a consuming Fire. We are indeed encouraged to
come with boldness; but that boldness is upon the account of our great High
Priest and Mediator; but though we are the Members of Christ, we must remember,
that God is unconceivably above us. The Man Christ Jesus himself when he
prayed, fell on his face before his heavenly Father, Mat. 26. 39. Nay, he calls
himself a worm too, Psalm. 22. 6. But I am a worm and no man, a reproach of men,
and despised of the People.

2. When we look upon God as Lord, we should be deeply humbled and abased for
our Affronts Offenses, and Rebellions against him. It Is the Law of the Lord
Almighty which sin breaks; and it is the Lord himself that sin causes to be
despised. When David was truly penitent and contrite, he cries out, Against
thee only have I sinned, and done this evil in thy sight, Psalm. 51. 4. His sin
had been an injury, and indeed a deadly one to Uriah his Subject; but it was a
gross and foul breach of the Law of God, and so was committed against him. And
as his sin was ever before him, so was that Lord against whom he had sinned.
This lays him very low, and makes him readily condemn himself, and ready to
justify God, how severe a Sentence soever should be past; how sore a
punishment soever should be inflicted upon him; that thou might, says he, be
justified when thou speak, and be clear when thou judge. Job had not been
so careful of God's Honor, as he had been to vindicate his own innocence; at
length the Lord himself does manifest his Glory to him: he confounds him with
that question, Job 40. 8. Will thou disannul my Judgment? Will thou condemn me
that thou may be Righteous? Job at length has a clearer view of the
Greatness and Sovereignty of that God with whom he had to do; and says, I have
heard of thee by the hearing of the Ear, but now mine Eye sees thee, wherefore
I abhor my self, and repent in Dust and Ashes, Job 42. 5, 6.

3. When we look upon God as Lord, we should admire his concernedness for the
Salvation and Happiness of such as we are. It was the expression of one who was
an eminent Saint, and a great King, O my Soul, thou have said unto the Lord
thou art my Lord, my goodness extends not to thee, Psalm 16. 2. He is a Lord
so high, so glorious in himself, so far exalted above all, that the goodness of
the best cannot in the least degree be beneficial to him. He stands not then in
need of Man, therefore his good will which he bears toward Men is the more to
be admired. If the whole humane Race after the first defection from God, had
perished, and every one of them had been miserable for ever; the blessedness of
God would have been no more impaired, than it was by the loss and misery of
those Spirits that first sinned, and left their own Habitation; none of which
ever was recovered, or shall be. Oh, whence is it that the Lord of Glory should
show such discriminating Grace to the Sons of Men! Lord! what is Man, that thou
who art so much above him, should be so mindful of him, as to visit him with
thy Salvation, who was unable to save himself, unworthy to be saved; nay,
unwilling to be saved, till thou did make him willing in the day of thy Power!

4. When we look upon God as Lord, we should exceedingly dread his Wrath, and
value his Loving Kindness. The Rebukes of such a mighty Lord, when provoked,
must needs be terrible, Psalm. 18. 7. Then the Earth shook and trembled, the
foundations also of the Hills moved and were shaken, because he was wrath. Exodus
15. 6, 7. Thy right hand, O Lord, is become glorious in Power; thy right hand,
O Lord, has dashed in pieces the Enemy, and in the greatness of thine
excellency thou have overthrown them that rose up against thee, thou sentest
forth thy wrath, which consumed them as Stubble. And as the Anger of God has
all evils in its power to inflict on those who are so foolhardy to provoke it,
so his loving kindness is ready to open the treasures of his goodness. How
bountiful is his love to his beloved ones! The Psalmist having meditated on it,
justly stands amazed at it, and cries out, How excellent is thy loving
kindness, O God! Psalm. 36. 7. It transcends all created love: if all the love
that is in Men and Angels were united together, it would not be so much,
compared with the love of God; as the light of a Gloworm is to the Sun, shining
forth in its Noonday Glory. And as the love of God is so excellent in it self,
transcendently excellent also are the acts and beneficial effects of it.

If the wrath of a King be as the messengers of death, Prove. 16. 14. what is
the wrath of the King of Kings and Lord of Lords! If in the light of the King's
Countenance is life, and his favor is as the Cloud of the later Rain, Prove.
16. 15. the favor of the blessed and only Potentate must needs be infinitely
more refreshing, and better than life it self. It is from this Lord that every
Man's Judgment comes. He ministers Judgment at present; good and evil is
dispensed by his hand; and it is he that will pass upon all the final Sentence
of Absolution or Condemnation at the last day. What care then should there be
to have his Wrath appeased by a Mediator! what fervency of Spirit in sueing for
peace and reconciliation! Solomon tells, that many seek the Rulers Favor; but
certainly Divine Favor is much more desirable, because every man's Judgment is
from the Lord, Prove. 29. 26.

5. When we look upon God as Lord, we should trust in him for deliverance from
other Lords who have had the Dominion over us. He can work whatsoever, and in
whomsoever he pleases, and none shall be able to hinder. The Psalmist was
sensible of sins force and power; he was weary of sins Dominion; he cries unto
God to deliver him from the Reign of all the sins he knew: and those sins which
were secret and concealed from his view, he begs that he might be convinced of
them, and thoroughly cleansed from them, Psalm. 19. 12, 13. The Lord can turn the
Heart perfectly to hate the sin that was most of all beloved; and the strength
of sin is gone when once it is hated; and as the hatred grows stronger and
stronger, sin becomes weaker and weaker daily. Saul was a proud self-confident
Pharisee, a furious Persecutor; the Lord meets him, and stops him in his
persecuting Rage; he humbles him, works in his Heart Faith in Christ, against
whom he had such a mighty and seemingly invincible prejudice; of a Wolf he
turns him into one of the Sheep of Christ; nay, into a zealous and careful
Shepherd of the Flock; so that he preached that Faith which once he endeavored
to destroy, Gal 3. 23.

The Lord can subdue Iniquity where it has born the greatest sway. If he speaks
the word of power, down go all strongholds; reasonings that before were
thought strong, are seen to be absurd, imaginations vain, high things and
thoughts are brought into Captivity and Obedience, 2 Cor. 10. 4, 5. For the
weapons of our warfare are not carnal, but mighty through God to the pulling
down of strong holds, casting down imaginations, and every high thing that
exalts it self against the knowledge of God, and bringing into Captivity
every thought to the Obedience of Christ.

The very Prince of the Devils, Beelzebub himself, the Lord can easily
dispossess. He cast him out of Heaven, and surely he can cast him out of the
Heart also. If the Lord speak the Word, Satan falls like Lightning: How sudden
and remarkable is his Downfall! If he charge this unclean Spirit to come out,
he must presently quit his Habitation; and if he command him to keep out, he
must enter no more, Mark 9. 25. He rebuked the foul Spirit, saying unto him; I
charge thee to come out of him, and to enter no more into him.

When the Lord by the preaching of the Gospel, made himself known in the World,
how were Heathen Idols destroyed? 1 These. 1. 9. Ye turned to God from Idols, to
serve the living and true God. And whatever Worldly Enjoyments have been
idolzied, he can show the Vanity of them, and mortify inordinate Affection to
them. He is jealous of his Honor, likes not to have his Throne usurped; we are
to trust in this Lord, and to desire he would take unto this his great Power,
and Reign in us; and that no opposite Lords may be any longer served.

6. When we look upon God as Lord, we should be careful to know his Will, and
always forward to do it. That is one of the first Inquiries of a true Convert.
Lord, what will thou have me to do? Acts 9. 6. Man's Will, till renewed by
Grace, is foolish, perverse, wicked, and perniciously inclined. He wills that
which is to his own Woe. It Is but reason that such a Will should yield to the
Will of God* who is wise, holy, and good Who ever acted according to the Will
of God, and saw cause to repent of it? And sure I am, that they who do contrary
to the Will of God, must repent of it in this World, or too late in the next.
We find that Wisdom is very much placed in knowing the Will of God: Ephesians. 5. 17.
Wherefore be ye not unwise, but understanding what the Will of the Lord is: And
Happiness is placed in the doing of it. Joh. 13. 17. If ye know these things
happy are ye if ye do them. We should approve our selves better Servants, if we
did but mind more our Lord and Master's Will. In Temptation we should consider
what is the Will of God, and then the Tempter would be withstood: When earthly
Treasure is laid before us, to draw our Hearts to covet it; we should remember,
it is the Will of the Lord, that our Heart and Treasure should be in Heaven.
Whatever Duty we are setting about, toward God or Man; we should inquire how
would God have this Duty to be done? What acceptable Service then would God
have from us! And what Blessings should we be to those, whom we are related to,
and converse with! Lord, show me thy Will; and let my Will, in all things, and
at all times, be determined by thine! This is becoming Language, and every Soul
should sincerely speak it. He is the most eminent and perfect Christian, who
stands most perfect and complete in all the Will of God.

7. When we look upon God as Lord, we should never quarrel or murmur at any
thing he is pleased to do to us or with us. Arbitrary Power is very much
affected by the Potentates of this World; though it would be much more truly
great in them, to do as they ought, than to do as they please. Arbitrary Power
is justly challenged by the Lord the universal Sovereign: He may do whatever he
pleases; and it will please him to do nothing but what becomes his own Wisdom,
Goodness, and other glorious Excellencies. A mighty Monarch who had walked in
Pride, at length was so abased, that he acknowledged and honored this highest
Lord of all; and he says, All the Inhabitants of the Earth are reputed as
nothing, and he does according to his Will in the Armies of Heaven, and among
the Inhabitants of the Earth, Dan 4. 35. The Dispensations of Divine Providence
must not fall under our Censure. He that reproves God will ill answer for it.
It Is sinful Boldness to strive with him, and say, What do thou? As if he had
not done so well as he might: It Is more becoming, with obedient Patience and
Submission, to cry out: Oh the Depth of the Riches, both of the Wisdom and
Knowledge of God! How unsearchable are his Judgments, and his Ways past finding
out! Romans 11. 33. and Psalm. 145. 17. The Lord is righteous in all his Ways, and
holy in all his Works. When under his severer Dealings with us, we charge him
with Rigor and want of Care; we do but charge God foolishly. His Understanding
is infinite, Psalm 147. 5. therefore he is not liable to the least Mistake: His
Bowels are tender, and he can never become Cruel It Is inconsistent with his
Justice, to lay upon any Man more than is right, that he should enter into
Judgment with God, Job 34. 23. He is so gracious that he afflicts when his
People need, and it is good for them to be afflicted. That Man spoke very ill who
said I do well to be angry. Whatever the Lord does to his People, he does
wisely, justly, faithfully; how then can their Fretting and Impatience be
justified! It would be far better for them to cease their Contention and
Disputing, and to answer as Job at last did, Job 40 4, 5. Behold, I am vile,
what shall I answer thee? I will lay my Hand upon my Mouth; once have I spoken,
but I will not anwer, yea twice, but I will proceed no farther.

8. When we look upon God as Lord, we should long to behold his Glory in his
Kingdom. It was the Desire of Moses, Exodus 33. 18. I beseech thee show me thy
Glory. It is but little that the Saints see of the King of Saints, in
comparison of what they shall see. They know but in part, and how should they
long that that which is perfect may come, and that which is in part may be done
away, 1 Cor. 13. 10. The Earth is the Lord's Footstool, and here we behold but
some Footsteps and Shaddows, and have a darker Discovery of him; but the Heaven
is his Throne, and when we come to stand before his Throne; how bright will be
his Majesty in our Eyes! How glorious his Holiness! How will his Face be all
Light and Love! And how ravishing will the fullest Sense of that Love be! It
should be our Care by a continual Increase of Purity in Heart, to be fitted for
this beatifical Vision of the Lord of Glory. Mat. 5. 8. Blessed are the pure in
Heart, for they shall see God. And this Vision should the more longed for,
because it will be transforming. When we behold the Lord's Glory, we shall
partake of it; when we see him, we shall, to our eternal Excellency and
Satisfaction, be like him. 1 John 3. 2. Beloved, now are we the Sons of God,
but it does not yet appear what we shall be; but we know when he shall appear,
we shall be like him; for we shall see him as he is.

In the last place follows the Application.

USE I. shall be of Reproof. Well may the Mouth of his Messengers be full of
Reproof, since the Lord that sends them is so generally disregarded. Several
sorts of Persons are worthy Reprehension.

1. They are to be reproved, who say with Pharaoh, who is the Lord that we
should obey his Voice? How many are there who will not acknowledge they owe him
any Service; or if they do acknowledge it; they are so wicked and unrighteous,
that they will not render what they cannot but confess is due to him! How many
say, Our Lips are our own, who is Lord over us? Psalm. 12. 4. who is he that
would give laws to our Tongues; and put them under a Bridle? They say also, our
Members are all our own, and therefore we will employ them as we please; though
that employing is abusing and abasing of them, to be Instruments of
Unrighteousness unto Sin. Our Time also is our own, and therefore we will pass
it according to our own Pleasure, as if Time were a thing of no Value, and to
have it well or ill with them to Eternity, were a matter of mere Indifferency.
They that now cry, Who is the Lord? When they stand, as they all must, before
his Judgment Seat, he will make them know who he is. How terrifying will his
Looks be! How heavy will his Hand be felt! They would not obey the Scepter of
his Word; and he will break them with his Iron Rod, and dash them in pieces
like a Potter's Vessel, Psalm. 2. 9.

2. They are to be reproved who have a greater Reverence for Man than for God,
who is the sovereign Lord of all. They dare not displease great Men; but the
great God they make bold to offend. Men whom they depend upon, they are careful
to keep in with; but that God, in whose Hand their Breath is, and whose are all
their Ways they do not glorify, Dan. 5. 23. They depend upon this Lord for
their Being and Blessedness, and all things. Their Life is continued only
during his Pleasure; all things that they have are of his bestowing; and if
ever they are blessed, it is God must make them so; and yet the Favor and Anger
of this God, are contemned in Comparison of the Love and Hatred of Man. How
many will comply with the Lusts of Men that will not conform to the Will of
God? Men's Inventions are regarded more than God's Institutions. Thus the
Statutes of Omri were kept, and all the Works of the House of Ahab, and Israel
did walk in their Counsels, Mic. 6. 16. when they rejected the Counsel of God
against themselves, and cast the Laws of Jehovah behind their Backs. But how
poor a thing is Man's Help against Divine Anger! Nay, here the mightiest Man
can be no Security. Job 9. 13. If God will not withdraw his Anger, the proud
Helpers do stoop under him: And those whom the Lord does undertake to comfort,
why should Man that shall dye dismay them. Isa. 51. 12, 13. I, even I am he
that comfort you. Who art thou that thou should be afraid of a Man that
shall dye, and of the Son of Man which shall be as Grass? And forgetest the
Lord thy Maker, that stretched forth the Heavens, and laid the Foundations of
the Earth? His Power may well make the Fury of Oppressors contemptible: But
God's Power is irresistible, as his Wrath is intolerable.

3. They are to be reproved who prefer the worst Lords before the greatest and
the best of all. The true God is certainly the best Lord; and Sin and Satan are
the worst that can be served; and yet how few has the former, how many Servants
have the later! The Lord's Government is most gracious; the Paths he requires
us to walk in are Pleasantness and Peace, Prove. 3. 17. But the Ways of Sin are
quite contrary. No Peace says my God to the wicked, Isa. 57. 21. Whatever, Sin
in the beginning may seem, its End is bitter as Wormwood, sharp as a two-edged
Sword; and they that serve it, their Feet go down to Death, and their Steps
will quickly take hold of Hell. Shall I show you the manner of Sin and Satan's
Reign? Their Vassals are put upon Cruel Hard Service, and they must stick at
nothing. If the fulfilling of their Lusts call for it, the Estate must be
wasted, Health must be endangered, Repute and good Name must be disregarded,
Posterity must be beggared, Life it self must be shortened, and the precious
Soul lost for ever, rather than sin not be gratified and served. Sin has a Law,
and what Command does it impose upon those that are subject to it? Its
Injunctions are such as these; Fight against God, and slight the Wrath of the
Lord Almighty. Mind neither thy Duty, nor thy Safety. Pursue Vanity and
Vexation of Spirit, but care not for the truest and eternal Blessedness. Be
sure to please thy Flesh, and seek thy self and mind thy Carnal Interest,
though thou art in the worst Sense undone thereby. Go on impenitently and
securely in thy Wickedness, till thou fall into Hell Flames. Do all this and
dye, and damn thy self unto Eternity. What hard sayings are these! Yet
Thousands and Millions hear and obey them! It is amazing that those who have
reasonable Souls, should act so void of all sound Reason, as to refuse his
Service, who commands them to be wise, and safe, and good, and should choose to
be Fools, and to be miserable!

4. They are to be reproved, who have begun to serve the Lord; and afterward
forsake his Service, and revolt from him. These revolters show a great Zeal and
Forwardness in Religion, many of them, for a time; they seem to have escaped
the pollutions of the World, and to have got the Victory over it, and to have
overcome the evil One: but being again entangled and overcome themselves by
Mammon and Satan, they are a credit to these Masters, and to their false and
pernicious ways; but they are a great dishonor to Religion, and to the Author
of it the Lord of Glory. These revolters discover an evil heart of unbelief in
departing from the living God, which is so much cautioned against, Heb. 3. 12.
and if without Faith it is impossible to please God, how much must he needs be
provoked by infidelity! and with what Torments will their unbelief at last be
confuted and punished together! These Revolters quench a great deal of Light
which has shined into them, this aggravates the works of darkness unto which
they return; though they have under Conviction felt the Terrors of the Lord,
yet they venture more than ever to incense him; in a special manner they grieve
the Spirit of God, and deeply wound their own Spirits: But these Wounds are not
felt at present; their Consciences are seared, Satan has fuller and faster
possession of them; fullness of sin quickly follows; and the last state with
them is worse than the first, Mat. 12. 45.

USE II. Shall be of Advice in these particulars.

1. Hearken to the Lord inviting and calling you all to his Service. There is
room in his House for many Thousands more than are there; and there is
plentiful and abundant provision for their entertainment. In my Father's House,
says the Prodigal when he came to himself, there is Bread enough and to spare,
Luke 15. 17. Christ's Sacrifice of himself can put away multitudes of sins more
than as yet have been pardoned. And though Millions of empty and lost Souls
more come to him, out of his fullness they may be all replenished, and secure
under the shadow of his wings. His Messengers say to you Come, himself says
Come, his Spirit says Come; your Wants which none but he can supply, speak
aloud to you to go to him; keep therefore no longer at a distance. He is most
ready to receive you graciously, and to communicate grace of all sorts to you.

2. Behold how willing this Lord is to pass by all past disobedience upon your
believing and repentance. The Apostle Paul was not upbraided with his
persecuting Rage and Hellish Fury, when once he submitted himself to the Lord,
and laid down his Weapons wherewith he had fought against God. The Grace of our
Lord, says he, was exceeding abundant, with Faith and Love that is in Christ
Jesus, 1 Timothy 1. 14. and v. 15, 16. he tells us, that he the chief of sinners
obtained Mercy, that the greatest sinners hereafter may hope and expect Mercy
upon their believing and Conversion. Howbeit for this Cause I obtained Mercy,
that in me first Jesus Christ might show forth all long-suffering for a Pattern
to them who should hereafter believe on him to Life Everlasting. Whatever your
Rebellions have been; if now you be willing and obedient. All shall be
forgotten and forgiven. Scarlet and Crimson Sins, shall become white as Snow
and Wool, Isa. 1. 18, 19.

3. See where your Righteousness and Strength lies. Jesus Christ the righteous
is the Righteousness of them that do believe. His Obedience and Sufferings can
satisfy for and cover all your Disobedience, and it is through him alone that
you attain the free Gift of Justification of Life. He became obedient to Death,
even the Death of the Cross, Psalm. 2. 8. and it is by the Obedience of this one,
the second Adam, that all, as many can believe in him are made righteous, Romans
5. 19. And as in the Lord you, have Righteousness, so in him you have Strength
too. His Power must rest upon you* else no good will be done by you: Through
his Strength all things may be done, but he himself says, without me ye can do
nothing, Joh. 15. 5. Never think by good Works to satisfy for bad ones: The
best Works have much amiss in them: And by no means entertain an Imagination,
that at your own Pleasure you can work in your selves to will and to do; but
always acknowledge, the necessity and Efficacy of the Grace of Christ, and
glorify that Grace, saying, when you obey and labor, it is not I, but the
Grace of God that is with me.

4. Earnestly desire that your Hearts may be circumcised to love both the Lord
himself, and his Service likewise. It is a Promise worth more, and if made good
to us, will enrich us more, than the Wealth of both the Indies: Deuteronomy. 30. 6.
The Lord thy God will circumcise thy Heart, and the Heart of thy Seed to love
the Lord thy God with all thy Heart, and with all thy Soul, that thou may
live. An Heart to love him is his own Gift, and the Heart must be circumcised
by himself, before it will be brought to love him. The Prophet speaks of the
Foreskin of the Heart; that must be taken away. Now this Foreskin of the Heart
is Carnal and Worldly Love, together with Enmity against God and his Law. Cry
to the Lord according to his good Word of Promise to mortify the one, and to
subdue the other: And that he would give you a new Heart and Nature, cause a
new Light to shine that may manifest his glorious Goodness in the Face of
Christ, and so direct your Hearts into the Love of himself. If he be truly
loved, he will be the more willingly obeyed; and truly his Precepts are worthy
to be loved too; the better they are kept, the more truly excellent are those
that keep them. And themselves are kept in more perfect Peace. The Psalmist
says, My Soul has kept thy Testimonies, and I love them exceedingly, Psalm.
119. 167. and no wonder, for he had said before, v. 165. Great Peace have they
that love thy Law, and nothing shall offend them. Such a Lord, such a Law
deserves Love, and Love will sweeten Service, it will not count this Service
tedious, but mightily incline the Heart to Perseverance in its Duty.

5. Let your Fear and Awe of the Lord's Majesty, when you attend upon him, be
joined with an Hope in his Mercy. If Fear and Hope are thus joined together, as
you will be the more encouraged in God, so God will take the more Pleasure in
you: For the Lord takes Pleasure in them that fear him, and in those that hope
in his Mercy, Psalm* ^47. 11. The Mercy of God is magnified in his Word, on
purpose that Hope may be raised, and rise still higher and higher. This Lord on
whom you ought to attend, is rich in Mercy; His merciful Kindness is great,
Psalm. 117. 2. He has Mercy, not upon the account of Merit in Man, but because
he will have Mercy, Romans 9. 18. And how often is it said, Psalm 136. that his
Mercy endures for ever! Here is a large and firm Foundation for Hope to build
on. And if your Hope be not presumptuous, but of a purifying Nature; you may
from such a merciful Lord, confidently expect that Grace, and those good things
you need in time: And when your short time is at an end, the best things of all
unto eternity.

I have done with the second Doctrine.

Doct. III. I come now to the third and last Doctrine, which I principally
design to insist on, That Attendance upon the Lord should be without
Distractien. It Is not only Apostasy from the Faith, and the Practice of
Religion, which the Apostle bids us to take heed of, which is a more gross
departing away from God; but he cautions against any Withdrawings of Heart from
that Lord with whom we have to do. Therefore in a time of Distress and
Persecution, he prefers a single State before Wedlock; not that Marriage in it
self considered, has any thing of Sin in it, for it is honorable in all; not
that a single State in it self has any thing of Holiness, but because the Cares
that attend Marriage, are apt to distract the Mind, and to hinder the things
that belong to the Lord, from being cared for as they ought and might be.
Indeed in the Context there is a plain Intimation, that it is a great part of
Christian Prudence, so to order our secular Affairs, and to make choice of such
a Condition of Life as may be most subservient to our spiritual Designs, and
may least interfere with our main Business, which is the Lord's Service, that
that may be done without Distraction. They are pronounced to be the blessed
ones, who keep God's Testimonies, and that seek him with the whole Heart, Psalm.
119. 2. And since the whole Heart must seek him; the Thoughts, the Affections,
the all of the Heart must attend upon him, nothing of the Soul must be absent
or withdrawn. The Prophet speaks of the Hearts engaging to approach unto God,
Jer. 30. 21. For who is this that engages his Heart to approach unto me? Says
the Lord. That the Heart may be thus engaged for God; it must be disengaged
from other things, and all that is within it too, must be engaged to approach
to him. When Moses and the Children of Israel were to go into the Wilderness to
serve the Lord: They went with their young and old, with their Flocks and their
herds, there was not an Hoof left behind, Exodus 10. 26. And when we go to serve
our God, we should go with our all: No Power of our Souls should be exempted,
not so much as a Thought should be left behind.

In the handling of this Doctrine I shall, First, tell you what Distraction in
attending upon God is; Secondly, What it is to attend upon the Lord without
Distraction. Thirdly, Assign the Reasons why, with such Care, we should take
heed of Distraction in serving him. Answer in the fourth place, some Cases of
Conscience about these Distractions. Fifthly, make Application.


In the first place, I am to tell you what Distraction in attending upon God
is. It Is the first Step to the Cure, to know our Disease, and to have a right
Sense of it. Several things are here to be premised.

1. Distraction is the Fault of the Heart: That deceitful and wicked thing; how
many Faults has it! And how often does it withdraw when we have to do with God,
flying as Jonah from his Presence! and being any where but where it should be!
Indeed sometimes this Distraction does but too visibly and scandalously appear
by unnecessary Whisperings, by Salutations when Persons are in God's Sanctuary
and Service, by the wandering of the Eye, and other irreverent Carriage and
Behavior in the time of Worship: These, when ordinarily allowed, are plain
Indications, that the Heart is not in God's Work, and which is worse, cares not
to be engaged therein: And how blameworthy then is it! It is the Heart which
foolishly departs from the Lord. It is not so right and steadfast with him as it
should be. Psalm. 78. 8. A Generation that set not their Heart aright, and whose
Spirit was not steadfast with God; has a Brand set upon them, that we may take
heed of being like them.

2. Distraction is a Fault that is most easily incurred; as the Leaves of some
Trees waver with the least stirring of the Wind, so the Mind of Man is apt to
waver, and discover its natural Instability, when Corruption stirs within, or
Satan endeavors to put the Heart into Disorder. How far may the Heart, if it
be not strictly watched, start of a sudden! as far as the East is from the
West! nay, as far as Earth is from Heaven! It Is natural to the Soul to lift up
it self to Vanity. This is intimated plainly by the Psalmist, when he describes
the acceptable Attendant on God to be one that has not lift up his Soul to
Vanity, Psalm. 24. 4. By Vanity we may understand Idols which are called by that
Name; or the Vanities of this World, which the Heart is so prone to gad, and
rove after, even when Duties of the greatest Importance are performing, and
which ought to be performed with the greatest Fixedness of Thought, and
Seriousness imaginable.

3. The longer the Distraction is, it is the worse. A Heart which is truly good
and honest, may be seized on by Distraction before it is aware. The evil one
may step into the Chariot and begin to drive it away from God; deceitful Sin
may suddenly arise in the Soul, and begin to disturb and defile it: But when
this is quickly observed, and the wakeful Conscience checks the Heart, and the
upright Heart is glad of the Admonition, and presently checks it self, and
immediately returns to its Lord, and to its Work and Duty: Satan misses his
Aim, and the Duty shall not be lost. The Soul which follows hardest after God,
may sometimes stumble; but if as soon as it is down, it is up again, and runs the
faster: This running will not be in vain.

But when Distraction continues for a great while, it argues the Conscience is
not so vigilent and faithful as it should be, in that it does not correct these
vagrant Thoughts which come into the Mind. There is a Fault also in the Heart,
that it can so patiently endure, such vain Guests to lodge in it for so long a
time before they are turned out of doors. The Psalmist says, that his Spirit
made diligent Search, Psalm. 77. 6. A Spirit that does so will quickly take
notice of these roving Imaginations; and there is an endeavor to thrust them
out as soon as they are found out: But if there is a Carelessness, and too great
a Connivance at these Wanderings; though the Soul may not be quite dead in Sin;
yet there is much of a Spiritual Lethargy and Sleepiness, which is the Image of
spiritual Death.

4. If Distractions in holy Duties are ordinarily allowed of, they argue the
Heart not right with God. When the Heart is constantly absent from Ordinances,
and does not care to be better inclined and disposed to them; when it willingly
is at Mammon's and Satan's Command, even then when the Body draws nigh to God,
and there is a Lip-honour and Service given to him; this argues plainly that
the Heart is unrenewed, and remains alienated and estranged from the Lord. The
Heart must needs be still carnal and wicked, and Enmity against God, that is
like the eyes of Fools in the End of the Earth, Prove. 17. 24. When things above
should be sought, and Heaven should be minded.

These things being premised, I shall tell you what Distraction in attending
upon God is, in in these Particulars.

1. The Heart is distracted in this Attendance, when its Thoughts are
impertinent and vain. These kind of Thoughts may well be called Legion, for
they are many. They are like the Motes in the Sun, or the Bubbles in the Water,
on a rainy Day, innumerable. These Thoughts hover about the Minds of the best,
when they engage in holy Duties, and will presently intrude, if they are not
kept out with a very strict Guard. But where they are entertained, they draw
off the Heart from the Work in hand, and the Lord sees it, and is displeased.
Psalm. 94. 11. The Lord knows the Thoughts of Man, that they are Vanity; and
Impertinency, is not the smallest part of this Vanity. Vain Man is compared to
a wild Ass's Colt, Job 11. 12. The Silliness of that Creature, and its Frisks
and Motions to little purpose, are a fit Representation of the Mind of Man, and
of its foolish Sallies and Vagaries in the Lord's Service. Who has not reason
to cry out with the Psalmist, Psalm. 69. 5. O God thou know my Foolishness,
and my Sins are not hid from thee. If in the Performance of holy Duties the
Tongue should fall a talking of some other matter, and idle and vain Discourse
should proceed out of the Lips; this would be a scandalous Distraction that
others might take notice of: Now thinking is the Minds speaking, and the
Heart-searcher can and does more easily take notice when the Mind thinks
impertinently, than we can observe when the Tongue speaks so.

2. The Heart is distracted, when in religious Duties its Thoughts are wicked
and vile. Our Lord who well knew what is in Man, tells us, Mat. 15. 19. Out of
the Heart of Man proceed evil Thoughts. These are the first bad Offspring, and
the greatest Wickedness that is acted, begins with them: How great was Man's
Wickedness upon Earth! When God saw that every Imagination of the Thoughts of
his Heart was only evil continually, Genesis 6. 5. If Thoughts are evil
continually, they don't cease to be evil, when Duties of Religion are engaged
in. When proud Thoughts, or wanton filthy Thoughts, or worldly Thoughts, or
envious, malicious, and revengeful Thoughts, or any other wicked Imaginations
have place in the Heart: These, as Swarms of noisome Flies, corrupt Men's
Services, and make their Sacrifices unto God to become abominable. By these the
Mind does not only wander from God, but is alienated and estranged from him.
The Heart is in Hell, while the Eyes are looking up to Heaven, and the Tongue
is speaking to the God that dwells there. When a Man with an Heart full of such
sinful Thoughts approaches unto God; how loathsome must he needs be unto his
pure and piercing Eye! The Lord beholds and knows him afar off, Psalm. 138. 6.
And indeed, what Fellowship can there be between Holiness and Pollution? Its
much more unbecoming and dangerous for such an one to approach the Presence of
God, than it would be for the foulest Leper, with the nastiest Garments, to
come before the greatest Emperor upon the Face of the Earth.

3. The Heart is distracted in attending on God. When hellish Injections are
entertained, Satan shows his deep and inveterate Enmity against God, in these
blasphemous Injections, and he creates a very troublesome Disturbance to us in
the Lord's Service; he has fiery Darts whereby he does endeavor to cause Hell
Fire in our Consciences, by dispairing Agonies and Horrors: And blasphemous
Thoughts are like fiery Bombs which he shoots into our Souls; to put us into
Disorder in our Duties, and utterly out of Frame. Sometimes this wickedly bold
and foul and wretched Spirit will give the vilest Names to the blessed God,
which are given to the worst of Men. Sometimes he will say that divine Favor
and Fury are both contemptible, and as if he were a mere Idol, that it is not in
him to do good or to do evil, Zeph. 1. 12. whereas indeed penal Evils are all
from him. Amo. 3. 6. Shall there be evil in the City and the Lord has not done
it? And the Psalmist tells, Psalm. 33. 5. He loves Righteousness and Judgment,
the Earth is full of the Goodness of the Lord.

Sometimes Satan will deny the Providence of God, and say, how does God know?
And is there Knowledge in the most high? As if he did not regard Men or their
Ways; but that all things in this World fall out, either according to blind
Chance, or fatal Necessity; whereas the Psalmist, with great Force and Evidence
of Reason argues, Psalm. 94. 9, 10. He that planted the Ear, shall he not hear?
He that formed the Eye, shall he not see? He that teaches Man Knowledge, shall
not he know? Nay, sometimes this evil one, though himself believes a God, and
trembles before him, yet will inject atheistical Thoughts, and confidently deny
the very Being of a God, that he may discourage all Religion and Application to
him: Whereas the Heavens declare the Glory of the Lord, and as the Light of the
Sun is evident, so it is evident there is a God, by whom that Sun was made, and
all things visible besides.

Finally, this lying Spirit will bear in with great Violence, blasphemous
Falsehoods against the Word and Gospel of Jesus Christ. Christ was manifested to
destroy the Works of the Devil; and the Devil will endeavor to hinder the Word
of Christ from being believed; though God himself did bear witness to the Truth
of this Word, both with Signs and Wonders, and with diverse Miracles and Gifts
of the Holy Ghost, according to his own Will, Heb. 2. 4. and miraculous
Operations of Grace cease not to this Day. When a blind Mind is made to see,
when an Heart of Stone is turned into an Heart of Flesh; when the dead in Sin
are made alive to God, and Righteousness is their Practice, and their
Conversation is in Heaven; all this shows a divine Efficacy in the Word, and
its divine Authority, and most certain Truth.

These hellish Injections must by no means have an undisturbed Abode in the
Mind; for if they have, they will cut the Sinews of all religious Endeavors:
They will damp the Affections, dead the Heart, and eat out all manner of
gracious Inclinations and Purposes. These blasphemous Injections show that
there is a Devil, for even Nature, as bad as it is* will rise against some vile
Thoughts, which he casts in, and he is an Enemy to God, to Righteousness, to
the Souls of Men, and as great a Liar as an Enemy; therefore he is not at all
to be credited, but his Wickedness and Falsehoods to be abhorred.

4. The Heart is distracted, when though its Thoughts are good, they are
unseasonable. A good Thought becomes a bad one, when it is entertained at a time
that is not proper for it. If when we are confessing Sin, a Thought, good for
the matter of it, arises that is utterly alien, that draws the Mind away from
thinking of Sin, and that has no Tendency to humble and break the Heart for it:
This Thought, by its Unseasonableness, becomes evil. If when we are Petitioning
for Mercy, a good Thought should intrude, and make us forget what we are doing,
and we neither mind what we are asking, nor to whom we are speaking. A good
Thought in this Case causes a sinful Distraction: Solomon says, that every
thing is beautiful in its time, Eccles. 3. 11. A Word spoken in due season, how
good is it! And as Words, so Thoughts are the better the more seasonable they
are. If the subtle Serpent cannot divert the Mind from the Duty performing, by
bad Thoughts, he will endeavor to do it by good ones. If when hearing the Word
preached, we fall a reading the Scripture to our selves, or our Minds are upon
a Piece of a Sermon hat we heard at another time, and the Truths that are
propounding, and the Duties that are pressing, are not at all regarded: Alas,
we are but too much like the very high way ground, and the Seed is catched away
as soon as sown.

5. The Heart is distracted when the Mind and Judgment are so carnal and
perverted, as to esteem earthly things above spiritual and eternal. When our
Lord says, The Light of the Body is the Eye, Mat. 6. 22. He intimates, that
what the Eye is to the Body, the Judgment is to the Soul, and indeed to the
whole Man: If the Judgment be rectified, and apprehends things aright, the
actings of the Soul will be the better; but if the Judgment be darkened, and
does not discern between Truth and Falsehood, between good and evil, between
Substance and Shaddows, the Soul must needs wander away from God, and lose it
self quickly. When the Judgment is perverted, there is a very wicked
Distraction of Mind, for the Judgment gives Sentence against God, and for the
Creature, as if a Portion in this Life were more worthy to be chosen, and
secured than an Inheritance that is eternal. It was said to the rich Man in
Hell, Son, remember thou in thy life time receivedst thy good things, Luke 16.
25 They are called his good things, because his mistaking Mind apprehended them
to be the good things indeed; and the best things of all, were not in his
Judgment so good as these. How can the natural Man choose but be distracted in
all his Duties he performs to God, since his darkened Mind thinks such Duties
unprofitable, and that the things of God are Foolishness, 1 Cor. 2. 14. The
natural man receives not the things of the Spirit of God, for they are
Foolishness unto him, neither can he know them because they are spiritually
discerned.

6. The Heart is distracted, when the Will and Affections withdraw from God and
fasten upon Vanity: A false Judgment being past, no wonder that a foolish
Choice is made. This is an ill distraction indeed: When the Biass of the Will
turns away from God, and it refuses to be subject to him, though the best Lord,
and cares as little to enjoy him as to obey him. The Lord observed and
complained of this. Psalm. 81. 11. My People would none of me. He offered no
less than himself to them; who is so infinitely desirable, who was so
alsufficient and able to fulfill their Desires, in whom the truest Delight was
to be found, yet this greatest and best Offer was contemned. And when the Heart
and Affections are thus denied to God, how are they bestowed? Pleasures are
loved more than God, and even in his House, and when there is an external
Service yielded: the Heart goes after its Covetousness, Ezekiel. 33. 31. There is
a Greediness after Gain; no hungring and thirsting after Righteousness:
Iniquity, though so hateful and hurtful, is regarded in the Heart, but there is
no regard unto God there. How can there be a worse Distraction, than for the
Heart to forsake Fullness and Goodness it self, and to embrace and fix upon
mere Emptiness and Evil! In this Distraction there is Phrenzy in the highest
Degree.

7. The Heart is distracted, when carnal self and interest in attending upon
God, is the great end designed. The end is that which directs an action; and
the eye and heart of him who acts, is upon the end which he pursues. If the end
be wrong, the action cannot be right. Without a sincere aim, no religious Duty
can sincerely be performed. Now if we look no higher than our carnal selves, in
those Services we pretend to do for God, our selfish design will be in our
Thoughts, and distract them: Acceptance with God, and the Enjoyment of him,
will not be at all minded. The Captives in Babylon were blamed in their Fasting
and Mourning, that God was not in their Eye; his Approbation, his Glory not
regarded. Zach. 7. 5. Did ye at all fast unto me, even unto me? They minded
returning to Canaan, more than returning to God and to their Duty. If indeed we
are truly selfish, God will not be angry with us; for there is an inseparable
connection between God's Honor, and our truest interest. When we seek and eye
him most, we most truly eye and seek our selves: God has the highest Honor
from us, when we look for the highest Happiness in him, and love him for
himself, and delight in him and bless and magnify him to eternity. But when
God himself is not our end; but his Service is made use of, that we may the
better bring about our earthly and worldly designs and projects: Our Duties
then are Hypocrisy and Distraction. Such were those whom the Prophet so
severely taxed. Jer. 12 2. Thou art near, O Lord, in their Mouths, and far from
their Reins. They gave good words, but their Hearts were far off from that God
to whom they spoke: It was outward Prosperity and Plenty which they sought; and
this Plenty and Prosperity was most wickedly abused.

8. The Heart is distracted, when the worship performed is Will worship of
Man's Invention, not of God's Institution. How can there choose but be
Distraction, if there be a wandering out of the Way in which he has appointed us
to serve him? The Jews of old were very culpable in this respect. Isa. 29. 13.
Their Fear toward me, says God, is taught by the Precepts of Men: When Man
aspired to be like unto God in Wisdom, he deprived himself of the Knowledge of
God, and grew unacquainted with his Will, so that he is utterly unfit to be his
own Instructor in Religion; there is a necessity of a Revelation from Heaven,
that God may be known* and the right way of serving him may be understood. The
vilest Impurities, the greatest Cruelties have been practiced under the Name of
Devotion, when Man has been contriving how God should be served. Nay,
Will Worship is condemned by the Apostle, though there be never so great a show
of Wisdom and Humility, and neglecting of the Body, Col. 2. 23. The Will of God
is to determine what Worship pleases him, not the Will of Man; and whatever
Mortifications and Austerities some may fancy; God allows an honor and
satisfaction to the flesh, as long as the Lusts of it are not fulfilled.
Worship that is not of God's Institution, is mere distraction, labor to no
purpose, unless it be to ill purpose. When God is represented by Images, he is
grossly misrepresented; the Glory of him who is an incorruptible Spirit is
changed. When other Mediators in Heaven are made use of, besides that great
High Priest who is passed into Heaven, Jesus the Son of God, worship becomes
carnal, sinful, and the mind of the Worshipper instead of drawing near to God,
is distracted and drawn away from him.

In the second place I am to tell you what it is to attend upon the Lord
without distraction.

1. To attend without distraction, is to set God just before us, and our selves
just before God. When our Eye is fixed upon his Eye, and we behold him looking
most steadfastly upon us. He searches the Hearts, and weighs the Spirits of the
Children of Men. Nothing can escape his finding out, for he knows the Secrets
of the Heart, Psalm. 44. 21. Does not he see my ways? says Job; not only the
ways of the Feet, but the ways and Workings of his very Soul, were open to
God's View. We are all here present before God, says Cornelius, Acts 10. 33. I
have set the Lord always before me, says David, Psalm. 16. 8. This is
undistracted Attendance, when the Lord is still kept in our view; and we keep
and behave our selves as just under the inspection of the all-observing Eye of
his Holiness.

2. To attend without distraction, is to have right apprehensions of God, whom
we attend upon. God is a Spirit, and as such he must be apprehended when we
worship him; that we may worship him in spirit and in truth, and that our
Conceptions of him may be spiritual, and suitable unto his Nature. As he is
without Passions, which Men are subject to, so without those bodily parts which
Men have. Indeed metaphorically, Eyes, and Hands, and Feet, and Heart are in
Scripture ascribed unto God; but by these is signified, his Knowledge, his
Working, his Accesses and Departing, his Will and Pleasure. We must take heed
of entertaining gross Idea's and Images in our Minds concerning God, Act. 17.
29. We ought not to think, says the Apostle, that the Godhead is like unto
Gold, or Silver, or Stone graven by art or Man's device. Such kind of
Representations are very improper of him, who not only fills the Earth, but the
Heaven of Heavens cannot contain him. Our worship is distraction, and the heart
is drawn away from God unto a mere Vanity and Idol, if God is conceived in the
likeness of any Creature. How severely are the Gentiles censured, and how
dreadfully were they punished, and left to their vile Lusts and Affections, to
dishonor their own Bodies; because they glorified not God as God, but changed
his Glory into the Image of corruptible Creatures! Romans 1. 21, 22, 23. Because
that when they knew God, they glorified him not as God, neither were thankful,
but became vain in their imaginations, and their foolish heart was darkened;
professing themselves to be wise they became Fools, and changed the Glory of
the incorruptible God, into an Image made like to corruptible Man, and to Birds
and fourfooted Beasts, and creeping things.

In our Attendance upon God, we must think of him, as an incomprehensible
Spirit, of infinite Wisdom, Power, Truth, Holiness, Mercy and Goodness; ready
in Christ to receive returning Sinners, but full of displeasure against those
that go on still in their Trespasses. God must be believed to be One, yet in
the Unity there is a Trinity. This one God is Father, Son, and Holy Ghost.
Nazianzen an ancient Greek Father, thus expresses his apprehensions of God,
when he came to worship him. I am not able, says he, to apprehend One, but I am
presently struck with the brightness of Three* I am not able to distinguish
Three, but I am presently brought back to One again. Regulate your
Apprehensions of God by that Revelation he has made of himself in his own Word;
and pry no farther than what is written, that so you may undistractedly worship
God himself, and not the fruit of your imagination instead of him.

3. To attend without distraction, implies the greatest intention of mind. As
all the Lines from the circumference of a Circle, meet together in one point of
the Center, so the Thoughts of the Mind should center upon God, and the Duty
that is done to him. God should be so minded, as that all other things should
be out of mind. Though the Soul is united to the Body, yet it should be in a
sense separated, as risen with Christ, and with him ascended, and sitting in
heavenly places, Ephesians. 2. 6. And has raised us up together, and made us sit
together in heavenly places in Christ Jesus. How intent upon God, and his
Praises are the Spirits of Just Men made perfect! And the Spirits of Saints
Militant should imitate those that are Triumphant. It is storied of that famous
Mathematician Archimedes, that when Syracuse was taken by Marcellus, he was so
intent in making Figures upon the ground, that he minded not the taking of the
City, and was slain by a Soldier that knew not who he was; for Marcellus had
given a Commandment to save him. If such a danger could not disturb the
intention of Archimedes, for the saving of a City, the saving of a Soul, does
justly challenge a greater intention in every Duty we perform to God.

4. To attend without distraction, implies the highest concernedness of Soul.
Faith should be strong, and constrain the Mind to be serious; things invisible
should be represented so evident and substantial, as if they were most visible
and apparent. God should be addressed, as if he appeared to us as he did to
Abraham; as if he talked with us, as he did to the Children of Israel from
Mount Sinai; With humbleness of Mind, and self-abasement, considering our
distance, guilt and vileness: we should cry out, Let not the Lord be angry if
we entreat the forgiveness of Sin, and that our Souls may live before him! Now
we should stir up our selves and take hold of God, Isa. 64. 7. Now his
Strength, and his Son, and his Covenant may be laid hold on; within a little
while, it may be too late, and impossible to do it. We should be concerned in
all Duties, and perform them with such a solicitous care, as if we saw the Dart
of the last Enemy ready to pierce us, and the Grave open for us; as if we saw
the Judge upon the great white Throne, and all both small and great standing
before God, and the Books opened, that they might be judged according to their
Works, Rev. 20. 11, 12. There should be a concernedness of Spirit, as if we saw
the World in a flame, Hell naked before us, and we beheld the flashings of
eternal fire, as if we saw Heaven opened, and all that Glory that is there.
Weight, and Worth, and Necessity command Concernedness; now when we attend on
God, we draw nigh to him about those things that are of most absolute
necessity, and of the greatest worth and weight imaginable.

5. To attend without distraction implies, the fullest bent and inclination of
heart; there must be intensivum velle, a strong propension of the Will toward
God, and this is expressed by longing, by panting, Psalm. 42. 1. As the Heart
pants after the Waterbrooks, so pants my soul after thee, O God. It Is the
Lord himself that thus determines the Will toward himself; and this he does
without compulsion; for he alters the Nature and Inclination of it, so that the
Will being made free by Divine Grace, uses its liberty aright, and chooses God
as its end, and the way of his Testimonies. Such an end, such a way is most
worthy to be chosen. The Heart now designs and desires the enjoying Fellowship
with God, as infinitely more valuable than all other Enjoyments. And this full
bent of the Heart, mightily fixes it; so that the stream of the Affections is
kept the better in one undivided Channel: When the Psalmist said, there was
none on Earth he desired besides God, it plainly showed, that his desire after
God swallowed up his desire after worldly things; and when he says, Whom have I
in Heaven but God! He signifies that he should not count Heaven it self to be
Heaven indeed, without the Enjoyment of God there.

6. To attend without distraction, implies a sincere care to please the Lord in
that attendance, his Approbation being principally minded. Man's good thoughts
and word, are more easily gained, but the Jew inwardly, his praise is not of
Man but of God, Romans 2. 29. And indeed all other Commendations are
insignificant, unless the Lord commands, 2 Cor. 10. 18. The undistracted
Attendant, studies to approve himself to God. With what confidence does David
speak before his all discerning Judge, that he had walked in his integrity,
Psalm. 26. 1. and Psalm. 17. 3. Thou have proved my heart, thou have visited me
in the night: Thou have tried me, and shall find nothing. He was not conscious
to himself of regarded sin, or of allowed guile and negligence in the Lord's
Service: Care to please that God whom we serve, is a necessary ingredient in
every Service that is acceptable. This care commands the heart into the
presence of God, and keeps it there; and he loves to see Hearts before him, set
on him, and seeking after him.

7. To attend without distraction, implies resisting all attempts to draw away
the heart from God. Satan and Mammon will be knocking at the Door of the Heart,
while it is attending upon the Lord, and the flesh which lusts against the
spirit, will be apt to show its treachery, and to open the Door: Undistracted
Attendants do use great Vigilance* for they are full of Jealousy over
themselves. They bid Satan to get him behind them, for they are worshipping the
Lord their God, and it is wickedness and boldness in him to disturb them in the
Lord's Service; and when the Affairs of the World would crowd in upon them,
they reply, They have some greater and more important affairs to mind, and
therefore those worldly matters must be regarded only at a convenient season.
At all times it should be our care to keep unspotted from the World; to keep
our selves that the wicked one touch us not, 1 John 5. 18. but this care should
be greatest when our approaches to God are nearest. For if the World and the
God of it should all bespatter and defile us, even while we are engaged in holy
Ordinances, how uncomely would this be! How inexcusable should we be! How much
displeased would the Lord be!

8. To attend without distraction, implies refusing to be diverted from
attending upon God without great necessity. Indeed since the Lord will have
mercy and not sacrifice; he will excuse our attendance, when unavoidable
necessity, and the Mercy he requires us to show, does divert us from it; but
Hearts that are truly gracious, are troubled when they are thus diverted. When
our Lord admonishes his Disciples to pray, that their flight might not be in
the Winter, nor on the Sabbath Day, Mat. 24. 20. he plainly intimates, that to
be disturbed on the Sabbath, and to be hindered from engaging in Ordinances,
ought to be looked upon as a very great Affliction. Carnal Minds are glad of
occasions that seem to justify their omission of Holy Duties; but sanctified
and renewed hearts are otherwise minded; they are sensible that Worship and
Duty is owing to the Lord, and that he is not benefited, but they, by giving
it. The Farm, the Merchandise, and things of that nature cannot hinder their
coming to the Marriage Supper. They are deaf to the persuasions of carnal
Relations and Friends, who would draw them off from Exercises of Religion. They
know that time was given them, not that chiefly they should mind things
temporal, but those things that are invisible and eternal. To be far from God
is the way to perish, it is good, it is pleasant, it is safe to be near him, Psalm.
73. 27. To be diverted from attending on the Lord, is to be diverted from the
most blessed thing on earth, Psalm. 65. 4. Blessed is the Man whom thou chusest,
and causest to approach unto thee that he may dwell in thy Courts, we shall be
satisfied with the goodness of thy House, even of thy holy Temple.

9. To attend without distraction, implies abiding with God, and perseverance
in his Service. The undistracted attendant, is steadfast in the Lord's Covenant;
his Bonds and Cords, are Bonds and Cords of love; and why should any say, Let
us break these Bonds asunder, and cast away these Cords from us? They were good
words, and they that spoke them were as good as their word, Jer. 50. 5. They
shall ask the way to Zion, with their faces thitherward, saying, Come and let
us join our selves to the Lord in a perpetual Covenant that shall not be
forgotten. This perpetual Covenant should be kept in everlasting remembrance;
and there is good reason for it, Psalm. 25. 10. All the paths of the Lord are
mercy and truth unto such as keep his Covenant and his Testimonies. He that
attends without distraction, ceases not to be an Attendant, but perseveres in
his Lord's Service; he takes care to have his Loins girt about for spiritual
Labor, his Light burning, for he is waiting and expecting his Lord's coming.
An ancient Father wished when Christ came that he might find him, aut precantem
aut praedicantem, either Praying or Preaching. Every Christian should have a
wish of this nature, that he may be found either praying, hearing, or
practicing what he hears. Blessed are those Servants whom the Lord when he
comes shall find so doing, Luke 12. 43.

In the third place I am to assign the reasons why with such care, we should
take heed of distraction in the Lord's Service: And these Reasons shall be of
two sorts. The first sort shall be drawn from the evil of distraction. The
second sort shall be drawn from the benefit of attending without distraction.


The first sort of reasons shall be drawn from the evil of distraction, and the
evil of this I shall make manifest and apparent.

1. In distraction there is great irreverence and contempt of God. Wherefore
does the wicked contemn God? says the Psalmist, Psalm. 10. 13. There is no
reason he should do it; nay, there is all the reason in the World to the
contrary, that he should adore and serve him. The wicked contemn God by running
away from him, and a total neglect of his Service; but his Attendants contemn
him when they make their addresses to him, if instead of offering spiritual
Sacrifices, they offer Affronts to God, and there is a special offensiveness in
so doing; therefore he protests that such Service were a trouble to him, that
he was weary to bear them, that his Soul hated them, Isa. 1. 14. If a Man
should address an earthly Potentate, and instead of speaking to the King,
should ever and anon talk to some inferior Person that stood by, instead of
hearing the King, should turn his Eye and his Ear away from him, and not mind a
word he should say; Royal Majesty would look upon this as an Affront
insufferable. But thus in distracted Duties, the King of Glory is treated, the
Mind is upon the Creature, and this and that and the other worldly affair, when
the Tongue is speaking to the Creator; and what he speaks, the Ear many times
hears not, and the Heart is farther off from heeding: Thus what would not be
done to a Governor, is done to the highest, and best, and greatest King, whose
dreadful Name all the Earth should stand in awe of.

2. In distraction there is a taking of God's Name in vain, the third
Commandment is broken, the Transgressors whereof, the Lord says, he will not
hold guiltless, Exodus 20. 7. This may be called the first Commandment with
threatening, as the fifth is said to be the first Commandment with promise: For
though in the second Commandment mention is made of the Mercy of God, and of
his Jealousy, yet the one is provoked by them that hate God; the other is
promised to them that love him, and keep his Commandments; so that Commandments
in the general are mentioned, not this particular Commandment specified. To
what purpose is a Duty performed, where distraction is allowed? The Name of God
is not hallowed but profaned, when it sounds from the Lips, but the heart
thinks not of, nor sanctifies him whose Name it is. When distraction prevails,
all Ordinances are engaged in vain; nay, there is not only a missing of that
benefit that is promised unto serious Engagers, but guilt is contracted; and by
such distracted Duties, the distance becomes greater between God and the
performers. Bernard complains, Aliud canto, aliud cogito: I sing and pray one
thing, and think another. And afterward, Vae mihi quoni. am ibi pecco ubi
peccata emendare debeo. I commit faults, woe is me! even in those Duties, by
which my faults should be amended. It was well he said, Woe is me! Because of
these distractions; else God would have said, Woe to thee, because of them. And
indeed where they are not minded nor bewailed, the case is woeful. God takes it
amiss, and is very much displeased, that such Hypocrites take his Name into
their Mouths.

3. In distraction there is a slighting of Jesus the Advocate and Mediator.
Our Lord's Heart and Soul was in the Work of our Redemption; he was forward to
undertake it, Heb. 10. 7. Lo I come to do thy Will, O God, and as willing to
finish it; therefore in his greatest Agonies, he said, Not my Will, but thine
be done. His Holy Will, notwithstanding the reluctance of innocent Nature,
perfectly submits to his Father's Pleasure, Joh. 18. 11. The Cup which my
Father gives me to drink, shall I not drink it? How undistracted and fervent
was our Lord in praying for his Church, whom his Father had given him out of
the World! And now he is in Heaven, his Heart, and Thoughts, and Care, are
upon, and for his Members Militant below: His intercession for them is
incessant: his Life now in Heaven, is a Life of continual interceding; and the
end of his intercession is, that the Blessings he has purchased by his
Sufferings may be bestowed upon Believers, whom he suffered for. Now what a
Slight is put upon this great High Priest, who is passed into the Heavens,
where he is so serious to intercede, if we are not serious in petitioning! If
we hardly think what we are doing, when we are asking for those Blessings which
it cost him not only strong Cries and Tears, but his Blood and Life to
purchase! They were not small things that the Blood of God was a price to
purchase. They are not small things that a glorified Redeemer is continually
praying to the Father to bestow. If these things are scarce thought of, when we
ask for them, they are most sinfully undervalued: Christ himself, his fullness,
his satisfaction and intercession are despised altogether.

4. In distraction there is a grieving and vexing the Holy Spirit of God, by
not valuing his proffered assistance. When Christ ascended into Heaven and was
glorified there, he sent the Spirit to abide with his Church for ever. And one
great work of the Spirit is to aid and assist us in our Supplications. He urges
us to attend upon God, and is most ready to help us in that attendance. He is
ready to fix our Minds, to incline our Hearts aright, to enlarge our Desire, to
make intercession for us, with groanings which cannot be uttered, Romans 8. 26.
He offers us his mighty Grace, which will enable us to pray prevailingly, to
hear profitably, and fruitfully to improve the Ordinances of God. But
distracted Attendants, are a grief and vexation to this good Spirit, they had
rather be without his help and grace than have it. They choose rather to lose
all their Duties by a wretched heartlessness and formality, than be assisted to
take pains in these Duties, that they may fare the better for them for ever.

5. In distraction there is an undervaluing of all promised Mercies and
Blessings, which God is ready to bestow on them that seriously attend upon him.
The Promises of the Gospel are made by him whose faithfulness never fails; and
the surety of the New Testament stands engaged that they shall be accomplished,
if they are by a true and lively Faith applied. These Promises are of things
which we cannot be without, but we must needs be beyond conception miserable!
Peace with God through Christ, and that Peace within, which passes all
Understanding, Grace sufficient to succor, support, strengthen and establish;
the good things of this Life, with a Blessing from Heaven upon them, and
endless Blessedness in the World to come: These are the things that are
promised; and who besides God can make Promises so exceeding precious and so
great? Now in our attendance upon him, he would have us expect what he has
promised, for he keeps truth for ever, and what he has promised he is able to
perform, Romans 4. 21. Distracted Attendants upon the Lord, look upon these
Promises with a strange Eye; they believe not the truth of them, or are not
persuaded of the worth of them, and are very careless in pleading of them, and
having no serious thoughts and desires after the promised Blessings, the
threatened Curses fall upon them.

6. In distraction there is great carelessness of our selves, and of our main
concerns, those of our immortal Souls. In attendance upon God, our Souls are
principally concerned. Now these Souls themselves are of more worth than the
World, and so are the Blessings we request for them, and to be heartless and
trifling here; what Apology can be made for it? What is come to the Soul of
Man, that it should be so mindless of it self! That it should have so few
Thoughts about it self! Distracted Duties, argue an indifferency what becomes
of the precious Soul to eternity; and an indifferency must needs cause a
miscarriage and ruin, since striving to enter in at the strait gate is
necessary, Luke 13. 24. and Heaven will be missed of, there be not an holy
violence to take it. In distracted Services Men put a cheat upon themselves,
they only seem to run, and so they will really miss the prize; and in this
Distraction there is great Hypocrisy, which is most hateful to God, and which
our Lord has denounced so many Woes against, Mat. 2. Hypocrites Duties, are a
most provoking Mockery; and tho Hell will have all the Wicked at last turned
into it, yet in a special manner it is called the portion of Hypocrites, as well
as Unbelievers, Mat. 24. 51. compared with Luke 12. 46.

7. Distraction exposes us to Satan: Distracted Attendants are Servants of the
Lord only in show, but Satan is really served and gratified by their Duties.
They expose themselves to this Enemy both as an Accuser, and a Tempter. When
their Hearts are absent from the Lord's Work, in which they engage, Satan s
Mouth is open against them. He boldly charged Job with being a Mercinary
Servant, and yet there was no ground for it, Job. 1. 9 Does Job fear God for
naught? But put forth thy hand now and touch what he has, and he will curse
thee to thy face, v. 11. And if he charged so good and upright a Man without
ground, surely he will be forward to accuse when there is abundant ground for
the Accusation. See, will Satan say, how such and such do serve the Lord with
Duties that are things of naught, and good for nothing. See how they mock the
God of Heaven to his very Face. And upon such distracted Service, as he is
forward to be an Accuser, so he has great advantage as a Tempter. Such Duties
bring in no strength from above to withstand him. Nay, the Lord is provoked to
withdraw further; and those whom God leaves to themselves, how easily does
Satan lead them Captive at his pleasure! All Strays are seized by the God of
this World, how close should we cleave to the God of Heaven!

8. Distraction is a great obstruction to the efficacy and success of
Ordinances. If we pray as if we prayed not, shall we speed? If we hear as if we
heard not, shall we profit? Will doing the Work of the Lord deceitfully, be
encouraged by the vouchsafing of Grace, or rewarded with Glory? Carefulness is
one effect and fruit of godly Sorrow, 2 Cor. 7. 11. For behold this self-same
that ye sorrowed after a godly sort what carefulness it wrought in you: And as
I said before, this Carefulness is an ingredient in every acceptable Duty. The
distracted Attendant has little care that God may be pleased; he cares not that
Ordinances in the truest, in a spiritual sense, be beneficial to him: God's
Anger therefore remains and abides upon him; nay, he grows more angry because
of his negligence: Ordinances leave him as they found him, not at all more safe
or better; nay, the Word not being a Savior of Life to Life, proves a Savior
of Death to Death, 2 Cor. 2. 16. It Is sad to have the means of Salvation
ineffectual to Salvation, but it is worse by these very means of Salvation being
distractedly used, to have Destruction promoted.

Thus have I made apparent those Evils that are in Distraction.

The second sort of Reasons shall be drawn from the benefit of attending upon
the Lord without distraction. The benefit of such kind of Attendance I shall
make manifest.

1. Attenders without distraction, their Hearts are right with God, he is in
Christ well pleased with them and with their serious Services. That which the
Lord chiefly minds and calls for, it is their care to give to him; and that is
their very heart. The Lord rejoices in the habitable parts of the Earth, and
his delights are with the Sons of Men, Prove. 8. 31. The Sons of Men that seek
him, and whose Hearts are perfect with him. As the wicked Man himself is
hateful, so the Sacrifice of the wicked is an abomination to the Lord, because
he never offers his Heart; God is not in his Thoughts even when he is offering
Sacrifice to him, but the Prayer of the upright is his delight, Prove. 15. 8.
The Heart-searcher sees how his heart and his words agree together. The Lord is
very much pleased to behold the Thoughts called off from other things, because
He Is preferred before them all, to behold the Mind fixed upon himself, and the
Soul with great vigor desiring his Grace, his Strength, and his Salvation, as
that which is most worthy to be longed for. That Is the Language of Heaven to
such an one, Cant. 2. 14. Let me see thy Countenance, let me hear thy voice;
for sweet is thy voice, and thy countenance is comely.

2. Attenders without distraction draw very near to God. And if it is so good to
draw near to him, it follows then, the nearer the better. There are some whom
the Lord beholds afar off, those whose proud and hard hearts were never truly
humbled for sin, their iniquity is a Wall of Partition between God and them:
When the Spouse of Christ her self was given to sleep, though her heart waked,
and was loath and lazy in too great a degree in the seeking of her Lord, she
complains thus. My beloved had withdrawn himself, and was gone, I sought him
but could not find him, I called him but he gave me no answer, Cant. 5. 6. But
undistracted attendance shows great diligence, vehemence of desire, and truth
in the inward parts, and God is nigh to them that call upon him in truth; he is
nigh to them not in some things only, but in all that they call upon him for,
Deuteronomy. 4. 7. God is nigh, as one reconciled, as one nearly related, as a most
compassionate and ready helper, as a sure Shield and Buckler, as a full and
all-sufficient Fountain, from whom whatever is needed may be derived.

3. Attenders without distraction know still more of God; they come to be more
intimately acquainted with him, and that acquaintance is of all other, the most
high and beneficial* Job. 22. 21. Acquaint now thy self with him, and be at
peace, thereby good shall come to thee. To understand the Secrets of Nature, to
understand humane affairs, and how they may be most prudently ordered: To
understand the Ordinances of Heaven, the Motions and Influences of the Sun and
Moon, and Stars, are pieces of knowledge very desirable; but to know the Lord
himself, is a Wisdom far beyond all other. Now the undistracted Attendant
follows on to know the Lord, and gives up himself more entirely to his Service,
and God will manifest himself to such an one in a more peculiar way. Psalm. 25.
14. The Secret of the Lord is with them that fear him, and he will show them
his Covenant. And their knowledge shall not be only notional, but to their
great satisfaction it shall be experimental. When others only hear of God by
the hearing of the Ear, they shall taste and see that he is gracious. Psalm. 34.
8, 9, 10. Oh taste and see that the Lord is good, blessed is the Man that
trusts in him* Oh fear the Lord ye his Saints, for there is no want to them
that fear him. The young Lions lack and suffer hunger, but they that seek the
Lord shall not want any good thing.

4. Attenders without distraction, have most of the Grace of God, and greatest
strength from him. The Lord (...), gives Grace that is greater than the
greatest earthly things, or he gives more Grace, Jam. 4. 6. still more and more
he is ready to communicate; and most of all to them that are most humble, and
that draw nearest to him; such as are bent upon it to seek the Lord, and his
Strength, and his Face evermore, shall not seek him, his Face or Strength in
vain. Holy David who was a sincere seeker, declares the good success he had,
Psalm* 138. 3. In the day when I cried, thou answereast me, and strengthnedst me
with strength in my Soul, and as the strength of God did rest on him, so the
Face of God did shine upon him to his great Consolation, Psalm. 25. 5. ^. His
Glory is great in thy Salvation, for thou have made him most blessed for ever,
thou have made him exceeding glad with thy Countenance. The undistracted
Attendant thrives amain, he grows rich in Faith, rich in Assurance, rich in
Experience. He increases with the increases of God, he grows up into him in
all things who is his Head, and approaches still nearer to the measure of the
Stature of the fullness of Christ. And where there is the most of Grace, usually
there is the most of Peace and Joy, perfecting Holiness in the fear of God, and
the Comforts of the Holy Ghost commonly keep pace, and go hand in hand together.

5. Attenders without distraction, are most victorious over their spiritual
Enemies; being strong in the Lord, and in the power of his Might, the power of
the Enemies of their Salvation can prevail but little. The nearer any approach
unto God, the farther they come out from the World, and they are the more
fortified against it, both on the right hand and on the left; the less do they
mind the world's honor or dishonor, evil report or good report from it, 2
Cor. 6. 7, 8. They are not afraid of the World's terror, and whatever the
World offers to them, they see enough in God to make the highest earthly
Enjoyments despised in comparison. Thus the innumerable Multitude of Stars,
though never so glittering before, do all disappear at the Sun rising.
Undistracted Attenders fix their Eye on God, and the more the invisible God is
seen, the more all visible things will vanish into nothing. The Psalmist had
cast his Eye upon the prosperity of the wicked, and began to admire it; he
comes into the Sanctuary of God, and looking upon God, he now wonders at his
own Folly in admiring so poor a thing as a worldly happiness, and the
Temptation that was so strong, is overcome. Safety from the most dangerous
Enemies is of the Lord; they whose thoughts are upon his Name, find it a strong
Tower. Satan and Mammon are less able to beguile them, and the lustings of the
Flesh, become weaker and weaker against the Spirit, and as they find sin more
and more destroyed, so they may behold the last Enemy Death without a Sting,
and the Grave as having lost its Victory.

6. Attenders without distraction, have most approbation from their own
Consciences. Conscience is a Monitor unto Duty, and a diligent observer how
it is performed. It will condemn Laziness, it will commend labor of Love; it
will upbraid the Evil and Slothful with their vain Oblations, but to the
undistracted Attendant, it will say, Well done good and faithful Servant! And
how much Joy and Peace is there in the Testimony of a good Conscience! 2 Cor.
1. 12. and we find a condemning and an approving Conscience compared together;
the condemning Conscience, is the forerunner of God's Condemning, and the
approbation of the Conscience is the forerunner of God's Absolution. 1 John 3.
20, 21. If our heart condemn us, God is greater than our heart, and knows all
things: Beloved, if our heart condemn us not, then have we confidence toward
God. Duties come off with great comfort when we have been intent and affected,
when God has been attentive to us, when we behold his Face shining, and find
his Hand open; and Conscience bears us witness, that we have been seriously,
and the Lord has been graciously minding what we have been doing.

7. Attenders without distraction, are most beneficial to others. They have the
most public Spirits, and all do fare the better, for that interest they have
in Heaven, which they daily improve for all. How much is the Church of God
beholding to them, who will not hold their Peace day or night, who will give
the Lord no rest until he make Jerusalem a praise on the Earth! Isa. 62. 6, 7.
When the wickedness of Israel had made a great breach for the Wrath of God to
break in upon them to consume them; Moses attends upon God, and intercedes with
such intention and concernedness, and fervency, that the Wrath of God is
appeased, and the ruin prevented, though it was at the door, Psalm. 106. 23.
Therefore he said that he would destroy them, had not Moses his chosen stood
before him in the breach to turn away his Wrath, lest he should destroy them.
Whole Nations reap the benefit of such undistracted and prevailing
Intercessions. The Apostle tells us, that Elias was a Man of like Passions with
others, yet he was so intent and servent in Prayer, that he opened Heaven, and
fetched Rain from thence, and the Earth brought forth her fruit, and an end was
put to a terrible Famine, which had lasted for several Years together, Jam. 5.
^8. The effectual fervent Prayer of a righteous Man avails much, he prevails
for others as well as for himself. Lot was a righteous Man, and vexed his
righteous Soul, because of the Sodomites unlawful Deeds, 2 Pet. 2. 8. yet his
Deliverance from Sodom's Flames is ascribed unto Abraham's intercession, Genesis
19. 29. And it came to pass when God destroyed the Cities of the Plain, that
God remembered Abraham, and sent Lot out of the midst of the overthrow, when he
overthrew the Cities wherein Lot dwelt. Saints should pray harder one for
another, and pray for them that are without, with more earnestness, that
greater Multitudes may be called out of the World, and brought into the Church,
and secured from the Perdition of ungodly Men. Undistracted Attendants upon
God, are Pillars to bear up, what else would fall into ruin. The Church, the
Nation in which they live, the whole World is beholding to them, as well as
particular Persons for whom they are concerned, and whom they bear upon their
hearts before the Lord.

I have done with the Reasons of the Doctrine.

In the fourth place I am to answer some Cases of Conscience, about these
Distractions in attending upon God, that so Difficulties which are apt to
perplex the Mind in this matter may be removed.

And CASE I. is this,

Whether the Thoughts cannot be off from God in the least when we attend upon
him, but there must be a culpable and sinful Distraction?

To this I answer.

1. In all our holy Duties, there should be a constant overawing sense of God
upon our Spirits, from the beginning to the end of them: Slavish fear alienates
the heart from God, but Filial Reverence keeps the heart close to him. That
part of the Duty is lost in which the sense of God is banished.

2. Something else besides God, may be thought of in Duties, and yet this is
not Distraction. To think of our sins when we confess them, is our Duty, and to
recollect the circumstances by which they have been heigtned and rendered more
exceeding sinful, Isa. 59. 12. For our Transgressions are multiplied before
thee, and our sins testify against us; for our transgressions are with us, and
as for iniquities we know them. Our Wants also we ought to think of, and the
necessity of having them supplied; and the all-sufficient Jehavah, is
sufficient to supply all needs whatsoever, be the Wants never so great and
many, and the Persons that apply to him, never so vast a Multitude. The
Blessings we desire ought also to be thought of: Others also which we pray for,
may be in our Minds when we are before God, with their Distresses under which
we would fain be helpful to them, by our Supplications on their behalf. It was
not Distraction in the Apostle, but matter of thanksgiving to the Lord, that
when he was at the Throne of Grace, Timothy was in his thoughts and
remembrance, 2 Timothy 1. 3. I thank God whom I serve from my forefathers with
pure Conscience, that without ceasing I have remembrance of thee in my prayers
night and day.

3. Our Thoughts must not run out so much upon the matter of our Duties, but
that there must be a quick and continual return to God, the Object whom we
worship. We must not so much be thinking what we are praying for, but we must
ever be minding him whom we are praying to. The Psalmist says, Psalm. 142 2. I
poured out my complaint before him, I showed before him my trouble. He thought
of his trouble, but had also a sense he was before God, who he knew could be a
present help to him.

CASE II. Whether it be Distraction and withdrawing from God, to think at all
of our worldly business and affairs?

To this I answer.

1. In ordering of our earthly Concerns, and in all our ways God is to be
acknowledged: His direction makes us act prudently, and his Blessing makes our
Labor prosperous The Blessing of the Lord makes rich, and he adds no sorrow
with it, Prove. 10. 22. His Blessing removes the Curse which sin had brought,
and very much cures the vexatious Vanity of the Creature. The Word of God is to
be eyed as the Rule which we ought to walk by, in our Secular Affairs; we
should inquire after his Will, and aim at his Glory in every thing which we do:
When Secular Actions are under the conduct and management of Religion, there is
not only a Blessing upon them, but also a great Beauty in them.

2. Diligence and Prudence in our wordly affairs, is a Duty, and this cannot be
without thoughts about them. Honest Projects, and wise Contrivances, are not at
all to be discommended; what is said of the Husbandman's Skill, is applicable
to Discretion in any other Calling. Isa. 28. 26, 29. God does instruct him to
discretion, and does teach him. A prudent thoughtfulness in these matters,
comes from the Lord of Hosts, which is wonderful in Counsel, and excellent in
working. To be without heed and care in the Works of our Calling, is sinful and
scandalous, and it is to walk disorderly. Our Lord plainly signifies there must
be care and fidelity in worldly things. Luke 16. 11. If ye have not been
faithful in the unrighteous Mammon, who will commit to your trust the true
Riches? The good Man must needs think of his Secular Affairs, else he could not
guide them with discretion, Psalm. 112. 5.

3. In a special manner we are to take heed, when engaged in worldly business,
of being too long without thinking of God, and lifting up our hearts to him.
Worldly Men when in the Sanctuary, and they seem to be worshipping the God of
Heaven, their thoughts are upon the World, because their Affections run that
way. Thus the Saints should do, when at the Exchange, or in their Shops, or at
the Market; their hearts even then should frequently be with God; this would
not be hypocrisy but sincerity in them, and worldly business would succeed the
better for it. It Is a proper Ejaculation at every turn in our Secular Matters.
Psalm. 143. 8. Cause me to know the way wherein I should walk, for I lift up my
Soul unto thee. And our ordinary Employments though never so advantageous and
delightful, should not be so taking, but that with the greatest readiness and
joy we should cease from them when called to give our Attendance upon God.

CASE III. Whether the best of Men while in this World, can be totally free
from Distraction in holy Duties?

Unto this I answer.

1. The natural Vanity of the Imagination, is not perfectly cured in any Saint
alive, and this in some degree will discover it self; the most serious and
solid mind has something of levity and frothiness in it, and this froth will be
working up, notwithstanding all endeavors to suppress it. Evil is present with
the best, when they would do their very best. The Apostle acknowledges there
was a law of sin in him, Romans 7. 21. In-dwelling sin remains even there where
Grace reigns, and is but too active in the Saints, when they desire to be most
active in the Lord's Service; therefore we read that the most spiritual
Sacrifices are acceptable through Jesus Christ, 1 Pet. 2. 5. Though the House
be spiritual, and the Priesthood Holy, and the Sacrifice spiritual, yet all
this by it self cannot procure acceptance; there are some sinful
imperfections, some Ebullitions of Vanity, as well as actings of grace; which
to cover, there is great need of the Mediation and Righteousness of the Lord
Jesus.

2. Saints are not so vigilant, and take not such pains with their hearts, as
they ought and might do, and before they are aware are distracted in their
Thoughts. The Sluggard's Field was all grown over with Thorns, and Nettles had
covered the Face thereof, Prove. 24. 31. The heart of Man by Nature brings forth
nothing but Weeds; and though the heart be renewed, yet these Weeds will
presently spring up in it, if it be not kept with constant care.

3. Though Believers are still haunted and pestered with some vain thoughts,
yet it is possible for them to be freed more and more from them. The more they
are renewed in the Spirit of their Mind, they will be able to serve the Lord
with greater intention of mind, and seriousness of Spirit. The more your reason
gets power over your fancy, and the more Grace gets power over your Reason, and
the more you call in help from Heaven; the more fixed your hearts will be upon
God, and the Work of God. Taking pains with the heart in Duty, is hard labor,
but the Lord is ready to succeed it.

CASE IV. Whether a true Believer may not sometimes perform Duties so
distractedly, as to reap no benefit at all by them? I answer.

1. The more there is of Distraction in Duties, the less Spiritual advantage is
like to be reaped by them; the more frequently the heart does start away from
God, when it is engaged in his worship, the more of obstruction there is unto
the Communication of Grace; the nearer we draw to God, the nearer he draws to
us; if we at any time withdraw, no wonder if he withdraw likewise. And the less
a Saint is troubled at his own Distractions, his heart is certainly in the
worst frame, and God is the more displeased.

2. Some Duties may be so distractedly performed as to be totally lost. It Is
true, the Union between Christ and Believers is inseparable, and nothing shall
separate them from the love of God in him; for he makes incessant intercession
for all his Members: It Is also certain that the Spirit abides in all true
Believers, and will never quite leave them who are his Temples and Habitation,
and the Spirit ever dwelling in them, they shall ever continue in a state of
Grace, and sin shall never recover its Dominion over them; and yet sometimes
they may fall into particular acts of sin; and some particular Duties may be
performed after such a careless and distracted manner, as to become sin. We
read Psalm. 80. 4. O Lord God of Hosts, how long will thou be angry with the
Prayers of thy People? Prayers of Saints may be unacceptable. Sometimes
Unbelief, Despondency and Discontent, and Impatience, quite spoils Prayer: How
could the Lord be pleased with Jonah's Petition? Jon. 4. 2, 3. And he prayed to
the Lord and said, I pray thee, O Lord, was not this my saying when I was yet
in my Country? Therefore I fled before unto Tarshish, for I knew that thou art
a gracious God and merciful, slow to anger and of great kindness, and repentest
thee of the evil. Therefore now, O Lord, take I beseech thee my life from me,
for it is better for me to die than to live. Sometimes distraction and deadness,
and a carnal worldly frame of Spirit, may hinder a Duty from doing any good to
the performer of it, though he be good in the main. The perfection of sincerity
may be so much wanting in some Services, as that they may prove altogether
unavailable, Rev. 3. 2. Be watchful, and strengthen the things that remain,
that are ready to die, for I have not found thy Works perfect before God.

3. I add further that Duties may be so performed by Believers themselves, that
the bad manner of doing them, shall cost them very dear. A true Saint may do
his Duty in a way so displeasing to God, that his Duty shall be his Death. Thus
the Corinthians came together to the Lord's Table, not for the better, but for
the worse, there was not that care to keep their hearts fixed upon God, and fit
for Communion with him, and the Holy Supper was profaned, by a prevailing of
sensuality, and Divine Displeasure broke out against them, 1 Cor. 11. 30. For
this cause many are weak and sickly among you, and many sleep; and they were
thus chastned of the Lord, and some with stripes that proved deadly, that they
might not be condemned with the World, v. 32. With what Intention, Vigilance,
and godly fear should the Lord's People engage in his Work and Worship! He will
be sanctified by them that draw near to him, or he will be sanctified upon
them; he will manifest to their cost, what an Holy and Jealous God he is:
Therefore says the Apostle, Do we provoke the Lord to Jealousy, are we
stronger than he? 1 Cor. 10. 22.

CASE V. What Distractions are they which are mercifully overlookt, and that
hinder not the success of our Duties, nor the benefit of them?

I answer.

1. The Lord in much Compassion overlooks those Distractions in his Service,
that are grievous to us, and which we heartily lament. He passes by the
greatest sins, for the great Propitiations sake, if there be Contrition in him
that has been guilty of them. Psalm. 51. 17. The Sacrifices of God are a broken
Spirit; a broken and a contrite heart, O God, thou will not despise. And if the
heart be broken, because religious Duties are so broken and interrupted by vain
imaginations, he will not withdraw his Presence, because of these weaknesses
that are bewailed, but according to his Promise, He will be nigh to them that
are of a broken heart, and will save such as are of a contrite Spirit, Psalm.
34. 18.

2. Distractions shall be passed by that are prayed against, before they come,
and are resisted when they are come. He that would worship God with great
intention of Soul, it is a sign his heart is good and honest, and that very Will
is wrought in him by the Lord's own Grace, and is pleasing in the Lord's Eyes;
and it is further pleasing to him, when he beholds a Soul checking these
Distractions as often as they do occur, and manifesting a constant dislike of
them. The Psalmist tells us, That he hated vain thoughts, but he loved both the
Word and the Work of God, Psalm. 119. 113. His hatred of vain thoughts, was well
taken, the intruding of them though they were hated, was overlookt in Mercy.
And this hatred of them, and perpetual conflicting with them is a good way to
be rid of them. And certainly those Distractions shall not be imputed to us,
which by checking of them and crying to Heaven for help, we do in some measure
prevail against.

3. Distractions shall be overlookt, the causes of which we endeavor to
remove; when we are upon our guard against the Cares of this Life, deceitful
Riches, and those Lusts and Pleasures, that would command our thoughts and
entice away our hearts from God, and cause them to be absent, when our Bodies
are before him. It Is mere self-deceit to pretend we are desirous to be freed
from the effect, if we like the cause; to say we dislike Distraction, if we are
pleased well enough with those things whereby Distraction is caused. The
Psalmist, who sighed and said, Oh let me not wander from thy Commandments!
Psalm. 119. 10. certainly he was watchful against, and groaned to be delivered
from every thing that might make him wander: Therefore he wishes that his heart
might not be inclined to covetousness, and that his eyes might be turned away
from beholding vanity, ver. 36, 37. He knew very well, that coveting this
World's Wealth, would eat out his Desires after God; and that eying and
affecting vanity, would deaden and distract his heart in the Lord's Service.

4. Distractions though very horrid, shall not hinder the success of Duties,
which the heart trembles at, and utterly detests and abhors. Satan sometimes
apparently shows himself Devil indeed; he roars like a Lion, he speaks like the
old Dragon. Hideous blasphemous Injections and thoughts, are with hellish
violence born into the mind of a Believer while attending upon God; and the
heart seems to be overspread with the blackness of darkness, and with the
wickedness of Hell it self. But when these Satanical Injections are disowned,
and the Believer cries out, Lord, I am oppressed, undertake for me! And his Eye
is unto Jesus for succor, who is so ready to help, (...), those who by force
are ready to be run down by the Devil, Act. 10. 38. Satan shall not prevail
against the Believer, but the Believer shall prevail with God for that Grace,
which the evil one is so busy to hinder him from partaking of.

5. Distractions shall in pity be covered, that are occasioned by the
prevailing indisposition of the head, or other corporal Maladies, that are the
effect of excessive pain, or of Melancholy, which causes great confusion, in
such cases the Lord's compassion is drawn forth, rather than his displeasure
provoked. We read, Psalm. 103. 13. Like as a Father pittieth his Children, so
the Lord pittieth them that fear him, for he knows their frame: They are
subject to much bodily indisposition, as well as to spiritual Infirmities. Now
what earthly Father is angry with a Child, because he does not those acts of
Obedience in sickness, which he could and would readily do, were health
continued? The Lord is infinitely beyond the tenderest earthly Parent in
pitying and sparing his Children: He observes the Spirit's willingness when
the Flesh is weak and indisposed.

Distractions by sudden Accidents also, shall not hinder Duties acceptance. God
will have mercy and not sacrifice, Mat. 9. 13. It will not displease him,
neither shall Duty be lost, if we leave off Prayer to help one by us fallen
into a Swoon, and that may expire without present succor; in such cases his
own Providence calls us off from a Duty of Religion, to an act of Mercy.

6. Distractions shall be past by, that drive us to Christ for acceptance, and
to the Spirit for greater assistance. The looking upon the Defects in our
Services, should make us look unto our Lord in whom we are complete, Col. 2.
10. and with a more entire dependence to rest upon his righteousness; hereby
Christ is honored, and the Father pleased, and a multitude of faults will be
covered. But help against them must be desired from the Holy Ghost. A gracious
heart still desires renewed strength and aid from the Spirit, to serve the Lord
more acceptably: but a lazy reliance upon Christ, with an allowance of defects
and distractions in the Duties we perform, must needs be a very great
provocation.

CASE VI. What course are Melancholic Persons to take in their Attendance on
God, when Distractions arise from the prevalency of that Distemper?

I answer.

1. They should take heed of prolixity and length in holy Duties. It is not
length but life in these Duties that God looks at: It is a thought that may
lodge in the Breast of an Heathen, but is unworthy of a Christian's heart, that
he shall be heard (...), for his much speaking, Mat. 6. 7. Christians should
not think much of the time they spend with God; yet overdoing in this regard,
is doing less, than if less were done. When Melancholy hinders Duties from
being extended, as formerly with vigor and fervency they were; they that more
briefly now perform them, should be the more frequent in short and holy
Ejaculations. And they must be sure to take heed of taking more pains to fix
their thoughts, than their heads will bear; for when their Heads are out of
order, the more they labor to be intent, the further they are off from it, the
disorder increases, and so does their discouragement. The Lord pities in such
cases, and allows them to spare their pains, which are not only fruitless but
hurtful, and to pity themselves, and not to attempt what a distempered Brain is
unfit for.

2. Melancholic ones must look unto Jesus in the due use of means, for the
cure of Head Distempers. How many corporal Maladies did our Lord heal in a
miraculous manner, when he was here on Earth! And he has not put off his
Compassions toward the Bodies of Men, now he is in Heaven. Though the skill of
the Lutist be never so great, he can never make good Music if the Lute it self
be out of tune: Satan has great advantage by prevailing Melancholy to hinder
Devotion, by the disorder of the Head, though the Heart be never so honest and
well inclined. And our Lord very well knows this, and being a merciful and
faithful High Priest, he is ready to succor in this case also, Heb. 2. ult.
All power is given to him in Earth as well as Heaven, all judgment committed to
him, Joh. 5. 22. so that all Distempers and Diseases come and go at his
Command; and though Miraculous Cures are not now to be expected, yet something
like them, sometimes has been wrought, in answer unto Prayer and Faith; and
where there has been a steadfast looking to Jesus, there has been a mighty
Blessing that has attended the means that have been used for the bringing of
Blood, and Spirits, and Brain into better order.

3. There are two great Duties which those that are under the power of
Melancholy are not so sit for: The one is Meditation, and the other Self
examination. A distempered and disordered Head will make but sorry work of
solemn Meditation; the Head will ache, the Mind will be lost in a cloud and mist
of Confusion, and the evil one will be ready to strike in, and make the
Melancholic Man turn self-accuser, and consequently self-tormenter* Such an
one therefore should be wary of attempting the Duty of set Meditation, but that
and reading should be joined together. A short consideration of what is read
there should be, as the Head will bear, a desire that the Heart may be
affected, and by the Grace of God a resolution to act and walk accordingly, and
those should be the Petitions, Incline my heart unto thy Testimonies, and make
me to go in the path of thy Commandments! Psalm. 119. 35, 36.

And as for self-examination, Melancholic ones, being now not so well
themselves, they should not be forward nor peremptory in passing Censures and
Judgment upon themselves, and they should be aware that Satan is now busy
about them; and he being a lying Spirit, his Suggestions that they are
Hypocrites and have no Grace, that they are cast away, and utterly forsaken by
the God of all Grace, should in no wife be credited. Satan's Suggestions may be
known by the design of them, which is not to quicken Souls to Duty, as the
motions of the holy Spirit are, but to drive them away from God, and to make
them say as he did in another case, since the case is desperate, and all hope
of Salvation gone, Why should I wait for the Lord any longer? 2 King. 2. 33.

4. Melancholic ones in the midst of their Distractions should grieve that
neither head nor heart are so disposed to serve the Lord as they desire. That Is
proper language to be used which came out of the Mouth of holy Job, chap. 10.
15. I am full of confusion, see thou my Affliction! And since they cannot
actively glorify God, by the exercise of strong Faith, and vehement Love, and
Joy and Delight in God, they should glorify him by an humble and patient
submission to his Will.

When a melancholic Soul is quite emptied of all self-confidence: and
self-conceit is in a manner annihilated: when under a great sense of its own
guilt and vileness, it looks unto Jesus, and desires by his Blood and Spirit to
be justified, and washed, and made clean, when it is ready to acknowledge that
if ever it is saved and brought to Heaven, Grace will be free, and
superabundant, because one of the lowest places in Hell has been deserved, how
far is flesh from glorying! and hereby glory is given to the Lord. When
melancholic ones, are ready in their greatest Distractions and blackest
darkness to justify the Lord, as righteous in all his Ways, and holy in all
his Works, Psalm. 145. 17. and to condemn themselves, because formerly when
their Heads were in better order, their Hearts were no better disposed, and
inclined to the Lord's Service, they please and glorify him more than they are
aware of. The more there is of self-distrust, self-dislike, self-condemnation,
humility, and patient bearing of Divine Indignation, because of sin that has
been committed, Mic. 7. 9. the more honor by all this does really redound to
God.

5. Let Melancholic ones take heed of being quite staved off from Duties and
Ordinances, though their performances are but mean and sorry. The Lord can
discern sense in the Soul, when perhaps there is hardly sense in the words, he
takes notice of the gracious bent and good inclination of the heart toward
himself, when the Thoughts against the Will do wander. Hezekiah had a most
remarkable answer, and prayed to good purpose, when his Petitions were broken,
and were rather chattering than Supplications. Isa. 38. 14. Like as a Crane, or
a Swallow, so did I chatter, I did mourn as a Dove, mine eyes fail with looking
upward: O Lord, I am oppressed, undertake for me.

CASE VII. What are those Distractions that make our attendance upon God
altogether unacceptable to him, and unavailable to our selves?

To this I answer.

1. Distractions make our Duties of none effect, for which there is no
concernedness, that God observes them, as long as Man can take no notice of
them. How can it be expected that the Lord should have any gracious regard to
them, who have no regard to him, or to his all* observing Eye? They that mind
the praise of Men, and not the praise of God; and if Men do but approve and
applaud, they are not troubled though God does not commend, but condemn them;
the praise of Men is all the reward they are likely to have, Mat. 6. 5. Verily,
I say unto you they have their reward. It Is an argument of a carnal heart, and
that Duties are lost, when Distractions are not unwelcome or disliked, but the
Heart is quiet enough with them. If this be the ordinary frame and temper of
the Heart, to make nothing of heartless performances, as long as Man* cannot
see the Heart to be absent, it is a sign that hypocrisy reigns, and alas
Hypocrites go to Hell through the Sanctuary; they tread the broad road,
praying, hearing, receiving, all along, till they fall into eternal
Condemnation.

2. Distractions make Duties of none effect, that are pleaded for, as if there
were nothing of sin or provocation in them. The worse the Duties are, many
times the Performers think them to be the better; they eye not their own Hearts
and observe not their Deviations and Wanderings; they rest in the external
Service, as if God would be pleased with the Work done* and not mind the manner
how. We read of some that were bold to expostulate with God, because they had
fasted, and he took no notice of it, and yet there was good reason for his
disliking what they did, because when their Voice was heard on high, their
Hearts were inclined to strife, debate, and wickedness, Isa. 58. 3, 4. The
Scribes and Pharisees contented themselves with an outside righteousness, they
minded not that their Hearts should be serious and sanctified in their
approaches to God; but this righteousness of theirs, our Lord pronounces
insufficient, and we must go beyond it, or we cannot go to Heaven.

3. Distractions make Duties of none effect, that come from prevailing and
allowed earthlimindedness. How can a devoted Servant of Mammon, whose Heart
worships Mammon, give acceptable attendance on God? His Covetousness after
which his Heart goes, proves him an Idolater, Ephesians. 5. 5. and his Service is
most abominable dissimulation. Let the Sin be what it will that is beloved; and
there is a resolution still to love and hide and spare it, that sin will so
distract and draw away the Heart from God, that no Duty that is done can please
him. If we cover our sins, we shall not prosper in our Services: If we hide our
iniquities in our Bosoms, because they are dear to us, God will hide his Face
and refuse to hear us when we cry to him, Isa. 59. 2.

4. Distractions make Duties of none effect, which hinder all manner of holy
and spiritual affections, and desires after God. How can the Lord accept of a
Service, when the Heart is dead and cold as a stone, and altogether senseless
and unconcerned that it is so? In such an heart there is no desire to know the
Lord and his ways, no inclination to become like to him, or to enjoy any
fellowship with him. The Apostle says, Let us have grace whereby we may serve
God acceptably, Heb. 12. 20. Those Distractions that altogether hinder the
acting and exercise of any grace whatsoever; so that there is no Faith, no
Love, no godly Sorrow, no hungring and thirsting after righteousness, certainly
hereby also the success of Duties must be hindered.

5. Distractions make Duties of none effect, which though reproved are not
striven against; but sloth and negligence, and formality in attendance upon
God, are allowed of. Abundance of Idleness, was the sin of Sodom; and abundance
of Idleness is to be found in many a Professor, even then when engaged in
Duties of Religion- Such bestow no labor upon their Hearts, they do not stir
up themselves to take hold of God, when they call upon his Name, Isa. 64. 7. As
Vinegar to the Teeth, and smoke to the Eyes is very offensive, so is the
sluggard to him that sends him. How then must the Lord needs be displeased with
the slothful attendant, and slight his negligent Service! Will such Service be
rewarded? No, no, so far from that, that it will be severely punished. He that
took no pains to improve his Talent, is called a wicked and slothful Servant,
Mat. 25. 26, and v. 30. the Sentence is past upon him, Cast ye the unprofitable
Servant into outer darkness, there shall be weeping and gnashing of Teeth.

In the last place follows the Application. And here I shall First, Caution you
against the Causes of Distraction. Secondly, Expostulate with you about these
Distractions. Thirdly, Direct unto Remedies against Distractions. Fourthly,
Insist upon several particular Duties, and show you how you may with less
Distraction perform them. Fifthly, Speak Terror to Sinners and Hypocrites.
Sixthly, Conclude with Comfort and Encouragement to Saints, who would fain do
better, and with less Distraction attend upon the Lord.


USEI. Shall be of Caution against the Causes of Distraction. If we would be
delivered from the effect, we must find out, and remove the cause. Health and
Ease are in vain hoped for, while no care is taken to remove the Causes of
sickness and pain. Serious in holy Duties we shall never be, whilst we allow
and cherish the Causes which make our Hearts rove and wander from God. Now the
great Causes of Distraction, which I am to warn you against, and you are to
take heed of are these.

1. I enter a Caveat against corrupted Nature. This is the Cause of Causes, if
you trace up any sin to its original, you will see that to be original sin.
Corrupted Nature never did any Duty well, has no care at all to do any thing
better Though the first Adam died, several thousand Years ago, yet in a sense
he lives to this Day, he walks and haunts and troubles his whole Posterity; and
though this old Man is Crucified with Christ, yet he is not quite dead in any
Believer, while the Believer lives upon the face of the Earth; and the evil
that remains in him, will show it self present with him, when he would do that
which is good, Romans 7. 21. We may truly cry out, Mystery of Iniquity, the great
corruption of Nature, the Mother of wickedness and abominations of the Earth.
As sin is from hence, so this is the grand obstruction of the serious Service
of God.

That depravation of humane Nature which is derived from the first Adam, makes
the Heart of Man deceitful above all things, as well as desperately wicked, and
for such an Heart in holy Duties to act treacherously, and to start aside from
God like a deceitful Bow, is indeed, but to act like it self. An Heart totally
carnal, is so estranged from God, that it will never come near him; you should
therefore value the promise of a new Heart and a new Spirit, Ezekiel. 36. 26. and
beg earnestly that what is promised may be given to you; and though your Hearts
are indeed renewed, the renovation is but imperfect, there is much of the old
nature still remaining, and this, if you are not very vigilant, will catch away
your thoughts, while you are worshipping the Lord, and bring a damp and
coldness upon your Hearts.

Original Corruption has seized upon all the Powers of your Souls, and makes
all of them averse from attending upon God. The Imagination is strongly
inclined to wander far off, and the Heart and Affections but too apt to follow.
If a free vent be but given to a sinful and vain imagination, the product and
offspring of it will be distracting thoughts without number, like the Locusts,
Frogs and Flies, that filled the Land of Egypt, and with these Religious Duties
will be corrupted, and rendered unacceptable.

Solomon tells us, that when Man fell from original uprightness, he sought out
many inventions, Eccles. 7. ult. and all these Inventions were but Distractions
from God, and ways of departing from him; a seeking and trying to find
satisfaction and felicity elsewhere, which is indeed to be found in the Lord
alone. Let this truth sink deep into you, that your Hearts naturally care not
for the Lord's Service; and if it be engaged in, they are very apt to be
careless therein. Cry to Heaven, that you may be more renewed in the Spirit of
your Mind, that the old Man may be more completely put off, and the new Man
more fully put on. The less your Hearts are renewed and sanctified, the more
you are likely to be distracted; the more there is of corruption in you, it
will the more discover it self in the Duties of Religion which you do perform.

2. A Caution is to be given you against your great Adversary Satan. He catches
the Word of God out of the Heart, he draws away the Heart from the Word, and
every other Duty. The Spirit of the Lord helps our infirmities, and assists us
in Prayer: This evil Spirit resists us in our Supplications. He himself
confesses, that he walks too and fro in the earth, and goes up and down in it,
Job. 1. 7. His business is to persuade the Children of Men to the doing of
evil, to hinder the doing of good, or to hinder the good that is done from
being well done. Who is the Man that this bold Enemy will not set upon, since
he tempted Christ himself, who is God and Man? If he persuaded our Lord to
worship the Devil, no wonder if he persuades us not to worship God, or to be
heartless in the worship of him. Where is the place in which we may be safe and
free from his Temptations, since he got into Paradise it self, and tempted and
prevailed over our first Parents there? In secret Prayer he is ready to disturb
us, he is busy in the Sanctuary, that Ordinances there may be lost, and our
engaging in them, may be for the worse and not for the better: He set upon
Judas and entered into him, while he was with Christ himself at the Table, Joh.
13. 27. Great reason we have to watch and pray against this Tempter, and to say
to him, The Lord rebuke thee! Zach. 3. 2.

Can you imagine that when you are about to draw nigh to God, Satan will not
draw nigh to you? He will present objects, and lay baits for your Senses,
thereby to divert your Minds from the Work of God, and not only will he tempt
you objectively, but by injection too. Though he cannot look into the Heart,
yet he can cast a great company of evil thoughts into it; he makes strange
impressions upon the Fancy, sometimes endeavoring to please it, sometimes to
terrify and affright it; that either the one or the other way the Mind in
Duties may be distracted: You had need to be well aware of this subtle and
sedulous Enemy, and to look unto your compassionate High Priest, who intercedes
for you with the Father, to succor you against the Tempter.

When Satan would interrupt you with this and the other trifle, reply to him,
You have to do with the great God, about business of the greatest and highest
consequence; and it would show both a neglect of God, and a slighting of your
own Souls, to be diverted. The Builders of Jerusalem's Walls, as they wrought
in the Work with the one hand, so in the other hand they held a Weapon, Neh. 4.
17. When you are about the Work of God you should have on the Armor of God,
that you may stand against the Devil's wiles, the shield of Faith, the
breast plate of Love and Righteonsness, the Helmet of Hope, and the Sword of
the Spirit which is the Word of God, Satan's force is too weak for such weapons
as these.

3. A Caution also is highly needful against Mammon as one of the principal
causes of Distraction. The Service of Mammon justles out the Service of God, or
so distracts it that it is justly accounted no Service at all. As this World is
vain in many other regards, so in this respect, that sin hinders the end of it
from being attained. Instead of being led up unto God per scalam creaturarum by
the Creatures which he has made, we are by them drawn away from him, instead of
admiring God in the Creature, we admire and affect the Creature and forget God.
The World being present and visible, takes the Senses of Men, and their
Fancies, and to walk after the sight of the eye, is the way that the heart very
well likes, Eccles. 11. 9. And hence it is, that the invisible God, and the
things which are unseen, tho of eternal excellency and continuance, are totally
disregarded, or but slightly pursued by the most of Men.

How are Men since the Fall, become Children in understanding! Mere toys and
trifles are of great account with them: Husks are coveted, but that which is
indeed Bread, they have no hunger after, Isa. 55. 2. Wherefore do ye spend your
Money for that which is not Bread? and your labor for that which satisfies
not? Hearken diligently unto me, and eat ye that which is good, and let your
Soul delight it self in fatness: Here is a plain intimation, that diligent
harkening, and serious Service of the Lord, was hindered, by minding things
which could not satisfy. These are things which the Flesh purveys for, that
the Lusts of it may be fulfilled; these are the things, that Satan puts a
varnish upon, that they may be the more ensnaring and bewitching; so that here
lies the great danger least while God is near in the mouth, the World fill the
heart, and steal it from him.

There are three things in reference to the World, which distract thousands of
Hearts, and cause millions of Duties to be in vain. The one is Love to the
World, the other is care about it, and another is Fear concerning it. Of all
these you are to beware with the greatest vigilance and concernedness.

1. Take heed of Love to the World. If the World has your Love, it will have
your Thoughts at command, and it will not fail to show its power, and to
command your thoughts off from God when you attend upon him. They that are
(...), lovers of Pleasures more than lovers of God, will think of Pleasures
rather than of God. That Rich Man in the Gospel, while he was alive, had Moses
and the Prophets, as well as his Brethren, he was an Israelite in Name, called
himself a Child of Abraham, and professed himself a Worshipper of the true God,
but all his worship was heartless, his heart was intoxicated with sensual
Delights, and his Purple, and fine Linen, and sumptuous fare, which every day
was provided for him, Luke 16. 19. That which the Soul takes pleasure in, how
will it be revolved in the Mind! Sports and Pastimes, Garbs and Ornaments,
Journies for diversion and delight, Feasts, and Mirth and Music, if the Heart
is foolishly fond of such sorry things as these; how will they possess the
Soul, and that in the very House of God, and when his Ordinances are
administered! They will be present to the imagination, though really absent, and
an imaginary satisfaction will be taken in them, and in the mean while the Lord
himself will be forgotten, and Communion with him slighted.

They that are greedy after gain, their hearts will be upon their gain, while
their Bodies are before the Lord. Covetousness commands the Thoughts, and
extinguishes holy Desires, while the Tongue is speaking heavenly words, the
Mind will be projecting and contriving how to get the Wealth of this World; as
if to be rich toward God, were but a poor thing in comparison. The earthly
heart pleases it self with the Thoughts of what it has and with the Hopes of
getting more of the World, that for the flesh more abundant provision may be
made. Oh suffer not the World to have your love and friendship; if you are
friends to the World and over familiar with it, it will have the more easy and
ready access into your hearts at any time, and that without the least check.
Familiar Friends you know, make bold to come into your door, without knocking
for admission.

2. Take heed of Care about the World. How do these solicitous cares about
earthly things distract and divide the Mind! When the Kingdom of God and his
righteousness should be sought, there is a taking thought for Food and Raiment,
and things of that inferior nature. Our Lord knew the evil of these Cares, and
therefore uses a great many words to dissuade from them. He tells us that our
heavenly Father clothes the Lillies of the Field, and feeds the Fowls of the
Air, which have neither Storehouse nor Barn; and much more will he provide
Bread for his Children to eat, and Raiment wherewith they may be clothed; and
they are (...) of little Faith, that make any doubt of it, Mat. 6. 30. If Cares
about such things prevail, they may cause gross omissions of Duty; or if Duties
are done, they may miscarry in the doing; there may be such an anxious
solicitousness about this earth, and the affairs of it, that Heaven and the God
of Heaven, may be hardly thought of. Worldly care is one of the things that
chokes the Word, and it will choke Prayer also, it will hinder the Word from
being fruitful, and Prayer from being successful. You have leave to cast all
your care upon God who cares for you, 1 Pet. 5. 7. And if banishing distrust in
God, and eagerness after the the World, you are careful for nothing in it; you
may then by Prayer and Supplication, with thanksgiving make your request known
unto God, Phil. 4. 6. and he will make it known to you, that this is the very
best course you can take for all manner of supplies.

3. Take heed of fear concerning the World; Our Lord says, why are ye so
fearful, O ye of little Faith? There is great reason for Faith in God, no
reason for fear what the World can do to you. Be not distracted by fear of
worldly losses; those shall not befall you, but when God sees them best for you,
and they shall turn to your truest gain. Be not distracted by fear of the
Worlds hatred, and the effects of it; the Grace and Joy of the Holy Ghost, can
be an hundredfold better even at present, than any worldly comfort that Man can
deprive you of. If an enraged World can keep you off from the Lord's Service,
he will have but little from you. Be not afraid therefore of their terror,
neither be troubled, but sanctify the Lord God in your hearts, ^ Pet. 3. 14,
15. and he has promised to be a Sanctuary to you. The fear of the Lions Den,
could not scare Daniel from the Throne of Grace, but he prayed and gave Thanks
as he was wont before his God.

If this present World cannot command your love nor care, nor raise your fear,
you will be mightily fortified against one very great cause of Distraction in
Religious Services.

4. Another cause of Distraction, which I must caution you against, is Passion
and Uncharitableness. Passion has a strange and mighty force, to transform the
whole Soul into it self; so that if this prevail, not only Grace shall be under
a dark Eclipse; but even Judgment, and Reason, and common Prudence, shall seem
to be altogether banished. Passion imbitters, or rather invenoms the whole
Heart of a Man, diffusing it self all over, so that all is under the power of
it. Passion has a monopoly of the thoughts, and fixes them upon Injuries
received; nay, though they are but imaginary injuries, yet being supposed real,
how intent is the Mind upon them! Perhaps Revenge, though so contrary to the
Nature of Christianity, is wished for, and meditated. Patience indeed possesses
the Soul, but Passion catches the Soul away, so that it is possessed no longer;
all the Powers and Faculties of the Soul, are disturbed, and most disorderly
employed.

Passion rises and lies down with the Passionate Man, and is a very bad
Companion all the day long; and when Duties of Religion come to be performed,
there is so much anger in the heart against Man, that God's anger is not feared
nor seriously deprecated; neither is his love valued, or with any earnestness
desired. As the furious Man abounds in transgression, so his attendance upon
God abounds in Distractions; and these Distractions being the overflowings of
wrath, and bitterness, and hatred, how displeasing and abominable must they
needs be unto the God of Love!

Our Lord presses our reconciliation to our Brother, before we offer our Gifts
unto God, Mat. 5. 24. Go thy way, first be reconciled to thy Brother, and then
come and offer thy Gift. Whilst thou refusest to be reconciled to thy Brother,
how can thou expect that God should be reconciled to thee? Mat. 6* 15. But if
ye forgive not Men their Trespasses, neither will your Father forgive your
Trespasses. As Charity thinks no evil, so Uncharitableness thinks nothing else.
It is severe in censuring, forward to judge, not fearing what is threatened, to
be it self judged, Mat. 7. 1. It hopes and believes nothing that is good, it
bears and endures nothing that it pronounces to be bad, or in the least
injurious to it.

Nay sometimes in Prayer, instead of the acting of Grace, uncharitableness will
be expressed before the Lord himself; there are most unseemly Complaints,
impious Imprecations, and Desires vented, that Divine Wrath may fall upon those
whom the passionate are angry with. But if they were so severely punished that
offered strange fire before the Lord, and fire come forth from the Lord and
consumed them; those that offer this hellish fire of furious and revengeful
desires, may well fear the vengeance of that fire that is eternal. If you give
way to this sinful anger, you give way to the Devil, and in this Chariot he
will drive furiously your Hearts away from God, in the Duties you perform: but
the more meek and composed and sedate your Souls are, the Holy Ghost will the
more delight to dwell in them, and to vouchsafe his assistance to you.

5. Another cause of distraction is the prevalency of infidelity. Faith is a
coming to God by Christ Jesus; Unbelief is a rejecting of this Mediator, and
the Hearts departing from the Lord: Take heed of unbelief, as that which
strikes at Religion in the very root, and blasts and withers all the Fruits of
it. Doubt not of the being of God, who gives being to all things that are, and
who gave and upholds you in yours to this day. Doubt not of his all-seeing Eye,
who fills Heaven and Earth with his presence. Doubt not of his being ready to
be found; all the true seed of Jacob, are witnesses for God, that they have
sought his face, and that they have not sought him in vain, Isa. 45. 19. Doubt
not of the promises in the Word, which thousands of Saints have found
accomplished unto their strengthening, supply, and satisfaction: Doubt not of
the Threatenings, which have so often taken hold of them who have boldly
ventured upon the sins threatened; so that they have been forced to say, Verily
he is a God that judges in the Earth, and like as the Lord of Hosts thought to
do unto us, according to our ways, and according to our doings, so has he
dealt with us, Zech. 1. 6.

If unbelief has place in you, and the great truths of the Gospel are
questioned, or not firmly assented to; how can you be serious in any Religious
Service? How distracted must your thoughts needs be, when you question whether
the Lord has any regard what you do, or how you do it? This unbelief the great
spoiler of your Performances, the Father of Lies endeavors to promote. He will
indeed inject unbelieving thoughts into Hearts that have much Faith and Grace
But as Bernard well says, Latrat solum cum suggerit, mordet cum ad consensum
trahit. Satan does only bark when he does suggest, he bites when he gains the
Hearts consent. Oh never entertain such Injections, never give the least
consent that they should lodge in you. Look upon them as errant falsehoods,
which an Enemy pesters you with, out of a pernicious design; firmly believe the
quite contrary truths, that that Belief may influence your Spirits, and make
you more serious when you are before the Lord.

6. The workings of spiritual pride in the heart, are another cause of
distraction which you are to beware of. It was a good observation of Augustine,
that other iniquity discovers it self in the doing of evil.

Superbia vero bonis operibus insidiatur, ut pereant. Pride lies in wait as it
were about your good Works, to spoil the doing of them, that they may be lost
labor. This sin shows it self several ways, and upon all occasions is apt to
stir, to puff up and swell the Mind, with high and touring thoughts and
imaginations. The Pharisee fasted twice a Week which implies Prayer and other
Exercises of Religion, Luke 18. 12. hereupon he became self-conceited, and
pride hindered his justification, for he placed his confidence in his own
righteousness. What a dangerous distraction is that, when these thoughts are
fixed in thy Heart, that by thy Prayers, and other Duties thou can make an
atonement for thy sins, which can indeed be made alone by the satisfaction and
intercession of the Lord Jesus!

When the Heart is enlarged in Prayer, and good expressions come with great
fluency from the Lips; how apt is he that prays to have high Conceits of
himself, and of his Performances? His Mind is prone to wander, and to think
what others think of him* and is sinfully pleased in the imagination, that they
are mightily pleased and taken with him; thus Pride draws off the Soul from
God, to contemplate its own excellent Gifts, and others Admiration of them.
Enlargements in holy Duties are very encouraging and comfortable, when we are
humble under them, when we acknowledge the Spirits Grace in them, and though
never so much enlarged, despair of acceptance but in Christ alone. But when
these Enlargements are so advanced and put into Christ's place, that we reckon
those Blessings owing to enlargements, which are the fruit of Christ's merit
and purchase; here is distracting Pride which draws off from Christ, and is
very displeasing to the Father. Such Thoughts as these. How well do I pray! How
broken for sin do I appear! How fervent in Spirit do I seem! What credit and
applause shall I get by this Performance! What a choice and precious Saint
shall I be accounted! Such Thoughts are apt to hover about an enlarged heart:
but if they are not kept out with an utter detestation of them; the Heart will
be distracted with hellish Pride, how heavenly soever the expressions of the
Mouth are.

And as you are to take heed of the Workings of Pride, so of every other sin
which does easily beset you. If when you are confessing any fleshly or worldly
Lust, it stirs in you, and your Hearts have some regard to it, and delightful
Thoughts about it; this will distract your Prayer, and deafen God's Ear. Oh
it is an ill thing to have the Heart resolve to spare the sin, which the
Hypocritical Tongue does cry aloud, that it may be slain. That sin which your
Constitutions, Callings, or the Times in which you live, make you most prone to
commit: Satan may in a special manner endeavor to invigorate, that it may be a
great distraction and disturbance to you in your attendance upon God. The Grace
of God therefore should make you most to watch against and hate that sin, which
Nature did most of all delight in, and love.

7. Another cause of distraction is, a zealous affection toward an erroneous
way. Errors are of several sorts, some are praeter fundamentum, off from the
Foundation; others are circa fundamentum, about the Foundation; a third sort
are contra fundamentum, against, and raze the very Foundation of Religion;
these last are most dangerous. The broachers and spreaders of them are called,
(...), ravening Wolves that spare not the Flock; and truly the propagators, of
lesser Errors do a great deal of harm, they are called little Foxes, and are
often very prejudicial especially to young Converts, and prove a great
hindrance to the good work begun in them: Therefore you read, Cant. 2. 15. Take
us the Foxes, the little Foxes that spoil the Vines, for our Vines have tender
Grapes. Errors, how do they excite the zeal of the Soul! And though they are
but about smaller matters, yet they so command the Tongue and Thoughts, that
they are more talked of and minded, than the great things of Law and Gospel.
Erroneous Opinions do so possess the Heart, that the main truths and things of
Religion are little regarded. and less improved.

They that are very fond of Error, when they are praying or hearing, or
engaged in other Ordinances: Satan dresses up that error with a disguise of
truth, and so presents it to their Minds, and their Minds are drawn away by the
thoughts of it, and Ordinances are ineffectual and lost to them. No wonder that
zealots for Error, are called, (...), Jud. v. 13. wandering Stars; they wander
from the way of truth, and this wandering makes them very much to wander from
God in holy Duties, whilst the eagerness of their Spirits, is after their
mistakes, in which they are so very confident.

Beguiled Souls are called unstable, 2 Pet. 2. 14. the Apostle tells us, they
are tossed to and fro, carried about with every wind of Doctrine. The
unsettledness of their Judgments, and proneness to run from one error to
another, mightily distracts their Thoughts, and they are little, if at all
edisied by their Duties. Errors are very apt to knock at the Door, when you
are attending upon God; and Satan is very busy then to disturb and distract
you with Thoughts about them. The Lord would be served with greater intention,
if you did not trouble your Heads with doubtful Disputations, which you are
cautioned against, Romans 14. 1. and if you did follow that counsel, 2 Pet. 3.
17. Beware lest ye being led away with the error of the wicked, fall from your
own stedfastness.

8. The sloth and loziness of the Heart, in refusing to take pains with it self
to keep close to God, is another cause of distraction; a cause it is, which
most commonly prevails, there is therefore need of caution against it. The Work
of the Heart with its own self, is very hard Work indeed, in the doing of this
to purpose, lies both the difficulty, and also the truth of Religion. To be
wicked and deceitful, are the two bad properties of the Heart, which are
natural to it; the wickedness of the Heart, makes it backward to come to God;
the deceitfulness of the Heart makes it very ready to start aside like a
deceitful Bow, and to fly off from him. Great pains and labor is absolutely
necessary to engage the Heart to approach to the Lord, and to abide with him.
These accesses to God are against nature; like rowing a Boat against a swift
Stream, or rolling a Stone up a steep Hill. If the Oar be not plied, the Stream
carries the Boat back: let the Stone but a little alone to it self, and how
presently, and how far will it run downward! The Poet observed the strength of
Natures inclination.

Naturam expellas furca licet, usque recurret. Use greatest force' against
Natures Will,
It shall recoyl upon you still.
There is need of constant care and industry, and the aid of supernatural
Grace, else the Heart will never be brought to acquaint it self with God, or to
delight in Communion with him.

Take heed of sloth in holy Duties, and carelessness of Spirit, which makes Men
indifferent and unconcerned what frame their Hearts are in; as if in these
distractions there were no great sin or harm. The Psalmist tells us, The Lord
is in his holy Temple, the Lord's Throne is in Heaven, his Eyes behold, his
Eyelids try the Children of Men, Psalm 11. 4. with a pleased Countenance, he
does behold the upright Heart, but he frowns upon all careless Servants. Take
heed of imagining there is no need of striving again vain Thoughts in the
Lord's Service. If these are allowed of, know that God allows not of them; and
if they have place in you, what may they come to at last? The greatest sin that
ever was committed, began with a Thought, and if the first Thought had been
utterly banished, the sinful desire had not been kindled, nor the Deed done

I have spoken of the causes of distraction, with great heed you are all of you
to beware of them; for if you give way to these, they will corrupt all your
Duties. I read in the old Law, that nothing that had a blemish was to be
offered to God in Sacrifice; this shows, that Christ the great Sacrifice, was
without blemish and without spot; and it is an intimation, what our Duties ought
to be. But if Distractions, and the causes of them, are not taken heed of, your
Services will be no better than a Sacrifice would have been, that had all the
forbidden blemishes, Lev. 22. 22. Blind, broken, maimed, with Wens, Scurvy, and
Scabbed; which must needs have been very hateful, if it had been offered to the
Lord.

USE II. By way of expostulation. I shall expostulate the matter with you about
these distractions in your Religious Performances.

1. Without distraction you can mind your Secular Affairs, and why should you
not be more intent and serious about your eternal concerns? What is a small
Cipher to the whole Circle of the Heavens? What is Time which is ended almost
as soon as begun, to Eternity that will never end at all? Temporal Afflictions
are light, and burdens only for a moment, 2 Cor. 4. 17. Temporal felicity is
but a pleasant and short Dream, and is chased away as a night Vision. But
eternal Woes and Joys, are Woes and Joys indeed; they are perfectly possessed
all at once, altogether; and as to the Woes, there can be no hope of any
release; as to the Joys, there is no room for any fear of deprivation.

2. Without distraction you can hear or read News, or a pleasant History; and
is not a Religious Duty of far greater importance to you? Shall the pleasing of
the fancy be minded more than the securing of the Soul? Shall the State of
Affairs in this World be asked after, and will you not seriously inquire into
your own Spiritual Estate? and mind what is likely to become of you, when you
go into the other World; where you will be fixed in blessedness or misery that
will be unalterable?

3. Without distraction hertofore you have hearkened to the evil one, and with
great studiousness contrived to commit sin, and if the worst Master was thus
attended upon, shall not now the best much more? Have you not devised
wickedness, and set your selves in an evil way? Psalm. 36. 4. and will you not
now with as great thoughtfulness devise how to do good, and with an
undistracted purpose set upon the doing of it? The Apostle would not only have
you to change your Master, and being free from sin, become Servants of
Righteousness, Romans 6. 18. but as you served sin, so you should serve
righteousness; be as forward, serious and diligent in holy Duties, as ever you
were in the Works of darkness.

4. Without distraction you have thought upon injuries, and meditated revenge;
and shall not reconciliation with God, and your own Salvation, be minded with
greater intention? Thou think est much of the wrongs that others do to thee,
think more of the injury thou have done to God's Justice, and how thou have
sinned against thine own Soul, in provoking his Wrath against thee, Jer. 7. 19.
Do they provoke me to anger, says the Lord? Do they not provoke themselves to
the confusion of their own faces? Let the Thoughts, of the many many Talents
which thou owe, swallow up the Thoughts of the few Pence which are owing thee.

5. How often, and for how long a time together, has mere Vanity commanded your
Thoughts and Hearts? And will you not watch with your Lord; and in his Work for
an hour? Proud Imaginations, silly Suppositions of your having that Wisdom,
Wealth, Excellency, and Esteem, which you have not, have prevailed; and you
have set your selves on high in your own fancies. Diverse sorts of Wickednesses,
how fixed have they been in your Speculations! And why should not your Spirits
be much more fixed upon God, and your Duty toward him?

6. Food and Raiment, and providing for your Families are minded in good
earnest, and without distraction; and should you not with far greater
heedfulness seek the Kingdom of God and his Righteousness? Why should there be
so much distraction in minding the one thing needful? If you do not mind the
good part quickly, you may miss of it eternally; it may soon be too late to
seek it. But if now you choose it, your Hearts being seriously set upon it, you
shall have it, and that good part shall never be taken away from you, Luke 10.
42.

USE III. Shall be of Direction, I am to direct you to proper Remedies against
distraction in Religious Performances. The Disease, I grant is difficult to be
cured; but with the great Physician, no Distemper is impossible to be healed.
Having therefore your Eye and dependence upon him, use these following Remedies.

1. Let your first Thoughts every Morning be always good ones. An Heart well
seasoned with these in the beginning of the day, is likely to be in the better
frame in holy Duties, and better inclined all the day long. As soon as you are
awake, let your Souls work Heavenward, and be lifted up to the God that is
there. Such Souls he is pleased with, and delights to communicate his Grace
unto. If the Lord has the first fruits of your Hearts, the first thoughts and
desires, you are likely to be blessed with the better thoughts and desires
afterward; as of old the first fruits being offered to God, his Blessing was
upon the whole Harvest. And tho you do take pains with your Hearts in the
Morning, remember, at no time of the day you must let down your Watch, and
become utterly regardless of your own Spirits; for if you are, corruption will
quickly, though it has had never so great a Check, return, and that with great
force and violence. Thus when the Sea fled, and Jordan was driven back, within
a little while they both returned to their former Course and Channel.

When I awake, says the Psalmist, I am still with thee, Psalm. 139 18. He saw
himself under God's special care, and compassed with his favor as with a
Shield; and God's Thoughts about him so full of tender mercy and loving
kindness, and amounting to so vast a Sum, were very precious and delightful to
him to think of. And how whenever he awaked, did his Heart work toward the
Lord, in a way of gratitude and love! Begin the Day well, and all the Day long
keep your Hearts with all keeping. If you would not have your Thoughts vain in
Duty, let them not be allowed to be vain at any time. In the space of time
between your solemn Duties, be frequent in holy Ejaculations, and mental
Applications unto God, this will mightily help to keep a sense of him upon your
Hearts, and the more undistracted will your Service be, when at your set times
every day you attend upon him.

2. Be sensible that the preparation of the heart in Man is from the Lord,
Prove. 16. 1. Look unto him therefore to prepare your Hearts for every Duty you
engage in. Cries for preparation should be the first Cries, and Cries
afterward are likely to be to better purpose. Preparation for Duty goes before
profit by it; and when the Lord vouchsafes to prepare, he intends to bestow
benefits His preparation causes Prayer to be so seriously and fervently made,
as that it shall in no wise meet with a denial, Psalm. 10. 17. Thou will prepare
their Heart, thou will cause thy Ear to hear. In this preparation, the Spirit
of the Lord affords a mighty help; there is a liberty and freedom to the Duty
that is to be performed; and the more free the Heart is to the Duty, the more
free and enlarged it is likely to be in the Duty. Clogs and weights are removed;
and among these clogs, distraction and deadness may well be reckoned.

The prepared heart is a fully resolved heart, and an holy and firm resolution
made in a strength beyond our own, will mightily help to banish distraction.
The prepared Heart by the Spirit and Grace of Christ, is disentangled from the
World, stands aloof from it, that it may draw the nearer to God. It is made to
see how worthy sin is of its most bitter Sorrow, and utter detestation, and
with an holy indignation, it says, What have I to do any more with any of my
iniquities? The prepared Heart prizes the Blessings it is about to petition for,
and longs to appear before God, from whom alone they can be obtained. It Is
delivered from the vain and injudicious Spirit of this World, and by the Spirit
which is of God, knows the worth of those things which are so freely given of
God. And this preparedness of Heart, must needs be a great preservative against
distraction.

3. Pray for the fulfilling of that Promise, wherein the Lord has engaged to
give you an heart to know him. They that are ignorant of God, must needs be
ignorant also how to attend upon him. If their knowledge be only notional, and
they know him not as they ought to know him, they will not attend upon him, as
they ought to attend upon him. Lay hold therefore upon that good Word of
Promise, Jer. 24. 7. And I will give them an heart to know me, that I am the
Lord, and they shall be my People, and I will be their God, for they shall
return to me with their whole heart. And Heb. 8. 11. They shall all know me,
from the least to the greatest. This knowledge of God will have a mighty
influence upon your Hearts, to bring your very Thoughts into captivity and
obedience, 2 Cor. 10. 5. We read, 1 Samuel 2. 3. That the Lord is a God of
knowledge, and by him actions are weighed, and they who rightly know this, will
take care to serve him in sincerity.

True knowledge of God will bring a great awe of him upon your Spirits. His
Majesty, Glory, Holiness, will strike you into great humility and reverence.
How will you be emptied of your selves, and your Souls and Thoughts swallowed
up in God, when he does cause his Excellency to pass before you! The appearance
of the Lord obscures and darkens all things else, that they are counted not
worth minding Therefore the Prophet says, Isa. 24. 23. Then the Moon shall be
confounded, and the Sun ashamed, when the Lord of Hosts shall reign in Mount
Zion and in Jerusalem, and before his Ancients gloriously. The Eye of this God
whom you attend upon, is jealous; and yet withal it is all* seeing. Oh take
heed of being deceived, as if God would be mocked by Man, and Man not be the
worse, nor smart for it. Gal. 6. 7. Be not deceived, God is not mocked, for
whatsoever a Man sows, that shall he also reap. If thy Duties are only like a
sowing of mere Chaff, how can thou expect to reap any good by them? The good
Angels themselves do reverence the Lord, whom you are worshipping; the Apostate
ones tremble before him; the better you know him, the more godly your fear will
be, and fear will unite your Hearts and Thoughts both to God, and to the Work
and Duty he requires.

4. Be very careful to cherish the Grace of Hope in your Hearts, and look upon
holy Duties as highly valuable Privileges: the greater your expectation is of
the truest benefit and advantage, the more intent and fixed will your Thoughts
be. The Apostle prays to the God of hope; for the believing Romans, that they
might abound in hope by the power of the Holy Ghost. Romans 15. 13. Hope has an
earnest expectation, and the better the things are, which are hoped for, still
the more earnest the expectation is; this the Apostle calls, (...), an
emphatical word, and signifies to look for a thing with an Head lifted up, and
with great intention both of Eyes and Mind. Such an Hope what a remedy would it
be against Distraction! When Hope is very low, the Mind runs very much upon
matter of discouragement; and is deadned by it. And the best things of all
being almost despaired of, the Heart is the apter to wander after things that
cannot profit; but Hope is compared to an Anchor, Heb. 6. 19. Which hope we
have as an Anchor of the Soul, both sure and steadfast, it keeps the Soul steady
and fixed upon what is hoped for, till it be enjoyed.

Duties are not only to be engaged in, as what are due to God, but we are to be
persuaded, that the giving what is due to God, is the way to receive still more
and more from him. In these Duties, our Hopes should be high in him that is
most high, we are not able to conceive how much he can do for us. We are to
hope in him as a most liberal and all-sufficient Giver; we are to expect the
yearning of his Bowels in our Distresses and Afflictions, and especially when
we are weary and heavy laden with the burden of our Iniquities. We are to
expect the unlocking of the unsearchable Riches of Christ, which are enough to
enrich the whole beggared progeny of Adam; and all that come to him shall
certainly experience the Riches and fullness of that Grace that dwells in him.
The Ploughman plows in hope, and hope fixes his Thoughts upon the precious
Fruits of the Earth, which in Harvest he expects to reap. Oh study the Promises
of God, which are exceeding broad; they are wider than the Earth and Sea, and
they reach as high as the highest Heaven. Hope for the promised Blessings which
are of all sorts Temporal, Spiritual, Eternal; and the more strong and lively
hope is, it will the more fix your Mind, revive your Spirits, and quicken your
Desires.

5. Another Remedy against Distraction, is a fervent Love. As love is the first
and great Command, so it is a most commanding affection: Amor meus pondus meum.
Love is the weight which sets all the Wheels a going, and inclines them that
way which it self is inclined. The Soul of Man has been by some affirmed to be
ubi amat, non ubi animat, where it loves, and on the object beloved, rather
than in the Body, which is the Tabernacle where it dwells; and the reason is,
because Love does so command the Mind and Thoughts after it. If your love be
set upon God, Love will set your Thoughts upon him. The Thoughts of the
Covetous* how are they intent upon their beloved gain! and the Pleasures which
the voluptuous dote on, are hardly ever out of their Mind! If love to God
constrain you to attend upon God, it will bring your Thoughts along with it,
and very much restrain them from wandering.

The Love of God can never be produced by corrupt Nature, nor by the mere force
of reason, it is a special Grace of the Lord's Spirit, and to him you must make
application for it. Christ died that he might bring you to God, and Love is the
going of the Soul to him. In the Name of Christ put up your earnest Petitions,
that this Grace of Love may be wrought in you in truth; and being wrought, that
it may continually be increased. The Lord says, he will write his Laws in your
Hearts; Oh pray that this great Command to love him, may be written in deep and
lasting Characters; and if the Lord once become your desire and delight: the
Duties you perform, will become more pleasant and delightful and undistracted.
God is light, and in him there is no darkness, nothing but what is desirable.
All Excellencies in the Creatures are derived from him, and the Streams are but
little if we look to the Fountain from whence they all come. This God, as
excellent and glorious as he is, is willing in Christ to be yours: Such
loveliness! Such loving* kindness; what Love does it call for from you! Let
nothing be able to draw away your Love, and the less will your Thoughts be
drawn away from him.

6. Be very poor in Spirit: A pressing sense of your spiritual Necessities,
will make you very intent and serious in begging Supplies from above, for it is
from thence alone you can be supplied. They that are pinched with Poverty, how
much do they think how poor they are! They have such a smart feeling of their
Needs, they can scarce think of any thing besides. The condemned Malefactor,
when he cries for a Pardon, and has hopes to speed, surely the apprehension of
his danger, makes his Words and his Thoughts to go together. When the Man
almost famished asks for Bread, no doubt his Mind is very much upon that Bread
which may prevent his starving. Be you but sensible how great the Needs of your
Souls are, and that it is the Father of Spirits only, who can give you the mercy
and grace which you need; and the more of sense you have, the less distracted
will you be in your Applications to him.

Our Lord pronounces the poor in Spirit blessed, Mat. 5. 3. their Petitions
come from an inward sense of their want, and of the worth of Blessings, and
being earnest Petitioners, they shall be successful ones. You that feel your
guilt, and fear Divine Wrath, must needs think of a Pardon, and the
desirableness of it, when you ask for it. You that are sensible of your
Maladies, how intent will your Minds be upon the Lord the healer of his People!
And you will have little list to think of something else, when you are begging
to be cured! True poverty of Spirit will constrain to an undistracted seeking
of that Gold tried in the fire to enrich you, and that white Raiment to cover
you, Rev. 3. 18. without which you must needs be wretched and miserable,
because you will be poor and naked.

7. Let Conscience be very tender, vigilant and faithful. Such a Conscience
will be very helpful to prevent distraction, or quickly to put an end to it. It
will observe, and fetch home the Truant, and straying Thoughts, and bring them
to your Duties. I distinguish between a tender Conscience and a scrupulous one,
for a scrupulous Conscience is a great cause of distraction; for Scruples are
most apt to run in and pester the Mind when holy Duties are performing.
Conscience acts in God's Name, by his Authority, and urges Obedience to his
Laws, and much insists, if it be truly enlightened and faithful, upon the right
manner of obeying. Conscience takes strict notice of the whole Soul and all the
actings of it; and this Officer of God, especially does this, in the Souls
approaches to the Lord; a sense of being under God's Eye, makes the faithful
Consciences Eye more strict and ready to spy all faults, that they may
presently be amended. In holy Duties, such a Conscience will be very busy, it
will earnestly protest against vain and distracting Thoughts; and it will say,
What make such thoughts here, when God and his Work ought only to be minded?
The presence of evil when good is doing, such a Conscience cannot brook with
Patience, it stirs up the lustings of the Spirit, against those of the Flesh,
that the Law of the Mind may prevail more against the Law in the Members, Romans
7. 23.

If Conscience is asleep in your Performances, how sorry and sinful will they
be! The Heart will be dead, the Thoughts will be gone far away, no holy
Affections will be stirring. Pray hard for a good Conscience, a Conscience not
only purged by the Blood of Christ from all the guilt which by dead Works you
have contracted, but also by the same Blood healed of its Sleepiness,
Stupidity, and all other faults of it.

And that Conscience may more effectually check your Hearts from roving, and
trifling in attendance upon God, look before you with the Eye of strong and
steady Faith, and see as far as Death and Judgment, and into Eternity; and then
do you judge, whether for your carelessly performed Duties, your Lord will say,
Well done true and faithful Servants! The Apostle having looked as far as his
own, and also the World's last Day, wherein the Heaven shall pass away with a
great noise, the Elements melt with fervent heat, and the Earth and the Works
therein shall be burnt up, rationally infers, that Christians Conversations
should be very well ordered, Duties of Godliness most undistractedly and
seriously performed. Seeing then that all these things shall be dissolved, what
manner of Persons ought ye to be in all holy Conversation and Godliness! 2 Pet.
3. 10, 11.

8. Another Remedy against Distraction, is growing in Grace, and in the
knowledge of Christ, 2 Pet. 3. 18. This will keep you from being led away by
error, and will make you more steadfast in Duty, as well as Truth. When Grace
shall be perfected in Glory, distraction will be perfectly cured: and here on
Earth the Cure is advanced, as Grace is augmented. The more Grace you have, you
will set the higher value upon Communion with God; and this will fill your
Hearts with holy Zeal and Indignation against every thing that may divert your
Minds, and be an obstruction to this Communion* The more Grace you have, the
more you are filled with the Spirit; and when you pray in the Holy Ghost, your
Prayer will be (...), in-wrought Prayer, Jam. 5. 16. How much of the Heart and
Soul will be therein! And the same Spirit in hearing, and other Ordinances,
will keep your Hearts with God, when they are about to turn to the right hand
or to the left Isa. 30. 21. The more Grace you have, the more your Treasure
will be in Heaven; and you are told, Mat. 6. 21. Where your treasure is, there
will your hearts be also.

Now that there may be an increase of Grace, Christ must be better known, for
it is from him that the first Grace is derived, and all additional degrees of
it. Study him more, and understand his fullness, who fills all in all, Ephesians. 1.
23. Desire with the Apostle, that you may know him, and the power of his
Resurrection, and the fellowship of his Sufferings, being made conformable to
his Death, Psalm. 3. 10. If you conform to the Death of Christ, and are
crucified and dead to the World, and the World to you, the things of the World
will appear without form and comeliness, and will be less able to distract your
Minds, and ensnare your Affections. And if you feel the Power of Christ's
Resurrection, your Hearts and Thoughts will rise with him, and at what a rate
will you seek those things that are above! The Angels when here on Earth, they
are doing what God commands them, and are in Heaven still as to their Thoughts,
and as to the Happiness they enjoy. You should be heavenly when about your
earthly business, but especially when you are attending upon the God of Heaven.
And the more experimentally you understand Christ risen, the less will things
on Earth be minded, and the higher will your Hearts rise and ascend after him.

9. Ever commit the keeping of your Souls to God himself in well-doing, 1 Pet.
4. 19. Apprehending how liable you are to distraction in his Service, entreat
that he would undertake for you. He that spans the Heavens, and in his Hand
does hold the Winds, so that they stir not in the least against his Will,
certainly is able to keep your Hearts undistracted in your Duties, and close to
himself. The Lord makes and searches, and new makes and fixes the Heart of Man;
and none of this is to be done, by any power less than his. When David's Soul
followed hard after God, he acknowledged it was the Lord's own right hand which
upheld him, Psalm. 63. 8. Call in help from Heaven against distraction, if you
would be helped effectually. The Christian, not only when he is leaving the
World, but when he is engaging in any Religious Duty, should say with the
Psalmist, Psalm. 31. 5. Into thy Hands, O Lord, I commit my Spirit. He, and he
alone can keep it in a serious and composed frame.

USE IV. Shall be of Counsel as to some particular Duties, which I shall insist
on, and show you how they may with less distraction, be performed. And there
are four Duties which at present I shall speak of. The first is, Reading the
Holy Scriptures. The second is, Hearing the Word Preached. The third is, The
Duty of Prayer. The fourth is, Communicating at the Lord's Table.


Of these in order.

I begin with Reading the Holy Scriptures, and that these may be read with less
distraction.

1. Be firmly persuaded of the Scriptures Divine Authority and Verity. When you
take the Bible to look into it, remember it is a Book of God's own making you
have in your hands. The Writers of it were but his Penmen, they wrote not their
own, but God's Mind and Will, and were moved and inspired by the Holy Ghost: To
be distracted and regardless of what you read, is to contemn God in
disregarding his Word. Mind what you read, for the Scripture can make you wise
to Salvation, 2 Timothy 3. 15. You may securely trust to his Word, its light is
infallible, it is certain in its Promises and Threatenings, 'twill by all be
found true to eternity. The word of the Lord endures for ever, 1 Pet. 1. 25.

2. Believe the Scriptures perfection and sufficiency, as a means most full and
plain to guide you to everlasting blessedness. Here you are faithfully warned
to flee from the Wrath to come, and from sin which does deserve it, and here
you may find God's Counsel, by which you may be guided safe to Glory, Psalm. 73.
24. You need not be distracted and doubtful in your own Minds, as if in the
Scriptures God's Mind was declared only in part. Man's additions are needless,
nay impious, Prove. 30. 6. Add thou not unto his Words, lest he reprove thee,
and thou be found a Liar; and Men's Traditions are vain. Heed the Word of God,
as that which enlightens the Eyes, converts the Soul, rejoices the Heart; as
that which is profitable for Doctrine, Reproof, for Correction, instruction in
Righteousness, that the Man of God may be perfect, thoroughly furnished unto all
good works, 2 Timothy 3. 16, 17.

3. Look upon the Scriptures as much directed to you in particular, and laying
an obligation upon you; as if they had dropped from God out of Heaven into your
hand. The word forbids sin in you, as well as in any other in the World; the
Commands of it reach you, as truly as if you had heard the Lord calling to you
by Name, to yield Obedience. The offers of the Gospel are really made to you,
and upon acceptance; the Blessings offered are your own: if they are refused,
how can you ecape the Wrath of him, who from Heaven speaks to you for your
good? Heb. 12. 25. That such a particular application should be made, is
signified by Solomon, whose word is as a Goad and a Nail fastened, to stir you
up to your Duty, and to settle you in it, Prove. 22. 19, 20. That thy trust may
be in the Lord, I have made known to thee this day, even unto thee. Have I not
written to thee excellent things in counsels and knowledge?

4. See the Lord himself just by you when you read his Word; and hear him
bidding you take heed how you read. As he has magnified his Word above all his
Name, so he requires a special regard should be had to it. He looks with
approbation and pleasure upon that Man who trembles at his Word, Isa. 66. 2.
but when he perceives instruction to be hated, and that his Law is cast behind
the Back, he admonishes such forgetters of God to consider what this neglect
will cost them, if not repented of, and he threatens to tear them in pieces, so
as that there shall be none to deliver, Psalm. 50. 17. 22.

5. Lift up your Eyes to Heaven for instruction from the Spirit, by whose
inspiration the Scripture was given. It Is the Spirit of Christ who opens Men's
Understandings to understand the Scriptures, Luke 24. 45. Be humbly sensible of
your ignorance, and proneness to error and mistake: A promise is made to the
humble and meek, that God will guide them in Judgment; so that they shall judge
aright of things, and he will teach them his way, Psalm. 25. 9. Cry to the Lord
to make you mind what you read, and to profit by what you mind. Desire
Scripture knowledge, that what you know, may have a deep impression upon your
Spirits, may excite holy and gracious Affections and Resolutions in your
Hearts, and be mightily effectual unto the more through amending of your ways
and doings.

6. In all your ways seek for light from the holy Scriptures, that every step
you take may be rightly ordered. Go not in any way, which the word of truth
calls a false way. How well and wisely does he walk, that can say with the
Psalmist, Thy Word is a Lamp to my Feet, and a light unto my Path! Psalm. 119.
105. When you go, let this Word lead you, and then when you sleep there is a
promise to keep you, and when you awake it will talk with you, and be telling
you what you must avoid, believe and do, that you may be blessed for ever. The
Commandment is a Lamp, and the Law is light, and the reproofs of instruction
are the way of Life, Prove. 6. 22, 23.

And as the Word talks to you, so you should talk of the word you read; it will
fix it in your Thoughts and Hearts the better, and make your Discourse more
edifying to others, Deuteronomy. 6, 6, 7. And these words which I command thee this
Day, shall be in thy heart; and thou shall diligently teach them to thy
Children, and shall talk of them when thou sit in thy House, and when thou
walk by the way, and when thou lie down, and when thou risest up. The more
the word is written in your Hearts, the more Grace is there; and the more thou
talkest of it unto them thou conversest with, the more it will administer Grace
to the Hearers.

The second Duty is hearing the Word preached: And that you may hear the word
with less distraction:

1. Look beyond Preachers unto that God who sends them, and speaks to you by
them. Look beyond the earthen Vessels, unto the Treasure which they bring; and
upon the Word that is preached, as the glorious Gospel of Jesus Christ, who is
the Image of God, 2 Cor. 4. 4, 7. Preachers of the Gospel are Christ's
Ambassadors, and they are sent to treat with you about Peace with God, and by
them God beseeches you to be reconciled, 2 Cor. 5. 20. How beautiful should you
count the Feet of them who preach the Gospel of Peace, and bring glad tidings
of good things! Romans 10. 15. Such Tidings are too good, distractedly and
heedlesly to be heard: And he that sends them is too great to be thus
contemned. When you sit before the Ministers of Christ, and the Stewards of the
Mysteries of God, remember what our Lord himself says, Luke 10. 16. He that
hears you, hears me; and he that despises you, despises me; and he that
despises me, despises him that sent me.

2. Apprehend who are ready if you hear distractedly and without care, to catch
away the Word from you as soon as it is spoken. Evil Angels are compared to the
Fowls of the Air, who hover about the Sower, to devour the Seed as soon as it
is sown, Luke 8. 5. These evil Spirits are fitly compared to Fowls, for they
are many; and how do they come flocking into our Religious Assemblies! It Is
desirable, to have Souls come flying to Christ, as Doves to their Windows; but
it may startle us to understand that Devils came flocking into Churches, to
catch away the Word which is preached there! These Enemies as they are many, so
as Fowls they are above us; and consequently not so easy is it to resist them!
How many Sermons have these evil Angels stolen! And the Sermons they have
stolen, they have them to show against heedless Hearers at the Day of reckoning.

3. Make a Covenant with your Eyes, that your hearing may be the less
distracted and more attentive. Fix not your sight upon any alluring and
ensnaring Objects, or any thing which may divert you. And as your Eyes must be
turned away from beholding Vanity, that you may be quickened in the way of your
Duty, so be sure to keep your Eyes waking. If sleep locks up the Senses, how
fast must the Heart the mean time be barred against the Word of God! Eutichus a
Church Sleeper, is an Example upon Record, sinking down with sleep while Paul
was preaching, he fell down and was taken up dead, Act. 20. 9. They that sleep
at a Sermon, scandalously reject and despise the word preached: Satan is a most
wakeful Witness against them, and his Arms are the Cradle in which they are
rockt.

4. Beg that the Lord himself would open your Hearts to attend to his Word. It
was he who opened the Heart of Lydia, and then she attended to those things
which were spoken by Paul, Acts 16. 14. It Is the Lord that makes way for the
Word into the Mind, that it may be heeded and understood; and he makes way for
the Word into the Heart, that the Heart may be changed and cleansed thereby,
Joh. 15. 3. Now are ye clean through the Word which I have spoken unto you.
It Is dreadful to provoke the Lord, so as to be like unto provoking Israel; to
whom Moses speaks thus, Deuteronomy. 29. 4. The Lord has not given you an Heart to
perceive, and Eyes to see, and Ears to hear unto this Day, And it will be worse
if you love to have it thus still. O think thus, that distracted hearing may
cause the word of Life to become deadly to you; and God may judicially and yet
justly harden your Hearts, lest you should see, and hear, and understand, and
convert and be healed, Isa* 6. 10.

5. Let the word preached be mixed with Faith, and received with Love. The
Apostle tells us, that the Word preached did not profit the hearers of it, not
being mixed with Faith in them that heard it, Heb. 4. 2. Commands will be
heeded and obeyed, that are indeed believed to be of God. Threatenings and
Promises that are most firmly credited, cannot but be minded, and have a mighty
influence. The Word also is to be received in the Love of it, that you may be
saved. The design of this Word is your deliverance from sin and misery, your
Peace, your Purity and Perfection, your eternal Redemption and Glory; and
therefore it commends it self exceedingly to your Aflections: A sincere love to
the Word, will command the Thoughts of the Heart, and hinder the Word from
being disregarded.

6. Remember that the Word which you hear, is your Life. There is a carelessness
of life, in heedlesness and distraction in hearing the Word of God, Deuteronomy. 32.
46, 47. Set your hearts unto all the Words which I testify among you this Day;
for it is not a vain thing for you, for it is your Life, Prove. 7. 2. Keep my
Commandments and live, and my Law as the Apple of your Eye, Isa. 55. 3. Incline
your Ear, come unto me, hear, and your Soul shall live; and I will make with
you an everlasting Covenant, even the sure Mercies of David.

And further to fix your attention to the Word preached, be all of you
persuaded, that you who are now in the Sanctuary, must shortly stand at the
Judgment Seat of Christ, and the Word which he has spoken, the same shall judge
you at the last day, Joh. 12. 48. Then you must render an account of your
Stewardship, and how all your Talents have been improved, and you must be
judged, and receive according to your Works. And sure I am, that the Sentence
which will then be pronounced, whether it be of Absolution, Come ye Blessed; or
of Condemnation, Go ye Cursed; cannot but be heard without distraction. Both
the one and the other of these Sentences must needs be heeded by all upon whom
they are passed; the one being so very comfortable, and the other so terrible
and confounding.

A third Duty which I shall insist on, is Prayer; now that you may with less
distraction call upon the Name of God.

1. Consider whose Name it is you are taking into your Mouths, Deuteronomy. 28. 58.
That glorious* and fearful Name, THE LORD THY GOD. A Name which should never be
in the Lips, without the profoundest Reverence in the Heart. The Gods that made
not the Heavens and the Earth, shall perish from the Earth, and from under
these Heavens But the Lord is the true God, he is the living God, and an
everlasting King; at his Wrath the Earth does tremble, and the Nations shall
not be able to abide his indignation, Jer. 10. 10, 11. This God whom you pray
to, is infinitely more above you, than the greatest Emperor is above the
meanest Worms that crawl upon the ground! How should you look to the frame of
your Spirits when you are before him! The Passion of fear calls in the Blood to
the Heart, that the Vitals may be fortified, and truly the Grace of fear will
call in the Thoughts of the Heart, that Duties performed to so great a Majesty,
may not be an heedless trifling with him.

2. Sequester your selves from other business to intend Prayer; the more you
are disentangled from your Secular Affairs, the more free and fit your Hearts
will be to be poured out before the Lord in your supplications. The further you
step out and off from the World, when you come to knock at Heaven Gates, the
more certainly will the Door be opened to you. If Mammon has your Thoughts and
Desires, when you are praying to God, you have a jealousy provoking Idol in
your Hearts, while in his Presence; and how offensive must this needs be to
him, to see an Idol there, where he chooses to dwell! One thing, says the
Psalmist, have I desired of the Lord, that will I seek after, Psalm. 27. 4.
Other things were esteemed worthless comparatively. Let not other matters
distract you when you are calling upon God, that you may pray in Prayer, and do
nothing else but pray. Remember, distracted Confessions increase Guilt and
Wrath; distracted Petitions ask for a denial, and distracted Praises will tend
very much unto the stopping of the Current of Mercies.

3. Be persuaded that the Lord will attentively mind what you pray, if you
intently mind what you pray for your selves. He takes pleasure in uprightness,
and this Heart-searcher well knows who are sincere; and not so much as a Sigh
or Groan from a sincere Soul, shall be disregarded. If you from your Heart cry
for Mercy, Mercy shall compass you about, Psalm. 32. 10. The Prophet tells us,
That the Lord hearkened and heard, Jer. 8. 6. Indeed most speak not aright, they
repent not of their wickedness, saying, what have we done? But those who do
speak aright, and being truly sensible of the evil of their doings, fervently
pray to have their sins covered, and all their defilements purged away: The
Lord who hearkens so attentively, will surely hear all such Cries, and in no
wise deny what is cried for. Believe the mighty efficacy of fervent Prayer, and
what rich returns this Trading to Heaven brings in, and what Treasures Prayer
is a Key to unlock, that you may be enriched thereby! A sacred coveting these
unsearchable Riches, will make you mind what you are doing when you are praying
to partake of them; and the Apostle tells you, for your encouragement, Romans 10.
12. There is no difference between the Jew and the Greek; for the same Lord
over all, is rich unto all that call upon him.

4. Cry earnestly for the holy Spirit of Promise: You will never pray aright,
or to any purpose, without his aid. The Holy Ghost is called the Spirit of
Grace, because all true Grace is from him, and so are all gracious desires and
actings. He is also called the Spirit of Supplication, all acceptable
Confessions, Petitions, and Thanksgivings, are of his enditing. And this Spirit
is promised; and how ready is our heavenly Father to give the Spirit to any
that ask him! Now we read that he which searches the heart, knows what is
the Mind of the Spirit, for he makes intercession for the Saints, accorning to
the Will of God, Romans 8. 27. Saints Prayers, are called the Mind of the Spirit;
he makes them to be according to the Will of God; and that not only as to the
matter of them, but also as to the manner: The Spirit of God at first moved
upon the face of the Waters; and how many useful Creatures did he produce out
of a Chaos of Confusion! And if that Spirit move upon your Hearts in Prayer, he
can keep your Thoughts that they stir not from God, and cause Faith, and godly
Sorrow and Hope, Humility and Love, to be in actual exercise; and the more
Grace is exercised: Prayer will be the less distracted and more successful.

5. Let Vigilance and watching go before, keep pace with Prayer, and follow
after it. Why has a Christian new Eyes and Light, but that he might watch with
the one, and by the other? Our Lord joined watching and praying together;
Prayer without watching will be heartless, watching without Prayer, will be
insufficient for your security. Watching with Prayer makes it more serious, and
to succeed the better. The Apostle says, The end of all things is at hand, be
ye therefore sober and watch unto Prayer, 1 Pet. 4. 7. Watching unto Prayer,
summons the whole Soul with all its Faculties to attend upon God, and to
prepare to meet him. We also read, Col. 4. 2. Continue in Prayer, and watch in
the same with Thanksgiving. Watching in Prayer, is a mighty help against the
Heart's straggling: This straggling is the sooner observed, and the straggling
Thoughts presently reduced. And he that watches after Prayer, diligently and
with all thankfulness observes the Answers of Prayer. And thus to do, will
strongly induce you to give your selves more to Prayer in good earnest, and to
wrestle with him, with whom you do so often prevail.

The fourth and last Duty I shall mention, is Communicating at the Lord's
Table; and that this may be done with less distraction.

1. Let there be more serious self-examination before you engage in that holy
Ordinance. 1 Cor. 11. 28. But let a Man examine himself, and so let him eat of
that Bread, and drink of that Cup. Look into the State of your Souls, and your
State is good, if you know the true God so as to love him and prefer him in
your choice before all things besides; and if you know Christ, so as to rely
upon him, with consent to be ruled by him, as your Lord and Savior, Joh. 17.
3. This is life eternal thus to know the only true God, and Jesus Christ whom
he has sent.

Take great notice also of Remember that Christ himself is really present at
his Table; and his Eye, which is as a flame of fire, observes the frame of
every heart. Fix your Eye upon your own Hearts, since Christ's Eye is upon them.
the present frame of your Hearts, that you may know in what Graces they are
weakest, and what kind of Lustings of the Flesh are aptest to prevail; and what
things they are which are most likely to distract your Minds, and draw away
your Hearts, when at the Table; your watch hereupon will be the stricter, and
your thoughts will run the more upon the particular Graces that are to be
strengthened, and upon the sins too, which are to be struck more dead by the
power of the Death and Crucifixion of Christ Jesus.

2. Let the Death of Christ, put you in mind what you were and would have been
still, if he had not died for you, you would have been dead in Law, under the
damnatory Sentence of it; and you would have been dead in Trespasses, dead to
God, and to any thing that is truly good; employed in nothing but dead works,
and thereby fitted to destruction. And how should your Thoughts be seized on by
the obligation your Lord has laid you under, in freeing you from Death and
eternal Destruction, by laying down his own Life a ransom for you! Mat. 20. 28.

When the Apostle said he determined not to know any thing save Jesus Christ
and him crucisied, 1 Cor. 2. 2. it shows upon whom his Thoughts were. Our
Thoughts at the Lord's Table should be fastened to Christ as he was to the
Cross. We should behold, admire, and be suitably affected when we behold him
that is equal with God, in the form of a Servant, in the likeness of sinsul
Flesh, and humbling himself so low, as to become obedient to Death, even the
Death of the Cross, Phil. 2. 8. Let the worth of the Person suffering the Merit
of the Sufferings themselves, and the value of the Benefits thereby procured,
be believed; and how can they choose but be heedfully thought of!

3. Take due notice, that Christ when he was dying, gave this charge to his
Disciples, that they should engage in this Ordinance as a Memorial of him.
Christ's Death was infinitely more, than if all Creatures that have Life, had
lost their Lives to make an atonement. Just when he was ready to make his Soul
an Offering for sin, he bids us to do this in remembrance of him, 1 Cor. 11.
23, 24. The Lord Jesus the same Night in which he was betrayed, took bread, and
when he had given thanks he brake it, and said, Take eat, this is my Body which
is broken for you, do this in remembrance of me. The command of such a Lord,
that Lord dying, and dying such a meritorious Death, and in that Death
expressing Love which passes Knowledge; and the Command given on purpose, that
he might still be and live in our remembrance, if well weighed, will make us
mind what we are doing, and prevent distraction.

4. The Sacramental Elements and Actions being understood, with their
signification, will be a great means to fix the Thoughts of the Communicants.
When your Eyes behold the Bread, let your Faith behold the Body of Christ. When
you see the Bread broken, believe that Christ was wounded and bruised for your
Iniquities, and bare them in his Body on the Tree. When the Bread is given you;
understand what a gift of God, Christ is. When you take the Bread into your
hands, let your Hearts be open, more fully to receive Christ himself, and to
receive still more from him. And when you eat the Bread, be sure to feed upon
Christ the Bread of Life by Faith. Rely upon his Crucifixion, as your
reconciliation; for, says the Apostle, We are reconciled to God by the Death of
his Son, Rom 5. 10. And as Bread is the staff of Life, so let this Bread of
Life be your Souls stay; rest upon Christ for spiritual life and strength more
and more abundantly to be given you.

When you perceive the Wine given a part from the Bread, think with your
selves, that your Lord's Life was indeed, though not against his Will, taken
from him; Body and Soul were separated, though neither from the Godhead. Look
beyond the Wine to the Blood of Jesus; believe it to be more precious than Gold
that perishes; and that being the blood of him who is God, it can do away the
greatest guilt, and the foulest spots and stains of the sins of Men. When you
drink the Wine, believe the Cup of Blessing to be indeed the Communion of the
Blood of Christ, 1 Cor. 10. 16. Rest on this Blood to justify you from all
things, for which the Law condemns you. Rest on this Blood to pacify your
Consciences and heal the Wounds which sin has made there, to purify and heal
all the Plagues of your Hearts, to make you perfect in every good work, and to
open a way for you into the holiest of all, Heb. 10. 19. not only to procure
constant access to the Throne of Grace, but an abundant entrance into the
everlasting Kingdom. Thus you will be helped against distraction in this
Ordinance, If what is visible to the Eye, the Heart understands and improves.

5. That you may be the more serious in this Ordinance of the Lord's Supper,
remember therein you solemnly renew Covenant with the God of Heaven, you give
your selves from your selves to him, and disclaim all other Lord's and Owners,
and profess to take him to be your Lord your God, your Guide, your All. Oh mind
what you do, that you may be sincere in doing it. God has no pleasure in Fools,
Eccles. 5. 4. who consider not with whom they have to do; who consider not what
evil they do, when they do that which is good, after a distracted and deceitful
manner.

In this Ordinance the Broad-Seal of Heaven is put into your hand to confirm
your Faith in the New Covenant; and that you may with greater confidence expect
the accomplishment of its Promises. He that rests on Christ, and hungers and
thirsts after righteousness, may rejoice in this Ordinance more than a Bankrupt
would do, that receives an Acquittance sealed, of the release of all his Debts,
and with it a Will and Testament sealed, whereby a plentiful Estate is made
over and assured to him. And the Communicants solemnly profess a Restipulation;
they tie themselves faster and more strictly to the Lord; there is nothing you
have, or are, but is his; Will and Heart and Thoughts are to be ever in his
Service, and at his Command.

6. Be sensible how dreadful guilt is contracted when you are guilty of the
Body and Blood of the Lord, and this guilt comes upon you by distracted,
careless and unworthy receiving. 1 Cor. 11. 27. Wherefore whosoever shall eat
this Bread and drink this Cup of the Lord unworthily, shall be guilty of the
Body and Blood of the Lord. The Communicant, whose Heart cares not how
distracted it is, how does he contemn the Son of God, his Blood and Benefits!
If he does not count them worth serious thinking of, surely he does not think
them worth his thankful acceptance. How precious is the Blood of Jesus! and
what an heavy load is the guilt of such Blood! It Is sad not to be saved by the
Blood of Christ, but much sorer, under the guilt of it to sink lower into
Damnation. Temporal Punishments that are inflicted upon receiving amiss may be
terrible; but how much worse are eternal Judgments! Oh give your Hearts into
God's Hand, that he may keep and order them at the Table and afterward; the
more there is of his help in the performance, the less will there be of
distraction, and of your own infirmities.

USE V. Shall be terror unto Sinners and Hypocrites, all whose attendance upon
God, is void of care, and full of allowed distraction. They freely grant their
Hearts a liberty, and their navghty Hearts take it, to be whatever they please,
and to run upon whatsoever they have a mind to, as if the Heart-searchers Eye,
had neither Sight nor Jealousy.

1. The Duties of such whose Hearts thus run away from God, are not steps
toward Heaven but toward Hell. If they hear the Word of God, they understand
it not; the Gospel is hid from them, and the God of this World blinds them, 2
Cor. 4. 34. If they attain to some kind of knowledge of the truth, they hold it
in unrighteousness. Sin grows stronger by their very Duties; its power not at
all impaired by them; for thinking by their Duties to make some amends for
their sins, they are the more emboldned to commit iniquity: When they have done
their heartless Services; God is the more angry with them. Thus the Jews of old
choosing their own ways, and their Souls delighting in their Abominations, and
having no delight in God, or in his ways, the hatefulness of their Sacrifices
is thus expressed, Isa. 66. 3. He that kills an Ox is as if he flew a Man;
he that sacrifices a Lamb, as if he cut off a Dogs Neck: He that offers an
Oblation, as if he offered Swines Blood: he that burns incense, as if he
blessed an idol. Not only by impenitency and hardness of Heart, but by
heartless Duties, the performers of them treasure up unto themselves Wrath
against the Day of Wrath.

2. When terrible Calamities force sinners to cry with some earnestness, for
relief, their Cries may be altogether in vain. God may justly be as heedless of
them in their distress, as they were impiously heedless of him in their
Devotions. Thus he threatens, when distress and anguish comes upon them, then
shall they call upon me, but I will not answer; they shall seek me early but
they shall not find me; nay, which is worse, he says, I will laugh at their
calamity, I will mock when their fear comes, Prove. 1. 26, 27, 28. They deserve
to be mocked at in their misery; all whose Duties were a mocking of God to his
very face. The Prophet speaks to the same purpose, Zach. 7. 13. Therefore it is
come to pass, that as he cried, and they would not hear, so they cried, and I
would not hear, says the Lord of Hosts.

And if he be deaf many times to sinners cries on Earth, and will afford them
no help: Certainly in Hell he will be utterly regardless of their Miseries. No
Prayers are heard, no Petitions are granted that come from that place of woe,
Luke 16. 24. 27.

3. When Sinners and Hypocrites are in Hell, what bitter Reflections will they
have upon their Distractions and Negligencies in the Service of God here on
Earth! How terribly will Conscience reproach and lash them, because in their
Day they knew not the things that concerned their Peace! Most wretched and
selfdestroy'd Fools, Conscience will call them; because it was no more in their
Thoughts to fear and escape eternal vengeance; because they were so eager after
things on Earth, which now can be enjoyed no more; as to neglect the
everlasting bliss and glory of the Heavenly Kingdom! They that will not do
their Duty to God now without distraction, shall be forced without distraction
to think of their misery to eternity. The greatness of their woe, will
immovable fix their Thoughts upon it. When a Sinner in outer darkness, shall
thus reflect upon himself, and his unconceivable deplorable and desperate case:
Oh what flames, what terrors and agonies do I suffer! What poisoned Arrows of
the Almighty are within me! How glorious is his power in my destruction! How
righteous though intolerable is his Indignation! And what I do suffer, I must
suffer without any hope at all of any ease or end! The undistracted thinking of
all this, cannot but make Hell to be out of measure hellish. Knowing now the
terrors of the Lord, let all be persuaded to take heed of trifling with an
holy and jealous God, and of doing his Work negligently, who will so severely
punish all evil, slothful, and unprofitable Servants!

USE VI. Shall be of encouragement and comfort to Believers, who would fain do
more and better than they do, and with less distraction serve the Lord. They
should indeed go with a low Sail, because of their leaky hearts, which are so
born down and hindered by indwelling sin, when they are attending upon God, and
yet that they may not be quite cast down, let their Eye be upon these grounds
of Consolation.

1. Let the Saints know that it is from that Grace which is within them, that
their Distractions are burdensome to them. As it is by the softness of the
Heart, that the remaining hardness of it is felt: so it is by the Grace in the
Heart, that its Wanderings are perceived; and being perceived become matter of
trouble. The Apostle speaks by way of encouragement, 1 Cor. 10. 13. There has
no temptation taken you, but such as common So say I: Thy Distraction which is
thy burden, is so far from proving thou have no Grace; that it is common to all
gracious Souls, while Militant in this World: and it is part of their Militancy
to be conflicting with distracted Thoughts; and the stronger they grow, in this
conflict, they are the more successful God has the renewed Will, it consents to
the Law of God that it is good, and desires more undistractedly and with
delight to do whatever is required; it is only remaining Flesh that is otherwise
inclined. The Apostles Reflection upon himself and what he did, was not
altogether without comfort, Rom 7. 25. I thank God through Jesus Christ our
Lord; so then with the Mind I my self serve the Law of God, but with the Flesh
the Law of Sin.

2. God will not impute those Distractions to Believers which they desire so
truly and earnestly to be freed from. It Is a good Rule, Non imputantur, si
violenter importantur. They are not imputed if they are violently brought into
the Heart, and their stay and abode there is not allowed of. The Man that
labors under the Palsy, his Head his Hands do shake against his Will, he does
not shake either himself, but wishes both were more steady. The Saints
Distractions are against their Wills, they do not willingly distract
themselves; the Lord does not call them Hypocrites for these, and they miscal,
if they call themselves by that Name, because their Hearts do sometimes start
away from Duty against the Will and Purpose of them. What Saint on Earth could
stand, if God should mark such iniquities and miscarriages as these! Psalm. 130.
3.

3. Christ's Satisfaction and Intercession, may comfort Believers under their
Distractions and all their Infirmities. Our Lord by suffering Death has made
complete satisfaction, as for their other Iniquities, so for the sins of their
holy things. God is so well pleased in the Son of his Love, that very faulty
and imperfect Duties being by him presented, are well taken. Oh what a
difference is there between a Duty as it comes from us, and as it has its
defects covered with Christ's Righteousness, and is so presented to the Father!
The Apostle tells us of the Glory of the Grace of God, wherein he has made us
accepted in the beloved, Ephesians. 1. 6. When Christ was upon Earth, the
satisfaction he made was sufficient to make reconciliation for all sins and
defects. And now he is in Heaven he ceases not to intercede for Believers; a
thousand faults may be found in their best Duties, but how absolutely faultless
and prevailing is this Intercession of their Advocate!

4. Many of those Duties, which doubting Saints have thought to be nothing but
Sin and Distraction; God sees and owns the actings of Grace in. He sees some
Fire in the smoking Flax, which he will not quench, though there is much that
is offensive with it; he sees some greenness in the bruised Reed, though there
is much that is dead, and he will not break it, Matt. 12. 20. His Eyelids try
the Children of Men, and he has a gracious regard to the actings of Grace and
Faith, though it be but as a grain of Mustard seed. Christ Jesus is said to be
quick of understanding in the fear of the Lord, Isa. 11. 3. He knows what Key
will open every Heart, and when he will open, none can keep shut; he can bring
the most fearless and stupid, to the fear of God. And where the fear of God is
in truth, though it be in a lower degree, he easily discerns it. When a Well of
Water is muddy at the top, there is purer Water working up from the Spring at
the bottom: When the Heart is very much discomposed and distracted in Duty; if
under all these Infirmities there is a working and stirring of the Grace of
God, he will both observe and be well pleased with it. He will not utterly
reject a Duty, when there is an hearty desire to do it well, and an hearty
grief it is done no better.

5. The Lord is ready to give a Blessing to those means which himself has
appointed for the cure of these Distractions. These means are effectual when
the Spirit makes them so. And is the Spirit of the Lord straightened? Mic. 2. 7.
What infirmity is too great for him to help? What Heart too roving and unruly
for him to settle? The means must be used, Cry for help that you may be helped
to cry; hear the word with a desire to feel its power; that you may hear it to
better purpose. Take encouragement from the mighty Spirit who is so ready to
accompany God's Institutions. He can fit you for your Duty, and fix your Hearts
in it, and crown the doing of it with the Blessings which are promised. And
when your Hearts are fixed, it is but reason your Mouths should sing and give
praise.

6. When Militant Saints come to be triumphant, their Distractions and
Complaints because of them, will be at a perpetual end. In Heaven they shall be
out of Satan's reach he shall resist them no more; this World they will have
left, which so often troubled both their heads and hearts, and will have
exchanged it for a World that is infinitely better; their perfected Spirits,
will be perfect in their Operations; nothing of imperfection will cleave to
what the glorified Saints above are doing. The Vision of God Face to Face, will
fix the Mind and Thoughts upon him eternally; having once looked on, they will
never care to look off more. Perfection of Holiness, Love, Delight and Joy,
must needs for ever hinder all even the least wandering. None can in the least
be weary of the Work that is done in Heaven, it is so full of pleasure, Rev. 4.
8 They rest not Day and Night, saving Holy, Holy, Holy, Lord God Almighty which
was, and is, and is to come; and full glad may they well be, that such a
pleasant Employment must never come to an end.

If all this Congregation, with their Pastor can but get safe into the House
not made with Hands eternal in the Heavens. Oh what Thoughts and Apprehensions
shall we have! How shall we be filled with Joy and Wonder, at what we shall
then behold! Being entered and swallowed up in the Joy of our Lord, shall we not
then cry out. Ah! Ah! What a difference is there between this Heavenly Country,
and the most desirable earthly Inheritance! The Sun is but a small Spark to
that Light which we now see! When we looked upward, we admired Heavens outside,
the Firmament with all its shining Luminaries, but now we plainly see that
Heaven is much more glorious within! What an excellent Society is this
innumerable Company of Angels that we are among! How does every glorified Saint
and Member of Christ resemble his Head! being all fair and no spot remaining!
How pleasant is the Harmony where there is no Sin, no Sorrow, no Defect, or
Discord! These Hallelujahs which we now join in, how ravishing and transporting
are they! not like the distracted Services which we used to perform together in
the Sanctuary! We are all now fixed in this glorious place, and shall go no more
out. Our Complaints are quite ended, and never again shall we do in the least
amiss! We are indeed without fault before the Throne of God, and we shall Live
and Reign, Triumph and Magnify the Lord for ever!

Thus have I finished my Discourse concerning Distraction in attending upon
God, a fault whereof all are guilty; most make nothing, or very light of* and
very few mind to have it mended: My design herein has been to do some Service
to the Church of Christ, that their Worship may be more pure and Spiritual,
being freed from those wandering Thoughts which both distract and defile it; and
that the Best of Lords may still have better and more acceptable Service, from
all of you, and from my self also. Whilst we are in this World, truly this
World is too much in us; it is suitable to our Senses, and apt to entice and
draw away our Hearts. Let the Eye of Faith pierce through the Clouds, and see
Heavens Joy and Glory, and then this Worlds Vanity will be the more apparent;
and how vain a thing it is for you to be so thoughtful about it, and eager after
it. When Faith has seen how God is attended upon by Saints and Angels above, it
may help to kindle in you an holy zeal and a vehement desire, more to resemble
those excellent Attendants, and to serve the Lord more gladly and seriously
here below.

Oh cry to have the Cure of Distractions carried on further toward
compleatness. Live as Strangers and Sojourners here on Earth, not concerned
about the things of it, as others are. Declare plainly that you are born from
above, and let your Hearts and Thoughts more and more ascend thither. Carry
your selves as fellow* Citizens with the Saints, and as those that are of the
Household of God. Let there be more of God, more of Grace in all you do and
speak; in all the Powers of your Souls, in all the Duties you perform. And
think with gladness and longing of that blessed Inheritance; when you shall be
fully delivered from Sin and Death, and all deadness and distraction in Mind
and Heart. Everlasting Rest must needs eternally exclude whatever does now
trouble you. And how perfectly healed, and every way perfect in Holiness and
Joy will you be, when you have attained to the Glorious Liberty of the Sons of
God!

FINIS.
HERBERT's Poem, called Giddiness, page 119.
OH what a thing is Man! How far from Power,
From settled Peace and Rest!
He is some twenty several Men at least
Each several Hour.
One while he counts of Heaven as of his Treasure,
But then a Thought creeps in,
And calls him Coward, who for fear of sin,
Will lose a Pleasure.
Oh what a Sight were Man, if his Attires,
Did alter with his Mind!
And like a Dolphins Skin, his Clothes combined,
With his Desires.
Surely if each one saw another's Heart,
There would be no Commerce;
No Sale or Bargain pass, all would disperse,
And live apart.
Lord mend or rather make us! One Creation
Will not suffice our turn;
Except thou make us daily, we shall spurn
Our own Salvation.
Another Poem of the same Author, called, The Method, page 126.
POOR Heart lament!
For since thy God refuses still,
There is some Rub, some Discontent
Which cools his Will.
Thy Father could
Quickly effect what thou do move;
For he is Power, and sure he would
For his Love.
Go search this thing,
Tumble thy Breast, and turn thy Book;
If thou had Lost a Glove or Ring,
Would thou not laok?
What do I see
Written above thee? Yesterday
I did behave me carelessly
When I did pray.
And should God's Ear,
To such Indifferents chained be,
Who do not their own motions hear?
In God less free?
But stay, What Is there?
Late when I would have something done,
I had a Motion to forbear,
Yet I went on.
And should God's Ear
Which needs not Man; be tied to those
Who hear not him, but quickly hear
His utter Foes?
Then once more pray;
Up with thy Heart, as well as Voice,
Seek Pardon first, and God will say,
Glad Heart rejoice.
FINIS.
ERRATA.
PAge 27. line 4. for heard read Heart. p. 83. l. 6. for hoc r. haec. p. 122.
l. 18. for find r. to find. p. 141. l. 20, for can r. do. p. 163. l. 6. for Man
r. Men, and l. 8. for cimmandeth r. commends. p. 171. l. 30. after of add if.
p. 173. l. 23, 24. foa Savior r. Savor. p. 253. ^ 6. for unconceivable r.
unconceivably.

Some BOOKS Printed for Brab. Aylmer.
THE Holy Bible, containing the Old Testament and the New; with Annotations and
Parallel Scriptures. To which is Annexed the Harmony of the Gospels. As also
the Reduction of the Jewish Weights, Coins and Measures; to our English
Standard: And a Table of the Promises in Scripture. By Samuel Clark, Minister
of the Gospel. Printed in Folio of a very fair Letter. The like never before in
one Volume.

The Four last Things, viz. Of Death, Judgment, Heaven, Hell. Practically
considered and applied in several Discourses. By William Bates, D. D.

A Sermon Preached upon the much Lamented Death of our late Gracious Sovereign
Queen Mary. To which is added the Address of Condolance to His Majesty by the
Dissenting Ministers. By W. Bates, D. D.

The Blessedness of the Righteous opened* and further recommended from the
Consideration of the Vanity of this mortal Life.

Of Delighting in God.

The Reconcileableness of God's Prescience.

Self-Dedication, Discoursed in the Anniversary Thanksgiving of a Person of
Honor for a great Deliverance.

The right use of that Argument in Prayer, from the Name of God, on behalf of a
People that profess it.

A Funeral Sermon on the Decease of that Worthy Gentlewoman, Mrs. Margeret
Baxter (Wife of the Reverend Mr. Richard Baxter.)

A Disourse relating to the much lamented Death, and Solemn Funeral of our
Incomparable and most Gracious Qveen Mary, of the most Blessed Memory.

These last seven above by the Reverend Mr. John How.

A Discourse of the great Disingenuity and Unreasonableness of Repining at
Afflicting Providence: And of the Influence which they ought to have upon us,
on Job. 2. 10. Published upon Occasion of the Death of our Gracious Sovereign,
Queen Mary of most Blessed Memory. With a Preface containing some Observations
touching Her Excellent Endowments and Exemplary Life. By Edward Lord Bishop of
Gloucester*


