THE Gentleman-Apothecary: BEING A LATE and TRUE STORY, Turned out of FRENCH:
With several LETTERS.

LONDON, Printed in the Year, 1678.

THE Gentleman-Apothecary.
THE Ladies method of Bleeding, and Glysters, is rarely good without dispute,
both for the Health and the Complexion; but especially Glysters; which Araminte
made often use of; not that they could make her fairer than they only found
her, but to preserve those Beauties fresh, and charming, which they could not
either create or increase.

Once upon a time having given order for this blessed Preservative, and being
told by her Woman, that all was ready, she laid her self down upon the Bed in
posture to receive it, with wonderful patience expecting the comfortable
office; with patience I say, for fretting makes people look old; and all
handsome women are under an Oath to be true to their Faces.

The Mistress having disposed her Body, as I told you, (in no very good
condition to take notice of what past in the Chamber) away runs the maid
(leaving the door open) for a napkin: And, just in the Interim, while she was
hunting for a cloth, gently up the stairs comes Timante, (a familiar friend of
the Ladies) and seeing the passage free, into the Chamber he goes, without
discovery.

The first spectacle he encountered, was a pair of incomperable Hanches; which
put him, for a while, to a stand; partly out of reverence, and partly out of
surprise: But in a short time, coming a little to himself, and looking round
about him, to see if any body were in the Room, he casts his eye upon a certain
Instrument which the maid had left on a Chair by the Bed side. The Gentleman,
very Innocently takes it up, and finding it laden, and his Mark fair, for want
of an Apothecary, resolves to do the work himself, and so he did; and that so
dexterously too, that the best Master of his trade in Paris could not have
mended it.

Immediately upon the discharge, out slips Timante again, as privately as he
came in, and no mortal the wiser. Araminte, in the mean while, draws up her
self within the Curtains, covers all for fear of the worst, and so disposes her
self to her Repose.

Timante was no sooner out of the House, but down comes the Maid, post have,
with twenty excuses in her mouth all the way she came, for making her Mistress
wait so long. Well Madam, says she, I am glad however to see your Ladyship keep
your self warm; But now, when you please, I am ready for you, and to say the
truth, the Glyster was somewhat with the hottest before.

What means this Wench! (cries Araminte) would thou have me take two at a
bout? Two, Madam? I beg your Ladyships pardon (says the Maid) you have had none
at all yet. Prithee no more fooling (cries the Mistress) and let me get this
out, before I take another in; did not thou thy self give me one just now?
Not I, Madam, as I hope to be saved, (says the Wench) I have been all this
while above in the Garret for a Napkin; but now I perceive your Ladyship has
been your own Apothecary, for I see the Bag is empty. Upon my soul not I, says
Araminte; but most assuredly I have a Glyster in my Guts, and whoever put it
there, was his Crafts-master. The Maid, she swore over and over, that, for her
part, she knew nothing on it.

Upon this, they fell to gazing one upon the other in the greatest confusion
imaginable, and, without a word speaking, betrayed in the disorder of their
Looks the distraction of their thoughts. At last, recollecting themselves, a
strict search was made in the Chamber for this invisible Operator, but no
creature to be found: Whereupon, they jointly concluded that it must needs be
the Devil, and with one voice cried out by consent that the House was haunted.

This Outcry brought all the Neighborhood in a trice, into Aramintes Chamber,
to learn what was the matter; The Maid told them, they had been troubled with a
spirit. Jesus Maria (cried the company, crossing themselves) but what has he
done? What has he done? To this, they could get nothing more out of them than
that the Devil was turned Apothecary.

By this time, Aramintes Physic began to grow troublesome, and the company
more so: But she kept all her Gripes and Grumblings to her self, till Flesh and
Blood could hold no longer, and then in plain terms desired she might be left a
little to her privacy. So soon as ever the Room was cleared, Araminte gave the
Devil his Glyster again, and found great ease upon it.

This was a Terrible Bout, but yet not so Terrible, as to fright a Lady from
minding her Beauty, and her Pleasure; nor could the Devil himself hinder
Araminte from dressing, and going abroad that Evening, according to her custom.

While these things past, Timante was upon a visit at the House of a great
Lady; whither he went directly from Araminte. The fancy of the encounter would
not out of his head; and still as he thought upon it, he could not for his
blood but blurt out a laughing, till it distasted the company, as if it had
been at some of them: And then, in his own defense, he was fain to discover
what it was that made him so merry, that they might not any longer take him for
a Person either unmannerly, or ridiculous.

In the story of his Adventure he gave them to understand, how that Providence
had made him Apothecary to one of the finest women in France; and so told them
all the Particulars, bating only the name of his Patient. This set the Company
a laughing, to break their hearts; and in fine, there never was an Afternoon of
pleasanter Conversation. This must be such a one, says one; or such a one, or
such a one, says another; and among the rest, Araminte came in for her part;
whom they pitched upon the rather, both because they knew her to be a great
dealer in that kind of Physic, and also that Timante came often to the house.

Araminte, you must know, was not of a humor to converse with Goblins, and
being possessed that her Apartment was haunted, she made all the have she could
to get ready, and a broad; And so out she goes, upon a visit to Cephise (the
Lady of the House where Timante then was, and where the Question, I told you
of, was still afoot.) Upon her coming into the Chamber, Timante was observed to
smile, and change color; which fortified the Company in their conjecture, that
Araminte was the concealed Party. Cephise received her with great Complement,
and civility; and being a Person that was Privileged by her Birth, and
Quality, to talk her Pleasure, (after several pretty things spoken in favor of
Araminte's Dress, and Person) I Will lay my Life, Madam, (says Cephise, slily
enough) that you have taken Physic to day, for methinks I read it your
Complexion. Araminte, with a blush, dissembled the matter as well as she could:
and Timante answered that blush with another, and a smile into the bargain,
which he could not forbear, though he bit his Lips heartily to suppress it; so
that he was forced to turn off to the Window, for fear Araminte should take
notice, and imagine the cause of it. These circumstances, being laid together;
confirmed the Company more and more; and when they had chatted away the Evening
till 'twas time to break up, they went every one their way, abundantly
satisfied, that they knew the Patient now, as well as the Apothecary.

Not long after this, there was a report all over the Town, that the Devil had
given Araminte a Glyster; and this was long of her own Woman, that first told
it in confidence to a friend of hers, and thence it past from hand to hand,
till it came to Araminte her self at last: And it was so public, that she
could not go abroad for being pointed at in the streets. But this Rumor lasted
not long, before Timante supplied the Devils place in the Story, as the more
probable, and credible Relation of the two.

Timante was now upon a ticklish point; if he should give over visiting as he
was wont, it might be taken for granted that the Report was true: And on the
other side, if he should go, and be charged upon it, he had no way to come off,
but by a flat denial of the Fact, in which case, evidence would be given
against him out of his own mouth. Upon this deliberation he resolved however to
go; but upon the very instant of setting his foot within the door, he fell into
so strange an apprehension of her displeasure, such an irresolution of mind,
and so wonderful a trembling of the heart, as made him suspect himself to have
a greater kindness for her than he was aware of; which troubled him the more,
because he knew she had a Servant already, one Licandre, who was then in the
Country.

In this disorder, up he goes to Araminte's Chamber, in whom he found a
thousand Graces and Advantages which he had never taken the least notice of
before; (for let but a man believe that he loves a Woman, or or that he ought
to love her, and it is enough to make him hang himself in his Garters for her.)
This surprise kept him for a while in silence, and at gaze: and Araminte on the
other side stood stone-still, with her eyes fixed on the ground, in the greater
confusion perchance of the two.

Timante durst not look his Mistress in the face, nor Araminte her Apothecary,
and for some half a quarter of an hour there past not a word; no not so much as
a look between them, to signify what they would have been at, if they could
have spoken. In the conclusion, Araminte brake the Ice, and with a sidelook;
Timante, (says she) There is something that I take very ill at your hands. And
-- But there she stopped; which Timante observing; Madam, says he, I cannot
imagine what you should take ill from me, who (I solemnly swear) never had any
other intention than to serve you. But there are Services, she replied, which I
should be loath to receive from Timante; and I need not tell you neither of what
Quality they are. I would I had ever been so happy, Madam, as to have served
you to your satisfaction, says Timante, that I might distinguish betwixt the
services you like, and those that displease you. The services I like (says
Araminte) are not of the nature of those you have rendered me. (These words
brought the blood into her Cheeks, but Timante went on, as if nothing had
been:) Alas Madam! says he, The services that I have rendered you! It has been
the design, I must confess, of my whole life to serve you, but I was never yet
blessed with any opportunity of doing it. For that, says Araminte, you will make
hard shift rather than want an opportunity. He that never found it, says
Timante, must needs want it; neither do I desire it, but in order to your
service: And -- Here Araminte interrupting him, It Is possible, says she, that
opportunity may put it into your power to do me a service that I should hardly
thank you for; and it may be that has been the very case already. If it has,
Madam, (says Timante) it is however more than I know. Come, come, (says
Araminte, raising her voice) let us have no more juggling; I know well enough
what you have done, and that you have done enough to make me abhor you. If I
have served you, Madam, as you suppose, why, says Timante, should you abhor me,
or take it amiss that I have served you? And yet, says Araminte, I do take it
ill, exceedingly ill. I cannot think (says he) that this comes from your heart;
if I have done you a service, methinks you should rather give me a Reward than
a Rebuke. Do not you know, says Araminte, (after a little pause, finding that
she could not make him speak home) that there are some services which are never
to be presented without asking leave? For my own part, says he, I reckon those
to be the Noblest services which are performed without talking of them. To ask
leave, favors too much of vanity, and ostentation, in publishing the matter
beforehand; and it proves many times but a vain pretense to what we are never
able to compass. Nay, further, says he, It is still more generous for a man to
conceal himself, not only in the doing of a service, but if it may be, even for
ever after the service is done. That Is no more, says Araminte, than I looked
for; and you shall do very well to make your self one of the concealed number:
For the service here in question is of a quality that better deserves a
Reprehension than a Recompense. The service, Madam, which I have done you,
(says Timante) is doubtless a very extravagant kind of service, if it be as you
render it; and that he who has done it is a stranger to it himself. Be so good,
I beseech you, as to mind me of it; give me but some hint that I may understand
it, and I do assure you, when I come once to know it, I shall not be so
mealy-mouthed as to disown it. (This, he foresaw, would put her to a puzzle:
and finding her at a loss.) But, Madam, says he, the service you reflect upon,
is as little known to your self, I perceive, as to me; and you that received
it, can give no better account of it, than I that did it, Go to, go to, says
Araminte, we understand one another: and since the service is so dishonorable,
that you are resolved not to own it, I shall not give my self the trouble to
tell you it. Let it suffice, such a service it was, as will blast your
Character among all honest men, and which I shall for ever remember as it
deserves. But we were better talk of something else. As Timante was about to
reply, she took the word out of his mouth, and said:

Have you not heard lately of a certain Cavalier that gave a Lady a Glyster?
Yes, says Timante, (not a little surprised at the Question) I have heard as
much, but I can hardly believe it. That Is not the point, says Araminte, for
true or false, it is the same thing to me: but answer me directly, If you had
been in that Cavaliers place, what would you have done? Being I was not there,
says Timante, I cannot say precisely what I would have done, if I had been
there, for I do not know in what humor I might have been. Well, says Aramine,
but in the humor you are in at present, what would you do, if such an accident
should offer it self, this very instant? Show me the accident, Madam, says he,
and I Will show you the humor; we have other thoughts upon the view of Objects,
than we have upon the Fancies of them. If you cannot tell me what you would
have done your self, tell me only, says Araminte, what another ought to have
done? That, says he, is the greater difficulty of the two; for, Madam, if I
know not what I would have done my self, how should I divine what another would
have done? I do not ask you (says the lovely Araminte, a little in heat) what
you would have done, or what another would have done in the Case, but what you
or another ought to have done? I am of opinion, Madam, says he (to speak
freely) that the respect which becomes us to the Face of a Woman, would be an
affront to her Backside; and to quit the palce for fear of putting a Bum out
of countenance, would appear a very ridiculous thing, and imply a most unmanly
want, both of Courage, and Respect. It is not thereabouts, Madam, that we are
to stand upon Ceremonies, and I should look upon him as a lost man to both
Sexes, that should shut his eyes upon so remarkable an occasion. Not but that I
could allow the Lady that should be so surprised, to be a little peevish, and
out of humor; and if she could call a man insolent and brutal for his pains, I
should not much hlame her for it. But yet let me tell your Ladyship, she that
understands her self, and knows how the World wags, would never make a serious
Bustle about such a Trifle; but begin the Raillery her self, to prevent others.
What are men made for, but to serve women? And provided they do their duties,
no matter upon what occasion. Alas! Madam, the Part is nice and tender: who
knows but one minute more in the cold Air might have cost her her life? and the
Glyster would have been quite spoiled too, for 'twas with the coolest already.
You may observe too, that so soon as ever he had done his work, he went his way
with all the gentleness imaginable. Now where is the crime of all this I beseech
you? unless a man shall be condemned for good Nature; or for the discretion of
improving the opportunity of serving a fair Lady, when it is offered him? This
is my sense, Madam, and what I should have done in the place of this Gallant;
and what I conceive any other man ought to have done, upon the like occasion.

This discourse put Araminte several times to the blush, which by twenty little
shifts, of looking another way, and the like, she kept from Timante as much as
possible. And when he had done, Well, says she, If this be your sense, I can
assure you, it is none of hers that is concerned in the Story; she abominates the
man, and knowing you to be one of the dearest Friends he has in the world, I am
to charge you, in her name, that you never look her in the face again, nor come
where she is to be seen. This I have in commission to tell you, and that it
will be your best course to do that of your self, which you will be otherwise
forced to. This menace (says Timante) signifies nothing to me, but for your
sake I submit; provided only that you tell me who this charming Creature may
be. I have not the gift of divination, Madam: How shall I be able to avoid I
know not whom? By this order of yours, I am never again to look upon any Woman
that is handsome, for fear it should prove that excellent Person whose sight I am
forbidden. No, no, Madam, you have too much goodness and justice (I am
confident) to impose any thing so severe and unreasonable.

If the renouncing of the whole Sex, in exchange for the blessing of your
particular favor, and conversation, may content you, I will frankly oblige my
self, never to see the face of any Woman besides your self, and reckon my self
a gainer too by quitting all the scattered Graces that are to be found in
womankind, for the concurrence of them all, in one and the same person. You ask
a thing not to be admitted (says Araminte) for the injured Lady and my self,
have so much one Interest, and one soul, that it is impossible to please the
one, with what displeases the other: Wherefore I do absolutely require it of
you, that from this moment, you never see me, nor speak to me again, to your
lives end. This is barbarous (cries Timante, a little disturbed) to punish a
man so bloodily, for a fault he never committed, and for a persons sake too
that he never disobliged. Tell her she is unjust. And -- Enough, enough of this,
(says Araminte) and too much too, unless 'twere better. You have done more than
you will confess, and the Lady you call unjust, knows well enough who was the doer
of it. No matter for particulars; you understand them better than we can tell
you. All I have more to say on my Friends behalf, is to advise you to govern
your Tongue, or there will be ways found to govern it for you: Ways, which my
Friend has hitherto forborne, for reasons best known to her self. Never think
to put off the matter, and cry, 'Twas none of you. I tell you the contrary. You
were seen when you went out of the house: Or, say no body had seen you, How
could you imagine, that what you your self had talked of so publicly, should
not come to the Ladies own ear at last? Come, come, (says she with a sigh)
consider what you have done: Think on it, and so fare you well to all eternity.
With these words in her mouth, out she goes into the next room, and locks her
self up in her Closet.

Timante was now at leisure to reflect upon what had past, and concluding
within himself; either that all was discovered already, or would be very
suddenly; he resolved to make the best of a bad game, and rather to put it off
with Merriment, and good Humor, than either to excuse or deny it. When he had
a little bethought himself, and finding Ink and Paper upon the Table, so pat to
his purpose, he drew over a Letter which he left upon the Table, against the
Hangings, so much in sight, that there was no coming into the Room, without
seeing it, and so went his way, not doubting but it would fall into the right
hand; and that so soon as ever he was gone, Araminte would come out of her
Closet again into the Chamber. He was scarce out of the door, but in comes
Neophile, a jolly Lass, and one of Timante's intimate acquaintance: the first
thing she cast her eye upon, was Timante's Letter, which without any scruple
she presently took up, and read it from one end to the other; (for these frolic
wenches, you must know, are privileged to do any thing.) This Letter put
Neophile into so violent a fit of laughing, that the noise of it fetched
Araminte out of her Closet, to know the business: and upon that, Neophile read
it over again, and laughed more and more. Prithee, what is the meaning of all
this? (says Araminte) Only a Paper that I found here upon the Table (says
Neophile) which I suppose you are very able to give a good account of, if you
please. Not I, upon my life (says Araminte) I never so much as saw it. Go to,
go to, (says Neophile, with a roguy smile) let us have none of these disguises
among Friends. It Is true, here is none of Araminte's name to this Paper, but
here is the History of a certain Adventure of hers, deny it if you can. Come,
come, Prithee do not pretend to make that a secret to me, that the whole world
is ready to make an oath of. This made Araminte change color, and yet she
could have been as free with Neophile as with any body: but still she protested
over and over, that she knew nothing at all of the Paper; and she had neither
read it, nor seen it. -- Why then says Neophile, it is but reason you should
have the reading of it: There it is. And Araminte read as follows.

THE APOTHECARY TO HIS Fair PATIENT.
Madam,
BY the manner of your Discourse about the Glyster, I perceive you are not
willing to tell me all you know; and I must be put to conjure for the rest:
which for your sake I am content to do, and to spare you the trouble of
speaking, what you are afraid to make me understand. But after this, I beseech
you, Madam, let us hear no more of Complaints, and Reproaches, as if I wanted
either Kindness, or respect. And yet now I am coming to the point, I am a
little doubtful, whether you would rather have me entertain you, under the name
of a Third Person, as you did Me, or address my self to a Third Person, when I
speak to You. For my own part, I am clearly for plain dealing among Friends;
and for treating You (now the vizor is off) as if I were He, that did the good
Office you wot of, and your self she that received it. Yes, yes, Madam; This is
the naked truth of the Case; and I my self am the happy man who had the honor
to do that service to the most delicious piece of Woman's Flesh in Nature. A
service, that was both seasonable, and expected: A service that was both given,
and taken, with all the Civility imaginable: A service, I say, presented upon
the Knee, with Reverence, and with Silence; and managed with so generous a
Moderation, that notwithstanding the utmost force of Charms, and Appetite, I
gave my eye alone the benefit of the Accident. You are too just, Madam, and too
wise, to take a Service for an Offense; and the first undoubtedly, of the Sex,
that ever quarreled any man for ministering an advantage to her Beauty.


This Letter, though pleasant enough to any body else, could not draw so much
as one smile from Araminte. All she said upon it, was (coldly to Neophile) that
she believed the Letter belonged to Neophile, and was not found, as she
pretended, upon the Table (not but that she knew well enough by the Contents,
that it came from Timante; only she was loath to own what had befaln her.)
Neophile on the other side, kept her ground, and showed Araminte that the Ink
was not yet dry; and that the Letter was of the same Paper with that on the
Table; and followed her so close, that at last Araminte had nothing left to
say, but that it was all one to her, if it were written on that very Table, and
with her Ink and Paper, so long as she never saw the Letter, nor knew in the
least, to whom it was intended, or any Creature that had been engaged in such
an adventure. Neophile, perceiving that Araminte was a little gravelled, and
taking for granted that the Story was true, in pure pity to her Friend, changed
her Discourse; but yet so ordered the matter, (as she was notably good at
Fishing) that she got all out of her before they parted, and made her self of
her particular confidence. And now was the time to reason her Friend out of
that insociable melancholy that possessed her, into a better temper.

Prithee Araminte (says Neophile) leave tormenting of thy self, (for a pitiful
business of I know not what) to make sport for other people: Do thou not
think we should have a comfortable world on it, if every Woman that has had her
Backside turned up, should be of this humor? I would not advise thee neither,
directly to confess the thing; nor would I have thee so positively to deny it;
but e'ne fairly pass it over, betwixt jest and earnest.

Araminte found this to be wholesome Counsel, and within two days, received from
Timante, (who durst not come himself) this following Letter.

TIMANTE TO THE Cruel ARAMINTE.
I Do not know what you may think of the Letter I left you the other day upon
the Table; but you are much to blame, if you do not take me to be a very honest
civil Fellow for my pains: First, in going to the Devil upon your Errand, to
learn that which you would have me know, and yet durst not tell me your self.
And then, to plead guilty, of my own accord, to a Charge which you could never
have proved: And all this for your satisfaction.

The last time I had the honor to see you, you were extremely angry with me
for my Curiosity; but let me tell you now, for your Consolation, that you are
abundantly revenged upon me, in my Love. To tell you the plain troth, I am
neither better nor worse, than stark mad, for a certain Woman, that within
these eight and forty hours, bad me never look her in the face again. If you be
the person, it is not my part to mind you of it, but on the contrary, to try if
I can make you forget it. I am perpetually beating my brains, which way to make
my peace with you, and my passion acceptable to you: But then, methinks, for a
Lady of your quality to cast her eyes upon a wretched Apothecary, were a most
unreasonable thing; and yet you are to consider, Madam, that I am an Apothecary
that chooses his Patients, and ministers only to fair Ladies: Witness the
incomparable Araminte, who knows this to be a truth, past dispute, or
contradiction. And where is the Cavalier now, that does not wish himself an
Apothecary in my place? Tell me for goodness sake, Madam, how I am with you,
and when I may see you, that I may tell you again, when you your self shall
see, at your feet, the most faithful, and passionate of all Mortals.

Timante.


This way of fooling pleased Araminte well enough, and set Timante, by little
and little, upon better terms with his Mistress, (who, you must know, was too
much a Christian, to carry malice in her heart against any man that had Wit in
him, and good Humor.) But as to the answering, either of this, or of any other
Letter, for the future, she was utterly against it, till all should be gone and
past, for fear of reviving the story.

But this would not serve Timante's turn; for his business was to possess
Araminte with a sense of his passion, and to show her that it was above all
discouragements. So that let her reply, or not, his resolution was to write on
at a venture, which he did a while after, as follows.

TIMANTE To the Fair and Speechless ARAMINTE.
WHat? not one poor word left to cast at a dog? Never, never to see Araminte
again? nor so much as to hear from her? ten thousand Catarrhs and Gouts, upon
the Eyes and Fingers that were the causes of it. And all this forsooth, for
having my eyes in my head; and for seeing those Delicacies which you your self
set before me: for doing the very thing which you your self called for, and
waited for; only it was done (as it appears) by a wrong hand. Is not this a
goodly cause of Banishment, think you? A very worthy ground of ruining a poor
Devil, Body and Soul, that loves you, as if Heaven and Earth would come
together. Pray let the party offended speak for it self, and do not you
complain at one end, for a kindness done to the other.

But this is all a man gets for his good will. Well, well: go on if you please,
and make me turn Apothecary in good earnest. I shall not want fair Customers,
never doubt it, when the world shall understand, that my first Trial of skill
was upon your sweet Ladyship. Do not provoke me, but be kind, and wise in time.
For in my whole practice, if ever I meet with the fellow of the sight you
showed me, I shall most certainly revolt. Till then you are to expect the
Persecution of my Letters, and after that day, not a syllable more, from
Timante, while your eyes are open.


Araminte found this Raillery, not amiss; but still she kept to her Resolution
of making no return, which put Timante upon this other Letter.

TIMANTE TO THE Fair ARAMINTE, If she be above grouud.
THough you have plagued me most damnably, yet I can have the Charity to
forgive you, if you be dead; but look for no quarter at my hands, if it shall
be your lot to be found among the living. To make such a pudder about a
Glyster? As if it had been Gunshot. I must see You no more, it seems, because I
saw That, which neither saw me, nor knows me, nor ever took any thing ill from
me; not indeed, any thing at all from me, but as the lawful Deputy of the
Chambermaid. It is not well, to trouble your self so much with what is done
below-stairs; and by your own own fretting, and fuming, to make that so hot in
the mouth, that was so cool and comfortable in the belly. I could say somewhat
more than you are aware of, perchance, in a business of which I was an
eyewitness; and revenge my self that way upon you, If I would give my mind to
it. But Basto.

If you be really dead, I do not see why any thing of this should trouble you;
but if you be alive, faith, recall your commands, and let me live too; for there
is nothing surer, than that your Kindness, or Cruelty, is the Life or Death of

Timante.


This Letter wrought no more upon Araminte than the rest; and Timante quickly
found that writing would never do his business; so that some other course was
now to be thought upon, for the making of his Peace with his Mistress: and no
way better, than by engaging Neophile; (which was his next work) who he knew
could do any thing she pleased, with Araminte. Upon the opening of his heart to
her, she promised him fair, and you shall now see how she proceeded.

She got Timante to her house, upon a certain time when Araminte was to make
her a Visit; and there she placed him behind the Hanging, within hearing.
Araminte, says she, I have a request to make you, and you must promise me
beforehand not to deny me. Araminte past her word, that she would not; and
immediately upon that, Neophile presents Timante to her, for her pardon, and
begs of her, that for the time to come, she should allow him the honor of
waiting upon her, as formerly he had done. No body loves you, Madam, better
than I do, says Neophile, and you shall never repent the entertainment of so
cheerful and ingenious a Conversation. Timante seconded this mediation of
Neophile, upon his knees, with all expressions of Tenderness, Passion, and
Humility imaginable. It was a pretty while before Araminte could recover her
self from the Confusion this surprise had given her, and just as she was about
to reply, she was struck dumb again; for she could not look Timante in the
Face, without reflecting that he had looked upon her, elsewhere* upon which
thought, she stood, for a good while, with her eyes fixed upon the ground, and
without one syllable speaking. But upon farther consideration, she resolved to
break through all these fantastical scruples, and to say something to Timante,
who was all this while upon his knees, in expectation of her Answer.

Timante, (says she) Neophile is my friend, and for her sake I am content to
pardon all that is past; for it is not possible I should hate any thing that
appears under her protection. Wherefore I do once again assure you, that
whatever is past, shall be forgotten as if it had never been. But I must now
conjure you on the other side, that you never see me again; and this I am sure
you will not refuse me, at least if you love me, as you say you do; or if you
have any respect for my Peace, and Credit; for I perceive I shall never be able
to look upon you, but with shame, and trouble. It is upon this condition, that
I pardon you the affront you have done me; and I shall judge of your Affection,
by your Obedience.

Ah Madam, says Timante, would you have me promise you an impossibility? To bid
a man show his Love by his Indifference, is to bid him Love and not Love at the
same time.

The very soul of Love is the presence of the beloved Object: take away That,
and Love is rather a Disease, than a Comfort. But how many are there, says
Araminte, that gratify their Passions, at all distances, with the very
contemplation, and desire of what they love? By your fair leave, Madam, says
Timante, he that lives in Desire, lives in Torment: But however, be it as you
please, whether my life shall be happy, or miserable; I shall not want
strength, and obedience, to carry this Passion with me to my Grave. Do as you
say then, said Araminte, and you will oblige me, in suffering for me. It shall
be so, Madam, (says Timante) with a passionate sadness in his Countenance. Bnt
is it not possible, that time -- No more Questions, says Araminte, but let it
suffice, that you will please me, if you obey me: And let me tell you, that he
that comes once to please his Mistress, is in a fair way to gain her. Timante,
finding that matters went better than he expected, pressed the business no
further; but passing his word for his obedience left the rest to Time, and good
Nature. On the other side, the lovely Araminte was so well satisfied with
Timante's manner of proceeding, both upon the point of Affection, and Respect,
that she told him, so soon as the talk was over, he might visit her again; and
that for her part, when the World should have forgotten his Fault, she would
not be the last should remember it. Upon this they parted; and Timante took his
leave. Araminte staid not long after; but not a word this bout to Neophile, of
any disposition she found in her self to favor the person, whom but just now,
she so violently hated.

It seems by the discourse, that the Apothecary and his Patient began now to
understand one another; which Neophile took notice of too; and within a few
days, brought her friend to confess as much. At which time, Licandre, (a
professed Servant, though no great Favorite of Araminte's) came out of the
Country, where he had been upon some earnest business. At his Return, he was
welcomed with the story of the Glyster; which, instead of diverting him, put
him (being extremely jealous, and hotheaded) into the most extravagant rage
imaginable. Nothing would serve him, but he must be revenged upon Timante; and
that too, not without reproaching Araminte (how innocent soever;) which he did
sufficiently, the first Visit he made her.

You are in good health, I hope, Madam, says Licandre. In very good health Sir,
I thank you, replys Araminte. Yes, Madam, says he, I make no question of it;
for I understand you are in a course of Physic to keep you so. Araminte, that
knew his humor perfectly well, and saw what he would be at, made him this
careless answer, I do not know how you come to be so well informed in my
Affairs; but this I assure you, Sir, that whatever I do, it is not to please
you. And yet Madam, says the brutish Licandre, though you have no design to
please Me, there are a thousand others that you would be glad with all your
heart to please: you would never have taken a Glyster of the first comer else.
You may be sure however for your part (says she, with a modest indignation)
that it is an office I Will never receive from you. And truly Madam, says he, I am
not at all ambitious of the honor; my Rivals it may be, will be glad on it; but
for my self I was never cut out for an Apothecary. At a venture, says Araminte,
I shall not put that to the trial. You Will do the better, Madam, says he, for I Am
not half so good at it as Timante. I cannot imagine, says she, what it is you
drive at. But it is enough, says he, that I can. They entertained one another at
this rate a good while; and Araminte was so quick upon him at every turn, that
Licandre had little joy of that Visit, and so away he went.

This business ran in his head all that night, and early in the morning, up he
gets, and away, toward Timante's Lodgings, to watch his going abroad, and
demand satisfaction, with his Sword in his hand, which he resolved to do, in
such a manner however, that it should appear rather a Casual Encounter, than a
Formal Duel. After a matter of an hours waiting, out comes Timante, and
Licandre, at a petty distance follows him, till they came in a little, blind,
unfrequented Alley; and there Licandre draws, and runs in upon him, bidding him
defend himself. One word was as good as a thousand to Timante in such a case,
who so behaved himself, that Licandre found he was like to have his belly-ful
before they parted. They exchanged several Passes, upon equal means; but at
last, Timante drew blood of his enemy; and it had gone worse with him too, if
company had not come in, and parted them.

There was no body took this engagement for any other than a Rencounter, and
yet the Combatants durst not trust themselves to the severity of the Law, but
thought it their wisest course to shift for themselves, and lie close, till
either their peace should be made, or they might fight it out.

You may imagine the different reflections these two Gentlemen past upon the
fortune of that day; and that while Timante on the one side was transported
with Joy, for the advantage he had gained upon his Adversary, and Rival, (both
in one.) Licandre, on the other side was ready to hang himself for the
contrary. But the thing that most stuck in his stomach, was, the ridiculous
occasion of the Quarrel. If the Devil had not possessed me, (says he) I should
never have brought my Life, and Honor to the stake, for a Glyster-pipe, with a
great deal to this effect: And while Licandre was in this chafe, and stewing
himself in his own grease, Timante's employment was to write to his Mistress,
which he did the same day in these terms.

TO THE Invisible FAIR ONE.
I Am under so absolute a Resolution, and Necessity of conforming my Opinions
and Affections to yours, and of loving, or disliking just as you do; that I
cannot say whether I am the better, or the worse for my late Success; till I
know how you understand it. If you take nothing amiss in it, I shall reckon it
a Blessing; if otherwise, it will turn to my Ruin. I have been thinking to
make you the Present of a little Gallantry, for your Diversion: the fruit of an
Idle Hour or two; But I have checked my self again, for fear you should from
that freedom, measure the Reverence, and Respects of

Timante.


Araminte took this Letter very kindly, but could not yet be prevailed upon to
put pen to paper: only by word of mouth she gave Timante to understand, that
she should be glad to have a sight of what he mentioned in his Letter. Which
Timante sent her immediately, in company with this which follows.

TO THE Most Charming Creature In the whole WORLD.
IF the Foolery I now send you should happen to displease you, blame your self,
Madam, for commanding it: you will find upon your perusal, that it is a piece
written in praise of -- somewhat that shall be nameless: The Child is not yet
Christened? What if we should call it a Panegyrique? Or give it what other name
you please. If it makes you merry, I have my end; and for matter of privacy, be
assured, that I shall be every jot as tender of showing it, as you your self
would be, of showing the subject of it. Rest upon it, Madam, that it shall
never go further, for my part, unless you show it your self. If there be any
thing in it that offends you, I am sorry for it, and ready to ask you
forgiveness. After all this, I do not believe you can be so severe, as to make
a Quarrel on it, at worst. I have your Commission for what I have done, and if I
have done amiss, what would you have more than the Repentance, and Submission of

Timante?


Araminte could not but smile upon the reading of this Letter, which she ran
over with great Impatience to be at that which follows.

I Never was so taken with any thing since I was born, Madam, as I was a little
while ago, with -- you know what. Indeed, take it altogether, for Beauty and
good Qualities, I do not believe there is the fellow of it upon the face of the
Earth: so plump, so smooth, so well proportioned. And then for a Complexion,
that is to say, for a pure Red and White: All the Roses and Lillies, the Snow
and Vermillion that ever were bestowed upon Ladies Cheeks in Sonnets and
Romances, from the beginning of the world to the date hereof, are nothing to it:
And all this without the expense of Pocket-Glasses, Powders, Paint, or Patches;
only an innocent wash now and then, and that is all. It Is true, the Pretty
Creature is as blind as Cupid, but then it is as sure too: and if it has no
eyes, neither does it want any; because it has nothing to do, but what may be
done in the Dark, as well as in the Light: And then the discretion of it is
admirable. It is very sparing of speech: It has the wit never to refuse a good
thing when it is offered, and and tells no tales out of School when it has done.
It is the Common Reconciler and Rendezvous of both Fools and Philosophers; and
in one word, the Support, the Comfort, and the Business of Humane Nature.

More might be said Pro and Con, in the case; but this shall suffice. My humble
Service, I beseech you, Madam, when you see my noble friend next. I know you
may do me a good Office there, if you please; and I am sure you will, if you
have that kindness for me, which I wish you may have; especially, when you
shall find, that this gayety of humor has in the bottom of it, the highest
degree of Passion, and Respect, that can enter into the Soul of

Timante.


Araminte did not well know what to make of the medly of this Letter, for there
was somewhat in it, to laugh at, and somewhat again to be angry at: for
Timante's Raillery went too far, when it came to make sport with her
Reputation; and that, she took great offense at. But upon consideration of the
Circumstances, and the general heedlesness of those that give up themselves to
this drolling humor, she concluded to pass it over, without any more ado.

By this, (as time and friends will do any thing) the King was pacified about
the quarrel, upon assurance, that there was nothing of appointment, or
premeditation in it: and a place of meeting was agreed upon at the house of one
that wished well to both, for the reconciling of the two Combatants; where they
were brought together; but with the greatest difficulty in the world, to get
Licandre thither. When they thought all was well, one of the Company was asking
how they came to fall out. Timante protested, he knew nothing at all on it, and
that Licandre who assaulted him, was able to give the best account. Licandre on
the other side, replied, that Timante was not so ignorant as he made himself:
which Timante denied again, with so many Oaths, and Imprecations, that they all
fell upon Licandre to tell them what it was. He shifted it off as well as he
could, but it would not pass upon the company, that he should set upon Timante,
and not know a reason for it. It was a long time before they could prevail; but
at last, after much earnestness, and importunity, Licandre told them in plain
terms, that he was jealous of Timante, and that he drew his Sword, in
vindication of a Lady for whom he had a great honor; which Lady Timante had
affronted, by giving her a Glyster, upon a mistake. This set the whole Company
a laughing, and one of them especially, so much louder than the rest, that
Licandre in a Rage, and Distraction, to see himself made sport of, gave him a
box of the ear, that made the Hall ring again, as well with the blow, as with
the lauhgter. This accident divided the Company presently into parties, some
for the Plaintiff, others for the Defendant; and a great many Swords were drawn
upon it in a moment. There were some wiser than others, that with much ado
parted them; but two or three of the forwardest were wounded first; of which
Licandre was one (as a just punishment of his rashness.) The hurt he had
received, was very dangerous, and yet the least part of the trouble; for
nothing galled him so much as to be brought upon the stage, for so filly a
business. Oh how he cursed himself; This comes of Caterwalling, with a pox!
(says he) the Devil takes her, and all that belongs to her, and my self too,
when ever I so much as think of her again. Two wounds have I now received for
one Glyster.

Araminte was told every syllable that past, and too well acquainted with the
Jealousy and Brutality of Licandre, to doubt the truth of it. Well, says she,
since he is in a vein of swearing, I Will make one Oath too; which is, never to
see the eyes of him again, if I can avoid it.

Just as Araminte had taken up this Resolution, in comes Neophile, on the
behalf of Timante to treat of Marriage, wherein she was not only free, as to
the disposing of her self, but by obligations of Honor, Reason, and
Inclination, induced to a Compliance. Beside, that Licandre was now lost with
her to all intents and purposes.

This accident of the Glyster struck a great stroke in the Match; for Araminte
looked upon that familiarity with a Woman's Backside, to be a kind of Conjugal
Prerogative; and reckoned upon it (effectually) as so much in hand, in part of
Matrimony: which followed not long after; without any regard to the unfortunate
Licandre, who lay bedridden all this while; and in torments both of Body and
Mind, not to be conceived. It was a wonderful thing, the operation of this
Glyster, for it wrought upon the very Heart of Araminte, and brought two
persons together, that had before seen one another, a thousand, and a thousand
times, the ordinary way, without ever dreaming of any such matter. This story
of the Apothecary and his Patient, served for Raillery, and Entertainment to
the Wits, a long time after; but without any thing of Scandal, or Reproach; for
they were both of them very excellent Persons; and all that could be made on it
was this, that Timante had done his work so well, he deserved his wages.

FINIS.

